Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing
289
Editor-in-Chief
Prof. Janusz Kacprzyk
Systems Research Institute
Polish Academy of Sciences
ul. Newelska 6
01-447 Warsaw
Poland
E-mail: kacprzyk@ibspan.waw.pl
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/2941

KoﬁKissi Dompere
The Theory of the Knowledge
Square: The Fuzzy Rational
Foundations of the
Knowledge-Production
Systems
ABC

Author
KoﬁKissi Dompere
Department of Economics
Howard University
Washington, D.C.
USA
ISSN 1434-9922
e-ISSN 1860-0808
ISBN 978-3-642-31118-5
e-ISBN 978-3-642-31119-2
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-31119-2
Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012942173
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of
this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer.
Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations
are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of pub-
lication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any
errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect
to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Dedication 
 
 
To all scholars, researchers, supporters and authors 
in the reference list whose efforts and hard works 
have made the work in this monograph possible, less 
tasking and more enjoyable. 
 
 
IN APPRECIATION 
 
Of the works of Springer, especially Professor 
Kacprzky and the editorial team of the series of 
Fuzziness and Soft Computing. This appreciation is 
also extende to Professor Zimamann, the editorial 
board and the refereeing network of the International 
Journal of Fuzzy Set and System, Busefal, Journal of 
Fuzzy Mathematics, International Journal of Fuzzy 
Economics, IEEE Systems Man and Cybenetics, 
Automatic Control System, Multi-value Logics for 
promoting research on the fuzzy phenomenon. 
 
 

Acknowledgements 
The theory of knowing, also characterized as the theory of knowledge, irrespective 
of how it is conceived and interpreted, affects all areas of human action and the 
practice of results of thinking that may guide the development of social and 
physical technologies in the social setups in time and over time. The 
understanding the path of knowing is very important to the success of the knowing 
process. There are many epistemic paths to the development of the knowing and 
knowledge-production processes. Not all the available paths will lead to an 
efficient utilization of available resource and cognitive time. One path may be 
conceived from the viewpoint of rational construct while another may be viewed 
as accident of knowing. Any of these paths to knowing, therefore, is about the 
discovery of what there is (or what ought to be) in human action and explanation 
(or implementation) of the behavior of how what there is (or what out to be) 
manifests itself in information-knowledge structures through the epistemic 
decision-choice processes. The theory of the knowledge square is about the 
analysis and discovery of an efficient path of knowing of the elements in the 
universal object set relative to social and natural states and processes under  
the conditions of language vagueness, human cognitive limitation and epistemic 
ambiguities that lead to exactness in knowing in an inexact information 
environment. In this frame, rationality, therefore, is about the discovery of an 
efficient path of intelligence in human action, and the explanation as to how this 
intelligence allows the universal object set to be reflected in human mind relative 
to social and natural processes. 
The greatest danger to the discovery of the efficient path of knowing of 
ontological elements and the understanding of the applications that may be 
required of them is ideological and scientific credulity that imprisons creative 
imagination in the walls of familiarity of thought and reasoning in the comfort 
zone of intellectual ignorance and arrogance. This ideological and scientific 
credulity finds an expression in the classical paradigm, with the principle of 
exactness of information, information representation and claims to absolute truths, 
on the basis of methodology of exact rigid determinations that cement the 
foundations of current scientific knowing in the knowledge-production process. 
The danger may be diminished, however, by developing cognitive habits of 
different forms of mendacity in order to create a more robust foundation of fuzzy 
paradigm composed of its laws of thought, logic and mathematics with the 
principles of inexactness of information, symbolism and claims of conditional 
truths on the basis of methodology of inexact flexible determinations of 
knowledge. In this respect, and in the development of the fuzzy paradigm, 
enhancement of its logic and expansion of its mathematical domain, we are 

VIII 
Acknowledgements 
 
thankful of all the researchers and scholars who have freed themselves from the 
ideological grip of the classical paradigm with Aristotelian principle in order to 
work on the frontier of fuzzy phenomena in all areas of the knowledge enterprise. 
This monograph has benefited from their contributions as well as those working in 
the classical paradigm as seen from the references. 
I express my thanks to my admirers and critics whose positive and negative 
reflections have reinforced my theoretical and philosophical convictions and made 
this work enjoyable to the end. My thanks also go to all my graduate students in 
my courses in economic theory, mathematical economics, operations research, 
cost-benefit analysis and international economics for their tolerance to the idea 
that the use of the classical system of thought runs into important epistemic 
limitations when and where qualitative dispositions are to be dealt with and when 
the system is as complex as socioeconomic one. Similar thanks go to Professor 
Momoh and his students in the electrical engineering who were working on the 
problems of power system, as well as fuzzy controllers, for allowing me to share 
my works on the fuzzy paradigm. This monograph has also benefited from my 
seminar works on the current methodological frontiers of the fuzzy paradigm with 
some students in the Computer Science Department and African Studies 
Department at Howard University. Special thanks go to Professor Rey Madoo for 
his continual encouragement and motivation. This monograph has also benefited 
from the works of Drs. Kwame Nkrumah, Cheik Anta Diop, and W.E. Abraham 
by way of motivation. All errors rest with me. 

Preface 
There is nothing more dangerous for new truth than old 
delusion 
W. Goethe 
 
It is a fact that all general theories grow from studies of 
particular problems and they do not have any meaning unless 
they can explain more specific questions and bring some order 
in them. 
R. Courant 
 
Furthermore, any genuine science must, even as science be 
relevant to action. But natural science itself, in its relevance to 
action to which it is relevant is not merely action upon natural 
objects, which are inert and passive, but is also action by a 
subject who does act and who consequently has a fundamental 
nature categorically opposed to that of the object matter of 
action. Social science must also but relevant to action and to the 
kind of action to which it is relevant. But this is not action upon 
an inert, passive object matter [R16.17, p.132]. 
 
Today nobody any longer denies that on account of the 
insufficiency of our senses measurement is never precise in the 
full sense of these terms. It is only more or less approximate. 
Besides, the Heisenberg principle shows that there are relations 
that man cannot measure at all. There is no such thing as 
quantitative 
exactitude 
in 
our 
description 
of 
natural 
phenomenon. However, the approximations that measurement of  
physical and chemical objects can provide are by and large 
sufficient for practical purposes. The orbit of technology is an 
orbit of approximate quantitative definiteness [R18.14, p. 62]. 
 
I.   The Monograph 
 
At the level of meta-theoretic investigation on the progress of knowledge 
development, the task of meta-theoretic analyses is to search for a general 
principle of the knowledge production irrespective of whether the knowledge 
production is about either nature or society or both. All systems of knowledge 

X 
Preface
 
production must be seen as human attempts to strip itself from ignorance and 
uncertainty by providing a rational account, not because we have ignorance and 
uncertainty, which we do, but to answer the question: what justification do we 
have to claim knowledge items and certainty of them for understanding and 
practice? In this connection, any knowledge system demands a set of rules, a 
paradigm so to speak, which forms the information processing machine as well as  
ideological boundaries to protect it and provide the belief system to claim their 
validities by cognitive agents.  
In this monograph an argument is offered that the uncertainties about 
knowledge production, discovery and growth are rooted in a critical and better 
understanding of knowledge of uncertainties and their relationship to information, 
methods of cognition and the effective utilization of these methods. The limited 
knowledge of these uncertainties is due to the failure of knowledge agents to 
understand the relationship among information, knowledge and ignorance on their 
part in linking the epistemological space, which is under the control of decision-
choice agents in the acts of knowing, to the ontological space that exists outside 
the control of cognitive agents. At the level of knowing, the knowledge about 
uncertainties must involve questions about defective information structure which 
is composed of information vagueness that gives rise to fuzzy uncertainty, 
possibilistic belief system and fuzzy risk on one hand; and then information 
limitation that gives rise to stochastic uncertainty, probabilistic belief system and 
stochastic risk on the other. All of these involve complex interactions of 
ontological and epistemic elements that involve the processing of defective 
information structure. 
At the level of cognition, P. N. Fedoseyev reflecting on Scientific Cognition 
Today, its Specific Features and Problems has this to say: 
 
The development of natural sciences and philosophy has 
shown that it is impossible to explain the whole wealth of the 
relationship between theory and experience and answer many 
important questions posed by the progress of science 
(particularly the question of character of scientific revolutions) 
if one confines oneself to formal-logical analysis in considering  
these problems. A far more comprehensive approach embracing 
all the essential elements in man’s search for knowledge is 
required [R8.21b, p.15]. 
 
The general intent of the monograph is to show the origins of paradigms relative 
to the assumed information structure and make a case for the use of fuzzy 
paradigm and its laws of thought in relation to the classical paradigm and its 
laws of thought and the applicable areas of knowing. 
 
 
 

Preface 
XI
 
II.   Experience in Cognition 
 
My intellectual path and growth have taught me new things as well as forced me 
to unlearn some methods of reasoning in logic and mathematics and search for 
other new methods of theoretical understanding. In economics, I learned the dual 
concepts of supply and demand, cost and benefit, input and output, substitution 
and transformations, quality and quantity, negative and positive, open and closed 
and many others. All these reflect the organic principle of the principle of 
opposites. Here, I became convinced that events of life present themselves in 
dualities with continuum for relative understanding. However, it is sometimes 
difficult if not impossible to simultaneously think in conceptual duality with a 
continuum of the same phenomenon where the new and the old are simultaneously 
present in the sense that the seed of the new is always in the womb of the old and 
the reminisce of the old resides in the growth of the new; and where every 
accepted truth has some elements of falsehood and every falsehood, in turn, has 
elements of truth. The conditions of opposites, duality, polarity and continuum 
seem to constitute the basic principle of ontological and epistemological 
transformations. Respectfully, the elements of the disappearance constitute either 
the costs or the benefit; and the elements of the emerging new constitute either the 
benefits or the cost of the continual substitution-transformation processes in 
nature, society and knowledge production. It seems that the understanding of 
natural and social processes can be undertaken under the general principles of 
opposites where each phenomenon contains its opposites in relative proportions to 
give its identity. 
In the development of the meta-theory of knowledge, a counsel was taken from 
a number of African traditional advices. No one is without knowledge except the 
one who asks no questions; Knowledge is like a garden: if it is not cultivated, it 
cannot be harvested; not to know is ignorance and not to want to know is mental 
slavery. The wisdom of today is a folly of tomorrow where the breaking day has 
wisdom and the falling day has a simple experience; if you fear something you 
endow it with power over you because too much fear does not create freedom but 
slavery and bondage. The adherence to these advices unlocks the creative essence 
of intellectual labor for continual process of the step-by-step progression to 
overcome the ideological boundaries that restrict human progress in knowing. 
This creative essence of intellectual labor has an active categorial moment of 
information-knowledge transformation to establish powerful flames of ideas to 
shine the dark sports of the knowledge house that death is incapable of 
extinguishing.  
 
III.   Decision-Choice Space and Knowledge Production 
 
Our knowledge-production process to reduce human ignorance about nature and 
society is an outcome of decision-choice modules working with information as 
input and paradigms of thought as processing tools to understand the complexity 
of the principles of opposites, as revealed in human cognition about an epistemic 
element. Information relates to the potential reduction of ignorance through the 

XII 
Preface
 
production of knowledge with information as an input and decision-choice 
modules as a technical processor. The precision of the claimed knowledge and 
sureness attached to it is a reflection of the attachment of same properties to 
information and the paradigm of thought and correctness of its use.  The process is 
an input-output phenomenon that generates principles through which knowledge is 
claimed to reduce ignorance. In this respect, we may speak of the knowledge 
content of information just as we speak of the information content of an event. 
The latter is directed toward the question of how much information is available 
from an event or a phenomenon and the former is directed to the question of how 
much knowledge is contained in the information of the event or the phenomenon. 
Both of them are cognitive activities. 
The first question is answered by acquaintance and the construction of sense 
data that form the primary category for initializing the epistemic journey. The 
second question is answered with a paradigm of thought in deriving  
the knowledge content as a derived category that must be related to the answer to 
the first question. The relationship between the acquaintance and information on 
one hand, and paradigm of thought and knowledge on the other hand is the subject 
matter of the theory of knowledge square. The theory of the knowledge square, 
thus, presents a meta-theory on the general theory of knowledge systems in 
relation to its development and growth by examining the path of knowledge-
production activities in general. Its task is to examine the path of epistemic 
activities that allow us to claim knowledge content to establish an isomorphic 
relation between an epistemic element and an ontological element. The path of 
knowledge search is the same in that the knowing activities take place in the same 
epistemological space that defines the highway to the universal knowledge house. 
What then separates knowledge areas into science, non-science, exact science and 
inexact science? The answer to this question is an element in the set of objectives 
of the theory of the knowledge square.  
Through the examination, conditions are derived to establish the fuzzy rational 
foundations for demarcation of knowledge areas, in particular, science and non-
science on one hand and exact science and inexact science on the other hand. In 
the general education, a belief is established regarding the existence of exact and 
inexact sciences where our number system is claimed to be exact. Similarly our 
symbolic system is also claimed to be exact. This claim of exactness in science, 
classical mathematics and classical logic does not have indisputability. The 
indisputability rests on the set of assumptions imposed on the epistemological 
space whose information characteristics contain qualitative and quantitative 
dispositions. The nature of the set of assumptions depends on the organization of 
knowledge production. The fundamental structure of the epistemological space is 
abstracted to establish the framework of the debate between the classical logic and 
its mathematics and the intuitionist logic and it mathematics leading to the fuzzy 
rational foundation of exact and inexact sciences. 
 
 
 

Preface 
XIII
 
IV.   The Organization of the Monograph 
 
To accomplish the task at hand and the set of objectives the monograph is 
organized in eight chapters. Chapter one is used to present the central problem of 
interest to the development of the theory of the knowledge square. It discusses the 
epistemic point of entry and point of exit into exact and inexact sciences and the 
need for a meta-theory of knowledge. First, an explicit distinction is made 
between the ontological and epistemological spaces. The distinction allows us to 
define and specify the ontological elements that are distinguished from the 
epistemic elements. The condition of separation is specified in terms of 
information structure where the ontological space is defined by non-defective 
(perfect) information structure as an input into the activities of non-cognitive 
agents. The epistemological space is defined by defective information structure as 
an input into the activities of cognitive agents. The definition of the concept of 
defective information structure is linguistically and symbolically offered.  
The rest of the chapter initializes the building blocks of the theory of the 
knowledge square by introducing the concept of the potential space in relation to 
the meta-theory on the theory of knowledge where the defining properties of the 
potential space are established. The ontological elements and the ontological space 
are taken as existing in a perfect state and hence there are no imperfections and 
there are no vague ontological elements. The epistemic elements and the 
epistemological space are under the information-knowledge processing capacity of 
the cognitive agents. Vague objects are the characteristics of the epistemological 
space that that amplifies human ignorance and uncertainty. 
 Chapter 2 is used to introduce the concept of the possibility space as the 
second analytical space of information processing activities of cognitive agents. 
The possibility space is introduced as composing of elements that are possible 
candidates for knowing. The definitions of the concepts of possibility and 
possibility space are provided in terms of information structures.  The possibility 
space constitutes an initial conceptual and analytic bridge between ontology and 
epistemology at the level of information-knowledge phenomenon. The elements in 
the possibility space are called possibilistic epistemic elements. They are 
established through information generation and the principle of acquaintance that 
involves the non-enhanced and enhanced senses. The information connecting the 
knowledge-potential space and the possibility space is incomplete and vague. The 
information structure with the characteristics of incompleteness and vagueness is 
termed defective information structure that becomes an input into the decision-
choice system of the knowledge-production process. The possibility space, on the 
other hand, is constructed by a process involving the use of membership 
characteristic functions to define conditions of belonging to categories that may 
justify conditions of possible knowledge. The component of the vagueness of  
the defective information generates possibilistic uncertainty of conditions of 
possibilistic epistemic elements where such uncertainty is argued to characterize 
all knowledge areas. The presence of vagueness defines degrees of belonging 
whose analytical structure is argued to require the need and use of fuzzy paradigm. 
 The concepts of possibility, possibility space and possibilistic epistemic 
elements are defined. The possibility space is argued to carry with it the condition 

XIV 
Preface
 
of inexactness and hence contains inexact epistemic elements. The defective 
information as the essential attribute on the possibilistic epistemic elements is 
represented by fuzzy symbolism. The discussions link epistemology and ontology 
to the nature of analog and digital spaces of acquaintance and language and then to 
the role of decision-choice actions in knowledge production. The problem 
representation of the defective information structure leads to the discussion on the 
nature of classical mathematical and logical variables in relation to linguistic 
variables and how they interact with fuzzy variables. The relationships among the 
possibility space, the possible world space and the knowledge-production process 
are discussed and connected to the classical and fuzzy paradigms. A discussion is 
then made on the role of mathematics in classification of science and the epistemic 
process. 
The chapter is concluded with the discussions on the possibility space, the 
formation of the primary category and the derived category in the knowledge-
production process. The distinction between explanatory and prescriptive sciences 
is made where their roles in the knowledge-production process are defined and 
explicated in terms of decision-choice rationality in the knowledge-production 
process. The possibility space is used to initialize the epistemic algorithm while 
the defective information structure and the nature of cognitive processing define 
the epistemological terrain. The introduction of the defective information structure 
strips off the a-prior condition of exactness in knowledge and science. In this way, 
a framework is created to provide the epistemic conditions for the use of the fuzzy 
paradigm that may or may not support the conclusions from the classical 
paradigm. 
Given the possibility and the possibility space, Chapter 3 introduces the 
concepts of probability and probability space from which their roles to the theory 
of the knowledge square are made explicit. The nature and the need for 
probabilistic reasoning in the process of knowing are developed and shown to be 
related to all areas of exact and inexact sciences and other knowledge areas. The 
concept of probability is explicated with discussions on the conditions of its 
measurement and related to the concepts of possibility and possibility space in 
order to specify the probabilistic epistemic elements. From the possibility space 
the probabilistic epistemic elements are constrained by possibility and 
impossibility as viewed in terms of duality under the principle of fuzzy 
continuum. The probability space that is conceptually presented here incorporates 
exact and inexact probability values and related to fuzzy-random process. In this 
respect the probability space in its general form is rightly called the fuzzy 
probability space where the probabilistic epistemic elements are called fuzzy 
probabilistic epistemic elements. 
The concept of probability is related to the concept of information 
incompleteness which defines the other component of the defective information 
structure on top of information vagueness which the other component of defective 
information structure discussed in the possibility space. The effects of the 
defective information structure in defining and specifying the epistemological 
space are made explicit and then related to the paradigm developments. The 
conditions of paradigm development are related to the classical paradigm with its 

Preface 
XV
 
laws of thought, logic and mathematics. Similarly, the conditions of paradigm 
development are related to the fuzzy paradigm with its laws of thought, logic and 
mathematics. These conditions are connected to the concept of exactness-
inexactness duality and dualism of epistemic actions over the epistemological 
space. The conditions of exactness-inexactness dualism are linked to the principle 
of the excluded middle of the classical paradigm which works with exact 
epistemological space defined by an exact and complete or incomplete 
information structure. The conditions of exactness-inexactness duality are linked 
to the principle of the continuum of the fuzzy paradigm which works on an inexact 
epistemological space defined by an inexact and complete or incomplete 
information structure. The exact classical probability space is abstracted from the 
exact epistemological space; the fuzzy probability space is abstracted from the 
inexact epistemological space. 
The probability space is then linked to explanatory and prescriptive sciences in 
terms of what there is and what ought to be in order to specify the epistemic cord 
that connects to the space of the epistemic reality with defined fuzzy risk and 
stochastic risk. The fuzzy and stochastic risks are connected to the concept of an 
irreducible core of general uncertainty and used as fuzzy-stochastic conditionality 
for knowledge and truth verification, falsification and corroboration in order to 
construct the space of the actual. The uses of the fuzzy and stochastic risks extend 
to scientific, technological, engineering and mathematical systems. 
Chapter 4 is used to present the concept and the space of the epistemic actual as 
the fourth building block in the theory of the knowledge square. The conditions 
and the properties of the space of the epistemic actual and its relationship to reality 
are offered and distinguished from the ontological actual. The manner in which 
the probabilistic epistemic elements enter into the space of the epistemic reality is 
discussed under the presence of ambiguities and inexactness. The analytical 
process of conversional linkages requires the explications of the key concepts of 
epistemology and methodology where the similarities and differences are made 
explicit and connected to the concepts of cognitive frame, toolbox frame and 
epistemic frame as defining the space of methodology. 
 The thinking instruments of analytic and synthetic logics are structured for 
understanding in the applications of fuzzy and classical paradigms. The 
differences and similarities in the paradigms are made explicit through the 
concepts of discreteness and continuum as they relate to exact and inexact 
symbolism in information representations and logical manipulations under 
defective information structure. The framework is analytically connected to the 
relational structure of nominalism, constructionism and reductionism in the 
knowledge-development processes. The meta-theoretic frame leads to a situation 
where a distinction is made between ontological information and epistemological 
information where the game of the knowledge-development is to show the identity 
of the two information sets of the same epistemic element. The central analytical 
positions of the theory of the knowledge square as a meta-theory on the theory of 
knowledge are summarized for reflections leading to the discussions on the space 
of the paradigms of thought and emergence of the fuzzy and classical epistemic 
systems.  

XVI 
Preface
 
In chapter 5, the analytical frame for the development of paradigms of thought 
over the epistemological space is presented. The concept of a paradigm is 
introduced, defined and explicated in relation to the defective information 
structure that allows conceptual constructs of exact and inexact epistemological 
spaces. The exact epistemological space is related to the conditions required for 
the development of the structure of exact symbolism and the logical rigidity of the 
classical analytics and their relationship to the classical paradigm, its laws of 
thought and mathematics of reasoning. Similarly, the inexact epistemological 
space is related to the conditions required for the development of the structure of 
inexact symbolism and the logical flexibility of the fuzzy analytics and their 
relationship to the fuzzy paradigm, its laws of thought and mathematics of 
reasoning. The conditions determining the foundations of both the classical and 
fuzzy epistemological spaces relative to information representations and 
knowledge developments are presented with some analytical clarity of their 
differences and similarities.  
The foundations of the classical paradigm are connected to dualism, and  those 
of the fuzzy paradigm are connected to duality and related to the fundamental 
continuum where the relationships  are then discussed in terms of negative and 
positive characteristic sets that are used to establish the conceptual identities of the 
epistemic elements relative to the ontological elements. The natures of the degrees 
of exactness and inexactness embodied in both classical and fuzzy laws of thought 
are brought forward and related to the classical epistemic rationality and fuzzy 
epistemic rationality. The role and effects on quantity-quality-time space are 
examined where the structures of the paradigm developments are related to the 
concepts of fuzzy and stochastic conditionalities. The chapter is concluded with 
the summaries of the epistemic pillars of classical and fuzzy paradigms. 
Chapter 6 is devoted to the critical examination of the relationships among 
information, fuzziness, and science, the theory of the knowledge square and the 
claims of exact sciences. Here, the space of knowing is partitioned into science 
and non-science and their concepts explicated. The space of science is partitioned 
into exact and inexact and the conditions that define their boundaries over the 
general epistemological space are examined. The chapter is also used to discuss 
the foundational conditions of exact and inexact symbolisms and then related to 
definitions, explications and the claim of the existence of exact science. The 
concept of irreducible core of inexactness is introduced through the fuzzy process 
where definitional and explicator sets are used to link common language to the 
language of science. 
The axioms of definability and explicability are presented and explained in 
relation to exact and inexact symbolisms for information representation through 
the introduction of definitional and explicator functions. The conditions of the 
existence of an exact symbolism in science, logic and mathematics are presented 
and linked to a fixed point theorem. Definitional and explicator fixed point 
theorems for the existence of exact symbolism are presented where the theorem of 
non-existence of exact symbolism is advanced and proven. The theorem of non-
existence of exact symbolism presents a challenge to the classical paradigm as a 
general information processing instrument for thought and knowledge production. 

Preface 
XVII
 
This challenge leads to the discussions of the affirmation of inexact symbolism 
and the emergence of intuitionist paradigm with its logic and mathematics and 
then to the fuzzy paradigm and its logic and mathematics. 
Chapter 7 is utilized to examine the relational conditions of the defective 
information structures for the cognitive works in the epistemological space and 
how these works connect to the ontological space through the understanding of the 
concepts of matter, energy and information as a fundamental relation that connects 
the ontological space to the epistemological space through the conversional power 
of the information process. The characteristic sets that generate inputs into  
the information process in the ontological space is taken to be exact while the 
characteristic sets that generate inputs into the information process in the 
epistemological space is taken to be inexact by the nature of human limitations. 
There are discussions for where the epistemic process works for the conditions of 
exactness to the conditions of inexactness. The nature of defective information 
structure over the epistemological space is argued to hold for all knowledge 
sectors including science and hence any segment of science cannot be claimed to 
be unquestionably exact. 
It is the presence of defective information structure, as characterizing the 
epistemic space, that provides the driving force for the development of logics and 
mathematics of possibility and probability to obtain the conditions and 
measurements of fuzzy and stochastic conditionalities and the associated risks in 
knowledge systems and applications leading to the introduction of the irreducible  
core of epistemic risk. The defining characteristics of science, non-science, and 
exact science are discussed and related to the nature of information structure 
assumed, the objectivity claimed and quantitative disposition imposed. The 
chapter is concluded with the discussions on the relationships among knowledge 
items, conditions of justification, corroboration and verification in the acceptance 
processes for an epistemic item to enter the epistemic reality. 
Chapter 8 is the concluding chapter for the development of the monograph 
which is devoted to a meta-theory on knowledge and the examination of 
conditions for the development of the fuzzy rational foundations of exact and 
inexact sciences. The identities of knowledge and science are examined through 
the introduction of empirical and axiomatic conditions in defining and establishing 
the primary category for the foundation and the initial information for categorial 
conversions. The relative concepts of empirical ontology, empirical epistemology, 
axiomatic ontology and axiomatic epistemology are introduced in relation to the  
initial information structure accepted to allow the comparative examination of 
what there is and what the knower knows. These concepts lead us to examining the 
objectives and classification of science into exact and inexact sciences and then 
into explanatory and prescriptive sciences. The discussion leads to a summary 
case in support of the need for fuzzy paradigm as a generalized information 
processing machine over the epistemological space in the knowledge production. 
Scientific and non-scientific methodologies are discussed in relation to toolboxes 
available for information-knowledge transformations. The manner in which 
cognitive agents are integrated into the epistemic process is discussed. 
 

Prologue 
Decision-choice agents function as cognitive agents before undertaking decision-
choice action in all spaces of human endeavor. The work of cognitive agents is an 
information collection and processing into a knowledge system. In other words, 
there is a cognitive mapping from the information space into the knowledge space 
where such a mapping is an input transformation module. The work of the 
decision-choice agent is the use of the obtained knowledge as input into decision-
choice action. The idea of knowledge production as an output from information 
processing suggests to us that information is not knowledge; it has to be refined to 
take away noises that create unsureness in order to improve dependability of use 
in the general decision-choice process. This unsureness comes under the general 
cover of uncertainty. There are two important questions that must be answered in 
relation to total uncertainty. Where does this unsureness enter the space of 
operations of cognitive agents? What is the meaning of uncertainty and what is its 
definition? Can the concept of uncertainty be explicated to give it a scientific 
content that covers the essential total aspects of human ignorance in knowledge 
and decision processes? 
I.   The Concept of Uncertainty in General 
 
Unsureness is associated with doubt of desired outcome of processes in nature 
and society. Doubt is a cognitive state of being that gives rise to the feelings 
(thoughts) of many possibilities and probabilities of the realization of a process. 
The feelings (thoughts) of many possibilities and probabilities, without a clear 
knowledge of what possible and probable outcome would be realized, give rise to 
uncertainties. 
 
Definition: Uncertainty 
 
Uncertainty is a cognitive state of being whose information and processing 
capacity constrain the abilities of cognitive agents to derive exact knowledge 
about possibilities and probabilities of realizations of outcomes of processes in  
 
 
 

XX 
Prologue
 
nature and society, as such, every claim of knowledge item resides in the true-
false duality with partial state of truth with a degree of false support that creates 
partial confidence in the decision agent’s choice actions. 
The understanding of uncertainty in language and science has claimed the efforts 
of many important minds and yet its conceptual definition and explication seem to 
elude clarity in the knowing and decision-making processes that must be related to 
knowledge which also contains cognitive awareness. At the level of awareness, 
uncertainty is an information phenomenon. At the level of knowing, uncertainty is 
phenomena of defective information structure, and paradigms as information-
processing modules. At the level of choice, uncertainty is a decision-choice 
phenomenon. The uncertainties about knowledge production may be attributed to 
the deficiency in the understanding of the nature of the epistemological space that 
carries the information input into the epistemic processing system where actions 
and outcomes can reduce the ignorance of the cognitive agents. In this framework, 
information is a primary category of the epistemic process; knowledge is its 
derivative, and ignorance is a derivative from knowledge which gives rise to 
uncertainty. The general framework of human action is such that uncertainty is 
related to ignorance which is related to information as an input for knowledge 
production. The outcomes of knowledge production are the results of activities in 
the decision-choice space. Uncertainty, in relation to ignorance of cognitive agents, 
is related to a number of conceptions of types of ignorance rooted in the nature of 
the information structure that is believed to be available as input into the 
knowledge-production process. 
In this respect, the first encounter of uncertainty may be seen at the primary 
level of knowing in terms of information characterization as input into the 
epistemic process over the epistemological space. It is useful to see uncertainties 
as the disparities between ontological information and epistemic information 
regarding any particular phenomenon at the threshold of knowledge production. In 
this way, uncertainties are seen as characteristics of the information-knowledge 
activities of cognitive agents in the epistemological space relative to the 
ontological space. The differences are the resulting reflections of the nature of the 
epistemological space, and due to two factors of incomplete reception of the 
ontological information characteristics (quantity of information) on one hand, and 
vagueness and ambiguities of the received information signals (quality of 
information) as they are cognitively coded and linguistically represented for the 
epistemic processing machine (the paradigm of thought). 
It may be pointed out, as it has been argued elsewhere; there is neither 
ontological uncertainty nor ontological risk [R11.22]. What we have are 
epistemological uncertainty and risk. What are present in the ontological space are 
continual substitution-transformation processes with a continuum in the quality-
quantity duality and neutrality of time as the environments of the ontological 
elements change to define new conditions of  relationality. In human actions,  
 
 
 
 

Prologue 
XXI
 
however, we are presented with epistemological uncertainty and epistemological 
risk that flow from ignorance created from the defective information structure for 
epistemic processing by cognitive agents. The problem, in general, is to 
understand the epistemological uncertainty, how the uncertainty is transformed 
into risk in human action and to design solutions to reduce the uncertainty and the 
corresponding risk. Over the epistemological space, therefore, the less defective is 
the information structure, and the more efficient is the paradigm of thought, the 
less is the cognitive ignorance and the greater is the epistemic certainty. From the 
viewpoint of logic as a guide of reasoning and thinking, Bertrand Russell’s advice 
is useful. 
 
The philosophical importance of logic may be illustrated by 
the fact that this confusion--- which is still committed by most 
writers---- obscure not only the whole study of the forms of 
judgment and inference, but also the relations of things to their 
qualities, of-concrete existence to abstract concepts, and of the 
world of sense to the world of Platonic ideas. Peano and Frege, 
who pointed out the error, did so for technical reasons, and 
applied their logic mainly to technical developments; but the 
philosophical importance of the advance which they made is 
impossible to exaggerate. 
 
The importance of the concept of quality in the Russell’s reflection cannot be 
overlook. It is an important component of the fuzzy logical and analytical system 
since it introduces subjectivity and judgment into the knowledge production 
system by internalizing the cognitive agent. It is also, here, that fuzzy mathematics 
and fuzzy logic are inseparable in the fuzzy paradigm of thought. 
 
II.   Uncertainty and Qualitative-Quantitative Dispositions 
 
The information received through the acquaintances of the characteristic set has 
qualitative disposition and quantitative disposition, both of which must be 
combined into one in the knowledge-production process to compute the 
knowledge content that will support decision-choice actions by decision-choice 
agents. In this respect, we separate knowledge-production activities from non-
knowledge production activities of decision-choice agents. Decision-making in the 
field of knowledge-production entails uncertainty. Similarly, decision-making in 
the use of the results of knowledge production entails uncertainty viewed in terms 
of hesitation of action due to lacks of surety of outcomes. 
The qualitative disposition of information is associated with vagueness, 
ambiguities, imprecision and others under the general structure of fuzziness over 
the epistemological space. The information containing these characteristics is  
 
 
 
 

XXII 
Prologue
 
termed fuzzy information structure, which gives rise to fuzzy uncertainty and 
fuzzy risk. The presence of fuzzy information structure is the result of 
acquaintance, human limitations in observation, human langue in classification 
and communication and others in developing the sense data for processing. In a 
broad general way, therefore, qualitative disposition of information may be 
associated with the source reception of information where real situations, as 
appear to cognitive agents, are not crisp and completely deterministic. It 
originates from the construct of knowledge possibilities. This is so irrespective of 
whether one is dealing with systems of simplicity or complexity. The difference 
in terms of crispness and rigidity is in degrees and varies over subjects and 
phenomena. 
The quantitative disposition of information is associated with incompleteness of 
the volume of information in terms of cognitive agents receiving full information 
characteristics about any phenomenon. The quantity of information is a volume 
phenomenon of acquaintance, which may be related to some form of measurement 
with a specific unit. It originates from the construct of knowledge probability that 
may be available for practice and action. At the level of information collection, 
therefore, there are two sources of uncertainties. One type of uncertainty is due to 
qualitative disposition of information termed fuzzy uncertainty and corresponding 
to it is the fuzzy risk. The other type of uncertainty is due to quantitative 
disposition of information termed as stochastic uncertainty and corresponding to it 
is the stochastic risk.  The fuzzy uncertainty flows from possibilistic information 
while the stochastic uncertainty flows from probabilistic (incomplete) information. 
The analytical task is how to identify and combine then for understanding human 
decision-choice actions and the risk of practice. 
At the level of knowledge-production, and given the initial information 
conditions, there is an uncertainty that is associated with the selected paradigm of 
the knowledge production. This uncertainty will be characterized as epistemic 
uncertainty that is associated with the paradigm used in the information 
processing to obtain thought or knowledge. Here, we have fuzzy epistemic 
uncertainty due to the use of fuzzy paradigm, its laws of thought and mathematics. 
There is the classical epistemic uncertainty due to the use of the classical 
paradigm, its laws of thought and mathematics. At the level of decision choice 
actions, there is an uncertainty due to the uses and misuses of the knowledge as an 
input into the decision-choice action that may require judgment as decision-choice 
agents pass through the penumbral regions of decision-knowledge interactive 
domains. This is the decision-choice uncertainty. All these types of uncertainty are 
defined in the epistemological space, and hence from the viewpoint of the meta-
theoretic construct in the current work. There is no ontological uncertainty or risk. 
The types and the paths of uncertainty are shown in Figure A. 
 

Prologue 
XXIII
 
Exact Ontological Information
Qualitative Characteristics
Quantitative Characteristics
 Vagueness and Ambiguities 
   Volume Incompleteness 
       Possibilistic Information 
Probabilistic Information
  Epistemological Information 
    Fuzzy  Uncertainty
Stochastic Uncertainty 
          Epistemological Information Uncertainty
Epistemic  Uncertainty
Fuzzy Epistemic Uncertainty
Classical Epistemic Uncertainty
Decision-Choice Uncertainty
Stochastic 
Fuzzy 
Uncertainty 
Fuzzy 
Stochastic 
Uncertainty 
Fig. A A Cognitive Geometry of the Concept and Types of Uncertainty  in Knowledge-Production and 
Decision-Choice Processes 
 
 
Any demarcation of science must take account of the nature of information 
structure that is assumed, the information representation needed, and the paradigm 
required for processing the information to attain the knowledge. The process must 
also account for the nature of the corresponding uncertainty and the corresponding 
epistemic risk, and how the uncertainty and risk differ in demarcations relative to 
the removal of the lack of surety about the knowledge. These will indicate to 
cognitive agents the type of the epistemological space that is assumed for the 

XXIV 
Prologue
 
information processing.  It must be understood that the epistemological space is a 
decision-choice created that includes information structure and the cognitive 
agents as part of knowledge dynamics. The cognitive and decision-choice agents 
do not exist outside the epistemological space which is their creation.  Neither do 
they exist outside the epistemic process for knowledge development. The nature of 
the epistemological space is transformed by cognitive agents, who are in turn 
transformed by their activities in search of knowledge for effective decision-
choice actions. The epistemological controversies, their progresses and resolutions 
in the knowledge production, can only be resolved in the decision-choice space 
that admits of subjectivity, objectivity, quality and quantity in order to construct a 
falsification, justification and corroboration of what constitutes knowledge in the 
epistemological space. This knowledge is never the final one, and is constantly 
being refined by fuzzy and stochastic tunings as the epistemological information is 
improved. The cognitive decision-choice agents constitute the primary category 
from which the epistemological space is derived by their actions and the epistemic 
process is constructed from their decision-choice modulus. 
Over the epistemological space, therefore, a revolutionary intellectual program 
that satisfies a new methodological system for operations is not merely negative to 
a system of the existing acceptable intellectual ideology. It is not a simple 
conceptual refutation of a dying social system of knowledge production, but it is a 
positively creative epistemic theory, derived in establishing a new guiding light to 
the emerging intellectual order that will include the vestiges of the old order. In 
this respect, we must see the unfolding of the positive enveloping path of human 
intellectual progress as the forces of ideological limitation of old intellectual order 
crumble under its own weight, with the emergence of a new paradigm to assert 
itself in the epistemological space, to finally liberate great minds from mental 
habits of intellectual slavery that effectively imprison imagination and creative 
thinking within the walls of intellectual habits and ideological constraints without 
a breathing space. The continual fuzzy-stochastic tuning and retuning demand the 
development of an intellectual culture of doubt, where we link the past to  
the future through the eyes of the present, for creative improvements by 
examining paradigmatic and philosophical categories. In this respect, the 
reflection of Bertrand Russell is useful 
 
And since the philosophies of the past belong to one or other 
of few great types--- types which in our day are perpetually 
recurring--- we may learn, from examining the greatest 
representative of any type, what are the grounds for such a 
philosophy. We may even learn, by observing the contradictions 
and inconsistencies from which no system hitherto propounded 
is free, what are the fundamental objections to the type in 
question, and how these objections are to be avoided. But in 
such inquiries the philosopher is no longer explained 
psychologically; he is examined as the advocate of what he 
holds to be a body of philosophic truth. 
 
 

Prologue 
XXV
 
This Russell’s reflection is amplified by Kwame Nkrumah’s reflection that simply 
states: 
 
The critical studies of the philosophies of the past should lead 
to the study of modern theories, for these latter, born of the fire 
of contemporary struggles are militant and alive….Philosophy, 
in understanding human society, calls for an analysis of facts 
and events, and an attempt to see how they fit into human life, 
and so how they make up human experience. In this way, 
philosophy, like history, can come to enrich, indeed to define the 
experience of man [R14.85, p. 3] 
 
A search for understanding the rise of different paradigms of thought over the 
epistemological space has been the driving force of this monograph. The main 
concern, at the moment, is the understanding of the relative positions and strengths 
of classical and fuzzy paradigms, and the kinds of thinking systems that they 
engender. The increasing expansion of research in fuzzy system, logic, 
mathematics and technology, and the need to solve the problems of vagueness, 
quality and inexact symbolism, require a philosophical action and explanation of 
their scientific directions and specifications of the applicable areas of their 
applications in all areas of knowledge production. This, we hope, will allow an 
attempt to provide a unified epistemic frame for further research on inexact 
epistemological space, and the development of the fuzzy paradigm, its logic and 
mathematics, and their uses in the knowledge production, especially in the areas 
where quality and vagueness are inseparably connected to the phenomena, and 
where quantitative transformations of quality are not available. The hope is that, a 
path will be opened to integrate knowledge sectors through an epistemic method 
of unified information processing capability where the knowing is integrated as 
part of human behavior. A reflection on the problem of knowledge production  
as an automatic self-control system is presented by the following statement by 
E.C. Harwood. 
 
In their attempt to know more about ‘knowledge,’ Dewey and 
Bentley have regarded knowing as an aspect of human behavior. 
No inner knower, or mind, or soul that does the knowing is 
assumed. They take man as they find him behaving in his cosmos 
or universe, never apart from it. Likewise, they take whatever is 
known in the cosmos or universe as they find it, never in 
isolation from it [R8.26, p.8]. 
 
In the development of the meta-theory of knowledge, a counsel is taken from a 
number of African traditional thoughts. No one is without knowledge except he 
who asks no questions; Knowledge is like a garden: if it is not cultivated, it cannot 
be harvested; not to know is ignorance and not to want to know is mental slavery. 
The wisdom of today is a folly of tomorrow where the breaking day has wisdom 
and the falling day has simple experience. This counsel fits into the notion that 

XXVI 
Prologue
 
every self-contained paradigm must be an epistemic program. The epistemic 
program must be constructed from an alternative representation of the information 
system with the rules of combination. The information representation and the rules 
of combination must be positive and organic in such a way as to replace or 
absolve existing paradigms as well as to be contestant to possibly emerging 
paradigms. The first, necessary and important condition for the paradigm’s 
development is its acceptance. Its development must be confined to those that 
understand the existing paradigms and their analytical difficulties and how the 
new paradigm can resolve the analytical difficulties and existing paradoxes. It is 
under this framework that the theory of the knowledge square is developed in this 
monograph. It presents aspects of computational epistemology as a guide to the 
understanding of information-knowledge structure in the processes of knowing. 
As used here, the primary purpose of the computational epistemology is to provide 
a qualitative and quantitative framework of computable logical system to justify 
epistemic claims, establish knowledge distance between an ontological element 
and epistemic element of the same phenomenon, and abstract an epistemic 
conditionality in the support of epistemic claim. Such a framework that deals with 
the problem of quality and quantity finds its analytical tools from the fuzzy 
paradigm, its logic and mathematics. It belongs to the thought systems of 
computational philosophy which will help us to understand the complex system of 
knowledge production, reduction of ignorance, uncertainty and risk in human 
actions in all areas of human endeavors. 
 
III.   A Note on Epistemic Conditionality and Knowing 
 
The emphasis on the epistemic activities in the knowledge production system must 
center around the understanding of the factors that affect the thinking system as a 
self-correcting process which enlarges the mind in the cognition but not simply on 
the orthodoxy or heterodoxy. Scientific philosophy must assist us in search of 
efficient path fot the knowledge-production process. The search for the optimal 
path of learning-thinking process must lead to the development of the needed 
logical framework for the establishment of the initial conditions, paradigm of 
thought, and epistemic transversality conditions for the optimal path of the 
cognitive process. The epistemic transversality conditions are simply the terminal 
conditions that help to distinguish a knowledge item from other admissible 
knowledge claims at the end of the temporally epistemic journey, which is 
induced by a paradigm, given the initial conditions. There are two types of 
epistemic transversality conditions that are of special interest to us. They are 
classical epistemic transversality conditions and the fuzzy epistemic transversality 
conditions. The classical epistemic transversality conditions require the epistemic 
risk to converge to zero through the stochastic tuning process where the initial 
conditions of limited information exactness and the classical epistemic 
transversality conditions are taken as sufficient to identify and claim a knowledge 
item with stochastic conditionality that tends to zero, as the quantitative 
information space widens within the classical paradigm with its logic. The fuzzy 
epistemic transversality conditions require the epistemic risk to converge to a 

Prologue 
XXVII
 
positive value of the core of the risk through the fuzzy-stochastic tuning process 
where the initial conditions of limited information inexactness and the fuzzy 
epistemic transversality conditions are necessary to identify a knowledge item 
with fuzzy-stochastic conditionality, as the quantitative information space widens 
and the space of vagueness of information decreases within the fuzzy paradigm 
with its logic and mathematics. 
The initial conditions, the paradigm and the epistemic transversality conditions 
may be related conditions of simplicity and complexity on one hand and relevance 
and irrelevance on the other hand. It is somehow accepted that one of the principal 
considerations guiding the process of creating theoretical frames is simplicity. 
Behind this simplicity is a search of elegance. Behind this search of elegance, are 
complex inexact information inputs that are many times difficult to represent as 
simple and exact, except by imposing a set of assumptions. The set of assumptions 
may render the resulting theory simple and irrelevant, especially when there are 
simultaneous existing of quality and quantity with continual transformations as 
time proceeds. Simplicity involves conception of phenomena (such as particles, 
points and instantaneous changes) with fixed quality. Complexity involves 
conception of phenomena (such as living organism, social organism, and gradual 
transformations) with both quantitative and qualitative changes. The main task of 
this monograph is the analysis of the analytical structures of complex and simple 
theories, as they relate to initial information conditions, paradigms, and 
transversality conditions, for identifying epistemic truths and reality in all areas of 
knowledge production. 
We have kept in mind that the effective use of a paradigm requires an 
evaluation of the environment of the theoretical and applied works of one’s 
subject area of study and how this area is related to other areas of the knowledge 
production. It, further, requires a critical analysis of the social circumstances 
surrounding the particular area of cognition, and its relative contributions to the 
general system of knowing. All these constitute parts of the information set, and 
indeed, they constitute important information characteristics for the initialization 
of the epistemic journey over the epistemological space. It is the subject areas of 
knowing that define the variable initial starting points as well as the varying 
terminal points of the epistemic journey. 
 
 

Contents 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure:  
     The Points of Entry and Departure.................................................................1 
     1.1   Ponts of Entry and Departure of the Theory of the Knowledge Square......2 
     1.2   The Knowledge Square...............................................................................7 
     1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential Space U
.......9 
 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concept of the  
     Possibility Space, P  ....................................................................................13 
     2.1   The Concepts of Possibility and Possibility Space ...................................13 
     2.2   The Possibility Space, the Spaces of Acquantance and Language............16 
     2.3   From the Space of Acquaintance to the Possibility Space........................20 
     2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds in the  
             Knowledge-Production Process................................................................25 
             2.4.1   Classical Paradigm, Fuzzy Paradigm, Possibility Space and  
                        Possible Worlds .............................................................................29 
             2.4.2   Mathematics in the Classification of Science  and the  
                        Epistemic Process ..........................................................................30 
     2.5   The Possibility Space, the Primary Category and the Derived  
             Category of Knowledge............................................................................32 
             2.5.1   Essential Postulates of the Primary and Derived Categories .........33 
             2.5.2   The Establishing Characteristics of the Primary and Derived  
                        Categories ......................................................................................34 
     2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences in the 
             Knowledge-Production Process................................................................35 
 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability  
     and the Probability Space ( B ) .....................................................................43 
     3.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Probability Space B ....43 
     3.2   The Concept of Probability and the Construction of the Probability  
             Space.........................................................................................................44 
     3.3   The Probability Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences................51 
 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space  
     of the Epistemic Actual ( A ) ........................................................................55 
     4.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Epistemic Actual ...........55 
 

XXX 
Contents
 
     4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality.............63 
             4.2.1   Clarifications in the Ontological Concepts ....................................63 
             4.2.2   Clarification of Epistemological Concepts ....................................65 
 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems 
     under Knowledge Production........................................................................73 
     5.1   Some Essential Definitions on the Path of Knowing................................73 
     5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws of Thought in the  
             Knowledge-Production Process................................................................75 
     5.3   Similarities and Differences between Dualism and Duality in the 
             Development of Laws of Thought ............................................................78 
     5.4   Exactness, Inexactness and the Classical Laws of Thought......................81 
     5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought ..........................86 
             5.5.1   How Do the Fuzzy Laws of Thought Apply? ................................87 
 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact  
     Science .............................................................................................................95 
     6.1   The Partition of Science into Exact and Inexact Sciences ........................95 
     6.2   Problems of Explication and Definition in the Knowledge-Production 
             Process......................................................................................................97 
             6.2.1   Concepts of Definition, Explication and Exactness in  
                        Information-Knowledge Representations ......................................98 
             6.2.2   Exactness, Fuzzy Definitional Set and the Construct of the  
                        Explicator Set.................................................................................99 
     6.3   Ontological Space, Epistemologial Space and Defective Information 
             Structure..................................................................................................103 
             6.3.1   Defective Information Structure and Cognition...........................103 
     6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point  
             Theorem..................................................................................................106 
             6.4.1   Qualitative Disposition, Vagueness and Exact Symbolism .........106 
             6.4.2   Approaches to Solving the Vagueness Problem  in  
                        Symbolism...................................................................................109 
             6.4.3   Definability and Explicability Axioms in the Language L ........113 
 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics  
     and Sciences...................................................................................................117 
     7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information Structure.........118 
             7.1.1   Inexactness, Exactness and Categorial Conversion in the  
                        Epistemological Space.................................................................123 
     7.2   Science and Non-science as Linguistic Categories in the  
             Information-Knowledge Production Process..........................................127 
             7.2.1   Characteristic Sets for Definition and Explication  of Science....127 
             7.2.2   Explanation, Definition and the Grammar of Knowledge  
                        Areas............................................................................................130 
     7.3   Science, Grammar and Acceptance of Knowledge.................................133 
 

Contents 
XXXI
 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square.............139 
     8.1   The Identities of Knowledge and Science...............................................139 
     8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of  
             Exact Science..........................................................................................144 
             8.2.1   Goals and Objectives of Science..................................................145 
             8.2.2   Classification of Science..............................................................148 
     8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology ....................................155 
 
References ..........................................................................................................163 
     R1.  Bounded Rationality in Knowledge Systems..........................................163 
     R2.  Category Theory in Mathematics, Logic and Sciences...........................164 
     R3.  Fuzzy Logic in Knowledge Production ..................................................165 
     R4.  Fuzzy Mathematics in Approximate Reasoning  under Conditions  
             of Inexactness and Vagueness ................................................................168 
     R5.  Fuzzy Optimization, Decision-Choices and Approximate Reasoning  
             in Sciences ..............................................................................................173 
     R6.  Fuzzy Probability, Fuzzy Random Variable and Random Fuzzy  
             Variable ..................................................................................................175 
     R7.  Ideology and the Knowledge Construction Process................................177 
     R8.  Information, Thought and Knowledge....................................................179 
     R9.  Language and the Knowledge-Production Process.................................182 
     R10.  Probabilistic Concepts and Reasoning..................................................183 
     R11.  Optimality, Classical Exactness and Equilibrium  in Knowledge  
               Systems.................................................................................................185 
     R12.  Possible Worlds and the Knowledge Production Process.....................189 
     R13.  Rationality, Information, Games, Conflicts and Exact Reasoning........190 
     R14.  Rationality and Philosophy of Exact and Inexact Sciences  
               in the Knoeledge Production.................................................................191 
     R15.  Riskiness, Decision-Choice Process and Paradoxes  in Knowledge 
               Constuction...........................................................................................196 
     R16.  The Prescriptive Science, Theory of Planning  and Cost-Benefit  
               Analysis in Knowledge Construction ...................................................197 
     R17.  Social Sciences, Mathematics and the Problems of Exact and  
               Inexact Methods of Thought.................................................................198 
     R18.  Theories of Utility, Expected Utility and Exact Problems  
               of Exact Methods..................................................................................199 
     R19.  Vagueness, Approximation and Reasoning  in the Knowledge 
               Construction..........................................................................................200 
 
Index ...................................................................................................................205 
 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 1–12. 
springerlink.com                                     © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 1 
The Theory of the Knowledge Square  
and the Information Structure: The Points  
of Entry and Departure  
In a number of my writings on philosophy of science, the theory of knowledge and 
foundations of fuzzy laws of thought, I view them from the vantage point of the 
theories of economic behavior, complexity of social dynamics, self-correcting 
systems, decision-choice systems and synergetic behavior of systems rather than 
as a philosopher or a mathematician. From this vantage point, I introduced an 
analytical concept of the knowledge square to allow me to deal with the problems 
of the relative positions of the critical concepts of exactness and inexactness in the 
general knowledge-production process. The problems of exactness and 
inexactness as seen in the exact-inexact duality are related to quantity and quality 
of information structures in categorial conversions and epistemic transformations 
of information signals into knowledge elements in the epistemological space 
[R2.3] [R2.10] [R11.21] [R11.22].  
The discussions in this monograph are to make explicit the analytical strengths 
of the theory of the knowledge square and its conceptual path for knowing. It will 
also indicate the required logical structure of knowing. The theory of the 
knowledge square is to assist in assembling methods and logic to be used as 
analytical instruments and techniques to organize the process in cognition in order 
to define the path of thought as an organic enveloping of decision-choice actions. 
The objective is to simplify the complexity of knowing through some logical filling 
under some rationality. The analytical position in this theory of the knowledge 
square is that the whole theory of knowing is decision-choice determined from 
defective information structure. It is under the conditions of decision-choice 
determination that cognition traverses over the epistemological space to transform 
information into claimed knowledge which is always conditional but not absolute. 
The conditionality specifies the applicable areas of claims and the degrees of risk 
associated with the epistemic claims. The rise of this conditionality and the factors 
that motivate it are made explicit in the theory of the knowledge square and shown 
to relate to quality and quantity of information.  

2 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
The theory also offers us an approach to conceptualize the importance of and 
the relative positions between the classical paradigm and the fuzzy paradigm as 
we view their logics and their corresponding mathematics that are used to guide 
reasoning in complex systems of universality and particularities in all levels of 
philosophy, physical, chemical, biological and social sciences and their mutual 
interactions under conditions of time, quality and quantity. In the whole process of 
knowledge construction and reduction, one encounters different problems of clear 
understanding of linguistic representations as well as interpretations of their 
meanings irrespective as to whether one is working in humanistic and non-
humanistic systems. The absence of clear understanding and unquestionable 
interpretation sometimes lead to claims of contradictions and paradoxes in 
knowledge acceptances as they relate to human experience and its management. 
The discussions and the geometry of Aristotelian logical opposites in the 
knowledge production process will be related to geometrically pyramidal 
structures in fuzzy logic and its opposites. In this respect, the meta-theory will 
bring into focus the sources of uncertainty and risk over the epistemological path. 
We shall specify the sets of conditions that give rise to the possible, the probable, 
the possibly probable, and the probably possible that lead to the theories of 
uncertainty, possibility, probability and inexact probability. 
1.1   Ponts of Entry and Departure of the Theory of the 
Knowledge Square 
The general foundation of our knowledge construction is shaky with some serious 
weak points such that the superstructure of our knowledge is being constructed 
without clear understanding of the pillars that support the house of knowledge that 
is being erected, and under continuously perpetual improvements and 
beautification. For example, there are some intellectual claims of existence of pure 
mathematics and exact science with some disrespect to distinguishing themselves 
from what they refer to as applied mathematics and inexact sciences in the domain 
of production of human knowledge. Interestingly, new knowledge seekers enter 
into the space of the knowledge search and build on the top of the knowledge 
house without examining the strength of its foundations and the pillars that 
support it. The contemporary information science, environmental science, 
clamatological science, medical and biological sciences and economics seem to 
suggest that this position of distinction between exact and inexact sciences cannot 
be held without question. In the process of our continual building and improving 
the house of knowledge, some initial foundational assumptions have come to be 
taken as natural and self-evident truths rather than as analytical conveniences in 
simplification and initialization of the building process. 
As such, the role of decision-choice process and its rationality in the 
knowledge-construction enterprise have been lost at higher levels of abstraction. 
These higher levels of abstraction are sometimes taken as justified by the assumed  
 

1.1   Ponts of Entry and Departure of the Theory of the Knowledge Square  
3
 
self-evident truths from the initial conditions. Our global knowledge structure has 
come to be accepted as real and completely believable to the neglect of the 
recognition that it is the building result of human cognitive construct with all its 
difficulties and flaws that need continual reexamination for cognitive tuning. 
Similarly, the logic of its construct has come to be accepted as the ultimate path to 
the knowledge house by the knowledge seekers including both the old and the new 
comers. The uncompromising belief in such an ultimate logical path becomes 
ideological which constrains the development of other possible logical categories 
in the possibility space. In this way, the belief imprisons imaginations and creative 
intuition within the wall of its ideology and refuses to allow cognitive freedom 
outside it. This seems to apply to all sectors of knowledge production, the process 
of teaching and learning at higher levels of education, research and knowledge 
search where one path of methodological reasoning is claimed to be the ultimate 
to a knowledge discovery. The belief-system is protected by those who have 
something to loose. A need arises to relax some of the initial assumptions that 
define the classical framework as the domain of rational knowledge development 
expands to meet new challenges of human decision-choice actions. 
The human knowledge construction operates through the dynamics of creative 
destruction where some old knowledge items, one time accepted as credible, 
become discredited and new ones are created in their places. This is the 
constructive-destructive duality with a continuum in the knowledge production 
process without end. Thus the development of human cognition runs into limits 
and the construction of the global knowledge house runs into material constraints. 
New experiences allow us to relax the material constraints and sometimes throw 
the existing logic into a flux. The foundation of the house of our knowledge 
construction is under continual conflicts in a true-false duality and quality-
quantity changes. These conflicts are useful in revealing points of critical stresses 
and the understanding of the conflicts at higher levels of reasoning among 
different knowledge sectors. The continual creation of these conflicts has two 
aggregate sources. One source is from the logic (methodology) of its construct. 
The other is from new experiences (changing information structure) that challenge 
our justified beliefs and the accepted knowledge elements. The aggregate 
epistemic effect is to continually reexamine the foundational path of our 
knowledge production itself and the strength of its analytical pillars that must be 
related to its very foundation; the foundation of thinking and knowing where the 
knowledge production is traversing on the enveloping path of the resultant forces 
of construction-destruction duality in a continuum. 
It is here that the theory of the knowledge square takes as its point of entry. It is 
meant to present a framework to examine the integrated key concepts and ideas of 
the building foundation of the house of the global knowledge. The concepts and 
ideas include measurements, certainty, vagueness, exactness, inexactness, 
particular, universal, symbolic representations, interpretations, laws of reason and 
many others. The essential utility here is the examination of human cognition into  
 

4 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
the forces at work in understanding nature and society, and how such understanding 
will provide a source of continual improvement in our justified belief system in 
using this understanding to examine claims of knowledge that offer us a useful 
toolbox to further understand the interactive forces of nature and society at work, 
and hence to manage society for the advantage of humans. The continual 
reexamination is demanded by the very nature of our knowledge production as self-
correction and self-improvement system. 
Traditionally, the forces of nature and society have been separated in our quest 
for understanding and knowledge without the understanding that nature imposes 
its will on the society while society imposes transformability on nature within 
defined boundaries of human capacity which expands with increasing knowledge. 
The forces of nature are considered beyond human intervention while the forces of 
society are subject to human creation and intervention. The methods of inquiry 
into these forces, as well their understanding, are also separated with less and 
lesser emphasis on the role that decision-choice processes play, particularly, in the 
knowledge sectors involving natural processes. It is only in some knowledge areas 
of social processes that human decision-choice activities in knowing are studied as 
part of the social process itself. It is not surprising that some subject areas of the 
knowledge-production process, such as mathematics, statistics and symbolic logic 
are studied, and presented as abstract systems devoid of human decision-choice 
actions and hence completely separated from the linguistic structure of human 
interactions, information and existence.  
The activities in these abstract systems are presented as games of thought 
within each system that is guided by strictly strategic rules of reasoning which 
then provide us with true-false configurations. Furthermore, the roles of 
institutions and those of social belief systems that either facilitate or restrain the 
domain of knowledge search are neglected. The end result has been a situation 
where some knowledge sub-structures have come to loose the basic notion that 
they are human constructs whose legitimacies are derived from the social system 
itself through collective decision-choice actions with vagueness, imperfections 
and inexactness. These qualitative elements of vagueness, logical imperfections 
and linguistic inexactness result in a situation where any claim of knowledge 
purity must be in degrees of perfection which are decision-choice determined. 
Our global knowledge system is a collection of cognitive models of interactions 
between ontology and epistemology with phrases of “what there is”, “what there is 
not”, “what ought to be”, “what could not be” and many similar linguistic 
characterizations of the knowable and unknowable phenomena through epistemic 
actions. The process of knowable and unknowable, with differential belief systems 
for their justifications, challenges human understanding of forces that are 
operating in the nature and society to shape their qualitative and quantitative 
structures. Our accepted knowledge is not the reality of these forces at work. It is 
simply an epistemic model of what our cognition and thought project. It is the 
recognition of, and the emphasis on the role of human decision-choice action in  
 

1.1   Ponts of Entry and Departure of the Theory of the Knowledge Square  
5
 
cognition, and the internalization of the role of the decision-choice processes in 
cognition, that the theory of the knowledge square presents a point of departure 
from the accepted tradition of knowledge production.  
It is in the search for a path to internalize the human decision-choice process, 
with its rationality, ambiguities in its language and faults of reasoning into the 
knowledge production process, that establishes an entry point for the theory of the 
knowledge square as an approach to understand claims and counter claims in 
science, non-science, exact science and inexact science. These points of entry and 
departure have been made possible from the developments of fuzzy paradigm 
whose laws of thought allow us to replace the classical law of excluded middle 
with the fuzzy law of continuum in order to internalize the decision-choice actions 
and deal with the complexity and synergetic structures. The approach taken here is 
not only that ontology and epistemology are seen in a unitary form, but that the 
process of knowing is separated from the methods of knowing and reconnected 
under the general unity of epistemics. 
 The theory of the knowledge square will allow us to place in proper 
interrelated epistemic modes, the dynamics of the essential components of 
methods and tools of knowledge production and the evolving path of the 
knowledge system. It will, further, allow us to demonstrate the unity of knowledge 
sectors where the study of natural sciences is embedded in the study of social 
sciences and the gains in the natural sciences reinforce the integrity of the study of 
the social sciences. The study of the social sciences is not embedded in the study 
of the natural science. From the viewpoint of social formation and in relation to 
cognition, there is no natural science without social science. In fact, a claim can be 
made that natural science is embedded in social science and that a progress in the 
study of categories of the natural sciences is a reflection in the progress in the 
study of categories of the social sciences. Areas of natural science and their 
studies are just as exact and certain to the extent to which social sciences and their 
studies are exact and certain through improved efficiencies of social management.  
The interesting thing is that humans are part of nature whose forces are under 
human cognition and whose process can not be separated from the society. The 
degrees of success of this cognition depend on the established social institutions 
that contain the social forces which are in turn under cognition and further 
institutional formation. In both cases of the study of forces of nature and society, 
cognitive agents interact and influence the subject of study, the problem selection 
and the outcomes of cognition, and all these take place always under a given 
social institutional configuration. The study of natural phenomena, just as the 
study of social phenomena, is a social activity governed by the dynamics of 
society as a self-regulating, self-correcting and self-exited system under continual 
quality-quantity transformations. 
The nature of categories of the natural sciences in terms of exactness and the 
efficiency of the study of the forces of nature, and the conclusions derived from 
the studies are reflections of the developmental complexities of the society, its  
 

6 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
institutions and methods of knowing. The developmental complexities of society 
are further complicated by the need to understand the equations of motion that 
govern their qualitative and quantitative dynamics and their interactions with non-
social processes. The knowledge about natural forces is also the knowledge about 
social forces and vice versa. In an essence, the knowledge about society and the 
knowledge about nature form an inseparable unit that reflects the existence of 
polarity, where each pole presents a duality [R2.9] [R11.20], [R11.21] [R14.29] 
[R14.30] that allows the understanding of the dynamics of the knowledge 
production. 
It is also from this angle of the concepts of polarity and duality, as reasoning 
instruments in the knowledge production process, that one may see the unity of 
science and a search for global systemicity and synergetics towards the knowledge 
production, where the geometry of thinking allows us to integrate the science of 
synergetics with complexity theory towards a universal principle of the knowledge 
production process. Unfortunately, our knowledge production system cannot take 
claim to any principle of universal validity. This seems to characterize both the 
natural and social sciences. The division of knowledge areas into natural, 
behavioral and social sciences with further sub-fields must be viewed as merely an 
analytical convenience of the enterprise of the knowledge production on the basis 
of decision-choice process with specified rationality and divisions of labor. Such 
divisions may be viewed in terms of sequential problem solving that allows social 
division of labor and specialization. From the point of view of societies, there is 
one knowledge house with many interconnected rooms and more rooms to be 
added for continual expansion and beautification. The question is: how is this 
house being constructed and how strong are its supporting pillars? 
It is the same decision-choice process that has artificially created exact and 
inexact sciences and maintains them with ideological vengeance and rigidity. It is 
also the same decision-choice process that will bring them into unity by dissolving 
the ideological walls that separate them. Our cognitive reflection is that exactness 
and inexactness exist in duality in the same way as, vagueness and clarity exist in 
duality where the understanding of the internal conflicts in their dualities provides 
us with conditions of categorial conversion from inexact to exact through a 
substitution-transformation process of logical dynamics in continuum. A question 
arises as to whether we consider exactness as primary logical category from 
which inexactness emerges as derived logical category or the other way around 
where inexactness constitutes the primary logical category from which exactness 
emerges as a derived logical category. By the use of instruments of the 
development in the theory of the knowledge square, we shall present a position 
that there are no differences between natural and social sciences and between 
exact and inexact sciences at the level of the path of knowing.  
The generally accepted social position and in the academy is that social science 
medical sciences, environmental sciences and behavioral sciences are inexact 
[R8.53][R8.54] [R14.88] [R14.97] and that natural science is exact. This is an 
ideology and we shall demonstrate that this ideology is created on a weak 
foundation and unsustainable assumption. The same characteristics that are used  
 

1.2   The Knowledge Square  
7
 
to separate science into exact and inexact sciences will be shown to unite them as 
a combinatorial knowledge-production unity. The same elements used to create 
accusations of inexactness against social and behavioral sciences will be used to 
strengthen them and then used as accusations to strip off conditions that define 
exactness of natural sciences. To do this, we must establish a universal principle 
of knowledge search and knowledge production that holds for all areas of 
cognition. Let us turn our attention to the structure and form of the epistemic 
process that will establish the universal principle and its conditions for knowledge 
production. The knowledge square provides us with a cognitive geometry of the 
universal sequence for the knowledge search, and this universal sequence will 
constitute the universal principle for knowledge development in the 
epistemological space. There is another thing in that the proponents of exactness 
in the knowledge production fail to account for the simultaneous existence of 
qualitative and quantitative characteristics of information characteristics of 
epistemic objects.  
1.2   The Knowledge Square 
What is the knowledge square and how is it related to the understanding of 
cognition and the establishment of the universal principle for knowledge search in 
the enterprise of knowledge production? Alternatively stated: what is the 
relationship between the knowledge square and the theory of knowledge? Our task 
which is a simple but difficult one is to define and specify the epistemic 
foundation of knowledge and how the evaluation of such a foundation is 
established by decision-choice processes of cognitive agents as part of the nature 
and society under epistemic processes. We shall then relate the theory of the 
knowledge square to the traditional view on the theory of knowledge that is 
decision-choice based. Within this decision-choice process, the knowledge square 
is established and composed of four epistemic building blocks with cognitive 
connecting cords that strengthen the foundation of the knowledge enterprise. 
These blocks are a) the potential space, b) the possibility space, c) the probability 
space, and d) the space of the actual. These spaces are knitted together by 
decision-choice actions of cognitive agents in the search for “what there is”, its 
knowability, explainability of its behavior, and the understanding of its 
substitution-transformation process. Together these blocks constitute the pillars of 
epistemology in a form that begins with the general and works its way to the 
specifics from the ontological space. In an essence, the development of the theory 
of the knowledge square is embedded in the general synergetic structures as 
geometry of cognition. The building blocks and their cognitive connecting cords 
as we will discuss are geometrically presented in Figure 1.2.1.  
 
 
 
 

8 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each of the building blocks is a family of categories. The cognitive connectors 
are logical processes that allow substitution-transformation processes to occur 
between blocks and within blocks. These connectors are the works of information 
and logics with assumptions that define the environments of categorial 
conversions whose dynamics are governed by conflicting forces in dualities that 
are embedded in languages of thought. At the center of the knowledge square are 
cognitive agents whose decision-choice actions determine what items are 
knowledge ones and what items are not, as we journey from the knowledge 
potential space to the space of cognitive reality, and as the contents of the 
knowledge house are being determined for epistemic filling. We shall deal in 
conceptual details and separate the essence of these blocks and establish their 
relational structures to the foundation of the knowledge enterprise. With the 
instruments that will emerge out of the theoretical framework of the knowledge 
square, we shall examine science, exact science and inexact science in order to 
establish their mutual similarities and differences. It will become clear that the 
path of the knowledge square is invariant to areas of knowledge search no matter 
how much segmentation is created and how many segments are imposed on the 
global area of knowing. We shall then examine intra-block and inter-block logical  
transformations that define the path of cognition as the universal principle of 
knowledge search and development in the epistemological space that is linked to 
the ontological space. 
U 
P  
A  
B  
Fig. 1.2.1A: Relational Geometry of the Building Blocks of the Knowledge 
Square Composed of  a) Potential Space U, b) Possibility Space, P c)  
Probability Space B  and d) the Space of the Actual, A  with cognitive  
connectors, 
's
ij
  
   
(
)
1
ϕ U  
( )
2
ϕ
P
( )
3
ϕ
B
( )
4
ϕ U  
 
 
COGNITIVE 
AGENTS 

1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential Space  
9
 
1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential Space U
1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential 
Space U  
In the theory of the knowledge square the potential space U is used to initialize 
the knowledge production process. It is useful to think of it as a cognitive potential 
space that contains all the elements of the universe called the universal object set. 
The universal object set is made up of elements, states and processes including all 
cognitive agents such as humans. It is potential in the sense that the elements may 
be exactly or inexactly knowable. These elements have essence and identity that 
are defined by characteristic sets. The characteristic sets belong to a family of 
characteristic sets where each set may be used to distinguish, classify and name 
the objects into categories by cognitive agents in a given language. The universal 
object set may be represented as, Ω with generic element ω∈Ω. The potential 
space for knowing may also be viewed as the ontological space. In other words, 
the development of the knowledge square is to search for conditions that 
distinguish the ontological space from the epistemological space with a further 
search for conditions that unite them. In this process, a number of definitions are 
required. 
 
Definition 1.3.1: The Cognitive Potential 
Cognitive potentiality is a schematic foundation of the knowledge square that 
initializes the conceptual system for the epistemic process in order to connect the 
epistemic space to the ontological space. 
 
Definition 1.3.2: The Universal Object Set, Ω  
The universal object set is the collection of all objects, states and processes that 
present potentials of being known by all elements in the universal object set.  
That is  
{
}
 a n d  
 is  p o te n tia lly  k n o w a b le
x | x
x
Ω
∈
=
U
 
 
Definition 1.3.3: The Potential Space, U  
The potential space is an infinite collection of families of categories in the 
universal object set and is infinitely closed under the substitution-transformation 
process. It is also the ontological space. 
The set Ω is defined in the potential space, U and contains infinite elements 
that are potentially identifiable and knowable through cognition by cognitive 
agents who are also part of the universal object set. Nothing in the universe is 
outside the universal object set or the ontological space. The processes of 
identification and knowing begin with awareness and visionary activities that help 
to establish the perceived characteristics and their essences. We may note that 
U is the potential space while Ω is a family of essential categories, each of 
which contains common elements and common defining characteristics as part of 
characteristic set with generic element x∈. For example, we may mention 
the category of living things with further categorization into cognitive and  

10 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
non-cognitive living things. The potential space U  is also the ontological space 
and the universal object set is a collection of ontological elements such that 
Ω ⊆U . 
 
Definition 1.3.4: Epistemological Space, E  
The epistemological space is the union of the possibility space, the probability space 
and the space of cognitive actual such that 
(
)
{
}
=
∈


|
E
e
e
P
B
A
. The  
symbol e is an epistemic element where E  is a collection of all epistemic elements 
The potential space, U composed of the elements in the universal object set, 
Ω  is taken to be that which actually exists in our universal system. Its existence, 
and the elements contained in it are independent of the awareness of its elements 
whether they are cognitive or non-cognitive agents. In other words, they will exist 
whether one is aware of them or not. It is the potential in the sense of knowability 
through cognition. The potential space, as an ontological space, is linked to the 
epistemological space through the processes of knowing where the epistemological 
space is the collection of all epistemic items and categories. The process of 
knowing, where the elements of the ontological space are to be discovered as 
knowledge items for storage by cognitive agents, begins with the awareness of the 
defining characteristics of an element in the potential space through identification, 
naming and category formation in the form  with a generic element 
(
)
such that 
 and 
x,
x
ω ∈
∈
ω∈Ω


. The characteristic identification, naming, and 
category formation are the works of information transmission and interpretations as 
sense data that operate through cognitive agents, whose very existence is also part 
of the universal object set. It is the development of the universal principle of 
knowing that is the concern and the subject matter of the theory of the knowledge 
square as a geometry of thinking. 
To clarify a tendency that may bring some confusion, the theory of the 
knowledge square postulates that the objects in the potential space are natural 
actual and the characteristics are their naturally defining attributes that exist 
independently of the awareness of the objects in the potential space. The set of 
characteristics that establishes identity, difference and similarity of objects in the 
universal object set may be referred to as natural characteristics. The category to 
which each object belongs in the potential space may also be referred to as natural 
category. There is, however, a cognitive process to establish parallel elements that 
can be compared to the natural elements for knowledge acceptance in the process 
of knowing and knowledge production. These objects that come to be known 
through cognition are classified as epistemic actual when the elements are claimed  
to be known. Thus corresponding to natural categories we have epistemic 
categories, corresponding to natural characteristic set we have epistemic 
characteristic set and corresponding to natural actual we have epistemic actual, all 
of which are under the process of cognition. 
The task of the knowledge construction is to show that the epistemic 
characteristic set is reasonably identical or have sufficiently close resemblance to 
the natural characteristic set for each element, the epistemic category formation is 
identical to the natural category formation and that the epistemic actual 

1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential Space  
11
 
1.3   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Potential Space U
corresponds to an aspect of the natural actual. In other words, we must show the 
isomorphism between the epistemic actual and the natural actual through 
cognition. Alternatively, we must show that the space of epistemic actual is 
contained in the ontological space in that (
)
(
)
 b u t 
⊂
⊄
A
U
U
A
 at all  
times. The process of showing this isomorphic relationship between epistemic 
elements and natural elements is decision-choice driven where inexactness, 
vagueness and approximations are attributes of its foundation in any language and 
reasoning for searches in both natural and non-natural spaces.  
The natural condition is ontological and the process of knowing is 
epistemological. Thus, there is objective information that defines the objective 
characteristic set, the family of natural categories, and potential space and its 
elements and categories. The question that the theory of the knowledge square 
seeks to answer is what is the process and universal principle through which 
cognitive agents acquire knowledge about aspects of the potential and the 
universal object set to which they belong? Another way to see the problem is 
through the question: what is the path or the geometry of thinking for establishing 
the isomorphism between cognitive elements and natural elements or between 
epistemic elements and ontological elements and what is the universal principle 
for establishing the path of cognition? 
There are a number of key concepts that have been introduced in this analytic 
framework. They need clarification in terms of their meaning and content. 
Definitions and explications are required for a) the potential space, b) the 
universal object set, c) the natural characteristic set, d) the universal characteristic 
set and e) the natural category. These are the initial and basic building blocks of 
the theory of the knowledge square as it relates to the understanding of the 
knowledge production and enterprise of knowledge. They are taken as axioms that 
initialize the knowledge construction process regarding knowability and 
explanability. They allow us to assert the ontological conditions of the universe 
and its elements [R2.9, pp.54-71] [R2.2.11]. They further allow us to derive the 
epistemological conditions of knowing. The conceptual system of the potential 
space is composed of postulates and axioms of existence of the universal system 
whose elements are to be known, through experience, and whose behaviors are to 
be explained through reasoning. The existence of the universal object set is taken 
to be independent of the existence of the awareness of its constituent elements 
whether these elements are cognitive agents or not. Alternatively, the ontological 
space is conceptually separated from the epistemological space and then reunited 
by thought and reasoning for the knowledge production. 
The question facing cognitive actions is simply how the elements in the 
universal object set come to know their own existence and the existence of other 
elements. It may be pointed out, at this juncture, that care must be exercised in 
conceptualizing the universal object set as defining the nature of the universe 
without confusing it with the classic debate on the relationship between the 
universal and the particular [R8.62][R14.96] [R14.97]. In this monograph, the 
universal is the set of particular objects where the collection of all particular 
objects with similarly defined characteristics constitutes a category. The universal 
object set is a mega-category in the sense that it is the family of families of 

12 
1   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Information Structure
 
particular categories. The concepts have nothing to do with universality and 
particularity of propositions, statement and hypothesis.  
The objects may be elements of states or processes or both. The conceptual 
system that we are advancing is on the principle of duality where there is no 
universal without the particular and there is no particular without the universal. 
The principle of duality is supported by the principle of continuum in the 
geometry of thinking where the particular is linked to the universal and vice versa. 
The universality and particularity mutually define themselves in identity and their 
existence in unity with continuum such that the process of reductionism allows the 
creation of quantum units. The concepts of the universal and the particular are in 
relation to objects of states and processes that establish the potential space; they 
are not in relation to propositions, truth and knowledge acceptance. The potential 
space is defined by what there is not a cognitive construct. It may be viewed as the 
ontological space that is the collection of all what there is. Let us connect the 
ontological space to the process of knowing through the geometry of thinking 
from the possibility space.  

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 13–41. 
springerlink.com                                       © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 2 
The Theory of the Knowledge Square  
and the Concept of the Possibility Space, P  
We now turn our attention to the possibility space P  as the second building block 
of the knowledge square. The possibility space is a cognitive connector between 
the potential space, U  and the space of the natural actual. It is an element of 
continuity of the epistemic chain of knowing and explaining where the potential 
space and its contents, relative to cognition, are taken to exist but unknown to 
cognitive agents as true ontological elements. The potential space is the 
initialization of activities of cognitive agents and their knowledge production 
process where knowledge and awareness of the elements must be abstracted by a 
process. The possibility space is made up of elements which are possible 
candidates for knowing from the potential space. It is cognitive construct in terms 
of ontology and epistemology. It constitutes an initial bridge between ontology 
and epistemology (the words epistemic and cognitive are interchangeably used in 
a number of occasions). The question, therefore, is: how are the concepts of 
possibility and possibility space defined, how are they connected and how are they 
related to the uncertainties and the process of knowing? 
2.1   The Concepts of Possibility and Possibility Space 
Let us turn our attention to the concept of the possibility space. This concept is 
linked to the concept of the possibility and what constitutes possible in the 
language structure and how the possible is related to uncertainties in cognition. 
The form that we want to construct requires definitions and explications of these 
concepts to which we turn our attention. 
 
Definition 2.1.1: Possibility 
Possibility in the conceptual scheme of the knowledge square is that which is 
cognitively abstracted from the universal space or the universal object set through 
acquaintances, senses and vision with justified degree of belief that the element 
may be a knowledge item. The impossibility is that which has zero justified degree 
of belief. 

14 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
Definition: 2.1.2:` Possibility Space, P  
The possibility space defines a conceptual category that provides a linkage 
between the natural elements of the universal object set and human imagination, 
intuition and conscious existence which allow a construct of that which is 
epistemologically believed to be informationally possible as knowledge within the 
universal object set (the potential space) and with differential degrees of 
possibilistic uncertainty associated with the elements. The collection of the 
conceived elements in the universal object set that are moved into a space whose 
elements are believed to be possibly knowable constitutes the possibility space 
( )
(
)
( )
(
]
{
}
with 
0 1  
P
P
P
U
=
μ
∈
μ
∈
x,
x
| x
x
.
 
 where 
( )
P
μ
x  is an index of 
possibilistic belief in the knowledge existence. 
The imagination, intuition and conscious reflections generate vagueness in 
ideas and ambiguities in thought and communication called fuzzy uncertainty 
which produces possibilistic belief system and possibilistic risk system in the 
knowledge production and decision-choice processes for assessing the knowledge 
content at all stages of knowing. The possibility space comes to us as a schedule 
with elements and corresponding distributions of degrees of possibilistic belief in 
the form 
( )
(
)
P
P
μ
∈
x,
x
. The cognitive instruments for the construct of the 
possibility space are obtained by imagination, intuition, information signals, 
principle of conscious existence and a system of beliefs. The outcomes in the 
possibility space, while useful, do not constitute knowledge. They merely point to 
the possibilities of knowledge. They help to identify the possible elements that 
require expenditure of cognitive labor and hence provide us with the instruments 
that allow us to construct the possibility space from the potential space. That 
which presents itself to the consciousness or reflected in the intuition is merely a 
possibility to an epistemic reality. It may also be an epistemic mirage. The 
elements in the possibility space may be classified as a sub-level of observation of 
pseudo-empirical data that are individually specific which has no truth-value 
except degrees of possibilistic beliefs. 
Intuition, imagination and conscious activities provide us with a path toward 
the construction and transformation of the universal object set, Ω into the 
possibility set, P , where P
U
⊂Ω ⊆
⊇Ω . This is on the epistemic path that allows 
us to construct a set of possible epistemic elements that may be considered as 
knowable in the sense of what there is. The general knowledge acquisition by 
cognitive agents is a never-ending process in a self-correcting system where each 
knowledge item, after acquisition, reveals a new item of unknown character. It is 
socially, individually and collectively cognitive activity. The institutional 
provision of its framework provides cognitive agents with social interaction 
toward a common goal, the goal of knowing through epistemic reflections of 
multitudes of phenomena for varying individual and collective needs. In this 
process, the concept of the possibility space is one of the organizing tools towards 
the understanding of human cognition and knowledge acceptance as deliberate  
 
 

2.1   The Concepts of Possibility and Possibility Space 
15
 
intellectual activities. The philosophical debate of actuality and possibility on one 
hand and intuitionism and formalism on the other does not arise here. It is 
considered as irrelevant when one accepts that the elements of the universal object 
set, composed of objects, processes and states, are relational in existence, and so 
also the knowledge construction towards knowing ([R8.59] [R8.56] [R14.9] 
[R14.14], [R14.23], [R14.52] [R14.97]). 
It is at this point of representation of information in the path of knowing that 
analog and digital processes enter into the knowledge production process. The 
question is simply whether reality is analog or digital; continuum or discrete; or 
inexact or exact? The answer provided in this discussion reflects a position that 
the concept of reality must be dichotomized into ontological and epistemological 
where ontological reality may be different from epistemological reality. The 
epistemological reality is a model representation of ontological reality as such 
they may stand to differ. It is a position in this discussion that ontological reality is 
analog and exact while the epistemological reality may be digital or analog or both 
by epistemic construct. It will be argued later in the monograph that whether one 
subscribes to epistemological reality as analog or digital will reflect on the 
methodological approach of information representation, methods of analysis and 
techniques of knowing. The nature of epistemic reality that is held will reflect the 
initial assumptions about the structure and the properties of what there is in the 
ontological space. There is a relationship between the ontological and epistemic 
realities where one is prior and the other is posterior. When one takes the 
ontological reality as a primary category and that this primary category is analog 
and exact, then the problem is to abstract the conditions of their relationship and 
how the epistemological reality acquires digital representation. The relational 
structure is shown in Figure 2.1.1. 
A possibility reflects itself as intuitive and imaginative actual with subjective 
belief justification but without a demonstration of its validity by cognitive agents. 
It is a step in verifying the properties of the epistemic actual against that of the 
natural actual for their acceptance into the general knowledge bag of humanity. A 
possibility space, therefore, is a possibility complex composing of a family of sets 
of possible elements even given the same phenomenon. It is a family of families 
of elements of intuition, imagination and contemplation. It is here that the concept 
of possible worlds may enter into our knowledge production system. It is a stage 
in the knowledge-production process that is subjectively reflected in intuitive 
elements in the universal object set. It is a part of the connecting path of the 
geometry of thinking to establish an isomorphism between some ontological 
elements and epistemological elements [R12]. It is also here that the processes of 
sequential and digital methods of representation, analysis and problem solving 
become tools for knowing. The human cognition works within a constraint set 
such that cognitive agents do not generally work in the space of analog but rather 
in the space of digital for simplicity toward knowing. Analog is complex and 
digital is simpler. The mind likes to work with simplicity and avoid complexities 
whenever possible. 
 

16 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
 
2.2   The Possibility Space, the Spaces of Acquantance and 
Language 
The connection between ontology and epistemology begins from experiential 
acquaintance and proceeds with naming, definition, meaning and communications 
of the acquainted items. We shall refer to the process of naming as nominalism 
that requires representation by either symbols or words in a given language. We 
shall refer to the process of conceptual contenting as definition while the process 
of communication, we shall refer to as a language that operates through oral or 
written symbols in order to describe, distinguish, classify and catalogue objects, 
concepts and experiences into categories for an individual and group distinctions. 
The space of nominalism is digital while the space of language has an analog 
beginning. The symbols appear to us as words which come to represent those 
objects, concepts, processes and notions in the universal object set to which 
intuitive and imaginative experiences reveal themselves to initial cognition. 
Concepts are formed around the symbols of objects where the symbols are defined 
for cognitive processing. Not all objects in the universal object set have names. It 
is only the objects in the universal object set that have acquaintances that are 
ONTOLOGY
EPISTEMOLOGY
DIGITAL
DIGITAL
ANALOG
ANALOG
Assumptions, 
Methods, 
Representation 
and Analysis
Fig. 2.1.1 The Relational Geometry of Ontology, Epistemology, Analog and 
Digital in Relation to Assumptions 

2.2   The Possibility Space, the Spaces of Acquantance and Language 
17
 
named. The implication is that all elements in the possibility space have or will 
have names and linguistic meaning. Names are digital while meanings are analog. 
Any element in the universal object set that has human acquaintance is assigned 
a word or a symbol and since these symbols are not unique from the space of 
acquaintance, it becomes necessary to fix their meanings and contents by 
definition and explication in a given language depending on the uses to which they 
are to be put and the role that they will play in human understanding in the 
universe of knowing and communication of understanding among cognitive 
agents. There are two initial problems associated with any word in the space of 
acquaintance given the object of acquaintance. They are the object’s name and the 
language of its representation and residence. The definition of a word or a symbol 
must correspond to the object of acquaintance or its derivative thereof, where the 
object may be an element, a process or a state. There is no law of nature that an 
exact correspondence can be created between an ontological element and an 
epistemic element in the process of cognition. At the very best, we may have 
cognitive approximations in experiential data, linguistic representation and 
communications.  
The processes of naming, defining by symbolic representation and the 
development of languages were not initially conscious efforts. They came to us 
through epistemic evolutions with continual cognitive refinements. Language and 
knowledge production are inseparable. They are also self-refining and self-
improving systems as unconsciously social constructs. They became conscious 
activities at a later period of human development and at the time when further 
development demanded clearer understanding of the elements in the space of 
acquaintances in order to communicate the objects of acquaintance as something 
dependable to either use or fear or share. Language emerges as representation and 
communication of information. Communication and understanding through the 
linguistic medium demand clarity of words, symbols and their meanings in  
the language of cognition as a carrier of that which is acquainted. Similarly, the 
thought that is being formed around the acquainted became necessary. Another 
way of looking at the process is that cognition begins as analog whose 
development fades into discreteness or digital, where the fundamental analog and 
discreteness may be related to the fundamental notions of exactness and 
inexactness.  
The need for communication among cognitive agents from human experiences 
in the space of acquaintance (defined in terms of intuition, contemplation and 
sense data) in the universal space, not only gave rise to language, but the language 
gave rise to the capacity to form ideas and construct thoughts on the basis of 
objects of acquaintance, their description, behavior and explanation. All these 
cannot be separated from conditions of economic production and human survival. 
The space of acquaintance is, thus, a subspace of the potential space for 
knowability. It projects nothing but speculations couched in thoughts of opinions  
 

18 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
and subjective reflections about some elements in the universal objet set that 
contains the elements of the space of acquaintance. The space of acquaintance is 
not the knowledge space; and the opinions and subjective reflections about the 
intuitive elements are not knowledge elements but elements for knowing called 
epistemic elements that may be made possible by operations on words in a 
language and formation of thought for knowledge verification.  
There is nothing unique about language and thought that can take claim to 
exactness relative to natural elements in the universal object set except by 
cognitive imposition and acceptance through decision-choice actions. In fact, 
linguistic symbols (words) on the basis of which ideas are formed are 
ambiguous in representation, vague in meaning and approximation in 
interpretation whose crisp understanding and exactness of meaning are the 
results of human decision-choice actions. The spoken language represents a 
combination of sound symbols of words that are coded with information for 
interpretation, processing and understanding by members of the linguistic group 
in accord with the rules of combination for knowledge development through 
judgment and decision making. The same sound symbols may be coded 
differently with different information contents and with different interpretation 
by members in another linguistic group also in accord with rules and decision 
making. The written language represents inscriptions of written symbols of 
sound symbols of words coded with information content for interpretation, 
processing and understanding by the linguistic group in accord with the implied 
grammar for knowledge development through decision making. The symbolic 
nature of the written language varies over linguistic groups even though they 
may carry the same information. In this way, information, knowledge and 
decision-choice processes are inseparable and reside in a unity where the 
transformation of information to justified knowledge is decision-choice 
determined through the methods of analog or digital as presented in  
Figure 2.2.1. 
In general, language is the foundation of communicating acquaintances, 
development and exchange of ideas, and propagation of thought which then 
motivates thinking and further refinement in a never-ending process of the 
knowledge search. The thinking relates things in the space of acquaintance 
through elaboration and development of multiplicity of concrete and abstract 
connections. In this respect, it is obvious that any language is arbitrary with its 
own character of defined conventions in symbolism of representation, and that all 
languages carry with them the qualitative properties of vagueness, inexactness, 
ambiguities and approximations in meaning and thought. Every language has a 
character and form that carry the culture and forms of thought. It is this qualitative 
arbitrariness that allows different language formations to be established. It is also 
the formation of categories and rules of associations that provide channels of 
translation from one language to another and where the translations are sensitive 
to the cultural confines of languages. 
 

2.2   The Possibility Space, the Spaces of Acquantance and Language 
19
 
 
The characteristics and categories in the universal object set are the same for all 
language formations but differently named as well as differently related to create 
concrete and abstract thoughts. Furthermore, acquaintances may be different for 
different human species in different language representations. The ideas and 
thoughts are carried by languages and are exact to the extent to which the 
languages can be made exact for any given culture. Ideas are formed with words 
and linguistic connectors in a complex system of organization that allows a 
linkage to be made of some elements in the universal object set to the space of 
acquaintance in either conscious or unconscious state. The acceptance of 
exactness of a language, in addition to the ideas and thoughts it carries, is 
dependent on the conventions which come to define the grammar and the laws of 
thought of that language. In this respect, vocabulary of any language, rules of its 
grammar and syntax are established by conventions that are fixed by collective 
needs of the social formation including the evolving culture.  
The vagueness, inexactness and approximations in languages are to all 
linguistic forms general but not specific to subspaces of acquaintances. They 
contain qualitative and quantitative dispositions of elements that define their 
identities. The acquaintances are related to cognitive agents though a complex 
system of information signals and communication. It is this vagueness character of 
languages that generates increasing complexities in language and for language 
translations. The vagueness is generated by the conditions of the fundamental 
DECISION-CHOICE 
REPRESENTATION
DIGITAL
INFORMATION 
ANALOG
KNOWLEDGE 
 
COGNITIVE 
AGENTS 
Fig. 2.2.1 The Relational Geometry of Information, Knowledge Representation, 
Analog and Digital in the Process of Knowing 

20 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
analog or continuum that imposes requirements of decision-choice actions to 
create assumed conditions of digital in simplicity, as we seek to relate the 
epistemic elements to the ontological elements in the process of knowing. The 
analytical path is shown in Figure 2.2.2 as the relational geometry for initializing 
the knowledge production process and how any assumed condition relates to the 
adopted methodology of a particular path of the knowledge production in the 
domain of exactness and inexactness of epistemic items.  
 
 
2.3   From the Space of Acquaintance to the Possibility Space 
The space of acquaintance is formed between complex interactions of cognitive 
agents and other elements in the universal object set through information 
transmissions and interpretations by the sending-receiving processes [R8.18] 
[R8.50] [R11.19]. Each element in the universal object set, Ω , is identified with a 
set of relational characteristics,  that defines its identity and allows a 
classificatory process to be undertaken for the expansion of linguistic vocabulary, 
the formation of ideas and thought developments from the elements of the space 
of acquaintance. The collection of the elements with the same relational 
characteristics from the space of acquaintance is called a category (for example, 
EPISTEMIC 
ELEMENTS
METHODOLOGY
DIGITAL/ 
DISCRETENESS 
EXACTNESS 
ANALOG/ 
CONTINUUM 
INEXACTNESS 
Fundamental 
Assumptions for 
Information 
Processing
Fig. 2.2.2 The Relational Geometry of Knowledge, Methodology, Discreteness, 
Continuum, exactness and Inexactness

2.3   From the Space of Acquaintance to the Possibility Space 
21
 
people, rivers, animals, ideas, propositions, atoms and other.). The collection of 
the categories of the epistemic elements together with anticipations of knowledge 
constitutes a family of classes of categories called the possibility space under 
cognitive action.  
It is at this juncture that the laws of thought become necessary and essential in 
forming the categories. The formation of categories is not different from the 
formation of class, sets and groups whose members have specified characteristics 
that are decision-choice defined in the possibility space. The formation of these 
categories cannot be done arbitrarily. It must follow some socially defined 
convention of the language of the process. It is here that the classical Aristotelian 
laws of thought enter [R14.58], [R14.66] [R14.97] [R14.100] into the formation of 
sets, categories, groups and the families as well as information processing and 
knowledge construction. It is also here that a distinction is made between the 
fundamental discreteness and the fundamental continuum in the initialization of 
the knowledge search process. The Aristotelian laws of thought initialize the 
knowledge search with the fundamental discreteness and present a rigid thinking 
in dualism where the elements in the space of acquaintance are viewed in {0, 1} 
sequence. 
These Aristotelian laws of thought in their essential form may be stated as all 
propositions are either true or false but not both which is carried on to 
mathematico-scientific reasoning where the claim of exactness and crisp 
categories imposes a rigidity of thinking, such that the elements in the space of 
acquaintance belong to a category or not and their symbolic representations are 
exact in meaning. It is here that mathematical language and thought are claimed to 
be exact and hence removed from the subjectivity of judgment as human action. 
The Aristotelian laws of thought, as applied to the formation of categories and the 
family of categories in the possibility space, fail to acknowledge the notion that 
language with words, connectors, grammar and syntax is based on conventions 
through evolution of intuitions and decision-choice needs of the social formation 
and production and reproduction of life. There is nothing naturally exact about the 
intuitive process in the space of acquaintance for the construction of the possibility 
space. In fact, what are epistemologically natural are inexactness, vagueness and 
ambiguities in the sending-receiving-interpretational module. 
In fact, the whole of the linguistic process and the intuitive formation involve 
anticipations that connect the space of the universal object set to the possibility 
space is vague, inexact and ambiguous requiring different laws of thought from 
those of Aristotelian in their constructs and understanding. Intuition in conscious 
or unconscious or both states, does not allow the principle of true or false but not 
both [R14.97], [R14.100], [R19.3], [R19.4]. For intuition to be helpful in the 
knowledge construction process, it requires a balance between truth characteristics 
and characteristics of falsity where decision-choice actions of cognitive agents 
impose acceptance with attached degree of intuitive confidence which lies between 
zero and one. This degree of intuitive confidence through judgment is taken away 
by the Aristotelian law of excluded middle thus imposing a mechanistic 
personality of judgment. The Aristotelian laws of thought must be replaced with 
new laws of thought that are closer to the human linguistic character and 

22 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
reasoning behavior. These new laws of thought must present new reasoning as 
well as be able to incorporate the Aristotelian laws as extremes. The need for new 
laws of thought places on us to distinguish between linguistic variables and 
symbolic variables that include mathematical and logical symbols. 
When the epistemic elements are moved to the possibility space by an 
epistemic process, they are transformed into possibilistic epistemic elements with 
associated degrees of anticipation for the next stage of cognitive processing. With 
the information on elements in the possibility space that is highly differentiated 
and relationally connected, cognitive agents see not {0,1} but a distribution of 
degrees of complex relation between zero and one [0,1] that helps to define shades 
of meaning, degrees of exactness that appeal to the fundamental analog, 
penumbral regions of interpretation and understanding, and others. It is here that 
the fuzzy laws of thought present an alternative for dealing with information 
processing and the knowledge construction at the presence of inexactness, 
vagueness and ambiguities. It is also here that the debate between the intuitionist 
logic and mathematic, on one hand, and the classical logic and mathematics based 
on the Aristotelian laws of thought, on the other hand, takes on an analytical 
importance for the knowledge production. The candidate for replacing the 
Aristotelian laws of thought is the fuzzy laws of thought which simply states that: 
All propositions contain true and false characteristics in varying proportions 
where the acceptance of all true propositions and all false propositions is by 
decision-choice actions operating on a defined rationality [R2.9, p. x]. The fuzzy 
laws of thought may be extended from the linguistic space to mathematical space, 
in that every element in the space of acquaintance belongs to a category with 
subjectively defined degree of belonging on the basis of quality and quantity. The 
fuzzy laws of thought incorporate the classical laws of thought as extreme cases. 
The fuzzy laws of thought are based not on dualism but on duality where the 
Aristotelian law of excluded middle is replaced by the law of fuzzy continuum 
[R14.5, pp.470-502]. 
Both the classical and fuzzy laws of thought involve two principles: one 
principle is used to construct significant categories while the other principle is 
used to determine which category may be taken as logically complementary to or 
follow the significant categories. The significant categories may come to be 
identified as the set of primary categories while the complementary categories are 
taken as derived categories from the primary categories. The laws of thought in 
category formation present us with two important variables in human thinking and 
manipulation for ideas and thought formation. They are linguistic or fuzzy 
variables and mathematical or logical variables. Thought systems require the 
presence of these variables and rules of combination in order to create significant 
propositions. Few distinguishing definitions of the different variables are required 
at this point of discussion. 
 
Definition 2.3.1: Classical Mathematical or Logical Variable 
The classical mathematical or logical variable in information representations, idea 
formations, and thought processes is one that moves over quantitative entities with  
 

2.3   From the Space of Acquaintance to the Possibility Space 
23
 
fixed quality and meaning but not over degrees of meaning of variables or shades 
of truth, and is operated with exact laws of thought in reasoning. Its meaning is 
exact, its reasoning is crisp and its interpretation is unambiguous and free from 
vagueness, ambiguities varying quality and subjectivity. 
 
Note 2.3.1 
The classical mathematical and logical variables define every word or symbol as a 
point on the real number line or as a singleton set with one meaning and fixed 
quality (see the problem of Russell [R19.58],[R14.96] [R8.62], response by Max 
Black [R19.4][R19.5], intuitionist approaches and reflections by Brouwer, 
[R14.14], Dummett, R14.31] and Gödel’s reflection [ R14.5, pp.447-469][R14.5, 
pp41-65]). In this respect, red as a symbol is exact in meaning and understanding. 
Thus, x as a mathematical or logical symbol is no different from Red as a color 
defined in a spectrum. The classical variables are appropriate for exact 
quantitative analysis where quality is given and fixed. Varying qualitative 
dispositions with quantitative analyses are difficult for representation and 
reasoning. When time and dynamics are introduced, we mostly deal with 
quantitative motion without much to say about qualitative motion in terms of 
transformations. In other words, our classical mathematical reasoning has very 
little to provide us, if any, when qualitative-quantitative transformations are the 
focus of analysis. By the nature of exact classical reasoning, human action is 
externalized from the knowledge-production process and artificially grafted to 
human decision-choice action by the use of rigid rules contrary to linguistic 
reasoning and subjective judgment. The problem of classical mathematics in 
relation to qualitative motion was the concern of Karl Niebyl [R14.82] while the 
problem of qualitative disposition in inter-categorial conversions in social 
transformations was the concern of Kwame Nkrumah [R14.85]. 
To present a variable that incorporates qualitative and quantitative elements in 
its representation, we introduce the concepts of linguistic variable and fuzzy 
variable in representation and reasoning (for discussions on linguistic and fuzzy 
variables see [R3.52][R3.53][R4.34][R4.48] [R6.36] [R14.91] [R19.4]). 
 
Definition 2.3.2: Linguistic Variable 
A linguistic variable in idea formations, information representations and thought 
processes is one that moves over two elements of quantity and quality of entities 
with corresponding distribution of degrees of meaning or shades of truth or 
degrees of quality associated with the variable, with subjectivity of understanding 
and designed laws of thought that involve quality and quantity. Its meaning is 
inexact, its reasoning is vague and its interpretations are approximations with 
degrees of acceptance determined by decision-choice actions for the accepted 
level of exactness from the distribution of the degrees of exactness. The variable 
has also come to be known as fuzzy variable, the corresponding laws of thought 
for its manipulation, as fuzzy laws of thought and the corresponding mathematics 
for analysis and computations as fuzzy mathematics. 
 

24 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
Note: 2.3.2 
The fuzzy or linguistic variable specifies every word or symbol as a set of 
meanings with more than one element of meaning or quality or value. For 
example, the word red is a set where each element in the red has an associated 
degree to which it is said to be red and the cutoffs are decision-choice determined. 
Thus, every word or symbol is a set containing quantities or qualities or both with 
varying degrees of belonging where such degrees of belonging define the 
embodied linguistic or symbolic clarity. Its essential distinction from the classical 
variable is not only that it is a set, but that it allows the variable to take on 
conceptual meaning and analytical significance on the basis of human decision-
choice action and judgment as endogenous processes in the knowledge-production 
system. 
The point of special emphasis is that words, symbols and language are arbitrary 
and cannot take unchallenging claims to exactness as the natural order of things. 
In fact, if words are exact there would be no need for dictionary, definitions and 
explications. They are exact because we say so by limiting the domain of their 
conceptual meanings, analytical representations and areas of application. The 
domain that defines the conditions of exactness is decision-choice imposed for the 
cutoffs such that the boundaries are fixed by human actions. Intuition reveals to us 
that the elements in the universal object set exist only as interconnected elements 
and in continual transformation such that an object can manifest some 
characteristics in certain respect and conditions in such a way that the intuitive 
encounters may reveal differential attributes that accord them with some epistemic 
identity. In reference to the laws of thought in the construction of the possibility 
space (composed of families of categories), the classical laws of thought impose 
exactness of categories while the fuzzy laws of thought impose inexactness where 
the elements in the categories are decision-choice determined by subjective 
intuition with an associated degree of acceptance into a category. Another way of 
looking at the problem is that the determination of the conditions of exactness is 
internalized as part of the calculus of knowing through the fuzzy process. 
The fuzzy laws of thought integrate human action into the process of category 
formation. They also reflect human intuitive limitations. Perfect exactness in all 
areas of human knowledge is cognitively unattainable. Perfect exactness is the 
ultimate goal that logic propels us towards. In this respect, it is useful to view 
exactness in degrees that are specified by a fuzzy set where complete inexactness 
and complete exactness are seen as polar cases of living duality in a continuum 
under logical tension. The possibility space for investigating natural phenomena in 
the epistemological space is exact to some degree that is determined in the 
knowing process through decision-choice action on the part of cognitive agents. 
This statement also holds for social sciences and other areas of knowledge search. 
The essential thrust in these discussions is that unity of science is a social attitude. 
Thinking under conditions of vagueness is an integral part of human thought 
process.  
 

2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
25
 
The problems of unity and separations in science are social. The solutions to 
these problems constitute important challenges of our knowledge enterprise in 
building the knowledge house with epistemic pillars. These epistemic pillars are 
constantly being strengthened for stability. The knowledge house contains many 
actual, potential and interconnected rooms whose numbers are constantly being 
increased, and whose room sizes are also under constant expansion with 
interconnected epistemic pipes to establish inter-sub-knowledge flow conditions. 
In this respect, the fuzzy paradigm offers us a new path to conceptualize the unity 
of science as well as provide us with a linkage path to intuitionist logic and 
mathematics, where continuity is a characteristic of the ontological space while 
discreteness is a characteristic of the epistemological space where discreteness is a 
creation by cognitive agents as a tool in the knowing process. 
2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds in the 
Knowledge-Production Process 
2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
Before we leave the possibility space and deal with the probability space, we will 
reflect on the contemporary conceptual scheme and logical development of the 
space of possible worlds and show their similarities with or differences from  
the possibility space [R12] [R12.2] [12.6] [R12.18] [R12.25]. The concept of the 
possible words may be viewed as a semantic characterization on a phenomenon 
and its existence or non-existence. Here, we have the realists who accept the 
existence of possible worlds and the antirealists who do not accept the existence of 
many possible worlds. The modalities of the possible worlds’ logic towards 
knowledge construction involve possibility, necessity, contingency and 
impossibility which also appear in varieties as shown in Figure 2.4.1. 
Given the modalities of possible worlds and varieties of the modalities, the 
collection of all possible worlds constitutes a set, P , which we shall refer to as the 
possible world set. A number of questions arise in connection with the possible 
world set. What is a possible world? Is the possible world set finite or infinite in 
its conceptual construct? How the possible worlds are cognitively formed? To 
explicate the concept of the possible world set, we need to specify the defining 
characteristics of the constituent elements of the possible world set. In other 
words, what are the candidates for the possible world set and how do we select 
them? Similarly, how do we distinguish one element of a possible world from 
other elements in the set? Is each element in the possible world set defined by 
some empirical or axiomatic conditions? In other words, are the elements in the 
possible world set epistemic elements or transformational elements? For extensive 
discussions and debates on the possible worlds and the knowledge system, see 
[R12] [R12.9] [R12.10] [R12.11] [R12.16] [R12.27] [R12.28] [R12]. Are they 
formed by acquaintance and epistemic anticipations or by analytical extensions of 
propositions of what there is, or, the possible or the probable? 
 

26 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
 
 
In answering the questions raised, it is useful to notice that the possible world 
set, just like the possibility set, is conceivable in the epistemological space. The 
elements, however, may be related to some elements in the ontological space by 
reasoning through reductionism. In this process, attempts have been made to 
distinguish between possibility and conceivability by ruling out psychologism. 
Such a distinction is problematic in the sense that the justification of psychologism 
as it is related to the laws of thought has a defense in the basic foundations of 
reasoning and logic as conceived in the linguistic or symbolic manipulation with 
defined rules. The rules are established by epistemic conditions in order to arrive 
at a conclusion for a truth-value. No logic or defined set of rules of thought is 
MODALITIES OF POSSIBLE WORLDS 
POSSIBILITY: 
Involves the 
notions of can
NECESSITY: 
Involves the notions 
of must, has to be, 
other wise. 
CONTIGENCY: 
Involves the notions of 
maybe, maybe not, 
might have been, 
might have not been, 
could have been other 
wise. 
IMPOSSIBILITY: 
Involves notions 
of cannot, could 
not, mast not. 
                                   Varieties of Modalities of Possible Worlds Claims
LOGICAL: Claims fixed by logic of reasoning by accepting and ruling out what is possible, 
necessary, contingent and impossible (in other words fixed by laws of thought).
ANALYTICAL: Claims fixed and rooted in categories of nominalism regarding meanings of words 
and terms such that a thing cannot be red and green or married or bachelor or man and woman at the 
same point of time. 
NOMOLOGICAL: Claims fixed and rooted in the laws of nature.
METAPHYSICAL: Claims rooted in and fixed by nature and identity conditions of things.
EPISTEMIC: Claims rooted in and fixed by what is said to be known. 
DOXASTIC: Claims fixed by what is believed or in accordance with belief system.
DEONTIC: Claims based on and fixed by what satisfies certain established norms or cultures. 
Fig. 2.4.1 Modalities of Possible Worlds in Relation to Possible-World Space 
THE EPISTEMOLOGICAL SPACE OF EPISTEMIC ACTUAL

2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
27
 
independent of human cognition, and there is no logic that is not a provision of 
laws of reason or thinking, and hence, independent of human existence and 
decision-choice action of truth-falsity acceptance. From the viewpoint of human 
knowledge production, possibility cannot be separated from intuition, imagination 
and vision. But intuition, imagination and vision reside in conceivability. The 
separability and non-separability between possibility and conceivability will 
depend on the definition and explication of possibility and how it is logically 
constructed. Conceivability and possibility belong to quality-quantity continuum 
with neutrality of time. 
When one accepts the existence of the universal object set, Ω  or the cognitive 
potential space, U , then the possibility and conceivability do not define the 
potential space. If one assumes possibility to be cognitively derived from the 
space of the universal, then one cannot dismiss conceivability and intuition from 
the construction of the possibility space. A clear distinction must be established as 
to the space in which our concepts apply. If acquaintance is required for 
conceivability, and conceivability is part of intuition, and intuition is a vehicle to 
establish cognitive possibility, then how do we separate conceivability from the 
possible world and the construct of the possible world set? In fact, the possible 
world set is spun by the conceivability process and the circumference of the 
possible world set, viewed as a circle, is determined by the diameter of 
conceivability. It is a dynamic and expanding set. Its foundation is affected by the 
state of what is taken to be known (that is, the available stock of knowledge) and 
defined in a continuum. 
There are a number of problems in the possible world literature. It is difficult to 
assess the definition of possibility and possible world as they are used and 
developed. It is also difficult to place the concepts in the evolution of knowledge 
conclusion. What is the phenomenon of possible world and what is possible world 
theory? The modalities and types of modalities are arbitrary imposed without 
knowing what is assumed and what is taken to be logically derived from the 
universal system’s duality of ignorance and non-ignorance. Is the possible world 
composed of propositions of possibility of differential existence as cognitively 
conceived, and on the basis of what? In relation to these discussions, we shall refer 
to definitions (2.1.1.and 2.1.2) as working definitions of the concepts of possibility 
and impossibility as elements of duality in a continuum and in relation to the 
concept of possibility space. From these definitions we shall examine how the 
elements in the possibility space may be related to the elements in the possible 
world set with different interpretations.  
As defined, a possibility is a cognitive concept capturing anticipations over the 
path from the unknown to an epistemic actual. While the universal object set is 
independent of cognitive agents, the possibility space is dependent on the 
existence of cognitive agents. The concept being developed here, regarding 
possibility space, is not a collection of possibilistic propositions and cannot be 
subjected to propositional calculus. It is not semantic and cannot be subjected to 
definitional clarity. In other words, the possibility space is not the same as the 
possible world set on the basis of propositions. The possibility space is a 
collection of categories of elements and a family of families of categories that may 

28 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
be cognitively knowable. It may then include elements in the possible world set 
that may go through a knowledge test. The representational structures have been 
discussed in [R2.9]. 
It may be emphasized that in the framework of fuzzy paradigm and fuzzy laws 
of thought, every linguistic term as either a word or symbol is a set of degrees of 
meaning or value representations, but not a clear cut one-to-one correspondence to 
that which is defined and that which defines. This situation will violate our 
linguistic concept of synonym and antonym. This is one of the problem 
representations 
that 
Russell 
unsuccessfully 
sought 
to 
solve 
[R9.2], 
[R9.15],[R9.25],[R9.29] [R14.5] [R14.6] [R14.95], [R14.97], [R14.113], [R19.5], 
[R19.15] [R19.58]. To put it another way, every term or symbol in a formal or an 
informal language is vague. The exactness of a meaning of a term or symbol is 
obtained by explication through decision-choice action by cognitive agents except 
those designated as linguistic primitives [R9.20] [R9.21]. 
The point of concern is that theories of mathematics and rules of mathematical 
operations cannot be unquestionably claimed to be concerned with the structural 
properties of symbols independent of their meanings and the world of ideas, as 
sometimes claimed, especially by the mathematical formalists as opposed to the 
mathematical intuitionists. Similarly, mathematics and symbolic logic may be 
viewed as cognitive structures with the help of acceptably defined rules of 
operation and hence, they are branches of general grammar that allows successive 
categories to be derived and for meanings to be attached when the primary 
category is established. In this respect the rules of combinations of mathematical 
symbols are no different from the rules of combination of linguistic symbols. 
When mathematics is seen as contributing to the global knowledge structure, then 
within the theory of the knowledge square that is being presented here, 
mathematics must be seen not as knowledge, but as a way of organizing thought, 
just as any language for organizing thought about phenomena in their general 
aspects for deeper understanding of the phenomena through the analysis of their 
properties. Mathematics, just like symbolic logic, is an instrument of reasoning 
and it cannot be more than this. As an instrument of reasoning, it is not unique and 
may take many forms such as the form of the formalists or the form of the 
intuitionists or the form of fuzzy mathematics with corresponding grammars.  
Similarly, propositions composed of inexact words or words with multiplicity 
of interpretive meanings cannot claim exactness in the true-false values. In so far 
as formalist’s mathematical and logical symbols remain symbols under rule 
manipulations without reference to ideas and concepts, the claim of exactness in 
their derived conclusions can be assured. Such exactness cannot be maintained 
without some questions in the interactive system of the ontological and epistemic 
processes where cognitive agents are internalized as part of the knowing system 
irrespective of the tools of the knowledge production. In the physical systems, the 
cognitive agent places himself or herself as the subject of the knowledge search 
where the object under epistemic action is seen as independent from the cognitive 
agent. In the social systems, however, the cognitive agent is both the subject and 
object of knowledge search in complex interactive mode. In this way, the 
knowledge search process is divided into two. The former is an epistemic action 

2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
29
 
on the knowledge about the environment of the cognitive agents. The latter is an 
epistemic action on the knowledge about the organizational arrangements of 
members in relation to the social and natural environments which are inseparably 
connected to the former in unity. 
In this respect, mathematics is not knowledge about the elements in the 
universal object set and it cannot be so. It is knowledge to the extent to which it 
reveals paths for problem statement, analysis and computations, that is, it is a way 
to organize thought around the available information in the process of finding 
knowledge. However, mathematics can help and guide us to uncover aspects of 
knowledge about phenomena that we can collectively agree upon in the 
ontological and epistemological search. The classical mathematical and logical 
symbolism in cognition neglects human judgment throughout the knowledge 
production process. The problem that is faced in the knowledge production 
process involves the question: can mathematical and logical symbols be created 
that can avoid the qualitative structures, the vagueness in representation, and 
subjectivity 
in 
reasoning 
and 
ambiguities 
in 
interpretations 
and 
be 
epistemologically relevant and significant in all areas of knowledge production? If 
not , then what kind of representation of representation of information will be 
more helpful in organizing thought that makes allowance for human judgment 
under vagueness, ambiguities and approximation? The problem was picked up and 
discussed by Max Black in his treatment on vagueness [R19.4]. It is this problem 
of neglect by the formalists that formed the central discussions between the 
formalist and the intuitionist mathematics and logic and between [R14.5], 
Brouwer and [R14.14] Russell [R14.99]. It is also this problem of neglect that the 
fuzzy paradigm seeks to solve. 
2.4.1 Classical Paradigm, Fuzzy Paradigm, Possibility Space  
and Possible Worlds 
In this respect, let us consider the relative nature of the classical paradigm and the 
fuzzy paradigm with their corresponding mathematics and logics in organizing 
thought. The goal and objective of the classical paradigm with its logic and 
mathematics are no different from the goal and objective of contemporary 
development of fuzzy paradigm with its logic and corresponding mathematics. 
Both of them are ways of organizing thought, processing information and 
converting epistemic items into justified knowledge items with an associated 
degree of exactness. The classical paradigm accepts and operates on the principle 
of exactness and objectivity thus externalizing the subjective judgments of the 
cognitive agents from the knowledge-production process, where the cognitive 
agents merely follow an established set of deductive and inductive rules that leads 
to exact conclusions with a perfect degree of acceptance or non-acceptance. Such 
exact degrees of acceptance or non-acceptance may be assigned a value of either 
one (true) or zero (false) in the set {
}
1,0 . In this way, the cognitive agent is the 
subject of the knowledge-production process, where all epistemic elements, 
excluding the knowledge seekers, are objects under cognition. 

30 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
The fuzzy paradigm, on the other hand, accepts and operates on the principle of 
inexactness and subjectivity with vagueness, ambiguity and approximations where 
exactness and objectivity are cognitive agent’s decision-choice determined thus 
internalizing the cognitive agent as an integral part of the knowledge-production 
process. In this way, the cognitive agent is both the subject and object of the 
knowledge-production process. The degrees of acceptance of true-false 
propositions are less perfect and require qualifications of measures in degrees of 
values in a continuum scale between zero and one as extreme cases that are 
inclusively specified as an infinite set of the form, [
]
0,1 , and where such measures 
include subjective judgment through decision-choice actions at all stages of the 
knowledge-production process. The fuzzy paradigm accepts the universe in the 
fundamental continuum of the ontological space and then designs methods and 
techniques that persevere this continuum in the epistemological space where 
methodological discreteness is viewed as approximations of the fundamental 
continuum, and methodological continuum is viewed as an enveloping of the 
methodological discreteness. The classical paradigm designs methods of discrete 
processes to study the continuum phenomenon. Here, it is not clear whether the 
ontological space is viewed as fundamentally discrete where its study must follow 
methodological discreteness. 
If science is defined and demarcated with the properties of classical 
mathematics as exact representation, then our knowledge production will be in 
trouble where there is an open door for any knowledge researcher to find a 
mathematical concept and its algorithm and search for or make up a problem that 
fits it. Here, one must keep in mind the intense discussions on the possible world 
and how such discussions may relate to mathematical objects and reasoning. A 
conclusion may, therefore, be derived that is mathematically true within its logical 
system, but have little to say about social or natural phenomena. Such a situation 
has happened many times before and will continue to happen in economics and 
other areas of social sciences where mathematical characterization is considered as 
elegant, abstract and intellectually appealing and contributing. It is here that some 
care must be exercised on what constitute mathematical truth and what constitute 
truths in natural and social sciences. 
2.4.2 Mathematics in the Classification of Science  
and the Epistemic Process 
In the use of unconstrained mathematicalization, mathematics drives the problems 
where unnecessary assumptions are made about the phenomena in order to fit  
the problems into mathematical structures rather than the problems driving the 
development of the needed logic and mathematics for abstracting solutions. The 
insistence on the conditions of exactness and objectivity will exclude a number of 
accepted areas of exact science and place them into inexact science. If science, 
however, is defined and demarcated with the properties of fuzzy mathematics and its 
algorithms as inexact representations with subjective judgment, then our knowledge 
production will cover wider areas of sciences. The strength of fuzzy paradigm in the 

2.4   The Possibility Space and the Possible Worlds 
31
 
knowledge-production process may be seen in two actions. It provides an allowance 
to deal with quality, vagueness and ambiguities in thought and cognition. It also 
provides an allowance in dealing with classifications of degrees of exactness in 
acceptances of conclusions due to the processing of defective information structure 
through subjective decision-choice actions in the deductive and inductive processes 
of thought. We shall define, explicate and expand on the nature of defective 
information structure and how it affects the use of mathematics in theoretical and 
applied knowledge (one can also refer to [R11.9]]). 
Mathematics and logic are epistemic tools that allow simpler symbolic 
representations of complex concepts, ideas and expressions of linguistic nature for 
easier manipulations under the guidance of their own grammars that are not 
possible by the use of the grammar of ordinary language. Mathematics, thus, 
offers an expanding set of rules of combination and logical manipulations of 
symbolic representation of concepts, ideas and further derived system of ideas that 
help to reveal the differences and unity of all sciences. Easier manipulations of 
concepts, thought formations and rules of combination of symbolic representations 
must not be equated with exactness of knowing. Mathematics and logic are used to 
organize the elements in the possibility space for further analysis in other spaces 
in the knowledge-production process. In this respect, it may be argued that every 
homological, metaphysical and analytical element in the possible world set is 
logically reducible to an element in the possibility space through a process. 
Alternatively stated, the elements in the possible world set are logically derived 
categories where their primary categories are traceable to the possibility space. For 
mathematics to fulfilled the task of unity of science and be applicable to all areas 
of sciences, it must be able to represent all information in terms of defective and 
non-defective structures.  
The possible world set is obtained by combinatorial construction from the 
epistemic elements in the possibility space where the set of its primary category 
may be obtained by methods of reductionism from the elements in the possible 
world space that houses the possible-world set. The possibility space constitutes 
the family of primary categories while the possible world set constitutes the family 
of derived categories from the possibility space. The set of the primary categories 
of the possible world set is obtained by methods of reductionism while the set of 
derived categories in the possible world space is obtained by the methods of 
constructionism. The most important distinguishing factor between the possibility 
space and the possible world set or the possible world space is that the elements in 
the possibility space involve processes for verifications, falsifications and 
corroborations of knowledge and truth irrespective of how the elements are 
abstracted, define and analyzed from the universal object set. The elements in the 
possible world set must satisfy the verification, falsification and corroboration 
conditions of logical truth but not necessarily the conditions of knowledge. 
Furthermore, any possibilistic epistemic element in the possibility space becomes 
a set of possible world elements that are generated by imaginational extension into 
the possible world space which then constitutes a family of derived categories. 
The size of each derived set for any possibilistic epistemic element, therefore, 
depends on imagination. 

32 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
It may be noted that the elements of the possible world set are semantic in 
nature where the logical truths of their elements are the subject of analysis. Their 
knowledge contents are not the subjects of analyses in the possible-world space. 
The size of the possible-world space is also amplified by cognitive imagination 
from the elements of the space of the epistemic actual. An element in the possible 
world set may satisfy conditions of either logical truth or falsity but may have 
nothing to materially contribute to the state of knowledge. It may exist as an 
imaginative element in correspondence to possibilistic epistemic element. For any 
element in the possibility space and any element in the space of the epistemic 
actual, there are technically infinite propositional elements that may be generated 
by imagination into the possible world set that is a collection of possible worlds 
associated with them. The distinguishing characteristic between the possibility 
space and the possible world set may be viewed as the relationship of 
propositional truth to knowledge. A proposition may be true in a given axiomatic 
system and may have nothing to do with knowledge. It is simply an exercise in 
reasoning that may or may not have any knowledge content as we observe in 
abstract mathematical and logical systems. 
Mathematics and corresponding theories just as symbolic logic and corresponding 
theories may equip us with sophisticated computability and reasoning systems, but 
may have nothing to tell us about conclusions of knowledge verification, 
falsification and corroboration as we move from the universal object set to what is 
claimed to be knowledge items. They may assist in designing computable test 
principles when concepts are placed behind the symbols in use. The results of pure 
mathematics and logic are not knowledge (in ontological sense from the 
epistemological space). Their study is to equip the holder with a discipline in the 
use of rules of reasoning as well as their further abstract development when such 
rules are constructed. They help us in abstracting significant propositions about 
elements in the possibility space. They also help in defining the structural unity of 
all sciences as well as identify some common characteristics and differences at the 
most diverse rooms of the general knowledge house. They, however, say nothing 
about the knowledge contents of the propositions about elements in both the 
possibility space and the possible world set or the possible-world space. The 
possibility space P  is contained in the possible world set P  where (
)
P ⊆P . 
The size of P in P  will depend on the imagination of cognitive agents. The 
possible world set may be enlarged by increasing the number of semantic 
propositions about a primary element in the possibility space. 
2.5   The Possibility Space, the Primary Category and the 
Derived Category of Knowledge 
2.5   The Possibility Space, the Primary Category and t he Derived Category 
The possibility space has been presented as the second building block in the chain 
of the process of knowing. It is connected to the universal object set through the 
relationship between the perception and reality supported by the cognitive process. 
The universal reality is that which is there as distinct from epistemic (cognitive) 
reality of that which is claimed to be known. The universal reality is also 

2.5   The Possibility Space, the Primary Category and the Derived Category 
33
 
ontological reality. The universal reality is the reflection of the ontological space 
while the epistemic reality is the reflection of the epistemological space through 
the cognitive process. The knowledge-production process begins with the 
universal reality and ends with the epistemic reality which is connected to the 
universal reality by logical transformations of categories of epistemic elements. 
Here, as elsewhere, we must separate natural categories from logical categories. 
Perception and the universal reality on one hand, and universal reality and 
epistemic potential on the other hand constitute categories of polarity and duality. 
The epistemic potential and the logical process, in turn, constitute a change in the 
knowledge structure of the universal unity through epistemic conflicts of rational 
justification, corroboration and verification with their corresponding appropriate 
index measures in the polarities and dualities.  
2.5.1   Essential Postulates of the Primary and Derived Categories 
The universal reality is partitioned into categories of unit existence that allow 
different forms of elements to be identified, distinguished, classified and named 
on the basis of characteristic sets of elements which form the nominal basis of 
language. Given the family of categories as defining the starting point of a search 
for knowledge about the universe, we work with conditions of epistemic 
initialization of a category called the primary category in the family. We must 
keep in mind that our awareness in the universal planetary system is the work of 
information, epistemic process and decision-choice actions. 
 
Postulate 2.5.1: Existence of Primary Category 
In the process of knowing, the set of categories of the possibility space has a 
primary category from which all other categories of epistemic reality evolve 
themselves through logical substitution-transformations into sequences of derived 
categories that must satisfy the principles of justification, corroboration, 
verification and falsification. 
 
Postulate 2.5.2: Non-uniqueness of the Primary Category 
The primary category of the possibility space is not unique in the logical 
transformations in the sequence of derived categories of epistemic reality. Every 
derived category has a supporting primary category and every element in the 
possible world set has its supporting primary category from the possibility space. 
Every derived category may constitute a primary category for subsequent derived 
categories in the sequence of the knowledge production.  
These postulates merely present to us the idea that any element of the 
possibility space is a candidate for selection by cognitive agents as a primary 
category of logical operations for truth and knowledge justification, corroboration 
and falsification as we work ourselves toward epistemic reality. The decision-
choice action on the primary category will be influenced by what is believed, 
known and accepted in the social structure. The collection of all candidates of the 
primary categories constitutes the possibility space in the knowledge production 
process. The elements in the possibility space are called the possibilistic epistemic 

34 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
elements. An example of the choice of a primary category is Thales’ choice of 
water as constituting the foundation from which all things are derivable. To 
Thales, therefore, water is a primary category from which all derived categories 
must meet justification, verification and corroboration principles for knowledge 
acceptance. Similarly, for Berkeley, the primary category was spirit and that every 
element in the possibility space is seen in terms of a spirit, [R14.85]. It is possible 
to select energy as the primary category of knowing. Basically, the choice of a 
primary category for research in the knowledge-production process is to answer 
the question of “what there is”. The justification principle in the selection of the 
primary category may be empirical or axiomatic, depending on the nature of the 
subject area of knowledge search. In physical sciences, it is primarily 
experimental and empirical; in economics and decision sciences, it is primarily 
axiomatic and mostly non-experimental.  
2.5.2 The Establishing Characteristics of the Primary and 
Derived Categories 
The characteristics of the primary category in the possibility space may be 
established on the basis of either empirical principle or axiomatic principle or both 
from the available information structure. In each case, we encounter conditions of 
inexactness in representation and vagueness in interpretation of exact structure of 
the primary category through its defining characteristics (attributes). The 
conditions of the primary category are about ontology that must be related to the 
epistemological process of explanation and prescription. It is within the elements 
in the possibility space that visions and imaginations acquire meaning in the 
prescriptive science, and understanding and reality acquire clarity in the 
explanatory science as they are related to the sequences of the knowledge 
production. The empirical or axiomatic conditions merely help to establish 
existence of a possibility from which its connection to the universal reality must 
be shown. The primary category is not knowledge and its claim to knowledge 
must be shown or demonstrated as belonging to the universal object set. The 
elements in the possibility space initialize the knowledge-production process. 
The construction of the elements in the possibility space must be shown to be 
composed of elements with their corresponding degrees of possibilistic belief. 
Every element in the possibility space is a category and corresponding to it is a 
distribution of possibilistic uncertainty due to vagueness and limitations of 
ambiguity that are imposed by inexactness of acquaintance and measured by 
possibility index. In other words, the vagueness, ambiguities and inexactness are 
the result of the information-transmission and receiving process. The variable that 
tends to capture the categorial element is referred to as the fuzzy variable. The 
field of variation of a fuzzy variable is fixed by the distribution of the values of the 
possibility index that impose the boundaries of applicable areas of the subjective 
possibilistic belief. The boundaries may be made elastic with the expanding 
knowledge structure. The elements in the possibility space are then ranked in 
terms of the measures that capture the index of possibilistic belief. Acquaintances 
create primary information which may be called experiential information structure 
that defines the elements in the possibility space. Imagination creates derived 

2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
35
 
information on the basis of the primary to give us another type of information 
which may be called imaginative information structure that characterizes the 
possible-world elements. 
Out of the possibility ranking of the elements in the possibility space, a 
selection is made of the primary category that satisfies the highest index of the 
possibility belief. The possibilistic belief captures uncertainty in the initial 
knowledge production due to vagueness of meaning of symbolic representation 
such as words and ambiguity in propositions or numerical complexity, or what 
may be referred to as inexact problems of linguistic variables for approximate 
reasoning and communication. The possibility space is such that when one selects 
the primary category, relative to a phenomenon, then one has in mind the notion 
that all other categories related to the phenomenon in the universal object set can 
be shown to be derivatives from the primary category. These primary-derivative 
categorial relations of the elements in the possibility space require the 
specification conditions of categorial conversion in the possibility space [R2.9]. 
The concepts and the representations of ideas contained in the fuzzy variables 
allow the development of substitution-transformation dynamics as to how the 
knowledge production works through the decision-choice rationality under 
vagueness, ambiguities and volume limitation of information limitation, which 
may generally be represented as defective information structure [R11.19]. The 
exactness or inexactness of our knowledge is rooted in our need for better 
understanding of the concept of defective information structure; our lack of 
qualitatively and quantitatively good knowledge in any area of the knowledge 
system reflects our difficulty of internalizing and integrating the ignorance of 
cognitive agents as part of the knowledge-production process, either through 
methodological constructionism or methodological reductionism which must 
transform an information structure to a knowledge system. This information 
structure has two components of quality and quantity. The deficiency of any one 
or both produces defective information structure that must be subjected to an 
epistemic process for knowledge derivation. Let us provide a working definition 
of the defective information structure. 
 
Definition 2.5.2: Defective Information Structure 
A defective information structure is one that contains qualitative characteristics of 
vagueness, ambiguities that give rise to fuzzy beliefs with possibilistic 
uncertainties and fuzzy risk, as well as quantitative characteristics of volume 
limitations that give rise to stochastic beliefs with probabilistic uncertainties and 
stochastic risk in the knowledge-production process. 
2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescript ive Sciences 
2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences in 
the Knowledge-Production Process 
2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescript ive Sciences 
To place the theory of the knowledge square in the general epistemology of the 
knowledge-production process and how it will help us to understand the empirical 
and axiomatic foundations of exact and inexact sciences, it is useful to partition 

36 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
the space of science into explanatory and prescriptive sciences. It is also useful to 
relate the possibility space to the analytical construct of explanatory and 
prescriptive sciences. In the explanatory science, the existence of an element, 
belonging to the possibility space, is examined or established by either empirical 
or axiomatic principle to postulate its ontology or knowability of what there is. 
Additionally, the characteristic behavior of what there is becomes subjected to 
explanability. The explainable behavior becomes subjected to the conditions of 
predictability. Thus, the chain of the cognitive process proceeds from ontology to 
knowability to explanability and to predictability. In other words, ontology (that 
which is there) precedes epistemology (that which is claimed to be known). This is 
shown in Figure 2.6.1 
We have pointed out that the possibilistic categories are established by means 
of the fuzzy paradigm where vagueness, inexactness and ambiguities due to 
intuitive processes (intuition) are essential characteristics of any possibility 
category. In terms of explanatory science, a fuzzy category comes to us with a 
degree of possibilistic uncertainty that is associated with the belief that the item is 
likely to be knowable. Each possibility category may be amplified into a possible 
world and placed into the possible-world space. In this respect, all elements in the 
possible world set carry with them defective information structures. 
 
  
CONCEPTUALIZABILITY 
WHAT THERE IS 
EXPLANABILITY 
EXPLANATORY RATIONALITY 
KNOWABILITY 
 
ONTOLOGICAL CONDITIONS  
PREDICTABILITY 
PREDICTIVE RATIONALITY 
 
EXPLANATORY 
   SCIENCE 
ONTOLOGY: Natural Actual
EPISTEMOLOGY: Epistemic Actual 
Fig. 2.6.1 An Epistemic Geometry of the Path of Explanatory Science in Relation 
to the Possibility Space 

2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
37
 
The logical system that presents this epistemic structure of the process of 
knowing constitutes a foundation of the explanatory theory within the explanatory 
science [R14.35] [R14.50]. The cognitive approach to the explanatory reasoning 
and its analytical structure, in the process of knowing, constitute the explanatory 
science. In the explanatory science, the decision-choice process is such that the 
development of the primary category and the derived categories must assume the 
existence of what there is while the explanatory theory establishes an explanatory 
rationality in support of the justification of knowledge claims of what there is. We 
may refer to what there is as an explanatory possibilistic category that is to be 
subjected to the logical principle of knowing from the possibility space. The 
possibility space, in this case, is composed of elements of possible knowledge 
with possibilistic uncertainty. The elements do not have claims to knowledge 
except claims to knowledge possibilities. The cognitive task, at the level of 
ontology, is to construct a possibilistic belief system in relation to the possibilistic 
uncertainty as a justification of what there is, and at the level of epistemology, to 
construct a justification in support of possibilistic belief indexes as measures of 
degrees of knowability. 
Different interpretations of the possibility space and the possibilistic categories 
present themselves when we enter into the realms of prescriptive science 
[R14.30], [R16.7] [R16.12]. In the prescriptive science, the decision-choice 
process is such that the development of the primary and derived categories must 
assume the existence of what ought to be, while the prescriptive theory establishes 
the conditions of the prescriptive rationality for the justification of what ought to 
be that meets the conditions of possibilistic belief in terms of candidates for 
actualization. The possibility space is composed of desirable elements that fit into 
human vision and realistic imagination for transformation into the space of the 
actual through a process. The possibility space is seen to be composed of elements 
not for understanding but to be transformed into elements in the category of an 
actual that must reside in the space of the actual. The conceptual integrity of any 
possible-world construct in the possible-world space enters here, where the 
conditions of actualizing an element in the possible world set may be established 
by the method of prescriptive theory, to the extent to which the element meets the 
conditions of categorial convertibility. Let us keep in mind the discussions of the 
similarity and differences between the possibility space and the possible-world 
space as seen by the definitional characteristics of their existence. 
The elements in the possibility space do not have claims to epistemic actual 
except for simple claims into the transformation-substitution process under the 
logic of categorial conversion. The cognitive task of prescriptive science, at the 
level of ontology, is to construct a possibilistic belief system that will provide a 
justification of that which ought to be. At the level of epistemology, the cognitive 
task is to construct a justification in terms of possibilistic indexes for degrees of 
categorial convertibility, or constructability or reductionability that will ensure 
appropriate transformations of the possibilistic epistemic elements. Here, we 

38 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
speak of the conditions of categorial convertibility in the process of either 
construction or reduction. 
It is important to keep in mind the interpretational framework of the possibility 
space and possibilitic categories as they relate to the explanatory and prescriptive 
sciences within the theory of the knowledge square and how exactness may be 
derived from inexactness. The elements of the possibility space are defined by 
fuzzy characteristics and categories. The fuzzy characteristics may be seen in 
terms of possibilistic belief systems with corresponding possibilistic categories 
and fixed by possibility distribution. Let us illustrate the deferential interpretations 
of the possibility space as they are related to explanatory and prescriptive 
sciences. Imagination, intuition, vagueness and ambiguities are subjectively 
transformed into decision-choice actions as internal parts of the knowledge-
production process. 
Consider an element called good society in the possibility space. A good 
society may be taken as the primary category in the possibility space from which 
different categories of good society may be derived. At the level of explanatory 
science, a good society may be considered first as what there is for knowability in 
the framework of ontology as established by empirical or axiomatic conditions. Is 
there anything called a good society? This question has a follow-up one. How 
many good societies are there in the possibility space and how similar are they? It 
is, therefore, a possible element for cognition. Given the existence of a good 
society, we must construct an explanatory theory of its behavior and then predict 
its further behavior in the same environment or its actualization in a similarly 
created environment. In the explanatory science, the good society is empirically 
established, and its predictability must take place in the same environment or 
another environment with identical structure. At the level of prescriptive science, 
the good society is by a value judgment existing in the possibility space or in the 
possible-world space where its characteristics are established by axiomatic system 
that may be supported by a set of sense data on the basis of a justified possibilistic 
belief. The element a good society may belong to the possible world set. As in the 
explanatory science, a good society is accorded its primary category from which 
derived categories are also made in the prescriptive science.  
In the prescriptive science, the task of cognitive agent is not to establish what 
there is, explain and predict its behavior. The task is to establish what ought to be 
by subjective assessment of the conditions of what there is, and how to transform 
it into the potential and actualize what ought to be in the actual-potential duality. 
The bringing into being of what ought to be requires the provision of a 
prescriptive theory that defines a path or a set of conditions to transform what 
ought to be into what there is. What there is, is a knowable possibility and what 
ought to be is an actualizable possibility. In both cases of explanatory and 
prescriptive sciences, the set of categories of possibility, in relation to a particular 
phenomenon, is closed by decision-choice action to constitute a manageable 
possibility set. Generally, however, the possibility set is open. The general  
 

2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
39
 
possibility space is convexly open and it is this convexity property that allows 
possible worlds set to be formed in the sense that any convex combination of 
derived categories from either the possibility space or the space of the epistemic 
actual belongs to the possible world set. For example, a living dog with one head 
belongs to the space of epistemic actual while a living dog with an elephant head 
or with multiple heads belongs to the possible world space. The possibility set is 
constructed from the possibility space and it is closed by decision-choice action 
where its elements are examined for probable categorial conversion through a 
substitution-transformation process. The possibility set is a categorial member of 
the possibility space and it is finite relative to a phenomenon. The possibility 
space that indicates the possible knowable elements, at any moment of time, is 
also finite, where such finitude is decision-choice determined, while the possible-
world set is infinite and only constrained by imagination and vision. 
At the level of explanatory science, this substitution-transformation process 
takes place through theoretical constructs to provide a justified belief for the claim 
of what there is. The behavior of what there is and its further occurrences under 
fuzzy information constraint are contained in the possibility space. The 
explanatory claims appear as propositions and hypotheses. The acceptances of 
their validity must be examined against the space of the probable for the 
phenomenon in question. At the level of prescriptive science, however, the 
substitution-transformation process takes place also through theoretical constructs 
to provide a justified belief for the claims of what ought to be and its actualization 
under a fuzzy information constraint which characterizes each element in the 
closed possibility set regarding a particular phenomena. The possibility set for 
each phenomenon is closed by fuzzy decision-choice rationality with the principle 
of fuzzy decomposition; otherwise, it is infinitely open. The chain of the cognitive 
process in the prescriptive science proceeds from conditions of conceptualizability 
to prescriptability to implementability and then to actualizability. In other words, 
epistemology (that which is claimed to be known) precedes ontology (that which 
is there). It is here that the possible world set enters the knowledge-production 
process. It is also here that engineering of all forms enters into the knowledge 
production enterprise. An immediate question follows as to whether the results of 
engineering fall under epistemology or ontology? The path of prescriptive science 
as seen from the possibility space is illustrated in Figure 2.6.2 In relation to 
epistemology and ontology. 
The possibility of the knowable in thought arises from the nature of intuitive 
form that reflects the first level of cognitive encounter through acquaintance with 
some elements in the universal object set. The role of intuition as presented in the 
formation of categories in the possibility space should not be confused with the 
intuitionist mathematics and logic even though they have something to contribute 
in strengthening the conceptual representation and understanding of the role of 
intuition in cognition and symbolic reasoning. 
 

40 
2   The Theory of the Knowledge Square 
 
 
 
The epistemic geometries of the paths of explanatory and prescriptive sciences 
in relation to the possibility space have interesting cognitive distinction. In the 
explanatory science, we begin from the potential space of knowing, locate the 
possible element of what there is, and move it to the possibility space for 
knowing. Ontological conditions that present a belief of knowability are 
constructed. We then develop explanatory theories about the phenomenon of 
interest and subject them to conditions of prediction, falsification, verification and 
corroboration [R2.9][R14.11] [R14.13][R14.21] [R14.30]. We simply move from 
the potential to the actual through an explanatory process. The cognitive process 
of moving from the potential to the epistemic actual by explanation constitutes the 
explanatory rationality. There is no cognitive effect on what there is except the 
construction of the justification of its existence and understanding of its behavior 
after its existence is cognitively ensured. In the explanatory science and the 
corresponding theories, the focus is explanation and understanding of the behavior 
of the elements of what there is but not to alter them or improve what there is. 
In the prescriptive science, we also begin from the space of the epistemic 
actual, locate what ought to be, and move it into the possibility space through the 
possible world set, construct prescriptive conditions, in terms of prescriptive 
theory, that present a justified belief of its happening, in terms of becoming what 
CONCEPTUALIZABILITY 
 
“WHAT OUGHT TO BE” 
IMPLEMENTABILITY  
  RULE APPLICATIONS 
 Prescriptive Rationality 
PRESCRIPTABILITY 
OPTIMAL-RULE DEVELOPMENT 
Epistemological Condition 
 
ACTUALIZABILITY 
          OUTCOMES 
WHAT THERE IS 
PRESCRIPTIVE 
   SCIENCE 
Fig. 2.6.2 An Epistemic Geometry of the Path of Prescriptive Science in Relation 
to the Possibility Space 
EPISTEMOLOGY: Cognitive Actual 
ONTOLOGY: Natural Actual 

2.6   Possibility Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
41
 
there is. We then develop strategies for the theory’s implementation and act on the 
conditions for the actualization of what ought to be. The cognitive process is 
referred to as prescriptive rationality and the actualization of what ought to be 
becomes what there is. In the prescriptive science, therefore, there is a cognitive 
effect on what there is in that what ought to be is cognitively acted on and 
transformed to become what there is as an ontological element.  
The test of validity of prescriptive theory is the success in transforming what 
ought to be (the potential) into what there is (the actual). The job of prescriptive 
science is to change the constituent elements of the space of the actual and link it 
to the potential space. The prescriptive theory becomes an explanatory theory 
when the implementation is successful. The job of explanatory science is not to 
change the elements in the space of the actual but to provide a justification and 
explanation that link the space of the actual to the space of the potential. The 
explanatory theory may provide some prescriptive conditions for the actualization 
of the same phenomenon in a similar environment [R2.9] [R14.30]. We shall now 
turn our attention to enter into the conceptual zone of the probable in relation to 
the epistemic path of the knowledge square. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 43–54. 
springerlink.com                                        © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 3 
The Theory of the Knowledge Square  
and the Concepts of Probability  
and the Probability Space (B ) 
We have discussed the potential and possibility spaces and their relationships to 
the knowledge-production process as viewed from the theory of the knowledge 
square. These conceptual relationships were connected to the possible-world 
space, the explanatory science, prescriptive science and the defective knowledge 
structure. On the basis of the defective knowledge structure, the roles of 
explanatory theory and the corresponding explanatory rationality were projected. 
Similarly, the prescriptive theory and the corresponding prescriptive rationality  
were discussed .We shall now turn our attention to the probability space and show 
how it is connected to the possibility space and then to the universal object set in a 
backward regressive process of the knowledge-production process. The possibility 
space and its construct on the basis of the fuzzy paradigm to deal with the problem 
of possibilistic uncertainty provide us with the analytical structure of possibilistic 
reasoning under conditions of defective information structure that is constrained 
by quality and quantity deficiencies about epistemic elements with neutrality of 
time.  
3.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Probability 
Space B  
Much of our knowledge production has benefited from probabilistic reasoning 
and logic that follow the classical laws of thought. The essential point that we 
must note is that possibilistic reasoning and its logic precede probabilistic 
reasoning and its logic. The possibilistic reasoning is always assumed to exist in 
the same way that we assume the existence of the possibility space on the basis of 
which the probabilistic reasoning is developed.  In our mathematical constructs, 
probability and probabilistic reasoning that are associated with conclusions in 
exact sciences, we must assume the existence of the possibilistic set that is 
developed from the possibility space for a given phenomenon. The implication is 
that the possibility space with its elements is defined and the possibility set for any 

44 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
phenomenon is given and closed for the construct of the probabilistic reasoning. It 
is on this basis that impossible outcomes and sure outcomes, relative to a 
phenomenon, take on scientific meanings in the probabilistic reasoning (see 
alternative discussions in [R12.6]).  
It may be noted that without the possibility space, possibility set and 
possibilistic reasoning, a search for knowledge or scientific reasoning may have 
no meaning and social value in thought and the practice of thought. A cure for 
cancer is a phenomenon and this phenomenon is defined in the possibility space, 
and various techniques and methods to reach the cure constitute derivatives with 
distribution of possibilistic measures of attached beliefs in the possibility space. 
The cure for cancer is a potential that we have moved by some method of 
cognition into the possibility space that provides us with a possibilistic belief 
system for epistemic investigation to find it. 
3.2   The Concept of Probability and the Construction of the 
Probability Space 
From the possibility space and given the primary category, a set of derived 
categories is abstracted by the method of categorial conversion and then examined 
for inclusion into a possibility set for any given phenomenon. Each element in a 
derived category  of the selected phenomenon, comes with a measure of 
possibilistic belief, p, which may be referred to as possibility measure, 
( )

m
p that 
depends on the possibilistic belief given the cognitive transformation from the 
universal object set. It may be noted that the concept of belief is a linguistic 
variable that has a fuzzy covering in its measure of degrees of belonging to a 
category. The possibility set, relevant to an event or a phenomenon, broadly 
speaking, is then constructed by imposing a cutoff by either a method of fuzzy 
ranking or optimization through the membership characteristic functions that may 
be constructed by subjective or objective conditions or both. The logical process 
of constructing the closed possibility set for each phenomenon works through the 
principles of duality, opposites and continuum. The opposites are the extremes of 
possibility and impossibility. Each element is conceptually viewed as a set of 
possibilities with a distribution defined by membership characteristic function. 
The same element is also viewed as a set of impossibilities with a distribution 
defined with a membership characteristic function. For the same element from the 
universal object set, as the size of the characteristic set of impossibility decreases, 
the size of the characteristic set of the possibility increases in dualistic sense.  
In this way, the possibility and impossibility are viewed in terms of duality in 
the fuzzy thought system with the principle of continuum. Thus, for every degree 
of possibility, there is a corresponding degree of impossibility for every epistemic 
element in such a way that every degree of possibility has a support of a degree of 
impossibility and vice versa. Both of them reside in an epistemic unity without 
which their conceptual understandings are meaningless. They are, however, 
viewed in terms of dualism in the classical thought system with the principle of 

3.2   The Concept of Probability and the Construction of the Probability Space 
45
 
excluded middle where the element is either possible or impossible without an 
indication of how the possibility set is obtained. The possibility in the fuzzy 
system is established by a positive characteristic set with a corresponding 
membership characteristic function that is increasing in the characteristic set. 
Similarly, the impossibility is established by a negative characteristic set with the 
corresponding membership characteristic function that is decreasing in the 
characteristic set. The membership characteristic function of each category, 
belonging to the possibility set, is taken as the goal and the membership 
characteristic function of its impossibility set is taken as a constraint to create a 
fuzzy optimization decision problem. The fuzzy optimization decision problem is 
then solved to obtain an optimal-level value which is then taken as a fixed optimal 
indifference value. The closed possibility set is then constructed as a fixed-level 
set with the optimal value, and the method of fuzzy decomposition, for a given 
phenomenon. The optimal fuzzy membership values are then used to rank the 
categorial derivatives that are related to the phenomenon of interest. This set 
involves the concept of epistemic possibility. The method of the construct is the 
same for both the explanatory and prescriptive sciences in the possibility space. 
The meanings, differences and similarities of the concepts of duality, dualism, and 
their corresponding principles of continuum and excluded middle respectively are 
discussed in the various chapters in this monograph. Some definitions are needed 
to build the relational structure of probabilistic concepts to the possibilistic 
concepts. 
 
Definition 3.1.1: Closed Possibility Set 
A possibility set of a phenomenon from the possibility space is said to be closed if 
there exists an optimally minimal membership value 
[
]
0,1
∈
*
a
 that is a support 
of the ordinary possibility set of the phenomenon, where the value
[
]
0,1
∈
*
a
 is 
decision-choice determined and it is bounded from below by 
[
]
0,1
∈
*
a <a
; 
otherwise it is said to be open.  
 
Note 3.1.1 
Any open possibility set is linguistically a subset of the possible world set. The set 
)
,1

∈
*
a
a
 is the support of the possibility set closure. Every probability set has a 
closed possibility set that allows the probabilistic reason to be valid between 
impossible and sure events. Every epistemic element with a possibility index-
value 
(
)
0,
∈
*
a
a
 is taken as an impossible event with probability value equal to 
zero in the probability space. We must keep in mind that impossible events may 
become possible while possible events may become impossible as time proceeds 
and new qualitative and quantitative information characteristics become available 
to enhance the domain of the possibility space. 
 

46 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
Definition 3.1.2: Probability 
Probability, in the conceptual scheme of the knowledge square is that which is 
cognitively abstracted from the possibility space through an epistemic 
transformation of the conceptual possibility, with justified degree of belief 
regarding the likelihood that the possibilistic epistemic element may be turned into 
a justified knowledge item. The improbability is that which has justified degree of 
belief that excludes it from the likelihood of transforming the possibilistic 
epistemic element into a knowledge item. 
 
Definition 3.1.3:  The Probability Space  
The possibility space in the conceptual scheme of the theory of the knowledge 
square is a conceptual subsystem that provides us with a linkage between the 
possibility space and the space of the epistemic actual that allows the 
understanding of the knowledge transformation process in the epistemological 
space where the possibilistic epistemic elements are cognitively believed to be 
informationally probable as a knowledge item that can enter the space of the 
epistemic actual with a degree of stochastic uncertainty. The collection of all 
elements that are moved from the possibility space with stochastic justified belief 
constitutes the probability space with elements called probabilistic epistemic 
elements that may be specified as:  
( )
(
)
( )
[
)
{
}
 = 
 and 
0 1
B
B
B
P
μ
∈
μ
∈
y ,
y
| y
,
y
,
 
Where 
( )
(
)
( )
( )
 is a possibilistic epistemic variable from the possibilisty space
 
 the degree of possibility of knowledge, a measure of possibilistic belief
 = the degree of probability of knowledge, a 
P
P
B
=
μ
μ
=
μ
y
x,
x
x
y
measure of probabilistic belief




 
Given the closed possibility set associated with a relevant phenomenon in the 
knowledge-production process, and with specified degrees of possibility 
constructed on the basis of characterized linguistic variable, an approximate 
reasoning and fuzzy paradigm, we now raise a question about the elements in the 
closed possibility set. The question is: how probable will any item in the 
possibility set be known from the explanatory rationality or be actualized from the 
prescriptive rationality? Let us notice that every epistemic item is an event with a 
complex combination of possibilistic and probabilistic uncertainties. These 
epistemic items may be restructured into what is called an event space. The search 
for an answer to this question points us to another epistemic uncertainty that is due 
to quantitative information limitation, in terms of volume limitationality and 
limitativeness, which surrounds the elements in the possibility set for a particular 
phenomenon. Let us keep in mind that the elements in the closed possibility set 
come as dual and as a fuzzy variable of representation, where each element 
appears with its degree of belonging, where such degrees of belonging capture the 
conditions of vagueness, ambiguities, inexactness and subjectivity through vision 
and imagination which together represent the possibilistic uncertainty. The  
 

3.2   The Concept of Probability and the Construction of the Probability Space 
47
 
possibility space comes with its own topology. It is, thus, a cognitive construct on 
the basis of a particular epistemic transformation to help eliminate some doubts of 
possibilistic uncertainty, and to decide on the degree of possibilistic uncertainty 
that is tolerable for an acceptance of an event as reasonably knowable under 
explanatory system, or reasonably actualizable under prescriptive system within 
some degree of human possibilistic ignorance associated with a particular 
phenomenon. In moving from the possibility space that is characterized with some 
degree of fuzziness, we must deal with an information limitationality and 
limitativeness in the global field of knowing in terms of volume that is available 
for quantitative processing. At this analytic point, there is a need, therefore, for the 
definitions of the concepts of limitationality and limitativeness as they relate to 
information structure. 
 
Definition 3.1.4: Information Limitationality and Limitativeness 
A decision-choice system  in the knowledge-production process is said to be 
information limitational (limitative) if an expansion in the volume of the 
supporting information structure is a necessary (sufficient) condition in obtaining 
a critical level of knowledge acceptance. 
Note 3.1.2 
The information limitationality and limitativeness, defined in terms of quantitative 
characteristics, present uncertainties which are different from those of possibilistic 
uncertainties that are due to the global fuzziness. It is called probabilistic 
uncertainty because it involves probabilistic or stochastic belief system due to 
incompleteness of the volume of information. To deal with probabilistic belief, an 
epistemic mapping is called upon to transform the closed possibility set into 
probabilistic categories. The collection of all these probabilistic categories 
constitutes the probability space that comes with its own topology. Each element 
in the probability space presents itself as a relational triplet of unit value, a degree 
of possibility and a degree of probability.  
It is useful to keep in mind that the possibility space is composed of 
possibilistic categories that are associated with all postulated outcomes of a 
phenomenon where each category is equipped with a possibilistic distribution that 
captures the degree of possibilistic uncertainty associated with the outcome of a 
given knowledge phenomenon. Similarly, we expect the categorial conversion of 
the possibilistic set into probability space to yield probabilistic categories 
equipped 
with 
probability 
distribution 
that 
captures 
the 
degrees 
of  
probabilistic belief associated with stochastic uncertainty of the outcome. The 
probabilistic 
epistemic 
elements 
appear 
as 
complex 
triplets 
of 
the  
form 
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
 w here 
P
B
P
P
μ
μ
μ
=
μ
x ,
x
,
y ,
y
,
y
x ,
x
 which is 
referred to as the fuzzy random variable with fuzzy (inexact) probability value for 
each element. The probability space is called the fuzzy probability space. The 
fuzzy random variable may be decomposed into the corresponding units of the 
triplets. The fuzzy random variable becomes a classical random variable with a 
corresponding classical probability space if we assume away the conditions of 

48 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
fuzziness composed of vagueness of language, subjectivity in imagination, 
ambiguities in communication and others. In the classical system of thought, 
( )
P
μ
x  in the classical probability space is set to one for each possibilistic 
epistemic element and hence each x  assumes an exact value and meaning with 
exact probability value under information incompleteness and hence we 
concentrate on the quantitative volume of information structure to the neglect of 
its quality. Since 
( )
1
P
μ
=
x
, the variable 
( )
(
)
P
=
μ
=
y
x,
x
x . 
The probability space is the third pillar in the chain of the knowledge-
production process in order to arrive at the epistemic actual. It is, thus, a cognitive 
construct on the basis of a particular epistemic transformation of information 
structure to help eliminate some doubts of stochastic belief, and to decide on the 
degree of probabilistic uncertainty that is tolerable for an acceptance of an event 
as reasonably true under an explanatory logical system or reasonably actualizable 
in a prescriptive logical system under some degree of human probabilistic 
ignorance in the case of the classical thought system, and fuzzy probabilistic 
ignorance in the case of the fuzzy thought system associated with a particular 
phenomenon. 
The epistemic utility of the construction of the probability space is to help us 
answer the question of how probable do we expect a possible phenomenon to be 
logically transformed into the space of the epistemic actual on the basis of 
quantitatively limited information which will allow cognitive agents to connect 
from the possible and then to the epistemic actual through the probable [R10] 
[R10.4][R10.5][R10.11] . The nature of human sense limitations in acquaintance, 
observation, imagination, recording, remembrance and retrieval imposes on 
human cognition an information that may be exact or inexact or both providing us 
with defective information structure. Such a defective information structure from 
the possible must be processed to arrive at a decision on the probable. The 
probability space and the probabilistic reasoning also help us to identify the 
probable knowledge element of what ought to be that can or will be actualized or 
can support and explain what there is under conditions of a defective information 
structure. Generally, the probability space is constructed from fuzzy categories 
that are elements of the possibility space.  The elements appear as pairs in the 
form of categories with possibility distribution. The elements are called 
possibilistic categories and the variables are called fuzzy variables. The possibility 
is the result of defective information structure due to vagueness in imagination, 
intuition, linguistic constructs of meaning, reasoning and communication that 
characterize our sense data or experiential information structure which may 
include experimental and non-experimental information sub-structures. 
In the construct of the probability space, on the basis of classical paradigm, the 
possibility space is taken as given where any probability set of the phenomenon 
under investigation is closed by impossibility with probability measure equals to 
zero, and surety with a probability measure equals to one by definition. No 
discussions are offered to us as to how the values of zero and one are obtained. In 
the construct of the probability space, on the basis of the fuzzy paradigm, the 
possibility space is first constructed where each possibility set for any  
 

3.2   The Concept of Probability and the Construction of the Probability Space 
49
 
phenomenon is closed by fuzzy decision-choice action that reconciles the 
conditions of the surety-impossibility continuum. The fuzzy decision-choice 
action is used to decide on the tolerance level of epistemic vagueness, ambiguity, 
and inexactness associated with the elements in the possibility set through fix-
level fuzzy algorithms that allow the epistemic possibilistic elements to be 
transformed into epistemic probabilistic elements.  
Generally, two situations must arise in the construct of the probability space as 
we logically move from the possibility space and traverse between the possible to 
the probable. One situation involves disregarding the associated degrees of 
belonging of the possible outcomes in the possibility space, thus converting the 
fuzzy categories into ordinary categories and hence into ordinary possibility sets 
where each element is equally possible under identical conditions. The conditions 
of “equally likely” imply that all elements in the possibility space have equal 
possibility values that are exact and equal to one, and hence we can neglect the 
component of the defective information structure due to fuzziness broadly defined 
to capture the qualitative disposition of information. In this way, we assume away 
the fuzzy uncertainties, concentrate on defective information structure due to 
quantitative incompleteness, and transform the complex fuzzy random variable 
that cannot obey the exact classical laws of thought into a simple classical random 
variable that can obey exact classical laws of thought. Alternatively, one may 
carry the fuzzy categories with the associated degrees of belonging to the 
members in the possibility set into the probability space where outcomes are not 
equally possible but are weighted by the associated degrees of possibility. The 
classical way of using Aristotelian reasoning with crisp set is such that the former 
situation is adopted where the possible elements to be examined for their probable 
occurrences come to us as un-weighted single variables under a new type of 
information uncertainty where the elements have no possibility weights. In other 
words, if 
and 
P
∈
≠
x,z
x
z,
, 
 then it is the case that 
( )
( )
1
P
P
μ
= μ
=
x
z
, which 
simply means that P is a crisp possibility set. 
In the former situation, the variables used in representing concepts associated 
with the phenomenon are exact symbolic and linguistic elements that obey the 
classical laws of thought irrespective of the complexities of the categories under 
epistemic scrutiny for knowledge acceptance of the possible, or for actualization of 
the possible. The variables are named as random variables that are either 
mathematical or logical objects. They are then manipulated under limited but exact 
information (stochastic) uncertainty with the classical laws of thought to obtain an 
exact justification in support of the probabilistic belief that the occurrences will be 
manifested in the defined environment. The vague aspect of the information 
structure that produces the fuzzy uncertainty is suppressed in all the sense data or 
experiential information structure. In this logical frame, one reasons in the classical 
paradigm where cognition is subjected to the tyranny of the principle of exactness 
that violates every reasonable account of, and adherence to human behavior and 
linguistic systems with flexible knowing as may be abstracted. This is the problem 
of exactness-inexactness duality in cognition and decision-choice actions. The 
problem of exactness-inexactness duality is mapped into the representation space of 
discrete-continuous duality that reflects methodological digital-analog duality in 

50 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
dealing with certainty-uncertainty duality. The problem expands in multiple 
dimensions as the phenomenon increases in complexity, especially in social, 
medical, technological and biological systems, requiring new epistemic approaches 
to representation and the search for justified knowledge items in the knowledge-
production process. It is the presence of this problem of the sequence of dualities 
with the acceptance of the principle of continuum that has given rise to the 
developments of other knowledge areas such as synergetics, complexity theory and 
energetics in the contemporary epistemology.  
The users of classical paradigm with its mathematics and logic operate like a 
chess player, with the imagination that they can arrange objects in the 
epistemological space with precision and ease by the applications of objective 
rigid rules of thought, just as the chess player operates on the chess board. They 
fail to account for the fundamental principle of dual motion in that the physical 
elements on the chess-board retain the same quality and do not exhibit counter 
qualitative motion and hence, they are easy to represent and manipulate. In 
practice and over the epistemological space, the epistemic elements alter their 
forms to incorporate motions of quality and quantity in the chess-board of 
knowing where the characteristics of the epistemic elements may be elusive due to 
the simultaneity of qualitative and quantitative motions contrary to the behavior of 
mathematical objects. This exact rigid determination, in the classical paradigm 
based on information exactness and operated with exact rules of thought, is 
replaced by inexact flexible determination with fuzzy covering in the fuzzy 
paradigm with its mathematic and logic. 
If the vagueness that generates fuzzy information is not suppressed in the 
possibility set as maintained in the fuzzy paradigm, then the latter situation is 
undertaken where the constructed probability space and the categories of the 
possibility set will conceptually and computationally appear in triplets as 
categories of potential elements with corresponding indexes of possibility and 
indexes of probability for any given phenomenon. In this way, the potential is 
continually connected to the possible and then to the probable in order to examine 
the conditions of the categories of the epistemic actual for collective approval and 
acceptance by decision-choice action. This situation of the presence of general 
fuzziness presents a dilemma for the classical laws of thought in human cognition 
operating with the classical epistemic modules as information processing facility 
in all areas of knowledge production. Over the epistemological space, the claim of 
exact probability in the classical laws of thought has become contaminated with 
vagueness while the probabilistic reasoning has also become contaminated with 
ambiguities. In this way, the derived results of thought are implicitly inexact in all 
areas of knowledge production, even though, symbolic exactness in 
representations, logical exactness in reasoning and mathematical exactness in 
computations on the basis of exact rigid determination are claimed by the use of 
the classical paradigm in thoughts. The implicit inexactness is contained in the 
assumptions on the basis of which the paradigm is manufactured.  
With the presence of vagueness and ambiguity, the classical probability space 
becomes the fuzzy-probability space.  The variable representation, in this case, is 
surrounded by two uncertainties of fuzziness and stocasticity, two interrelated 

3.3   The Probability Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
51
 
belief systems of possibilistic belief and probabilistic belief, two types of 
supporting measures of justification of possibility index and probability index and 
two types of risk of fuzzy risk and stochastic risk in a composite form called the 
fuzzy-stochastic risk where we must deal with inexact probability measures. The 
variable representations in the probability space are not simply random variables 
but fuzzy random variables. The classical probability space with random variable 
becomes a fuzzy probability space with fuzzy-random variable. In this frame, the 
probability measures are no longer exact, but rather, we encounter either inexact 
probability [R6.15] [R6.28] [R15.9] [R15.23] or vague probability [R15.8] 
[R15.12] [R6.24] [R15.26]. The fuzzy-random variables do not obey the classical 
laws of thought in their manipulations and conceptual combinations on the chess 
board of knowing. They obey the rules of conceptual combinations of the laws of 
thought of the fuzzy logic in the fuzzy paradigm. In this way, the fuzzy paradigm 
allows us to deal with both the quantitative motion that may be external and 
qualitative motion that is an internal transformation. The fuzzy laws of thought 
affect all areas of knowledge production in such a way that the claim of principle 
of exactness in any area of knowledge production is simply by assumption, since 
the decision-choice processes of every area of thought must deal with the 
defective information structure and subjective phenomena. 
It is here that the logic of mathematics of probability, either in the classical 
form or in the fuzzy form, becomes helpful in answering the epistemic question of 
how probable can a possible outcome enter the space of the epistemic actual. It is 
also here that a problem arises with the classical laws of thought as an attempt is 
made to account for the qualitative elements of the information structure. In 
answering these questions, the logicians and the mathematicians using the 
classical laws of thought discount the vagueness and inexactness associated with 
elements in the probability space, and ambiguities in reasoning associated with 
vague logical and mathematical elements in order to arrive at the knowledge 
acceptance. So far the complete development of fuzzy probability space is 
ongoing and is the challenge of mathematics that will handle vagueness. It is here 
that the fuzzy laws of thought with its mathematics bring us some relieve and help 
to establish a path to follow in the epistemic space whether one is considering 
explanatory or prescriptive science.  
3.3   The Probability Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive 
Sciences 
The interpretational elements in the possibility space, as they relate to explanatory 
and prescriptive sciences, have been discussed. Directly or indirectly, these 
interpretations also relate to the structures of exact and inexact sciences which are 
under the subject matter of our epistemic action. They also offer us new and 
logically fresh alternative views of what constitutes science and non-science and 
what kinds of assumptions are required for applying different rules of information 
representations and laws of thought in knowledge development. Similar 
interpretations of the epistemic elements in the probability space are necessary to 

52 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
understand the chain that connects the building blocks in the theory of the 
knowledge square from the potential to the epistemic actual passing through the 
possible and the probable. We must keep in mind that the possible, the probable 
and the actual are concepts specified in the epistemological space and related to 
the process of knowing, while the potential is a concept that is related to the 
ontological space that allows us to initialize the knowledge search dynamics. In 
general, the theory of the knowledge square involves the questions of how the 
epistemological space is connected to the ontological space that is taken as the 
collection of the elements of “what there is” under the knowing process in the 
epistemic space.  
Given the interpretations of the possibilistic categories, what conceptual system 
do these possibility categories assume in the probability space? The possibility 
space presents us with possibility sets for each phenomenon where the primary 
category is established either by empirical or axiomatic foundations or both. 
Corresponding to the possibility set, regarding a particular phenomenon,  are 
either 1) a set of explanatory theories with a family of sets of explanatory 
propositions, or 2) a set of prescriptive theories with a family of sets of 
prescriptive propositions. To what extent can one believe in these explanatory and 
prescriptive propositions as probable in relation to the space of the epistemic 
actual? 
The search for answers to the question of how probable do these possible 
elements that contain knowledge contents leads us to the logical and mathematical 
construction of a probabilistic belief index or any other belief index to rank the 
probable elements or find their average behavior and deviations around the 
average. In the explanatory science, the subject of epistemic analysis is on the 
examination of competing explanatory theories on the basis of the indexes of 
probabilistic belief system, derived from the defective information structure due to 
incomplete information signals associated with the probabilistic categories, and in 
support of the claimed inference of the derived propositions. The question of how 
probable involves the distribution of true-false values in duality of the theoretical 
propositions and their ranking for acceptance of a particular theory. These true-
false values are distributed in continuum within the duality. In prescriptive 
science, the subject of epistemic analysis in the probability space is on the 
examination of competing prescriptive theories, also on the basis of index of 
probabilistic belief system derived also from the defective information structure 
on the basis of volume incompleteness of available information signals given the 
elements of vagueness. The process is first to transform the possibility set into a 
probabilistic set and to rank the elements in the probability set for the selection of 
the most probable, and to establish the average behavior of the phenomenon as 
well as deviations of other elements around the average. 
In both cases of explanatory and prescriptive theoretical systems, the 
development of the index of probability is related to rationality of decision-choice 
action regarding true-false claims of the explanatory propositions on one hand and 
potential-actual transformation claims of the prescriptive propositions on the 
other. The elements in the probability space, regarding the explanatory science, 
have no claims to knowledge except claims to the probable acceptances as 

3.3   The Probability Space, Explanatory and Prescriptive Sciences 
53
 
knowledge. Such acceptances of the explanatory propositions or claims must go 
through the principles of corroboration, falsification and verification given the 
possibilistic and probabilistic justified belief systems [R2.9] [R8.27] [R8.56] 
[R14.45] [R14.49]. The elements in the probability space, in the case of 
prescriptive science, have no claims to actuality, except claims to probable 
transformations from the probability space to the space of the epistemic actual, 
after the implementation of the prescriptive rules.  
The claims to probable categorial conversions in the prescriptive science, 
unlike the case of the explanatory science, are subjected to principles of 
corroboration, falsification and verification after the applications of the sets of 
prescriptive rules (for extra discussions see the works in [R2.9]. In the explanatory 
science, we deal with conditions of justification, corroboration, falsification and 
verification of knowledge claims. In the prescriptive science, we deal with 
conditions of justification, corroboration, falsification and verification of 
outcomes of decision-action claims. This distinction of claims in explanatory and 
prescriptive theories is very important in the knowledge-production process. 
Decision-choice actions in both explanatory and prescriptive sciences are 
constrained by defective information structures that generate fuzzy and stochastic 
uncertainties, and related to them are the possibilistic and probabilistic beliefs with 
resulting fuzzy risk and stochastic risk which are associated with inexact but not 
exact sciences [R11.21][R11.22]. The fuzzy risk is related to fuzzy conditionality 
while the stochastic risk is related to stochastic conditionality in the knowledge-
production enterprise. They combine to produce an aggregate that is fuzzy-
stochastic risk. 
The results of the epistemic activities in the epistemological space are that the 
knowledge structure constructed from the defective information structure 
irrespective of the area of knowledge cannot take an unquestionable claim to 
exactness no matter how hard one tries. The point here is that the claim of 
exactness for some area of knowledge or science is an epistemic fiction whose 
cognitive and intellectual support is a set of assumptions. It is here that one may 
link the defective information structure to correctness, accuracy and precision in 
the knowledge-production system. The universal principle, in the enterprise of 
knowing, is that all areas of knowledge production are clouded with inexactness. 
Such inexactness is due to defective information structure that in turn is generated 
by vagueness in linguistic representation of concepts and ideas, ambiguities in 
perceptions of the sense data, volume incompleteness of information signals, 
approximations in human reasoning and faulty communication channels. It is 
important to point out that the probability index constructed to deal with 
probabilistic belief also brings conditions of vagueness and ambiguity into the 
probabilistic reasoning creating a need for concepts of subjective, imprecise, 
vague or fuzzy probability indexes which have their own logic of analytical 
construct. The presence of these fuzzy probability indexes in decision-choice 
actions involving the estimation of exact subjective probability was an intense 
debate in [R11.22] [R13.26] [R15.8] [R15.9] [R15.26]. This debate may be related 
to the debate between the camps of the classical and personal probability theories 
in terms of objective and subjective dispositions. 

54 
3   The Theory of the Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Probability Space ( B )
 
Furthermore, it may also be pointed out that as the complexity of the system 
increases, any attempt to impose exactness on the knowledge-production process 
renders the acquired knowledge irrelevant to decision-choice action. This is a 
typical case in economics, especially in macroeconomics, where the classical 
paradigm is used to generate theories about the complex system of human 
decision-choice actions at both the individual and collective levels. The same 
situation applies to a number of knowledge areas such as medical sciences, 
biological sciences, climatology and others. As the complexity of the system of 
analytical interest increases in dimensionality, the defectiveness of the information 
structure increases with increasing information vagueness, conceptual ambiguity 
and information incompleteness, that make it difficult to apply the classical laws 
of thought and mathematics to derive unquestionably sustainable useful 
propositions. In all these, we have to deal with the simultaneous presence of 
quality and quantity with the corresponding qualitative and quantitative motions 
where the complexity increases with increasing qualitative motion. 
In the epistemological space, exactness is the ultimate that we seek in the 
knowledge-production process given the quantitative volume of information. Its 
attainment is approached through the process of reducing the fuzziness of the 
defectiveness in the information structure so as to reduce the possibilistic 
uncertainty and risk. It requires a reduction in ambiguity and vagueness in 
representation, a reduction of imprecision of information signals, a reduction of 
the size of subjective information, an improvement in the logic of reasoning and 
communications of the known. In all these human activities, there exists an 
irreducible core of fuzzy uncertainty in any area of knowledge production. This 
irreducible core of fuzzy uncertainty generates an irreducible core of inexactness, 
which in turn produces an irreducible core of fuzzy risk for any decision-choice 
system. Such irreducible core of fuzzy risk is the minimum component of systemic 
risk associated with any decision-choice system whether it is social, physical or 
non-physical in the knowledge-production process. The desire to derive exact 
theoretical propositions and to claim exact knowledge items, through the use of 
classical mathematics and exact reason, forces theories into quantitative straight 
jackets at the sacrifice of important qualitative characteristics. This is the problem 
raised in [R14.79] [R14.82] in relation to quality, quantity and time. The point 
here is that, for the mathematics and exact rigid determination to work, the 
internal configuration that generates qualitative motion must be assumed to be 
static and the decision-choice expectations that link the time trinity of past, present 
and future must be static. This point will need some further discussion. It may be 
pointed out that, in this meta-theoretic framework, possibility relates to quality 
and probability relates to quantity of information. The concepts of possibility and 
probability spaces that are discussed here are defined through the concept of the 
information phenomenon which is then mapped onto the space of the epistemic 
actual to which we now turn our attention. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 55–72. 
springerlink.com                                        © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 4 
The Knowledge Square and the Concepts  
of Actual and the Space of the Epistemic  
Actual ( A ) 
We have discussed the foundational blocks of the spaces of the potential, 
possibility and probability and their relationships to the process of knowing in 
order to reduce human ignorance in all areas of knowledge. We shall now turn our 
attention to examine the space of the epistemic actual and discuss the 
connectedness of this space to the spaces of probability, possibility and the 
potential (the space of the universal object set) in the reduction process in  
the knowledge production. The space of the epistemic actual is the final 
destination of our knowledge journey and the results of the game of knowing. It  
helps to close the theory of the knowledge square as a continuum process of 
thought where the chain is never broken, and guarantees that the knowledge 
production is a never-ending process in the sense that the space of the epistemic 
actual is also ontologically and epistemologically connected to the potential space 
through logical dualities and creative tensions. It is here that the principles of 
corroboration, falsification, verification and acceptance of true or false 
propositions and knowledge claims acquire meanings. It is this analytical structure 
of the theory of the Knowledge square that allows scientific and philosophical 
assessments of meanings embodied in the potential, possible, probable and actual 
and the corresponding developments of logical paradigms and mathematical 
structures to deal with them.  
4.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Epistemic 
Actual 
To understand the concepts of possibility and actuality and their relationships, 
they must be referenced to the concepts of the potential and the probability and 
how they are related to the possibility and actuality in the epistemic process. 
Similarly, to have a reasonable understanding of the meanings of the concepts of 
the possible worlds, actual world, and the world epistemic actual, and their 
relationships, we must understand the conceptual ideas about the analytical 
relationships of the potential space, possibility space, probability space and the 

56 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
space of the epistemic actual. We have pointed out that the possibility space for 
analytical works is smaller than possible-world set and that every element of the 
possibility space generates a set in the possible worlds by convex combinations 
where such convex combinations generate combinatorial imaginations in the 
construct of the possible world set. However, no element in the possible world set 
can be conceived and generated outside the four spaces. Similarly, no human 
invention and engineering is possible outside the four spaces of the knowledge 
square. 
From the view point of polarity and duality, with a well structured fuzzy logical 
and mathematical process, every actuality is a potential in a transformation and 
every potential is an actuality in the making through a process where the actual 
fades into the potential, the potential fades into the possibility, the possibility fades 
into the probability and then back to the actual to complete the knowledge square 
with further transformational connections to the potential in a continual process 
without end. The journey through these spaces is the work of epistemic actions 
with inputs of defective information structures. No segment of the knowledge 
production can, with comfort, claim exactness of its inquiry due to the presence of 
the irreducible core of inexactness associated with all human decision-choice 
actions working through all possible information structures. The best we can claim 
is varying degrees of exactness from which we can construct a fix-level set by 
human reason and judgment to establish an ordinary set of exact science from 
inexact science by fuzzy decomposition. In this way, every element claimed to be 
exact in science has an irreducible core of inexactness that is accepted as a risk of 
knowledge failure and ignorance in that science. But this is true in all knowledge 
sectors. The implication is that any potential knowledge is an open fuzzy set 
which can be closed only by decision-choice actions on behalf of cognitive agents. 
The potential, the possible, the probable and the actual are connected by 
continuous processes that are relationally epistemic, and no two of them appear as 
parallel as seems to be implied in Buchler [R9.3]. The defining spaces of the 
potential, the possibility, the probability and the epistemic actual must be seen in 
terms of quality, quantity and time as key sets of categories of knowing.  
For the understanding among the concepts of the potential, the possible, the 
probable, we shall offer a definition of the concept of the epistemic actual and the 
space of the actual. Both the concepts of actual and the space of actual are 
cognitive constructs. The space of the cognitive actual is taken as the space of 
epistemic reality. 
Definition 4.1.1: The Actual and Reality 
An actual in a conceptual scheme of the knowledge square is that which is 
cognitively abstracted with epistemic methods from the probability space through 
a cognitive transformation of the conceptual probability with a justified degree of 
belief regarding the notion that the epistemic element has been claimed with 
acceptable methods to be a justified knowledge item, and hence belongs to the 
epistemic reality which constitutes the model of the cognitive actual.  
 

4.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Epistemic Actual 
57
 
Definition 4.1.2: The Space of the Actual 
The space of the actual in the conceptual scheme of the theory of the knowledge 
square is a conceptual subsystem that provides us with a linkage between the 
probability space and the space of the potential which allows the understanding of  
the knowledge transformation process in the epistemological space where the 
probabilistic epistemic elements are cognitively believed and hence accepted to be 
informationally actual as a knowledge item with some degrees of certainty. The 
collection of all elements that are moved from the probability space with justified 
belief constitutes the space of epistemic actual. The elements of the space of 
epistemic actual are called the knowledge elements and the space may represented as. 
( )
( )
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
( )
( )
(
)
[
)
 
 =  
and  
w ith 
1
B
P
P
B
A
P
B
P
A
B


=
μ
μ
μ
∈




μ
∈
μ
=
μ
μ
∈α





z
| z
x , y ,
y
,
x
, x ,
x
,
y ,
y
z
x
y
,
 
 
Where 
( )
( )
( )
(
)
 the degree of possibility of knowledge, a measure of possibilistic belief
 = the degree of probability of knowledge, a measure of probabilistic belief
 is a possibilistic epistemic variab
P
B
P
μ
=
μ
=
μ
x
y
y
x,
x
( )
le from the possibility space
 is the maximum tolerance level of risk of knowledge acceptance
A





μ
= α

z
 
Note 4.1.1 
The space of the epistemic actual is equal to or less than the space of cognitive 
reality which is analytically constrained. It is also a conceptual system that allows 
us to connect our knowing process of epistemic reality to the ontological space 
where the epistemic elements are examined and confirmed against the ontological 
elements of what there is, where quantitative and qualitative distinctions of the 
identities of the epistemic elements in simplicity and complexity are established. 
The space of cognitive reality is made up of the elements of epistemic actual that 
are believed to have isomorphic correspondences with some elements of 
ontological space. 
There are two types of possibilistic and probabilistic categories. One type is 
cognitive, in terms of knowing what there is. The other type is natural and social 
in the sense of categorial conversions through logical substitution-transformation 
processes. In the former, there is a seed of knowing what the actual and its 
behavior are. In the latter, there is a seed of the actual in the process of making 
and becoming. In both cases the actual resides in the probable, the probable 
resides in the possible and the possible resides in the potential in a continuum. All 
of these are relationally connected to produce the universal object set that is 
infinitely closed under the substitution-transformation process in knowing and 
categorial conversions. In this process, the old actual fades into the potential from 
which the possible is born to give rise to the seed of the probable that gives birth 
to the actual as a new candidate to fade into the potential. This is the structure and 
analytical foundation of the knowledge square and its contribution to the theory of 
knowledge.  

58 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
The theory of the knowledge square projects an infinite continuum of 
substitution-transformation processes in polarity and duality of quantity and 
quality spaces, with time acting as a neutral element where qualitative and 
quantitative spaces and time emerge as one in the ontological and epistemological 
processes whose epistemic connections are the work of information and paradigm 
of thought. The substitution-transformation process is the destruction of old 
knowledge and the replacement of the old with a new knowledge of the same 
phenomenon with different qualitative disposition through forces of creative 
tension. In this way, the knowledge production and the growth of knowledge are 
destructive-constructive processes where decision-choice actions operate in the 
ignorance-knowledge space in a continual process. 
From the conceptual system of the knowledge square, a question arises as to 
what can be said about the methodology in the knowledge-acquisition process. The 
essential proposition from the theory of the knowledge square is that the 
methodological approach to cognition follows the same path and this path is a 
subject-matter neutral. The first observation is that the universal object set 
contains every element in the potential space and is reflected in the ontological 
system. The elemental contents are taken to be what there is. The elements are 
made up of natural and social categories which contain objects, states and 
processes that are named in a given language and identified and defined by 
quality-quantity characteristics at any given time. From the potential space, we 
may cognitively abstract the social and natural possibility sets, the elemental 
contents of which, by the very nature of their identifications and categorizations of 
the linguistic structures, inherit the property of vagueness in the possibility space. 
The vagueness may be associated with quality but not necessarily the quantity of 
information needed for epistemic action. This vagueness is a characteristic of 
information on all social and natural phenomena in the knowledge-production 
systems. In fact, it is the property of quality that gives identity to an entity and 
distinguishes it from other entities in the universal object set as well as creates the 
conditions for the essential categories to be formed in the epistemological space. 
The process of thought formation requires information and information 
processing which in turn require developing inter-relational and intra-relational 
structures among the elements in the possibility set in accordance with their 
defined qualitative characteristics, irrespective of whether the elements belong to a 
social or natural possibility set. The objective is to move the thought system from 
the possibility space, where we can examine the sufficiency of the quality of 
information, to create the probability space where we can examine the sufficiency 
of the quantity of information, or simply from the possibility set in order to create 
the probability set. The thought processes in all cases are plagued with ambiguities 
in language and inexactness of reasoning requiring subjective decision-choice 
action for relational clarity. This condition is general to all knowledge sectors 
whether social or natural. The qualitative characteristics of vagueness, ambiguities 
and subjective are grouped as fuzzy phenomenon with possibilistic belief system 
under dual creative tension. The resolution of this creative tension becomes a 
decision-choice support to the formation of the possibility set. This possibilistic 
belief system may be divided into two sub-systems, one of which is associated 

4.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Epistemic Actual 
59
 
with natural possibilistic category and the other associated with social possibilistic 
category. The fuzzy characteristics in the possibility space are carried on to the 
probability space and disposed of in the space of the actual by decision-choice 
action. The elements in the Periodic Table are identified not simply by their 
quantitative characteristics but by their qualitative characteristics. For example, an 
once of gold and an once of silver are of the same quantity of weight but we know 
them by the differences in their qualitative characteristics. Inter-categorial 
differences are established by qualitative characteristics while intra-categorial 
difference are established by quantitative differences which may or may not be 
supported by intra-categorial qualitative differences which are defined in terms of 
aesthetics.  
At the level of the probability space, one is confronted not only with the 
problem of quality of information from the possibility set but with the problem of 
the quantity of information associated with it given the quality. The probability 
space will be of no analytical use if we have complete information. The problem 
of quality of information affects all areas of knowledge production including the 
epistemic process in nature and society, and hence affects natural, social, medical, 
behavioral sciences and related ones. The nature of the problem has been 
explained under the epistemic understanding of the probability space, the 
conditions of the probability set and the corresponding probabilistic belief system. 
The epistemic path is such that we may partition the probability set into natural 
probability set (that is probability set associated with natural phenomena) and 
social probability set (probability set associated with social phenomena) for 
analytical convenience, but we cannot get rid of the associated limited information 
that constrains certainty of exactness. We also cannot get ride off fuzziness that 
constrains the exactness of certainty. Furthermore, the processing of the 
probabilistic information to arrive at propositions about the elements in the space 
of epistemic actual also suffers from the same problems irrespective of whether 
one is in natural or social sciences. The problem is that the input of the 
knowledge-production process is of defective-information structures and the 
information processing is constrained by capacity limitations that lead to 
approximations by cognitive agents operating in the epistemological space with 
decision-choice actions. 
The thought process in the probability space is also plagued with probabilistic 
ambiguities and reasoning inexactness which requires subjective decision-choice 
actions for relational clarity of the probability values as measures of stochastic 
beliefs. This is general to all knowledge sectors whether social or natural. From 
the probabilistic set and with appropriate probabilistic reasoning, we work with 
knowledge acceptance conditions under stochastic and fuzzy risks to construct the 
elements in the epistemic reality. This path of sequence is the methodology of the 
knowledge-production process as projected by the theory of the knowledge 
square. The theory of the knowledge square projects a universal principle for 
cognitive intra-categorial and inter-categorial conversions in every stage in the 
knowledge-production enterprise. It holds for natural sciences, social science, 

60 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
behavioral science, medical sciences, chemical sciences, economics, psychology 
political science and other knowledge sectors as well. 
The essential features of the theory of the knowledge square are the explanation 
to the processes through which defective information structures, information 
representation, paradigms of thought and decision-choice action arise in the 
epistemological space, as we seek to connect the process of knowing over the 
epistemological space to the ontological space. The toolbox of the knowledge 
square in dealing with the essential features is composed of polarity, duality, 
opposites, continuum, contradiction and the use of fuzzy paradigm in the 
knowledge-production process. From the conditions of the theory of the 
knowledge square, we shall offer a definition of epistemology as it is explicated 
and used in these discussions, and then analyze its relative importance to the 
development of toolboxes for knowledge search. 
Definition 4.1.3: Epistemology 
Epistemology is a universal thinking framework for knowledge production and the 
process of knowing (ignorance reduction). It is independent of the content or the 
area of knowledge sector, its axiomatic and empirical foundations of the primary 
category, techniques and methods of acquiring knowledge through information 
processing to create derived categories from the primary categories on the basis of 
sequences of justified possibilistic and probabilistic belief systems. It is a 
framework of creating an epistemic actual through the spaces of potential, 
possibility and probability where the collection of all the primary and derived 
categories constitute the epistemological space. 
The general conditions of epistemology define the space of the knowledge-
production game. These conditions are made up of information, irrespective of 
how it is acquired, and information-processing modules which involve paradigms 
of thought. We shall now distinguish between epistemology from methodology by 
a definition of methodology as a subject area of study and as a complement to 
epistemology. 
Definition 4.1.4: Methodology 
Methodology is a cognitive discipline in the knowledge-production process 
devoted to a  systematic and logical study of sets of correct and incorrect 
techniques, methods, rules, procedures and principles of reasoning that may be 
used within a given paradigm over the epistemological space for knowledge 
search in various knowledge sectors as may be needed by the nature of their 
specific subject matters to deal with the possibility space, the probability space 
and the space of epistemic actual in order to connect the epistemological space to 
the ontological space through the spaces of the potential, possibility, probability 
and the epistemic actual. It examines the appropriateness and suitability of all 
learning and research tools that may vary from basic assumptions, to particular 
research techniques for different areas of the knowledge-production process given  
 

4.1   The Knowledge Square and the Concept of the Epistemic Actual 
61
 
the paradigm of thought. The methodology, therefore, may be viewed as a module 
for examining an optimal design and application of techniques, methods, rules, 
procedures and principles of reasoning with a paradigm. 
As explicated, epistemology is, thus, a cognitive frame that is synthetic in its 
approaches to knowledge production. Conceptually, epistemology defines the 
space of cognitive activities on the basis of an accepted paradigm for knowledge 
search, production and knowing. The epistemological space is, thus, general for all 
knowledge-production systems. Methodology is a toolbox frame that is analytic in 
its approaches to knowledge search, knowing and discovery over the 
epistemological space. Both the cognitive frame and toolbox frame constitute the 
epistemic frame of the knowledge construction-reduction system that is self-
organizing, self-contained and self-correcting.  The theory of the knowledge 
square is presented to deal with the conditions of the knowledge search process 
and its path to knowing but not to deal directly with specific content of knowledge 
as a product in cognition. As such, we have consistently used the phrase the 
knowledge-production process to suggest that we are about the process and its 
path for knowing and acquiring knowledge.  
The theory of the knowledge square is concerned with the broad conception of 
epistemology, the building blocks of the epistemological space, the nature of the 
information structure that gives rise to paradigms which give birth to different 
inter-paradigm and intra-paradigm methodologies for efficient epistemic practice 
within paradigms. It is a meta-theoretical system on the knowledge production 
process. It is not concerned with the examinations and developments of specific 
methods, techniques, rules, principles and others that may be superimposed on the 
information-knowledge- production process by the specific needs of different 
knowledge sectors on the knowledge-production process. This path of knowing is 
general to all knowledge systems, thus projecting a universal principle to 
knowledge production.  
Epistemologically, therefore, exact science is not different from inexact science 
except in content, problems and methods of knowledge abstraction and knowing. 
There are, therefore, no differences in social science, natural science, medical 
science, behavioral science, biological science, cognitive science, physical science 
and other areas of the knowledge production over the epistemic space. The 
acquisition of knowledge items in any of these areas needs information input, a 
method of information processing, rules of claiming discovery of knowledge, and 
rules of acceptance of knowledge claims. The methods of acquaintances and 
information acquisition will vary over knowledge areas. One thing that is common 
among all these knowledge sectors is that no claim of perfect information (non-
fuzzy and complete) can be assured irrespective of the mode of acquaintance 
except by assumption. All knowledge areas must work with defective information 
structure (fuzzy and incomplete).  The interactive processes of the knowledge 
square, cognitive frame, toolbox frame and epistemic frame, as they relate to 
synthetic and analytical logics in a complex system of the knowledge production 
process and cognitive agents, are shown in Figure 4.1.1.  
 

62 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.1.1 Relational Geometry of the Building Blocks of the Knowledge Square 
Composed of  a) Potential Space U  , b) Possibility Space, P c) Probability Space 
B  and d) the Space of the Actual, A  with cognitive connectors, 
's
ij
 Showing 
Interactions of Methodology, Toolbox, Synthetic and Analytic Logics 

4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality 
63
 
Here, given the ontological space, a distinction is made between epistemology 
and methodology that will allow us to examine the categories of exact and inexact 
sciences from the position of duality and continuum such that exactness emerges 
from inexactness through a process. Inexactness is a property of the 
epistemological space and exactness is the property of the ontological space. The 
epistemological space is defined by the conditions of the knowledge square given 
the ontological space. The methodological space is established by pyramidal logic 
that presents a relational structure of six elemental tools of synthetic and analytical 
logics in a relational pyramid that is superimposed on another relational pyramid 
of epistemic, cognitive and toolbox frames in an interactive mode for the 
knowledge-search activities in the epistemological space. The set of frames 
constitutes a pyramid. Similarly, the set of logics constitutes a pyramid and their 
interactions constitute a complex system of knowing. 
4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and 
Reality 
Let us turn our attention to provide some clarifications and reflections on the 
conditions of relationality among some concepts and ideas that have been used in 
these discussions and will be used in further discussions in the rest of the 
monograph. The theory of the knowledge square has a number of building blocks 
that must be related to the development of the general theory of knowledge 
production. There are two organic building blocks that must be related in the 
knowledge-discovery process.  
4.2.1   Clarifications in the Ontological Concepts 
First we have the organic building block of the space of what there is. The 
cognitive representation is called the conceptual ontology. The elements of what 
there is are called ontological elements. The ontological elements are made up of 
objects, processes and states that are under continuous transformations. The 
conceptual place that houses these ontological elements is called the ontological 
space. The collection of these elements that may be accessible to knowing is 
called the potential set. The identities of all the elements in the ontological space 
are defined by sets of characteristics that are independent and unknown to 
cognitive agents. The family of the sets of defining characteristics for the 
identities of the ontological elements is called the ontological information 
characteristic set. 
Each ontological element is defined by a unique set of ontological 
characteristics at any natural transformational period. The unique sets of the 
characteristics of the ontological elements allow multiple give-and-take relations 
to create antagonistic, similarity, and differences among the ontological elements. 
These relationships are established among the elements whether they are aware or 
not. Besides establishing uniqueness, the relationships and the characteristics 

64 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
allow groups to be formed called ontological categories.  The essential property of 
the ontological space is that it is continuous in the sense of analog and in the sense 
that the ontological characteristics are information flows that are propelled by 
energy for uninterrupted communications and transformations. This is the 
principle of ontological continuum where relationships and categorial conversions 
of the ontological elements are continuous and eternal in terms of matter-energy 
information trinity in the ontological times. The behaviors of the categories obey 
the natural laws of categorial conversions on the basis of information energy and 
decision-choice actions under the principle of continuum. 
The information that flows from the ontological characteristics is the 
ontological information; the decision-choice actions that lead to continual 
transformation of the ontological characteristics is the ontological decision-choice 
system and the transformation process is called the ontological categorial 
conversion. The results of interactions of information and energy that provide the 
forces of categorial conversion is called the ontological categorial moment that 
operates in continuum on the basis of ontological time and space that is expressed 
in quality-quantity-time space. The quality-quantity-time space with simultaneous 
interactions of qualitative and quantitative motions may be split into 1) quality-
quantity space with transformational dynamics, 2) quality-time space with 
qualitative motion and 3) quantity-time space with quantitative motion which 
includes space-time dynamics. The complete ontological space, the universe, is 
not only continuous but infinitely closed under continual transformations and 
categorial conversions.  
Since the ontological universe is infinitely closed under transformational 
continuum, it cannot expand. It can only alter qualitative characteristics and 
rearrange the ontological elements. The idea of conceiving the ontological 
universe as expanding must also admit the existence of an empty space in terms of 
space-time phenomenon that is not accounted for in our conception of infinity to 
which an ontological expansion can occur, whether our concept of infinity is 
explicated as a simple infinity, super infinity or infinitely infinity or infinity of 
infinities. In this way, our definitional concept of the universe is incomplete if 
there is an empty space to which it can expand. This is not a discussion on certain 
claims in the cosmology in relation to the concepts of dark matter, energy and 
their distribution. Our concern here is the nature of our linguistic representation of 
what we claim to know and whether such claims are consistent with what there is. 
An infinitely complete universe defined in terms of matter, energy and 
information cannot quantitatively expand as viewed in terms of space-time 
phenomena. Individual ontological elements can expand but they do so at the 
expanse of contraction of other ontological elements. This is also the principle of 
cost-benefit duality where every beneficial transformation has a supporting cost 
transformation. As it is seen here, the universe is, however, continually 
transforming itself in terms of quality that gives meaning to continual creation 
without end. Some clarifications of the concepts of epistemology and 
methodology as defined in this monograph are in order. 

4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality 
65
 
4.2.2   Clarification of Epistemological Concepts 
Given the existence of the collection of what there is and that the ontological 
universe is in a continuum, the questions that face the cognitive agents are how the 
ontological elements can be known and how their behavior can be conceptualized. 
These questions are existential and different from, but are complemented by the 
question of how the universe came into being in terms of creation. The first two 
questions involve the knowing process of ontological existence while the second 
involves the knowing process of the ontological creation. These questions bring us 
to the second global building block which is the space of knowing that is 
constructed by cognitive agents. The space of knowing is the epistemological 
space that contains the epistemic elements which are elements to be known by 
cognitive agents (what is to be known). From the universal object set of the 
ontological space and from the epistemological space that defines the environment 
of the process of knowing, three interrelated spaces are established. They are the 
spaces of possibility, probability and epistemic actual. The four blocks of the 
potential space, the possibility space, the probability space and the space of  
the epistemic actual constitute what defines the knowledge square. The study and 
the development of their connections into a thought system form the theory of the 
knowledge square. The logical structure and the conceptual system of thought of 
the theory of the knowledge square establish a foundation and a universal 
principle for the development of theory of knowledge. The principle is universal 
in the sense that it applies and unites all areas of justified knowledge as a complete 
unified knowledge system [R9.23] [R11.34] [R14.79] [R14.83]. 
The development of the general knowledge system requires information input 
from the ontological space through the sending-receiving process of the 
characteristics of the ontological elements. The information about the ontological 
elements is ontologically coded as objective information that contains the 
description of the ontological characteristics in the sense of what there is through 
acquaintances at the primary level of knowing. The sending process from the 
ontological elements requires energy which is continuous. The cognitive agents 
receive this ontologically objective information as information signals and 
subjectively translate them into epistemological information. This epistemological 
information is used to specify the epistemic elements and the knowledge 
possibility set which is described by the epistemological characteristic set that 
helps to give identity to the epistemic elements and establish epistemic categories 
in the possibility space. The possibility set waits to be processed into the 
probability set and then to the set of epistemic actual. 
The process of knowing what there is is an input-output duality where the 
ontological information is transformed into epistemological information about 
epistemic elements which then becomes input into the knowledge-production 
processes. The knowledge-production process is an epistemic activity undertaken 
by the cognitive agents to reveal the nature of any epistemic element and its 
category. It is here that nominalism finds meaning and use in the knowing process. 
The set of the results of the information-processing activities is the epistemic 
reality known to be the  knowledge as an output that completes the input-output 

66 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
duality which spins the information-knowledge duality. The processing of 
information is driven by the relational dynamics of nominalism, constructionism 
and reductionism. In nominalism, we have information language for the initial 
decoding of the ontological information into epistemological information which is 
the subjective information that must be cognitively processed into claimed 
knowledge. The claimed knowledge characterizes the space of epistemic reality. 
The information processing is undertaken through the epistemological decision-
choice system that generates the epistemological categorial conversion and 
epistemological categorial moment which provides the epistemic transformational 
dynamics from the potential space through the possibility space and the 
probability space to the space of epistemic reality that contains the elements that 
are claimed to be known. The essential conceptual parallelism is presented in 
Figure 4.2.1. 
 
 
 
An analytical question regarding information representation emerges in the 
epistemological decision-choice system. We have argued that the epistemological 
information is made up of defective information structure composed of quality-
              WHAT THERE IS 
 
1. The Ontological Elements 
2. The Ontological Space 
3. The Potential Set 
4. The Ontological Characteristics 
5. The Ontological Categories 
6. The Ontological Information 
7. The Ontological Decision- 
    Choice System 
8. The Ontological Categorial  
     Conversion 
9 The Ontological Categorial  
    Moment 
10. The Ontological Reality 
    WHAT TO BE KNOWN 
 
1. The Epistemological Elements 
2. The Epistemological Space 
3. The Possibility and Probability   
     Sets 
4. The Epistemological 
     Characteristics 
5. The Epistemological Categories 
6. The Epistemological Information 
7. The Epistemological Decision- 
    Choice System 
8. The Epistemological Categorial  
     Conversion 
9. The Epistemological Categorial  
     Moment 
10. The Epistemic Reality 
       (What is claimed to be known) 
 
ONTOLOGICAL CONCEPTS 
EPISTEMOLOGAL CONCEPTS 
Fig. 4.2.1 The Comparative Concepts in Ontological and Epistemic Processes in 
Knowing

4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality 
67
 
quantity characteristics of fuzziness and incompleteness. The representation 
involves the use of symbolism to create the conditions of nominalism for the 
information-processing activities and communication that must account for the 
problem of information defectiveness among cognitive agents. The answer to the 
question translates into solving the problem of appropriate information 
representation which is related to formal and informal languages. We have 
assumed the fundamental ontological continuum of analog representation for the 
ontological elements, category and space. The justification is that the ontological 
elements are the work of information and energy which are in continuum. When 
we come to the epistemological space, what representation must be adopted for 
the epistemological information? Should nominalism adopt the analog 
representation or should it adopt the digital representation or both when the 
representation is in either formal or informal languages that may or may not 
account for the qualitative aspect of information defectiveness?  The nature of the 
solution to the problem of information representation is extremely important in the 
working mechanism of the epistemic decision-choice system in the knowledge 
production, in that it affects the development of paradigms of thought, 
methodology and the tools of knowledge search within the paradigms.  
Our informal languages are developed to account for fuzzy and incomplete 
characteristics that create defective structure of the epistemological information by 
combining analog (continuous) and digital (discrete) representations. The problem 
of appropriate formal representation in terms of logical and mathematical 
symbolisms has been the first intense debate between the intuitionists on one hand 
and the logistics and formalists on the other hand. The formalists adhere to the 
discrete system such as integers to impose exactness which is then related to digital 
representation and then to discrete processes. The formalist position leads to a search 
for discrete and digital mathematics and information processing. The intuitionists 
adhere to the continuum system to incorporate inexactness, such as intervals, which 
is related to analog representations and then to continuous processes. The intuitionist 
position leads to a search for methods of interval and analog mathematics and logic 
of information processing. The formalist school of mathematics and logic finds 
comfort in the Aristotelian laws of thought with excluded middle and non-
acceptance of contradiction as logical value through exact rigid determination. The 
intuitionist school of mathematics and logic finds comfort in the logic of 
contradiction in continuum where the principle of excluded middle is rejected. One 
may refer to the formalist-intuitionist debate on representation and logic [R14.5] 
[R14.6][R14.14] . Let us keep in mind that the quantitative values in informal 
language are represented by linguistic numbers such as big, small, tall, short, few, 
many, little and others which are represented in a continuum where cutoffs are 
decision-choice determined under inexact flexible determination. 
As stated previously, the fundamental continuum is a characteristic of the 
ontological space and the ontological information is also ontologically coded and 
represented in continuum and carried in continuum without the control of 
cognitive agents. The debate on information representation in the epistemological 
space is a methodological one that cognitive agents have control in the decision-
choice process. It is about the fundamental principle of appropriate information 

68 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
representation and processing that will provide us with a minimum deviation 
between ontological and epistemological information for any given phenomenon 
or a minimum deviation between ontological reality and epistemic reality. Here, 
we have available to us the use of the methodological continuum or the 
methodological discreteness or both. The choice of a symbolic representation of 
information depends on whether one views the universe as composed of digital 
objects, states and processes or whether one views the universe as composed of 
analog object, states and processes. In the former, every digital ontological 
element exists in non-transformational mode with unchanging quality. In the 
latter, every analog ontological element is in a process of continual transformation 
with changing quality. One may also choose digital symbolism on the basis of 
simplicity or analog symbolism on the basis of accuracy at the level of 
epistemology. The methodological continuum leads to analog and the 
methodological discreteness leads to digital, both of which belong to cognition 
and instruments to connect the epistemological space to the ontological space.  
The information representation and the study of the ontological continuum may 
be approached by the methods of either epistemic continuum or epistemic 
discreteness. Initially, the development of informal languages as information 
representation tries to combine both to account for both quality and quantity in 
order to deal with the defective information structure in the epistemological space. 
For example, the linguistic variables such as red, beautiful, nice and many others 
that carry qualitative characteristics are defined in continuum or analog. The 
linguistic quantities such as big, small, tall, and huge and others that carry 
qualitative characteristics are also defined in continuum. At the level of knowing, 
the epistemological continuum allows us to account for the part of defective 
information structure that creates inexactness and hence inexact symbolism and 
approximation logic. In this case, there is a trade of exactness in simplicity for 
correctness in complexity. At the level of knowing, the epistemological 
discreteness allows us to do away with the part of defective information structure 
that creates inexactness so that exact symbolism and exact logic may be used. In 
this case, there is a trade of correctness in complexity for exactness in simplicity. 
In our attempt to relate the elements in the epistemological space to the 
elements in the ontological space, should the developments of tools of information 
representation, processing and understanding be those of inexact symbolism and 
reasoning, or should they be exact symbolism and reasoning? The two 
methodological paths for the development of the theory of knowledge presented 
an intense debate in the field of mathematics and symbolic logic between the 
intuitionist school operating on non-classical paradigm on one hand and the school 
of the formalists and the logistics operating on the classical paradigm. The point of 
disagreement is on the nature of the information that must enter as input into the 
epistemological decision-choice system for the knowledge production process. 
Four possibilities in questions are open to us.  1) Should the defective information 
structure be assumed away where we deal with non-defective information 
structure composed of exactness and completeness? 2) Should the defective 
information structure be partially retained where only the incompleteness is 
allowed while we rid the information input of the component of fuzziness to 

4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality 
69
 
obtain exact and incomplete information structure? 3) Alternatively, should the 
defective information structure be partially retained where only the fuzziness is 
allowed while we rid the information input of the component of incompleteness to 
obtain inexact and incomplete information structure? 4) Similarly, should the 
defective information structure be fully retained with fuzziness and 
incompleteness in order to obtain inexact and incomplete information structure as 
the input into the epistemic decision-choice system? Questions 1 and 2 are 
answered in a positive way by the school of the formalists and logics and apply 
the classical paradigm of knowledge construction, while questions 3 and 4 are 
positively answered by the intuitionist school and extended to the modern fuzzy-
system school, and apply the fuzzy paradigm to information processing toward the 
knowledge production in all areas of knowing activity. 
At the level of epistemic activities over the epistemological space, the 
following positions are maintained in the construct of the epistemological 
decision-choice system to transform the epistemic information as input to 
epistemic reality as the output in these discussions. 
1. A space-time continuum is a characteristic of the ontological space. It does 
not emerge from digital description. 
2. Digital description as an exact representation is a characteristic of the 
epistemological space. It is appropriate in approximation points in the 
methodological continuum. It follows the analytical representation of exact 
rigid determination on the principle of the Aristotelian logic. 
3. Logical continuum is an enveloping of the discrete process and so also 
analog is an enveloping of the digital process. The digital (discrete) process 
is a point-to-point characterization of events in analog (continuum). It is an 
approximation method. 
4. The concepts of minimal length, time, energy, information and how we 
could observe them are epistemological questions that relate to epistemic 
reality. They are separate from the ontological reality. In this respect, the 
fundamental discreteness must be seen in terms of limitations of cognitive 
agents in their attempts to relate epistemic elements, processes and states 
from the epistemological space to those of the ontological space in the 
ontological continuum. 
5. The relative conceptual position from the theory of the knowledge square is 
that the ontological space, the total universe, is infinitely infinite while the 
epistemological space at any epistemic time, is finitely infinite which is 
related to different levels of infinity [R14.39][R14.5]. In this respect, the 
conclusion from the theory of the knowledge square is that the ontological 
space, the ontological universe, when properly conceptualized, is incapable 
of expansion in quantitative terms or in space-time relation. Every element 
is conceived as matter and every matter is energy and information and vice 
versa where the matter is under constant transformational dynamics that is 
governed by ontological laws of qualitative motion since it is infinitely self-
contained and has no empty space to expand into. The expansions of the 
ontological elements viewed in space-time processes are quantitatively 
compensatory while transformations of ontological elements are 
qualitatively compensatory.  

70 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
6. The epistemological universe that is either discretely or continuously 
represented is under continual expansion depending on the activities of 
cognitive agents in the epistemological space. Alternatively speaking, the 
epistemological universe has an empty space and hence expansion is 
possible since the epistemological universe is established by our knowledge 
system at any epistemic time. 
7. The fundamental discreteness may not be associated with ontological 
activities, the outcomes of which are under cognition but independent of the 
general human thought system. The principles of continuum, discreteness, 
analog and digital in the epistemological space must be seen in terms of 
methodology of knowing through information representation and 
applications of paradigms of thought. The technique of discreteness allows 
the use of the classical paradigm to understand the fundamental ontological 
continuum through the method of sequential problem-solving where x is x 
and 5 is 5 which is consistent with the classical laws of thought of strict 
opposites with excluded middle. The digital and discrete methods, in 
addition to human decision-choice actions, may be used in the construction 
of the epistemological universe which is substantially smaller than the 
ontological universe. 
8. The epistemological universe is a human construct on the basis of what is 
claimed to be known in the attempt to know and understand the events in 
the ontological universe. It is a universe of ideas, knowledge, speculations, 
dreams, phantom objects, delusions and many others. The ontological 
universe is made up of matter composed of energy and information where 
energy flows, information flows and time flows in continuum. The 
digitization of any of these is taken as methodological simplicity of human 
inability to handle the simultaneity of qualitative and quantitative 
continuum in extreme complexity. Methodologically, these flows can be 
studied with digital process as continuous approximations between 
intervals. Importantly, a minute, an hour, a day, a month and a year are all 
human calibrations to understand the flow of time in human activities such 
as communication, economic production, commerce and others. Similarly, 
the calibration and unit measurement of volume, length, energy and all 
others must be viewed in the same cognitive structure and abstraction and 
must be related to consumption-production duality, selling-buying duality 
and the phenomenon of socioeconomic exchange. The digital representation 
and description are consistent with all the flows by decision-choice actions 
in the epistemological space. Discreteness is an epistemic method of 
knowing and epistemic reality but not ontological reality. It is an analytical 
convenience that allows the extensive development of the classical 
mathematics to be used to derive exact propositions as approximations from 
defective information structure. Such approximations are usually poor 
representations of the systems. They may, however, be useful 
representation for practice with fuzzy-stochastic-risk conditionality. It is 
here, that the theories of sequential problem solving ill-posed problems and 
approximations may claim their useful instructions. 

4.2   Epistemic Clarifications of Discretness, Continuum and Reality 
71
 
9.  The question of comparability of ontological space and epistemic method of 
fundamental discreteness is epistemologically irrelevant since the epistemic 
process may be viewed as residing in the discrete-continuum or digital-
analog duality. In continuum, we find discreteness and vice versa and in 
analog we find digital and vice versa in the epistemological space. From 
the view point of the classical paradigm that has taken hold of our 
knowledge-production process, the only way to represent, describe, model 
and theorize about the ontological continuum is through the methods of 
discreteness and digital as a sequential process in understanding and 
knowing. In this way, the world scientific picture is presented as digital or 
discrete, and then claimed to be exact without human intervention as it 
cognitively evolves in stages moving from the potential to the possible and 
then to the probable and finally to the epistemic actual. This scientific 
picture as obtained with methods of discreteness and digital is simply a 
small subset of that which could be obtained with either the methods of 
continuum or analog or both. The question that arises is simple: When 
should exactness be accepted by trading off complexity for simplicity and 
under what conditions should accuracy and relevance be accepted by 
trading off simplicity for complexity? Here again, we encounter cost-
benefit duality and corresponding rationality. 
10. From the theory of the knowledge square, an important distinction is made 
between ontological reality and epistemic reality. From the established 
distinction, we can reflect on the question as to whether reality must be 
purely analog. The ontological reality exists in an ontological continuum 
and is simply what there is. It exists in opposites, polarity, duality and unity 
in continual transformations through self-adjustments, self-correction and 
self-integrating. An example is life-death duality that involves all 
transformation of existence where quantitative and qualitative changes in 
ontological elements are compensatory in terms of cost-benefit duality. The 
transformation of life to death is an ontological process in continuum. The 
epistemic reality is cognitive creation though a methodology and paradigms 
of thought with their laws of knowing. It may exist in either an 
epistemological discreteness or digital process. It may also exist as an 
epistemological continuum or analog process.  
11. The theory of the knowledge square points to the meta-theoretic position 
that the epistemic discreteness is a human deficient attempt in simplicity to 
knowing and understanding of the extreme complexity of the ontological 
continuum in simplicity. The complexity, synergetics, energetics and 
informatics exist in digital-analog, discrete-continuous and reality-potential 
dualities as integrated systems. The applicable paradigm of thought must be 
the fuzzy paradigm in the epistemological space in order to deal with the 
defective information structure, linguistic vagueness, ambiguities in 
reasoning, and information incompleteness where conclusions of exactness 
and certainty are constructed from inexactness and uncertainty by decision-
choice actions of cognitive agents. The methodological discreteness and 
digital imposes exactness and simplicity by assuming away information 

72 
4   The Knowledge Square and the Concepts of Actual and the Space ( A )
 
inexactness while the methodological continuum and analog deals with 
inexactness and complexity to construct conditional exactness and 
simplicity with analytical claims. This inexactness is a property of all areas 
of the rooms in the knowledge house.  
In the fuzzy paradigm of thought, every symbol and meaning can be represented 
as a set that shows the degree to which the symbol belongs to the set. Let such a 
set be 
 with a generic element, x ∈

. The degree to which x∈ is represented 
by a membership characteristic function of the form 
( ) [
]
0,1
x
μ
∈

. 
Thus
( )
(
)
( ) [
]
{
}
,
|  
,
0,1
x
x
x
x
μ
μ
=
∈
∈




is an analog with an interval 
representation. Digital representation implies that  
( )
1 or 0
x
μ
=

 for exactness 
with finite members. An analog representation implies that
( ) [
]
0,1
x
μ
∈

 for 
inexactness which is a fuzzy covering of the digital representation where 
{
}
[
]
0,1
0,1
⊂
. The digital is simple and more preferred information representation 
and processing because of exactness and the extensive development of, and 
general familiarity with the classical mathematics and logic. It, however, loses 
substantial degree of relevance in representation as the system’s complexity 
increases. The analog is complex and less preferred information representation 
and processing because of inexactness and the relatively less known and 
development of the fuzzy mathematics and logic. The inexactness is, however, 
compensated by increasing degrees of relevance in representation as the system’s 
complexity increases. The work on analog system will reveal new scientific world 
pictures that are not contained in the digital system which is an approximation of 
some set elements in the analog system. Digital epistemic reality is a subset of 
analog epistemic reality which may or may not have correspondence with 
ontological reality. In fact, there are some mathematicians who have not 
encountered intuitionist mathematics, how it differs from the currently accepted 
classical mathematics, the debate on information representation and the rise of 
fuzzy mathematics. This may also hold in the logical space. This monograph is 
directed to making explicit the essential differences and the corresponding 
paradigms of thought for their integrated development and selective use. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 73–93. 
springerlink.com                                       © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 5 
Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy  
and Classical Epistemic Systems  
under Knowledge Production 
We have argued from the position of either the theory of complex systems or 
synergetics in the conceptual system of the knowledge square, that besides the 
epistemic indifference of the content of the knowledge areas, all areas of 
knowledge production share in common, the input of defective information 
structure. The defective information structure is composed of fuzzy information 
deformity that gives rise to fuzzy uncertainty and information incompleteness 
deformity that gives rise to stochastic uncertainty from the possibility and 
probability spaces respectively. In fact, the available toolbox and the logic 
composed of possibilistic and probabilistic reasoning to deal with these 
uncertainties are not different in substance and computational structure, except 
perhaps in style. For the benefit of further differentiations of knowledge areas and 
new ones that may arise in the future, it is useful to examine the conditions of 
inexactness of exact science and then the exactness of inexact science. In this 
respect, some essential working definitions are needed. 
5.1   Some Essential Definitions on the Path of Knowing 
The examination of exactness and inexactness of sciences requires us to reflect on 
the organic paradigms and their corresponding laws of thought, and how they are 
related to the knowledge-production process. Let us offer a definition of the 
concept of the paradigm that is used here. This definition will be a conceptual 
guide to the understanding of its previous use as well as for further discussions. 
The ontological space is defined as U  while the epistemological space, 
(
)
E
B P A
=


. Given the ontological space, the epistemological space is composed 
of the possibility space, the probability space and the space of epistemic actual. 
All these spaces are defined in terms of the nature of their information structures 
for knowledge-production, and decision-choice action and the corresponding 
system of beliefs. 

74 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
Definition 5.1.1: Knowledge Item 
An element, n, in the epistemological space is said to be a justified knowledge 
item if 
(
)
n
U E
∈

, in that it belongs to the spaces of potential, possibility, 
probability and epistemic actual with a justified support, 
∈ϒ
g
, where ϒ is a 
family of justification systems. It is said to be an epistemic item if 
(
)
n
U B P
∈


, 
in that it belongs to all other spaces except the space of epistemic actual. 
 
Note: 5.1.1 
Any justification system is either a rational or non-rational belief system. It is 
made up of possibilistic belief with a corresponding risk and probabilistic belief 
with a corresponding risk. In the system of knowledge production, we concentrate 
on the rational component of the belief system. The collection of all the rational 
belief systems is called a family of justified belief systems in support of the 
knowledge claims. This family of the rational belief systems is connected to the 
paradigms and epistemic conditionality.  
 
Definition 5.1.2: Paradigm 
A paradigm may be viewed in terms of a set of primary principles and supporting 
secondary principles to form a closed system in reasoning, in order to pose 
problems and find solutions, and raise questions and construct answers to them in 
the search for knowledge through epistemic actions by cognitive agents over the 
epistemological space of the knowledge-production process. It includes 
determinations of assumptions about the environment of the knowledge search, 
information input and representation, logical structure in constructing theories and 
informed belief structure in claiming the validity of theoretical and empirical 
conclusions in relation to justifications, falsifications, verifications and 
corroborations between ontological elements and epistemological elements. A 
paradigm is an epistemic template which has implied geometry of thinking that is 
used by a group of cognitive agents for knowledge searches in the knowledge-
production process over the epistemological space. 
 
Note: 5.1.2 
As defined, a paradigm is a cognitive approach in the knowledge-production 
process given the epistemological space. It defines a particular school of thought 
(information 
representation 
and 
information-processing 
module) 
in 
the 
knowledge-production enterprise. It is a decision-behavioral framework of a 
particular cognitive group over the epistemological space in terms of accepted 
logical tools for the knowledge production. In particular, it deals with the nature of 
assumptions about the information structure and the methodological process of 
transforming information to knowledge by constructing derived categories from a 
primary category or reducing derived categories to a primary category. In defining  
 

5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws 
75
 
methodology, it was pointed out that methodology is directed to the study and 
analyses of appropriateness of tools and techniques for an optimal application of 
paradigms. 
5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws 
5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws of 
Thought in the Knowledge-Production Process 
5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws 
There are two paradigms and the corresponding laws of thought that are of interest 
to us and essential to the system of understanding that we are constructing in 
relation to exact and inexact knowledge systems within the theory of the 
knowledge square.  These are the classical paradigm with its laws of thought and 
corresponding mathematics on one hand, and the fuzzy paradigm with its laws of 
thought and corresponding mathematics on the other hand. In the process of 
discussions, we shall bring into focus the epistemic usefulness of the role of the 
fuzzy paradigm composed of its laws of thought and mathematics, and what 
contribution it can make in improving cognition in the knowledge-production 
process and its enterprise, by placing it alongside the epistemic structure of the 
classical paradigm in our contemporary rapidly technological change in the 
information-decision-interactive processes. It may be pointed out, that the core 
argument of the theory of the knowledge square is that our knowledge-production 
process is an information-decision-interactive process where such information 
comes to us as defective. The classical paradigm has been in existence since 
classical antiquity and it is the dominant force in human thinking [R2.12] [R2.18] 
[R8.11] [R8.17] [R8.56] [R8.62] [R14.20][R14.66][14.97] [R14.113.  
The fuzzy paradigm, even though its basic elements can be traced to classical 
antiquity, is relatively new in its active development. Its understanding role in 
thinking and use are still under intensive and extensive development; and its use in 
thought is yet to be fully appreciated. Its logic and mathematical operations 
present different rules of reasoning that must be learnt by those working with the 
rules of the classical paradigm. The path of its development may historically be 
associated with intuitionist logic and mathematics, and their criticisms of formalist 
mathematics, logic and the use of Aristotelian laws of thought, the principles of 
excluded middle and the non-acceptance of contradiction [R14.97] [R19.74] in 
reasoning. The understanding of exactness in thought must be related to the 
principles of discrete and digital processes, aspects of which were discussed in the 
previous chapter. The understanding of inexactness in thought must also be related 
to the principle of continuum and analog processes that we have also discussed. 
The two paradigms have similarities and differences that we shall explore in 
relation to exact and inexact knowledge systems and their uses in the processes of 
knowing. Additionally, we shall explore the discrete and digital reasoning on one 
hand and the continuum and analog reasoning on the other, in order to place the 
discussions on the new demands on contemporary thinking. At the level of 
similarities, both paradigms have information structure, symbolism, laws of 
thought, theory of symbolic logic and corresponding mathematics that affect all 

76 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
areas of the knowledge-production process. At the level of differences, there are 
differences in the information structures, symbolism, the laws of thought, theory 
of symbolic logic and the corresponding mathematics. The classical laws of 
thought accept quantity, objectivity, no contradiction in their use, and this position 
is carried on to the rule of operations of its symbolic logic and mathematics under 
the principle of exact rigid determination which requires exact information 
structure where quality is assumed away in the epistemological space. It also 
accepts no inexactness, vagueness, ambiguity and subjectivity. The fuzzy laws of 
thought accept contradiction as an inherent part of human thinking, and this 
position is carried on to its symbolic logic and mathematics which can handle both 
exact and inexact information structures. It also accepts inexactness, vagueness, 
ambiguity, quality and subjectivity as essential components of the knowledge 
production in the epistemological space. 
These paradigms create the conditions of the cognitive paths of reasoning in 
connecting what there is to what is known from the potential to the possible to the 
probable and to the epistemic actual as seen from the epistemic geometry of the 
knowledge square. The two paradigms are viewed in terms of toolboxes of 
reasoning, given the capacity of human cognition, in order to connect some 
elements in the epistemological space to some elements in the ontological space. 
The space for knowledge production is complex with categorial differences and 
similarities. The process of knowing works through information, language and 
epistemic rationality. The language is constructed on the basis of acquaintances 
with the ontological elements and epistemic rationality that allows us to accept 
what there is as a satisfying identity condition of knowledge. The nature of the 
path of knowing depends on how we impose, accept and deal with varying degrees 
of complexity in the epistemological space given the path of knowledge 
production. 
There are two paths which are available to use in dealing with the complexity 
in the defective information structure in the process of knowing. One path of 
knowing imposes discreteness, digitization, exactness and objectivity in the 
information representation in a given language structure. This path presents 
simplicity in complexity, and then develops logic with excluded middle that 
accepts no contradiction as valid, in order to deal with the simplified exact 
information space where contradictions are abstracted out of the decision-choice 
process. The other path of knowing accepts the transfer of the ontological 
continuum, inexactness and subjectivity in information representation in any given 
language structure. This path retains the complexity and the continuum, and 
constructs a logic that accepts contradiction in its truth value to deal with the 
complex information space.  
The exact information representation corresponds to the classical laws of 
thought that exclude the continuum phenomenon and impose conditions of 
excluded middle in an analytical and synthetic reasoning by merely dealing with 
the endpoints of the continuum in the knowledge search. The inexact information 
representation corresponds to the fuzzy logic (infinite logic) that affirms 

5.2   Reflections on Paradigms and Categories of Laws 
77
 
continuum and develops thought in an analytical and synthetic reasoning that 
incorporates the classical endpoints and the fuzzy continuum in complex systems 
on the basis of decision-choice dynamics. The relative positions of the two 
paradigms and the corresponding assumptions about the information structure are 
presented as relational geometry in Figure 5.2.1. It may be pointed out that 
discretization and digitization are requirements for imposing exactness, which, is 
in turn a requirement for the use of the classical paradigm leading to exact rigid 
determination in all computable systems. Continuum and analog are requirements 
for the presence of inexactness, which, in turn is a requirement for the use of the 
fuzzy paradigm leading to inexact flexible determination on the basis of decision-
choice system. 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE 
PRODUCTION 
FUZZY 
PARADIGM 
CLASSICAL 
PARADIGM 
ORGANIC 
PARADIGM 
EPISTEMOLOGICAL 
        SPACE 
Fig. 5.2.1 A Relational Geometry of the Developments of the Classical and 
Fuzzy Paradigms with Assumptions about Information Structure and 
Representation 
Assumptions about 
Information Structure 
and Representation 
Defective 
information 
Structure with 
vagueness, 
ambiguities 
and 
quantitative 
and qualitative 
characteristics 
Non-Defective 
information 
Structure with 
quantitative 
characteristics 
in exactness 
and no  
ambiguities 
and qualitative 
characteristics 
RESTRICTED 
EXACTNESS 
UNRESTRICTED 
EXACTNESS 

78 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
The understanding of these two paradigmatic approaches to the knowledge-
production process within any given language requires a critical reflection on the 
structure of linguistic categories and on the forces of substitution–transformation 
processes, intra-categorial and inter-categorial conversions. All these relations and  
approaches to knowing and understanding of the relational structure between 
ontology and epistemology must be seen in terms of analytical tools of dualism, 
duality, excluded middle, continuum and unity of the knowing process. The 
analytical tools of opposites, dualism, duality, excluded middle, continuum and 
unity must be related to continuous, discrete, analog and digital in order to 
understand and appreciate the relative competing nature of the two paradigms in 
terms of the reasoning toolboxes that they offer. The fuzzy toolbox and the 
classical toolbox are fashioned in accordance with the type of information 
structure assumed in the knowledge-production process. The nature of the 
information structure assumed dictates the structure and form of the development 
of the paradigm in relation to its information representation and laws of thought 
and mathematics for information processing. Thus, the differences and similarities 
of the two paradigms may be identified and explained with the nature of the 
information structure that is assumed to be available for the decision-choice 
actions in the knowledge-production process. Let us examine them. 
5.3   Similarities and Differences between Dualism and Duality 
in the Development of Laws of Thought 
5.3   Similarities and Differences Between Dualism and Duality 
Dualism and duality have been discussed intensely in all branches of the 
knowledge-production process. Both of them relate and derive their meanings 
from the principle of opposites. Duality has entered into mathematics, sciences, 
economics, operations research and the theory of optimization with some 
differences in interpretations in relation to computable systems. Dualism has been 
restricted mostly to philosophy and religion and some aspects of social science 
such as political science. In our current discussion, we shall limit ourselves to 
logical conditions of duality and dualism as they relate to the development and 
acceptance of knowledge. Both dualism and duality have common roots and are 
based on a dual that projects the essence of binary and opposites, where the 
opposites may be viewed, either as both opposites are mutually exclusive and 
collectively exhaustive regarding a particular phenomenon and a category, or, the 
opposites may be viewed as mutually non-exclusive and collectively exhaustive in 
logical derivatives regarding the same phenomenon.  
When the opposites are viewed as mutually exclusive and collectively 
exhaustive, then the object or the phenomenon is characterized by two discrete 
entities of distinction. When the opposites are viewed as mutually non-exclusive 
and collective exhaustive, then the object or the phenomenon is characterized by a 
continuum of opposites which may be mutually indistinguishable at the same 
points. The idea here is that every phenomenon or entity in the universal object set  
 

5.3   Similarities and Differences Between Dualism and Duality 
79
 
is characterized by opposites. These opposites may be viewed in terms of negative 
(cost) or positive (benefit) characteristics that provide identity to each element. 
We shall use these opposites to place a distinction and similarity between dualism  
and duality. From the viewpoint of knowing, every ontological element contains  
negative and positive characteristic sets that retain its identity in both ontological 
and epistemic spaces. The epistemological characteristic set may deviate from the 
ontological characteristic set as viewed in terms of the information content. 
 
Definition 5.3.1: Characteristic Set 
The set,  is said to be a universal characteristic set if there are subsets, 
⊂


 
that may be assigned to any of the elements in the universal object set, Ω , for 
identity and distinction of category  to which identical elements belong. The 
characteristic set, 


 is said to be category-specific and defines the essential 
attributes of the classification of the category, . 
 
Note 5.3.1 
For the purpose of verifying knowledge, the category and characteristic set may be 
identified as ontological, U and epistemological, E , whose elements must be 
compared for knowledge acceptance or rejection. Ontological category is 
U
, 
Ontological characteristic set is 
U
, Epistemological category is E  and the 
Epistemological characteristic set is E . In the ontological space, the characteristic 
set of each category may then be identified as 


U while in the epistemological 
space, the characteristic set of each category may be identified as 


E . Let us keep 
in mind that each ontological element and each epistemic element has the same 
characteristic set of the category it belongs. In this way, a completely true 
knowledge requires an equality between ontological identity and epistemic identity 
of elements such that, 
=


E
U , and hence the epistemic category is the same as 
the ontological category. A partial knowledge is then defined to exist if, 
⊂


E
U . 
Linguistic representations and symbolism of the information of the characteristics 
project differential nature of these characteristic sets over the epistemic space. The 
development of the theory of statistics is to develop the framework, techniques and 
methods to examine closeness of E to U  through estimation and hypotheses 
testing. From the universal object set to the probability space, the main concern in 
the knowledge production process is to examine the information content of 
epistemic variables. From the probability space to the space of the epistemic actual 
the main concern shifts to the examination of the knowledge content of the 
epistemic variables. In the former, the test for acceptance is on the credibility of the 
information content in terms of quality and quantity, while in the latter the test of 
acceptance is on the knowledge content for acceptance in terms of ontological-
epistemological knowledge distance (gap). 
 
 

80 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
Proposition 5.3.1: Existence of Categories 
Every element in a category exists and is defined by its opposites. Its identity is 
specified by a non-empty negative characteristic set, 
N ≠∅


, and a non-empty 
positive 
characteristic 
set, 
P ≠∅


, 
such 
that 
(
)
N
P
=







and 
N
P
#
#




 in order to establish the identity of the element and its category in 
the ontological space. 
 
Note: 5.3.2 
As it has been previously pointed out, the negative and positive characteristic sets 
that divide a unit into two opposites and unite them into unity may be taken as 
discrete entities of attributes with nothing in common that define the qualitative 
essence of the elements and the category to which they belong. They may also be 
taken as residing in a continuum that expresses a smooth transition between the 
extremes to establish the identity of the elements through linkages. The linkages 
of the negative and positive characteristic sets are through relations that must be 
established. These relations are complementary, supplementary, give-and-take 
(reciprocity) and others. The relations may change as time proceeds and 
transformations of characteristics take place. The essential elements of thinking 
are that both negative and positive characteristics interact in fulfilling and 
supplying something that both the negative and the positive lack, to ensure their 
mutual existence and the survival of the element in the category of their residence.  
It is this relationality that ensures the quality identity and integrity of the 
elements for distinction from others in the epistemological space through 
informational acquaintance. The relationality of the positive and negative subsets 
of characteristics is essential in defining the concepts of dualism and duality as 
they relate to the paradigms with the developments of their logics and 
corresponding mathematics. Let us keep in focus that every element in the 
universal object set presents to the cognitive agents both cost and benefit or 
negative and positive characteristic sets as seen in terms of usefulness and harm. 
Here, we may specify ontological and epistemological negative characteristic sets 
respectively as
N


U and 
N


E , and the ontological and epistemological positive 
characteristic sets as 
p
p
and 




U
E . Since the ontological space is given, we shall 
concentrate on the epistemological space. 
 
Definition 5.3.2: Dualism 
Dualism is a conceptual system of representing and thinking about a categorial 
element with an internal self which is divided into two opposing parts without 
internal relations except that of relative definition.  In dualism, we have 
(
)
N
P
=







 with (
)
N
P
= ∅





 in specifying the condition of excluded 
middle with  as its category of belonging. 
 

5.4   Exactness, Inexactness and the Classical Laws of Thought 
81
 
Definition 5.3.3:  Duality 
Duality is a conceptual system of representing and thinking about an element in 
the universal object set with an internal self which is divided into two opposing  
parts with continual interactions in a continuum for their mutual existence. In 
duality, we have 
(
)
N
P
=







 with (
)
N
P
≠∅





 that specifies non-
excluded middle for continuum with  as its category of belonging. 
 
Definition 5.3.4 Continuum 
A Continuum is a conceptual system of representing and thinking about an 
element in the universal object set with an internal self which  is divided into two 
opposing non-separable inter-supporting negative-positive duality, such that every 
negative characteristic has inseparable supporting positive characteristic and vice 
versa that defines its identity and maintains its integrity in a unified whole. 
 
Note: 5.3.3 
As defined, the duality contains dualism as extreme cases in reasoning. Dualism 
is, thus, a subset of duality in the true-false space. This leads to the statement that 
for every proposition of dualism there is a propositional covering in duality. 
However, not all propositions in duality have correspondence in dualism. 
Alternatively stated, by the principle of continuum, every true-false proposition in 
the classical laws of thought has a proposition that covers it in the fuzzy laws of 
thought. Viewed in terms of mathematical thinking, if we construct any set  of a 
phenomenon on the principle of classical laws of thought, and then construct a set 
 of the same phenomenon on the principle of fuzzy laws of thought, then  is 
always contained in 
(
)
 
⊂


. We shall speak of logical dualism and duality. 
As stated, in the fuzzy laws of thought, every true proposition has an inseparable 
false proposition as its support and every false proposition has a true support 
proposition. Translated in the logic of sets, every negative (false) characteristic set 
has a positive characteristic set that mutually define their individual identities in 
continuum and unity. 
5.4   Exactness, Inexactness and the Classical Laws of Thought 
From the definitions of dualism and duality, the classical laws of thought apply to 
dualism but not to duality as we have defined them. In logical dualism, we work in 
exact spaces of potential, possibility and probability that have no room for 
inexactness of any kind in the knowledge-production process towards the space of 
epistemic actual. When one accepts the descriptive notion of dualism where 
N

 
and 
P

 exist as independent characteristic sets, then the assignment function 

82 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
from 

 into 
N

 and 
P

 may be specified as a membership characteristic 
function 
( )
N x
μ


 and 
( )
P
x
μ


 with a structure: 
           
( )
N
N
P
P
N
1 if 
 and 
, Negative Characteristic Set
0 if 
 and 
x
x
x
x
x
μ


∈
∉


= 

∉
∈














    (5.4.1) 
Similarly, we can specify: 
           
( )
P
P
N
N
P
1 if 
 and 
, Positive Characteristic Set
0 if 
 and 
x
x
x
x
x
μ


∈
∉


= 

∉
∈














     (5.4.2) 
In the classical situation, the partition of the characteristic set of every epistemic 
element is said to be crisp and exact and the dualism coincides with the non-
interactive opposites. The fundamental structure of thinking within the classical 
paradigm is composed of the toolbox of dualism, non-interactive opposites and the 
classical laws of thought with the corresponding mathematics. These together 
define the classical exact symbolic reasoning, exact rigid termination and exact 
computable systems which apply to all areas of the knowledge-production that use 
the classical paradigm. The problem with this approach to knowledge production 
is that quality and subjectivity are excluded as essential elements on the path of 
knowing. In the classical paradigm, certainty and uncertainty are introduced as 
belonging to the exact space of thought, where uncertainty is related to limited 
information and measured in the exact probability space with an assumed exact 
possibility set, all of which tend to produce the classical epistemic rationality in 
the knowledge-production process. The epistemic toolbox defined in terms of 
pyramidal geometric structure is then imposed on the information-knowledge 
structure as presented in Figure 5.4.1. 
It is important to note that in the classical paradigm of thought, we deal with 
quantity and time where information is assumed to be exact and full for the 
certainty space and exact and limited in the uncertainty space. Ambiguities, 
vagueness and subjectivity play no essential role in the analytical structure. The 
failure to discuss the problems of vagueness, ambiguity and subjectivity as part 
of the internal structure of thought points to an important limitation of the 
classical paradigm as a general information processing module [R14.6] [R14.4] 
[R19.3] [R19.4] [R19.58]. The problem of inadequacy of the classical system of 
thought increases in difficulty in the information-knowledge representation and 
thought if vagueness, ambiguities and subjectivity are not only related to 
qualitative phenomena and time, but they are dominant characteristics of the 
epistemic variable. This situation moves us from the quantity-time space to 
quality-quantity-time space with an increasing complexity that creates 
increasing inexactness.  
 

5.4   Exactness, Inexactness and the Classical Laws of Thought 
83
 
 
The presence of such inexactness in the knowledge-production process strips 
off the logical potency of the classical paradigm especially as a universal system 
of thought in dealing with the science of transformations, complexity, synergetics, 
energetics and social change. The theory of approximations, as developed within 
the classical paradigm, is an artificial grafting that is still applicable in the 
quantity-time space. Within the classical quantity-time space are developed the 
     CLASSICAL 
     PARADIGM 
EXACT PROBABILITY 
SPACE 
DUALISM 
EXCLUDED 
MIDDLE 
EXACT NON- 
FUZZY 
POSSIBILITY 
  CLASSICAL                  EPISTEMIC
                   RATIONALITY
CLASSICAL 
EPISTEMOL
OGY 
NEGATIVE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
SET 
POSITIVE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
SET 
DUALISM
EXACT TOPOLOGICAL SPACES
EXACT PROBABILITY SPACES
EXACT NON-PROBABILITY SPACES
Fig. 5.4.1 An Epistemic Geometry of the Classical Paradigm in Relation to Exact 
and Inexact knowledge and Reasoning
     QUANTITY-TIME SPACE 
Stochastic Conditionality 
Non-Stochastic Conditionality
EPISTEMIC CONDITIONALITY 

84 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
classical mathematics and algorithmic thinking where the elements within 
opposite are restricted to quantitative relations with regard to correlation and 
causation where much thought is on computable exact quantitative systems. Such 
exact computation is referred to in our modern information age as hard 
computable system as opposed to soft computable systems. The conditions for 
constructing hard computable system require discrete and digital representation of 
information where we examine precision and accuracy in terms of quantitative 
dispositions. Linguistic values such as large, tall, plenty and others cannot be 
represented in the classical system. 
In the quantity-time space, the classical thought is restricted to quantitative 
changes by reducing the system into individual parts (digits) with an assumed and 
unchanging qualitative disposition of the system. It is difficult to extend the 
classical logic to deal with self-organizing systems, self-exciting systems or self-
correcting systems where internal relations of parts generate substitution-
transformation dynamics leading to qualitative changes, and where there are active 
interactions between quantity and quality with the progress of time; and where 
transformations are induced from within and by internal controllers in such a way 
that the quantitative representation is an inadequate description of the system’s 
behavior. An example of complexity with quality-quantity-time structure in social 
sciences is the social system itself composed of political, legal and economic 
structures. In the medical-biological sciences, an example is the human body 
where hormones act as information-knowledge transmitters to the brain subsystem 
for internal controls. The inexactness of science is captured through the statement 
by Max Black: 
While the mathematician [formalist] constructs a theory in terms 
of “perfect” [exact] objects, the experimental scientist observes 
objects of which the properties demanded by the theory are and 
can, in the very nature of measurement, be only approximately 
true. As Duhem remarks, mathematical deduction is not useful 
to the physicist if interpreted rigorously [R19.22p. 427]. 
Black’s statement may be complemented by a number of positions and criticisms 
in the intuitionist mathematics, particularly, that of Brouwer who states: 
It is well to notice in this connection [isolation of causal 
sequences and supplementation of human activity] that a 
natural law in the statement of which measurable magnitudes 
occur can only be understood to hold in nature with a certain 
degree of approximation; indeed natural laws as a rule are not 
proof against sufficient refinement of the measuring tools….The 
question where mathematical exactness does exist, is answered 
differently by the two sides; the intuitionist says: in the human 
intellect, the formalist says: on paper…. 
It is true that from certain relations among mathematical 
entities, which we assume as axioms, we deduce other relations 
according to fixed laws, in the conviction that in this way we 
derive truths from truths by logical reasoning but this non-

5.4   Exactness, Inexactness and the Classical Laws of Thought 
85
 
mathematical conviction of truth or legitimacy has no exactness 
whatever and is nothing but vague sensation of delight arising 
from the knowledge of the efficacy of the projection into nature 
of these relations and laws of reasoning [classical]. For the 
formalist therefore mathematical exactness consists merely in 
the method of developing the series of relations, and is 
independent of the significance one might want to give to the 
relations or the entities which they relate. And for the consistent 
formalist these meaningless series of relations to which 
mathematics are deduced have mathematical existence only 
when they have been represented in spoken or written language 
together with the mathematical-logical laws upon which their 
development depends , thus forming what is called symbolic 
logic [R14.14, pp. 77-79]. 
In the same analytical discussion, Brouwer points out the need for the formalist 
mathematicians to avoid the use of linguistic variables (fuzzy variables in the 
current usage) in their analytical developments. Linguistic variables carry with 
them the qualitative characteristics of the essence of epistemic entities leading to 
vagueness in representation, ambiguities in reasoning, subjectivity in the 
interpretations of the conclusion and decision-choice action with respect to the 
degree of exactness that is associated with the thought system.  He, further, raises 
some important questions of acceptability of systems of symbolic representation 
of information and the relative preference for non-contradiction over contradiction 
in truth values. He states: 
Because the usual spoken or written languages do not in the 
least satisfy the requirement of consistency demanded of this 
symbolic logic, formalists try to avoid the use of ordinary langue 
in mathematics…. Why certain systems of symbolic logic rather 
than others may be effectively projected upon nature….Not to 
the mathematician, but to the psychologist, belongs the task of 
explaining why we believe in certain system of symbolic logic 
and not in others, in particular why we are averse to the so-
called contradictory systems in which the negative as well as the 
positive of certain propositions are valid [R14.14, p79]. 
Fundamentally, the analytical concerns of Brouwer and Black in the knowledge-
production process must be seen in terms of the differences in the fundamental 
assumptions in the epistemological space on the basis of which representation of 
information may be constructed and the nature of reasoning may also be imposed 
on the representation for truth acceptance and non-acceptance. These concerns 
must not be carried to the ontological space whose elements are taken to satisfy 
the conditions of the law of identity where what there is, is what there is. All 
logical schools of thought and the corresponding paradigm seem to accept this law 
of identity that unites them. They, however, are distinguished and separated by 
their manner of treating contradictions in true-false acceptance of propositions. 
The classical paradigm accepts no contradictions in the true-false acceptance of 

86 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
statement, propositions and conclusions. In this way, a statement can be proven to 
be false by showing a simple contradiction in the sense that it contains the 
elements of the opposites. Every true statement is free of its opposite in the 
classical paradigm. This approach is used in proving validities of theorems in 
logic and mathematics. 
The non-classical paradigms, such as the fuzzy paradigm, accept the presence 
of contradiction as part of reasoning to decide on truth and falsity in propositions, 
statements and analytical conclusions. In this respect, a statement or a proposition 
cannot simply be proven false or true by the presence of a contradiction. Any 
contradiction in a statement, proposition and conclusion is resolved by balancing 
the relational struggle of true-false duality in continuum which proceeds in doing 
away with the classical law of excluded middle and replacing it with the law of 
continuum. One may also refer to the works in [R14.6][R14.14][R14.31]. With 
these questions and critiques about the fundamental assumptions of the classical 
paradigm, let us turn our attention to the development of the fuzzy paradigm with 
the corresponding logic and mathematics. It may be pointed out that the analytical 
work with the classical paradigm may lead some researchers to try to prove that 
the universe is discrete and digital rather than continuum. 
5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought 
Some current areas of knowledge and emerging ones cannot be fully expanded on 
the basis of the classical paradigm composed of its laws of thought and 
mathematics. The paradigm establishes the boundary of problems and questions 
that can be dealt with.  Among such areas are synergetic science, complexity 
science, the science of social management, macroeconomics, the science of self-
organizing systems, environmental sciences, systemicity and others. The 
conceptual systems of these areas have one thing in common; they are complex 
with quantity-quality interactions in time and over time. They are defined and 
specified in quality-quantity-time space with dynamic qualitative relations among 
parts where the identity of each individual element, in the universal object set, 
alters its quality with separate parts in disunity, and when the separate parts are 
brought into unity, the identity of the element may assume a different quality as it 
is conceptualized in the epistemological space. For example, if a living being is 
cut into parts, it is transformed from life to death and when the parts are brought 
together, it is transformed into a dead body. No human part, for example, can 
accomplish a task in isolation from the body system. All these systems reflect 
conditions of energetics and synergetic complexities in such a way that epistemic 
objects exist in an inexact space whose analytic and synthetic understanding 
requires a logico-mathematical space, where we cannot do away with vagueness 
and ambiguities that require subjectivity in judgment as we move over qualitative-
quantitative states with time in motion.  
In this epistemic frame, the fundamental classical assumptions are replaced by 
fundamental fuzzy assumptions about the epistemological space such that the 
connected, the separate, the continuous, the analog the discrete and the digital are 
united to give rise to the logical continuum with a cutoff process, defined in terms 

5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought 
87
 
of exactness and truth, is decision-choice determined in the intellect, where every 
epistemic category and set of characteristics of epistemic element are human 
constructs. This is where the fuzzy paradigm enters and where fuzzy mathematical 
objects exist from the cognitive world of epistemic objects that are independent of 
the thinking of cognitive agents, who simply obey the conditions of exact 
information representation and the classical laws of thought. 
5.5.1   How Do the Fuzzy Laws of Thought Apply? 
As stated, the fuzzy laws of thought apply under the system of dualities in addition 
to dualism, where dualism is conceptually contained in duality in the set-theoretic 
thinking under the principle of logical continuum. The true-false claim proceeds 
from the conceptual structure of duality. The fuzzy laws of thought may be viewed 
in terms of the postulate that every element in the universal object set or in the 
ontological space is defined by their characteristic set, . When one accepts this 
defining structure of duality where 
N
P
and 



 exist as interdependent negative 
and positive characteristic sets, then the assignment function from 


 as the 
characteristic set of the category, , into either 
N


 or 
P


 may be specified in 
terms of membership functions 
( )
N
μ



 and 
( )
P
μ



 in the thought process. The 
complexity of such specification requires us to bring into the analytical process, 
the essential differences between duality and polarity. Duality and poles are 
interdependent in their existence. In each pole of a polarity there resides a duality 
that provides the pole’s identity. In this respect, the assignment characteristic 
function for the negative and positive poles through the membership functions 
may be written as: 
 
POSITIVE POLE OF 

 
                    
( )
[
]
( )
( )
[
]
P
N
P
P
P
P
0,1
, if the pole is positive
with
1
0,1
x
x
x
μ
μ
μ
∈







=
−
∈










                         (5.5.1.1) 
NEGATIVE POLE OF 

 
               
( )
[
]
( )
( )
[
]
N
P
N
N
P
N
0,1
, if the pole is negative
with
1
0,1
x
x
x
μ
μ
μ
∈







=
−
∈










                           (5.5.1.2) 
The logic of the duality is such that in the positive pole relative to the negative 
pole we have: 

88 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
    
( )
( )
[
]
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
N
P
N
N
N
P
P
P
P
N
P
P
N 
P
P
1
0,1
That is, 
 and 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
μ
μ
μ
μ
μ
μ
μ








=
−
∈
≠


















≠
≠






















   (5.5.1.3) 
Every polarity  may then be specified in terms of membership functions as: 
( )
(
)
( )
( )
( )
(
)
P
N
P
P
N
P
 = 
,
|
,  
,
 = 
x
x
x
x
x
x
μ
μ
μ
μ






∈
=























 
                                                                                                                      (5.5.1.4) 
Linguistically, the membership negative (positive) characteristic set in the positive 
pole is not the same as the membership negative (positive) characteristic set in the 
negative pole. The defining epistemic condition is such that the polarity and 
duality are not defined by crisp sets nor do the sets coincide with each other, but 
they exist in interactive and interdependent relations that define their mutual 
existence as well as the identities of the elements in the universal object set. 
The interactive structures of polarity and duality generate the system’s complexity 
and synergetic relations with quality-quantity interactions, where the knowledge-
production process imposes upon the cognitive agent the need to make judgments, 
and externalization of the cognitive agent is impossible, because the knowledge-
production process is embedded in an inexact epistemological space due to the 
presence of the defective information structure. In this case, the partition of the 
information space is said to be vague, fuzzy and inexact. The epistemic elements 
unlike the ontological elements are inexact. The fundamental structure of information 
processing through thinking is composed of the toolbox of duality, opposites, 
polarity, continuum and fuzzy laws of thought with corresponding logic and 
mathematics that define the fuzzy paradigm. The advantage of the fuzzy paradigm is 
its capacity to allow quantity, quality, subjectivity, learning and the correction process 
to be integrated into cognition in a manner that admits of errors of judgment in 
reasoning with further allowances for the information-knowledge production system 
to retain its position as self-exciting, self-organizing and self-correcting towards 
exactness and perfection. This is essential for the study of social dynamics, 
cybernetics of physical and biological systems, climate science and quantum 
phenomena that the classical exact reasoning and rigid determination fail to capture.  
In the fuzzy paradigm, certainty and uncertainty are introduced as belonging to the 
inexact space. Certainty is defined in the fuzzy space in the sense of relative contents 
of vagueness and ambiguity, and where uncertainty is related to limited fuzzy 
information and measured in fuzzy probability space with defined possibility sets. All 
of this tends to produce fuzzy rationality in thought that incorporates boundedness of 
rationality through the classical extremes and fuzzy continuum phenomenon. The 
epistemic process is to do away with the principle of excluded middle and to replace it 
with the principle of continuum. The epistemic toolbox defined in terms of pyramidal 
logical structures is then imposed on the information-knowledge space that passes 
through the quality-quantity-time space as represented in Figure 5.5.1.1. 

5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought 
89
 
 
 
FUZZY PARADIGM 
FUZZY PROBABILITY 
SPACE 
DUALITY 
CONTINUUM 
FUZZY 
POSSIBILITY 
 
FUZZY 
EPISTEMOL
OGY 
DUALITY
FUZZY TOPOLOGICAL SPACES
FUZZY PROBABILITY SPACES
FUZZY NON-PROBABILITY SPACES 
Fig. 5.5.1.1 An Epistemic Geometry of the Fuzzy Paradigm in Relation to Exact 
and Inexact Sciences and Reasoning 
     QUALITY-QUANTITY-TIME SPACE
+VE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
SET
-VE CHARACTERISTIC 
SET 
-VE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
SET
+VE 
CHARACTERISTIC 
SET
NEGATIVE  POLE 
POSITIVE  POLE
POLARITY 
Fuzzy-Stochastic Conditionality 
Fuzzy-Non-Stochastic Conditionality
       FUZZY    EPISTEMIC  
          RATIONALITY
EPISTEMIC CONDITIONALITY

90 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
The structure of the epistemic process is such that in the fuzzy paradigm, we 
simultaneously deal with the behavior of quality, quantity and time as embodied in 
an epistemic element in the universal object set. If information is fuzzy, then it 
may be assumed to be full relative to the phenomenon of interest. The information 
structure is said to be defective due to fuzziness. In this case, we are placed in the 
fuzzy-non-stochastic topological space where uncertainty is generated solely by 
the fuzzy process containing ambiguity, vagueness and subjectivity that produce 
inexactness where the analytical structure involves finding the conditional exact-
value equivalence. The variable representation of the epistemic elements is fuzzy-
non-stochastic variable. The conditionality is conceptually expressed through the 
fuzzy covering of degrees of exactness associated with the phenomenon, and 
hence we only have to deal with the phenomena and measurements of fuzzy non-
stochastic uncertainty and risk that are measured in a simple fuzzy topological 
space and computed with fuzzy mathematics and analyzed with fuzzy logic and its 
laws of thought. 
Alternatively, when we assume incomplete or limited information in the terrain 
of vagueness, ambiguity and subjectivity, then we are dealing simultaneously with 
fuzziness and stochasticity in the information-knowledge production. The 
uncertainty surrounding claims and knowledge production is generated by either 
fuzzy-stochastic or stochastic-fuzzy process that produces inexactness. The 
relevant variable representation of the epistemic elements in the universal object 
set is either fuzzy-stochastic variable in the fuzzy-stochastic space or stochastic-
fuzzy variable in the stochastic-fuzzy space and the concept of exactness must 
meet conditions of stochastic fuzzy conditionality [R4.48] [R11.22]. The case is 
such that the analytical structure involves finding conditional exact-certainty-
value equivalence that allows us to analytically deal with inexact or vague 
probability measures. It is here that we encounter concepts of higher-level 
probability, probability of probability, belief functions and many others that still 
retain the classical laws of thought and are computed in the classical topological 
spaces. The view in this monograph is that the problem of inexact probability must 
be defined; specified, computed and analyzed in the fuzzy-stochastic topological 
space, otherwise the problem of inexact probability acquires phantom 
characteristics in the sense that is formulated in inappropriate space where 
solution does not exist. 
To develop the concept of fuzzy conditionality and the required measure, we 
must visit the concepts of polarity and duality of the same object in the universal 
object set. Both polarity and duality are made up of opposite characteristic sets in 
unity and continuum that admit of internal negation and subjective decision for 
epistemic identity which ensures a comparison of the epistemic identity with 
ontological identity of the same phenomenon for knowing. The unity connects the 
polarity and duality while the continuum is partitioned by fuzzy conditionality that 
logically allows discrete values to be established within the continuum through 
decision-choice actions. It is this fuzzy conditionality that provides a logical 
connectedness between inexactness and exactness of phenomena and then 
connects the classical paradigm to the fuzzy paradigm. With fuzzy conditionality, 
the applicable domain of exactness can be specified through the principle of fuzzy 
decomposition where the indeterminacy of vagueness and ambiguity can be 

5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought 
91
 
moved to determinacy by the fuzzy process and the fuzzy decision-choice 
rationality in language, reasoning and measurement. The fuzzy decision-choice 
rationality provides us with logical channels to integrate subjectivity in relation to 
quality and free the cognitive agent from the tyranny of the classical world of 
exact rigid determination that is independent of the judgments of thinking beings. 
Every exact proposition generated in the classical paradigm has its fuzzy-
conditionality covering. The fuzzy conditionality of exactness of any proposition is 
dependent on the methods of fuzzification and defuzzification. The fuzzification 
transforms the problems in the classical two-valued exact logical space into the 
logical continuum in inexact logical space of fuzzy system. The defuzzification 
transforms the logical continuum in the inexact space of fuzzy systems into qualified 
exact propositions in the classical two-valued exact logical space. Alternatively 
stated, dualism with the excluded middle is transformed by fuzzification operator 
into inexact-exact duality with a continuum which is then retransformed by 
defuzzification operator into dualism with qualification of fuzzy conditionality. 
 
Definition 1.3.3.1: Fuzzy Conditionality 
Fuzzy conditionality is a conditional expression in a quantitative disposition that 
specifies the optimal conditions to which a defuzzified variable or statement from 
a fuzzy topological space belongs to an exact classical topological space with a 
conceptual or numerical clarity. It specifies the threshold partition of exactness 
(non-vagueness) from inexactness (vague or ambiguous) as decision-choice 
determined. The defuzzified value is the measure of the exact-value equivalence 
with a fuzzy conditionality as a measure of its degree of attached confidence. 
The fuzzy paradigm provides us with a vehicle to acknowledge the presence of 
vagueness, ambiguity, inexactness, qualitative disposition and subjectivity in the 
information used as input in the knowledge-production process as we move 
through the quality-quantity-time space. It also offers us a way to develop 
methods of symbolic representation of defective information structure for 
reasoning to abstract exact-value equivalences from inexact systems. The solution 
is such that the classical principle of absolutism is shown as limiting the exact-
inexact value cases where any point of separation must meet the conditions of 
fuzzy conditionality. We may note that series of values of fuzzy conditionality 
may be used to decompose the fuzzy set of logical truth into its classical parts. The 
measure of the fuzzy conditionality is the measure of degree of confidence 
attached to exact and inexact propositions. This allows us to speak of fuzzy 
propositional calculus in the fuzzy paradigm with different laws of operations and 
true-false acceptance (for fuzzy propositional calculus see [R3][R3.2][R3.6] 
[R3.21] [R3.32] [R3.50] [R3.52]).  
We may conclude that the examinations of the principal forms of thought of the 
classical and the fuzzy paradigms and their relative approaches in relating them to 
the behavior of cognitive agents over the epistemological space constitute the 
essential forces of the analytical work in the theory of the knowledge square. The 
epistemological space is shown to follow a universal principle of knowledge 
production that is revealed by the theory of the knowledge square. The 
methodological space is partitioned into specificities of knowledge areas and 
preferences of approach to the knowledge search and the construction of the house 

92 
5   Paradigms of Thought in the Fuzzy and Classical Epistemic Systems
 
of knowledge. The input into the knowledge production is seen in terms of the 
assumptions made in the use of the defective information structure as an input and 
the condition of the claim of the knowledge item. At the level of information 
representation, the classical paradigm is connected with exact symbolism that 
involves discrete and digital conditions. At the level of information representation, 
the fuzzy paradigm is connected with inexact symbolism encompassing 
continuum and analog conditions. Table 5.5.1 is used to show the similarities and 
differences of the two paradigms. 
 
 
1. Principle of opposites, 
2. Dualism, 
3. Excluded Middle, 
4. Mutually exclusive and  
    collectively exhaustive negative 
     and positive characteristic sets, 
5. Exact Polarity of negative and  
    positive poles, 
6. Category: 
    a) Exact-category formation, 
    b) Exact analytical categories, 
    c) Exact nominalism, 
    d) Constant quality, 
    e) Quantity-time space, 
7. Categorial changes: 
    a) Exact categorial conversion, 
    b) Exact categorial moment, 
    c) exact constructionism, 
    d) Exact reductionism, 
8. Classical Logic and Mathematics: 
    a) Exact Symbolism, 
    b) Exact analysis, 
    c) Absence of subjectivity, 
   d) Exact quantitative disposition,  
   e) Exact rigid determination, 
    f) Exact Probability, 
   g) Exact stochastic conditionality, 
   h) Absence of fuzzy conditionality, 
9.Exact epistemological Space with  
   defective information structure due 
    to Incompleteness, 
10. Exact decision-choice actions 
THE EPISTEMIC PILLARS OF  
THE CLASSICAL PARADIGM OF 
THOUGHT 
1. Principle of opposites, 
2. Duality, 
3. Continuum, 
4. Mutually non-exclusive and  
    collectively exhaustive negative 
     and positive characteristic sets, 
5. Inexact Polarity of negative and  
    positive poles, 
6. Category: 
    a) Inexact-category formation, 
    b) Inexact analytical categories, 
    c) Inexact nominalism, 
    d) Varying quality, 
    e) Quality-quantity-time space, 
7. Categorial changes: 
    a) Inexact categorial conversion, 
    b) Inexact categorial moment 
    c) Inexact constructionism 
    d) Inexact reductionism 
8. Fuzzy Logic and Mathematics: 
    a) Inexact Symbolism, 
    b) Inexact analysis, 
    c) Presence of subjectivity, 
   d) Inexact quantitative disposition,  
   e) Inexact flexible determination, 
    f) Inexact Probability, 
   g) Inexact stochastic conditionality 
     h) Fuzzy conditionality 
9.Inexact epistemological Space   
   with defective information  
    structure  due to Incompleteness 
     and Fuzziness, 
10. Inexact decision-choice actions 
THE EPISTEMIC PILLARS OF  
THE FUZZY PARADIGM OF 
THOUGHT 
Table 5.1.1 Comparison of the Essential Similarities and Differences of the 
Classical and Fuzzy Paradigms of Thought. 

5.5   Inexactness, Exactness and the Fuzzy Laws of Thought 
93
 
The epistemic comparative structure for the essential similarities and 
differences brings to the understanding how the problem of the classical excluded 
middle in the classical paradigm is resolved with the fuzzy paradigm with the 
logical continuum. At the level of thought, the classical paradigm deals with 
exactness as expressed in dualism without connection to its opposites through the 
principle of excluded middle. At the level of thought, the fuzzy paradigm deals 
with inexactness of reasoning as expressed in duality with connection to its 
opposites through the principle of logical continuum. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 95–115. 
springerlink.com                                         © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 6 
Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square  
and the Problem of Exact Science 
Given the structure of the theory of the knowledge square, as presented in 
previous chapters, we will now reflect on the structure of science and the theory of 
knowledge in relation to fuzziness that covers ambiguities, vagueness and quality 
in the information structure as an input for knowledge production. The stage of 
our modern knowledge, the speed of the global technological progress, the 
relationship between technological progress and knowledge, the required 
efficiency of organizational operations to use the human and non-human resources 
to improve human conditions and maintain life, the required efficiency of social 
management of synergetic relations, the increasing need for information and the 
complexities of our accepted knowledge, demand an important reexamination of 
certain philosophical claims on modes of reasoning and methods of acceptance of 
epistemic items as true or false in the knowledge-production process. Our 
knowledge-production enterprise has been partitioned into science and non-
science with more social respect and credibility given to the results of science and 
the enterprise of science. Let us examine the structure and form of this partition. 
6.1   The Partition of Science into Exact and Inexact Sciences 
In the process of knowledge production, the claim of what constitutes scientific 
knowledge has also been partitioned into exact and inexact sciences. The 
implication is that there is a segment of our scientific enterprise that deals with 
inexact science by some accepted criteria and there is a segment that deals with 
exact science. This brings us to a conflict between definition and criteria as to 
what is knowledge, what is science, what is exact science and what is inexact 
science, and what criteria may be used to demarcate them for knowing and 
understanding. The establishment of the framework belongs to the problem of 
demarcation of the knowledge-production space. Knowledge, science, exact 
science and inexact science epistemologically constitute an awareness of a set of 
what there is (ontological elements) and knowability of what there is 
(epistemological element). We shall present  synthetic and analytical structures 
that all these stated logical entities represent categories of knowing with a 
category that constitutes a primary one from which other categories emerge by 
categorial conversion in logical systems into categorial derivatives. 

96 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
The ontology of these categories requires us to produce the defining 
characteristics that show the nature of knowledge and then the distinction between 
science and non-science in the knowledge-production system that will bring into 
focus the similarities and differences of the exact and inexact sciences, and then 
show the places they occupy in the knowledge-production process. Our focus then 
is to answer the question of what are exact and inexact sciences in the knowledge-
production process and to what extent are they similar or different. The need for 
such an epistemic inquiry is driven by our contemporary progress in informatics, 
biometrics, synergetics, energetics, and intelligent technology in decision-choice 
sciences, the problems in medical decisions, the structure of social sciences and 
the knowledge problems of macro-systems. This need has been amplified by the 
cross-fertilization of different areas in the knowledge-production enterprise in 
terms of interdisciplinary efforts and activities and other areas of health sciences 
that have given rise to the complexity theory and the theory of soft or inexact 
computing. The point of entry into the examinations of the epistemic problems of 
exact and inexact sciences is from personal encounters with some methodological 
difficulties in economic science [R2.9] [R11.19], the research works in the general 
decision theory and a search for epistemic rationality in complex systems that are 
self-organizing, self-correcting and self-regulating such as macroeconomics, 
development economics,  macroeconomic planning and political economy 
[R14.30] [R16.1][R16.2][16.4][R16.7]. Discussions in the academic and general 
literature are riddled with sharp criticisms against economics as a sector of 
knowledge production. Whenever something goes wrong in our macroeconomic 
systems, the subject area of economics and its practitioners are singled out for 
criticism about inexactness, non-scientific status and lack of knowledge in 
economic thinking.  
All the constructed laws of behavior and contributions by economics to 
different areas of thought regarding the efficient management of society and its 
institutions, the understanding of uncertainty, the efficient use of resources and the 
contributions to tools of operations research and the theory of statistical inference 
among many are all forgotten [R1] [R10] [R11] [R13] except for the notion that 
economics does not offer us correct policy. The critics forget the Keynes’ advice 
that: The theory of economics does not furnish a body of settled conclusions 
immediately applicable to policy. It is a method rather than a doctrine, an 
apparatus of the mind, a technique of thinking, which helps its possessor to draw 
correct conclusions [R 14.30, p.xiii]. From the conditions of knowing, distinctions 
must be made among correctness, precision, accuracy and exactness epistemic 
claims. This statement of Keynes may be extended to other areas of knowledge. 
Again, an important point is always overlooked. This point is simply that the 
practices and the uses of economic methods and the epistemic frame of 
economics, as apparatuses of the mind and techniques of reasoning and a 
framework to create economic policies, are influenced not by the validity of 
economic thought but by the political expediencies and the ideological positions 
of the ruling political governance. In the practice of the management of the social 
systems, political rationality comes to replace economic rationality such that good 
economic policies may be sacrificed on the basis of political rationality. On these 

6.2   Problems of Explication and Definition in the Knowledge-Production Process 
97
 
bases, economics, for example, is placed in the category of inexact science. What 
attributes constitute the characteristics of science are presented through 
assumptions rather than critical explication of the central building blocks of the 
knowledge production and the basic explication of the key defining terms such as 
science and knowledge itself. 
6.2   Problems of Explication and Definition in the Knowledge-
Production Process 
In general, explication involves the linguistic process of cognitively transforming 
an inexact ordinary term (explicandum- that which is to be explicated) into a more 
exact term (explicatum- that which explicates) that is termed scientific in its 
linguistic home [R2.9] [R9.13] [R10.4] [R10.12][R14.18][14.84]. The ordinary 
linguistic terms, with their rules of constructive relations to define a language, are 
viewed as vague. Each term contains multiplicity of meaning that widens the 
applicable space of its uses. The process of explication is to strip the word or 
symbol of an ordinary language off or reduce its vagueness to a minimum and 
assign relatively an exact linguistic meaning within a special context in cognition 
and language. In other words, we work from inexactness to exactness. The 
concept of special context is very important in the sense that the context helps to 
define the term’s domain of applicability. For example, the term equality must be 
seen in a context-specific; otherwise, it loses its useful scientific meaning. 
Equality under law in a society is different from equality in quantitatively 
computable systems as well as equality in income distribution in economic 
systems. Similarly, iso-equality curves have specific meaning depending on the 
context of the area of knowledge.  The maps of iso-equality curves in the utility 
spaces, in output spaces, temperature spaces and magnetic fields present different 
conceptual system of information representations with differential exact and 
inexact combinations. The objective of explication is to reduce the dimensionality 
of the applicable meaning associated with a word or symbol which will require 
subjective interpretation that may vary across many individual cognitive agents 
and knowledge areas.  
The epistemic framework of demands for explication is that when any problem 
of the knowledge process is stated in inexact terms, the problem acquires 
characteristics of inexactness which then prevents an attainment of an exact 
solution without an epistemic conditionality. In the analytical structure of exact 
knowledge, we must, thus, solve the initial two problems of explication of terms 
and the optimal process of exact knowledge production. In the process of 
constructing the knowledge structure, it is useful to keep in mind that the 
explication problem is different from the knowledge-production problem. There is 
no satisfactory solution to the knowledge-production problem when there is the 
presence of indeterminacy of meaning since such indeterminacy may lead to either 
phantom or ill-posed problems The solution to the knowledge-production problem 
cannot be determined to belong to the set of right or wrong solutions or as applied 
to propositional calculus because the true-false value is not determinable. All these 

98 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
pertain to the concept of exact science in terms of explication of language and 
terms of scientific communication and for the reporting of the results that must be 
transmitted to the general knowledge community. It is here that the problems of 
explications and definitions tend to arise in the knowledge-production process. It 
is also here that methodological discreteness and methodological continuum 
reveal their epistemic similarity and differences. 
6.2.1 Concepts of Definition, Explication and Exactness in 
Information-Knowledge Representations 
The question that always emerges is: what set of required conditions will 
constitute a satisfactory solution to the problem of explication that will help to 
specify the domain of exact knowledge, general science and exact science? The 
problem belongs to theories of meaning and formal languages. The problem also 
presents itself as, given the explicandum, what is the satisfactory explicatum? This 
problem, in an ordinary language, boils down to the problem of hedging. The 
problem may be stated simply as given an inexact concept of a term, what is the 
acceptable exact concept equivalence or term in a specific context of the 
knowledge production in a given language? In this epistemic process, we must 
explicate the concepts of inexactness and exactness themselves in relation to the 
context of the knowledge production. The problem of explicandum ( Ed ) and 
explicatum ( Et ) must also be seen in the context of inexact-exact duality with 
conflicts of meanings and dynamics of categorial conversion in a given language 
where the meaning of exactness is relatively connected to that of inexactness in a 
continuum. Let us turn our attention to a set of workable definitions relevant for 
our discussions on the concepts of inexactness and exactness from which we shall 
attach science in the knowledge-production process. 
 
Definition 6.2.1.1a: Linguistic Approach for Inexactness/ Exactness 
Inexactness in human communication and reasoning in a given language involves 
situations where there is a multiplicity of meaning that may be assigned to a term 
and conclusion depending on the sending and receiving cognitive agents. 
Exactness is such that one meaning is assigned to the term irrespective of the 
sender or receiver of the message.  
 
Note 6.2.1.1 
This property is translated to discrete and digital and projects a property of a 
singleton set. It is this property of the singleton set that makes digital process 
appealing at the expense of comprehensiveness and clarity of complexity. 
 
Definition 6.2.1.1b: Symbolic Approach for Inexact and Exactness 
Let T  be a term and  be the space of meaning in a language L , and let F  be a 
function defined on T  into  to assign meaning to T in language L , and hence 
the meaning of T  may be written as 
(
)
{
} where #
1
∈
≥

M
m
F m
m
M
=
| 
=
,
T
. 

6.2   Problems of Explication and Definition in the Knowledge-Production Process 
99
 
The term T  is said to be inexact if 
1
M
#
>  and it is said to be exact if 
1
M
#
= . It is 
said to be indefinable if 
∅
M =
 where in this respect T  is said to be the basic or a 
linguistic primitive. The set M  is said to be linguistically a definitional set for the 
term T . 
Let us now turn our attention to the linguistic and analytical specification of 
explication. This requires that we first provide the specification of what a 
definition connotes and how the concept of a definition relates to that of an 
explication. Definition is a relationship between that which is to be defined called 
definiendum and that which defines called definiens. Definition, therefore, is a 
reasoning device or a process to fix the meaning of a symbolic representation in a 
given language L , or by the use of an extension principle to enlarge the language 
L , with new symbolic representations over the epistemological space. As stated, 
every element 
∈
m
M  is a definition of a term 
∈
T
L . Each of the defining terms 
in the set 
∈
m
M  may be viewed in terms of the degrees of exactness to which the 
meaning is a representation of 
∈
T
L . If 
1
2 ∈
m
m
M
,
, then 
1
2
a n d  
m
m
 
are  
in equivalence relation ( )
≈ in definability if they have the same degree of 
exactness of definition, and hence we write 
1
2
≈
m
m
 as interchangeable in  
the language L . It is the ranking of meanings of words by the distribution of the 
degrees of exactness of meaning, given a linguistic term, which provides the 
efficiency of language in relation to thought and expressions of ideas.  
6.2.2 Exactness, Fuzzy Definitional Set and the Construct of the 
Explicator Set 
The set M with index set I  is a fuzzy set of meanings in degrees of exactness 
relative to 
∈
T
L . As a fuzzy set of meanings, it may be represented as M with 
membership characteristic function specified as 
(
) [
]
0,1
μ
∈
M m
 where the degree of 
closeness to which 
∈
m
M  defines 
∈
T
L  is ranked by the degree of belonging 
(
)
μM m , thus, 
1
2
≈
m
m
 if 
(
)
(
)
1
2
 =  
μ
μ
M
M
m
m
. Furthermore, given 
2 ,
∈
m m
m
M
3
,
 if 
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
2
3
 >  
μ
μ
μ
>
M
M
M
m
m
m
, then we conclude that 
1
m  is a better definitional word among the three in the language L . Let us keep 
in mind that every language, L  may be divided into linguistic primitives, the 
indefinable words, Lp  and linguistic derivative Ld , with the definable words and 
a grammar Lg  where 
 =


L
L
L
L
p
d
g . The set of definable terms creates 
linguistic conditions of substitutions and transformations in communication and 
thought processes conditional on Lg . In this respect, a definability condition 
requires 
that 
there 
exist 
at 
least 
one 
element, 
∈
m
M  
such 
that 
(
)  and ,
∈
F m
m
=
,
T
T
. The concept of definition in the knowledge-production 
process requires a set-to-point mapping where if 
(
)
(
)
1
2
 >  
μ
μ
M
M
m
m
 and 
 

100 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
(
)
(
)
2
3
 μ
μ
>
M
M
m
m
 then 
(
)
(
)
1
3
μ
μ
>
M
M
m
m
 which simply implies 
consistency of meaning in the context of the subject. Every non-primitive term has 
a definitional dimension in sciences and the knowledge-production and 
communicational processes.  
The definition of an exact meaning presents some problems since every, 
∈
m
M  
is also a set of meanings if it is not a linguistic primitive. Given the definability 
conditions, explication involves a reduction in dimensionality of definitional 
elements contained in M into a new fuzzy set M of meanings with an index set I 
and a membership characteristic function 
(
) [
]
0,1
μ
∈
M m
. Explication, in this 
respect, is the same thing as a definition with a reduced dimensionality of the form 
(
) [
]
0,1
μ
∈
∈
M
m M
m

, (
)
max
=
. The new set formed by a mapping from the 
definitional set into explicative space is called the explicator set. In this respect, 
the condition for explicability is such that the explicator set is contained in the 
definitional set. The condition of exactness in explication, given the explicator set, 
requires, that m =
∈
T
L  in addition to the condition that M is a singleton set with 
( )
( )
1
μ
μ
= =
M
M
m
T . In which case, we have equality between explicandum and 
explicatum (
)
 = 
Et
Ed  and hence explication is not needed in the sense of 
reducing the dimensionality of the definitional set.  
Inexactness may be due to vagueness in the meaning of the linguistic term or 
ambiguities in the instruments of reason or limited information for logical 
derivatives. Both inexactness and exactness are categories of meaning and 
reasoning. In human linguistic structures and from the viewpoint of explication, 
the category of inexactness in meaning and reason is taken as the primary category 
for logical transformations. Exactness is a derived category from the primary 
category of inexactness where both exist as duality in logical unity requiring a 
categorial conversion in continuum. In other words, the search for exactness in the 
knowledge production is arrived at by a process from inexactness but not the other 
way around. Exactness, therefore, cannot be assumed as an epistemic 
characteristic of any language and in the domain of cognition. Here, we 
distinguish between ontological exactness and epistemological exactness. 
Inexactness is not a characteristic in the ontological space. In the epistemological 
space, however, the activities of knowledge production are such that we begin 
with an inexact representation and work our way to exact representation in all 
areas of cognition. This is equivalent to the statement that from nothingness we 
search for somethingness in the continuum of nothingness-somethingness duality 
or in the ignorance-knowledge duality in a continuum.  The concepts of exactness 
and inexactness are only meaningful in the epistemological space where we seek 
to establish the identity of epistemic elements with the ontological elements. 
Inexactness is due to information incompleteness (partial ignorance) and 
information vagueness (ambiguities or lack of clarity). Thus the solution to the 
problem of explication requires us to solve two problems of information 
completeness (incompleteness) and information clarity (vagueness). Both  
 

6.2   Problems of Explication and Definition in the Knowledge-Production Process 
101
 
problems cannot be solved to provide full exactness of concepts in moving from 
explicandum (concept of inexactness) to explicatum (concept of exactness). The 
problem is not futile when we realize that inexactness and exactness in the 
epistemological space are in linguistic degrees of preferences in meaning the 
cutoffs of which are decision-choice determined. This decision-choice 
determination allows us to accept, on the practical level, that the needed concept 
has been massaged enough to be, at least, practically exact to serve as a basis of 
knowledge production. In this case, the value of 
( ) [
]
0,1
μ
∈
M m
 has been 
determined. Explication, therefore, is a subjective maximization of exactness of 
meaning under constraint of inexactness of meaning so as to reduce the 
dimensionality of the definitional set of meanings. Analytically, it is an 
optimization of the membership characteristic function of exactness (inexactness) 
subject to the membership characteristic function of inexactness (exactness). For 
further analysis of explication see [R10.4][R10.12]R14.18][14.84] [R19.52]. 
Exactness, therefore, is an ultimate state of perfect meaning toward which 
cognitive process may seek as a goal. The nature of human information-decision-
choice process is such that there will always be an irreducible core of inexactness 
that is generated by defective information structure and ambiguities in reasoning 
to preserve the irreducible ignorance. 
 
Definition 6.2.2.1: Irreducible Core of Inexactness 
An irreducible core of inexactness is a notion where the definitional set cannot be 
massaged to reduce its dimensionality for the creation of the explicator set. The 
measure of the irreducible core of inexactness is the value of the fuzzy residual. 
The fuzzy residual may also be seen in terms of irreducible core of vagueness. 
In the epistemological space, we observe the presence of exactness-inexactness 
duality in the definitional set M with a general characteristic set, C , for each 
element 
∈
m
M  of the characteristic set of exactness, E , with a generic element, 
∈E
e
 and a membership function of 
( )
mE e . Alongside of it we have the 
characteristic set of inexactness, Z , with a generic element of 
∈Z
z
 and a 
membership characteristic function, 
( )
mZ z  where , 
(
)
=

C
E
Z  is the general 
characteristic set such that 
∈C
e, z
. The exactness-inexactness duality exists in a 
continuum such that any inexactness has exactness support and vice versa. We 
shall refer to this inseparable existence as fuzzy logical support. The structures of 
the characteristic functions are such that 
( )
mE e  is upward sloping 
(
( )
0
d
d

≥




mE e
e
) while 
( )
mZ z  is downward slopping 
( )
0
d
d

≤




mZ z
z
 with 
(
)
, ∈

C = E
Z
e z
. The curvatures of the membership functions project the notion 
that as the characteristics of inexactness get reduced, the characteristics of 
exactness increase where there is a point of indifference. They combine to project 
exact-inexact duality with fuzzy continuum. The explication problem is then  
 

102 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
solved by optimizing the membership function of the exactness characteristic set 
subject to the membership function of the characteristic set of inexactness. The 
process requires the framing of a fuzzy decision problem 
(
)

D = E
Z with a 
membership function defined as 
( )
( )
( )


⋅=
⋅
⋅


m
m
m
D
E
Z
 the optimum of which 
will then be sought. The solution to the decision problem may be formulated as a 
fuzzy optimization one of the form: 
                     
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
Opt
opt
s.t 
0
∈

=
=
= 



−
≤



m
a
m
m
m
m
E
D
D
D
E
Z
*
*
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
            (6.2.2.1) 
Each element in the definitional set will have an associated optimal a*  which will 
then be used to construct the explicator set, X  through the method of fuzzy 
decomposition with 
                                 
( )
(
)
{
}
0.5,1
=
≥
∈
M
X
m
m
m
a
|
*
                          (6.2.2.2) 
Definition 6.2.2.2: Explicator Set 
An explicator set is the collection of definiens with an associated distribution of 
the degrees of definitional exactness that are greater than the indifference point. 
An explication is said to exist if there is an explicator set that can reduce the 
dimensionality of the definitional set of a word or term in concepts. 
It is generally held that given an explicandum (word of ordinary language 
which is to be explicated), the explicatum (word of science that explicates) must 
satisfy the conditions of explicandum. Similarly, the exactness in a word’s 
application, the usefulness in its information carriage and the concept’s simplicity 
to convey meaning must satisfy the conditions of the explicandum. The process of 
explication, therefore, is to establish the language of knowledge and define the 
grammar of science where there are many grammars as there are areas claimed to 
be science. The condition where the explicatum is equal to explicandum 
(
)
 = 
Et
Ed is difficult to meet. This difficulty is resolved by the use of decision-
choice action, in that, exactness is determined by cognitive resolutions in the 
conflicts of meanings in any language as we have established in eqns. 6.2.2.1 and 
6.2.2.2. It is only conceptually neutral mathematical and symbolic logic that 
exactness can be achieved where every symbol in the mathematical language 
meets the condition of reflexivity where (
)
(
)
 and 
x
x
y
y
=
=
 and if (
)
x
y
=
then 
they represent the same thing when concepts are attached. These conceptually 
neutral mathematical and logical symbols escape the problem of inexactness in the 
sense that x is x, with membership degree of exactness equals to one, and with 
zero irreducible core of inexactness such that it can be operated on with exact laws 
of thought. In this case, the law of identity is met in the sense that x is what x is, 
and hence assumes the characteristics of an ontological element where the  
conditions of the ontological identity are assumed to hold in the epistemological 

6.3   Ontological Space, Epistemologial Space and Defective Information Structure 
103
 
space (see the discussions in [R9.13] [R14.3][R14.5] [R14.6] [R14.14] [R14.15] 
[R14.31] [R14.68] [R14.113] [R19.4][R19.58]). 
The decision-choice approach to solve the explication problem, like any 
decision-choice element in human action, involves two types of uncertainties. One 
type of the uncertainty is due to information incompleteness and the other type is 
due to information vagueness. The information incompleteness provides us with 
stochastic uncertainty and probabilistic belief structures. Probability is said to 
exist if there is defective information structure due to quantitative incompleteness 
of the available information. The information vagueness provides us with fuzzy 
uncertainty with possibilistic belief structures about our acceptance of the derived 
explicatum. Thus a possibility is said to exist if there is a defective information 
structure due to qualitative information vagueness and ambiguity. This decision-
choice process must lead to a classificatory system of concepts about elements in 
the universal object set that will allow us to define distinctions and similarities in 
terms of qualitative and quantitative comparisons for logical category formations 
that are relevant to concept representations, thought formations and validity 
analyses with logical conversions from ignorance or partial ignorance to 
knowledge, and from unjustified opinions to justified opinions.  
6.3   Ontological Space, Epistemologial Space and Defective 
Information Structure 
In all these, we cannot avoid the notion that the results of knowledge are 
inseparable from human cognitive actions involving information-decision-
interactive processes. Here again and as elsewhere, two types of information are 
distinguished [R2.9]. One type is objective information which is associated with 
ontological elements and the other type is subjective information which is 
associated with epistemological elements. In this way, ignorance is defined as 
epistemic distance between ontological and epistemological elements for any 
given element in the universal object set. The information incompleteness and 
information vagueness are defined in the subjective information space which is 
under the control of cognitive agents. The concepts of vagueness, ambiguity, 
incompleteness, and subjectivity are meaningless and have no epistemic contents 
in the world devoid of cognitive agents. In these discussions, objectivity is to 
ontology just as subjectivity is to epistemology. Over the ontological space 
objectivity is seen in terms of identity without subjectivity. Over the 
epistemological space objectivity is seen in terms of subjective set covering 
defined as circular distance around the ontological identity. 
6.3.1   Defective Information Structure and Cognition 
Ignorance is reflected in the lack of knowledge and the lack of knowledge is 
reflected in the deficiency in the composite information and thought involving  
 

104 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
cognitive activities over the epistemological space. The composite aggregate of 
information incompleteness and information vagueness constitutes the defective 
information structure.  
 
Definition 6.3.1.1: Defective Information Structure 
A defective information structure is an epistemological phenomenon in the 
process of reducing human ignorance by cognizing the ontological elements 
through epistemic processes. The information structure is said to be defective if 
the characteristic set of the epistemic elements are incomplete and vague. 
 
Note 6.3.1.1 
If the characteristic set of an epistemic element is incomplete then the information 
structure is said to be quantitatively defective. It is said to be qualitatively 
defective if some elements of the characteristic set of the epistemic element are 
vague. The information structure is said to be partially defective if it is either 
qualitatively or quantitatively defective but not both. It is said to be completely 
defective if it is both qualitatively and quantitatively defective. The qualitative and 
quantitative defectiveness may be specified in terms of membership characteristic 
functions of set creation to deal with qualitatively and quantitatively linguistic 
variables. 
The information structure defining ontological elements is not under the control 
of cognitive agents as such it is taken to be objective since the ontological 
elements are what they are. The information structure, defining the 
epistemological elements, is under the control of cognitive agents as such it is 
taken to be subjective since the epistemological elements are what we claim to be 
under cognition. The relationships among ontology, epistemology and information 
may be illustrated with Figure 6.3.1.1. 
The explication of exact science, then, boils down to answering a question of 
whether there exists any knowledge (epistemic) item that is of ultimate certainty 
that defiles all cognitive doubts and vagueness given any program of human 
cognition or an epistemic process with epistemological information under either 
discreteness or continuum. The ontological question of existence of an ultimate 
certainty of knowledge and hence a property of exactness of an epistemic item 
goes directly into the nature of human conception and the required toolbox of 
knowledge search, information processing and knowledge acquisition. This 
question must be related to the epistemological question of how can cognitive 
agents know the ultimate certainty of knowledge of any ontological item. 
Hopefully, the ontological problem of existence of ultimate certainty of 
knowledge and hence exact science is not a phantom problem in the sense of Max 
Planck [R8.55]. To make sure that we are not dealing with a phantom problem, we 
may define an ultimate certainty of knowledge. 

6.3   Ontological Space, Epistemologial Space and Defective Information Structure 
105
 
 
Definition 6.3.1.2: Ultimate Certainty of Knowledge 
An epistemic item is said to contain an ultimate certainty of knowledge if its 
epistemic characteristic set can be shown to be equal to the ontological 
characteristic set of the ontological element such that 
=




E
U where 






E
U
E
Í
Í
. 
 
Note 6.3.1.1 
The above definition must be referenced to the Note 5.3.1 of Chapter 5 where 
Ontological category is U , Ontological characteristic set is U , Epistemological 
category is E , and Epistemological characteristic set is E . In the ontological 
space, the characteristic set of each category may be identified as 


U while in the 
epistemological space, the characteristic set of each category may be identified as 


E . The problem of ultimate certainty of knowledge is said to a phantom one if 
it does not exist in an ontological sense and hence. 
E
U




Ì
. 
To examine the ontological problem, we must answer a number of 
epistemological questions. Are the principles of cognition and toolbox of exact 
science created on any universally valid principle? If they are, what is the 
universally valid principle for their support? How are truth and falsity established 
with this universally valid principle and how are cognitive elements admitted into 
the universal knowledge bag or into the epistemic reality? Can we find a world 
ONTOLOGICAL 
SPACE 
NON-DEFECTIVE 
INFORMATION 
STRUCTURE 
ONTOLOGICAL 
REALITY 
EPISTEMOLOGICAL 
SPACE 
DEFECTIVE 
INFORMATION 
STRUCTURE 
EPISTEMIC 
REALITY 
THE KNOWLEDGE 
SEARCH SYSTEM 
Fig. 6.3.3.1 The Geometry of the Relational Structure of Ontology, Epistemology, 
Information Structures and Reality

106 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
view that is generally and uniformly accepted by knowledge finders? Are the 
properties of exactness and inexactness associated with the universal ontology or 
associated with human cognition and hence with the universal epistemology? Are 
exactness and inexactness characteristics of actual or potential or both? Is 
absolutism implied in the notion of knowledge exactness? Is epistemic exactness 
equal to ontological exactness? Is ontological reality the same as epistemic reality, 
and if not, how are they different? Here, a question is being raised as to whether 
exactness, vagueness and inexactness are ontological properties of existence or 
epistemological properties of knowing. All these questions involve a cluster of 
problems of explication that relates to language and symbolic representations of 
the information-knowledge system. 
6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed 
Point Theorem 
In chapter Five, discussions were made on representational conditions of fuzzy 
symbols or other symbols that may represent vague concepts. The vague concepts 
are represented by the word of the entity and the degree of exactness to which the 
word (symbol) represents the concept’s entity. This was the problem of Max 
Black [R14.6][R19.4] as well as the problem of the intuitionist mathematical and 
logical school that rejects the formalist exact symbolic representation as 
conceptually meaningless [R14.5][R14.14] [R14.16] [R14.26] [R14.31].  
6.4.1   Qualitative Disposition, Vagueness and Exact Symbolism 
When inexactness or vagueness is associated with quality, it complicates the 
concept’s symbolic representation as well as introduces subjective phenomena 
into the thought process in that both quality and quantity must be simultaneously 
represented by a symbol in both static and dynamic systems. The symbolic 
representations of concepts and thoughts acquire extra complexities as the 
qualitative disposition is considered alongside of qualitative disposition with the 
passage of time. This case was of a particular concern for Karl Niebyl [R14.82]. In 
this connection on information-knowledge representation and the challenges that it 
presents in thought production and the principles of symbolism, it is useful to 
reflect on the statement by Russell. 
 
Reflection on philosophical problems has convinced me that a 
much larger number than I used to think, or than is generally 
thought, are connected with the principle of symbolism, that is 
to say, with the relation between what means and what is meant. 
In dealing with highly abstract matters it is much easier to 
grasp the symbols (usually words) than it is to grasp what they 
stand for. The result of this is that almost all thinking that 
purports to be philosophical or logical consists in attributing to 
the world the properties of language. Since language really 

6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point Theorem 
107
 
occurs, it obviously has all the properties common to all 
occurrences, and to that extent the metaphysic based upon 
linguistic considerations may not be erroneous. But language 
has many properties which are not shared by things in general, 
and when these properties intrude into our metaphysic it 
becomes altogether misleading. I do not think that the study of 
the principles of symbolism will yield any positive results in 
metaphysics, but I do think it will yield a great many negative 
results by enabling us to avoid fallacious inferences from 
symbols to things. The influence of symbolism on philosophy is 
mainly unconscious; if it were conscious it would do less harm. 
By studying the principles of symbolism we can learn not to be 
unconsciously influenced by language, and in this way can 
escape a host of erroneous notions [R19.58, p. 147] 
Vagueness in symbolic representation of concepts and the reasoning with vague 
concepts present important challenges to the classical paradigm, with its logic and 
mathematics, that projects exact rigid determination under the principles of 
excluded middle and non-contradiction. These Aristotelian principles of excluded 
middle and non-contradiction are rejected by intuitionist logic and mathematics. 
The problem is that we have to solve the problem of simultaneous representation 
of quality and quantity with neutrality of time.  One reason is that when logical 
and mathematical symbols become devoid from contents, they loose the 
characteristics of qualitative disposition of epistemic elements. In this way, their 
analytical manipulations and conclusions that are derived carry no identifiable 
knowledge, and the derived truths or falsities are only internally valid within the 
system’s axiomatic reasoning process. In this respect, reasoning with symbolic 
exactness produces only a series of relations that is independent of content and 
meaning that one may want to assign to the relations of the entities that are 
produced by reasoning. The epistemic framework of the classical exact rigid 
determination is constructed on the presupposition of existence of a world of 
mathematical objects, a world independent of the thinking individual, obeying the 
laws of classical logic and whose objects may possess with respect to each other 
the ‘relation of a set to its elements [R14.14 p.81]. This is supported by the 
statement: The law of excluded middle is true when precise symbols are employed, 
but it is not true when symbols are vague, as, in fact, all symbols are [R19.58, 
p.149]. A further supporting statement of the above is: All traditional logic 
habitually assumes that precise symbols are being employed. It is therefore not 
applicable to this terrestrial life, but only to an imagined celestial existence 
[R19.58, p151]. 
The foundations of the development of paradigms of thought begin with the 
nature of information structure and its symbolic representation for the knowledge 
production over the epistemological space. The nature of the principle of 
symbolism in the information representation will dictate the type of reasoning that 
will be appropriate in symbolic manipulations and thought production. Since 
language, for expressing information, carries with it vagueness and the available  

108 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
information as an input of reasoning is limited, it is useful to begin with the notion 
that the information for initializing the primary category in constructing the 
derived categories of knowledge over the epistemological space  is defective. 
Thus, the problem, involving the analytical work of reasoning with symbolic 
representation of concepts and their relationships in any given language, is that we 
have to deal with a defective information structure that is due to vagueness and 
incompleteness in information signals in the transmission-reception processes.  
The interactive relationships of the methodology of representation and analysis 
may be viewed in terms of exactness, discreteness, inexactness and continuum as 
in Figure 6.4.1.1, where one pyramid presents an exact methodological path that is 
associated with the classical paradigm of exact rigid determination while 
superimposed on it is another pyramid that presents a methodological path of 
inexactness with fuzzy paradigm of inexact flexible determination. The pyramidal 
structure of exactness-discrete-methodological space represents the path of the 
classical paradigm in the enterprise of the knowledge production. The pyramidal 
structure of inexactness-continuum-methodological space represents the path of 
the fuzzy paradigm in the enterprise of the knowledge production. 
 
 
The questions then become: How do we deal with the problem of vagueness in 
symbolic representation of vague concepts and ideas, and what reasoning rules 
must be created if we reject some principles of the classical paradigm over the  
 
SPACE OF 
METHODOLOGY  
EXACTNESS 
DISCRETENESS/ 
DIGITAL 
SPACE OF
 METHODOLOGY  
INEXACTNESS 
CONTINUUM/
ANALOG 
THE 
EPISTEMOLOGICAL 
SPACE 
Fig. 6.4.1.1 The Geometry of the Relational Structure of Methodology, Exactness, 
Inexactness, Discreteness and Continuum Over the Epistemological Space

6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point Theorem 
109
 
epistemological space? These questions and the answers have been points of 
critical contentions and lines of separation between the formalists and 
intuitionalists schools of mathematics and logics [R14.3] [14.5][R14.14]] [R14.96] 
[R14.99]. They are also the points of difference and the lines of separation 
between the classical paradigm and the fuzzy paradigm. Given the acceptance of 
information incompleteness, we must have a way of constructing symbols for 
information-knowledge representation under conditions of vagueness and 
ambiguities that are characteristics of language and reasoning. This is the problem 
of vagueness in representation and thought. The problem also relates to exactness 
and inexactness, discreteness and continuum and digital and analog which belong 
to deformity of the epistemological space. 
6.4.2 Approaches to Solving the Vagueness Problem  
in Symbolism 
Two different paths are opened to us for solving the vagueness problem as we 
view the foundation and evaluation of symbolism in logic and mathematics in 
relation to the positions of the formalists and the intuitionalists. One path follows a 
process to conceptually get rid of the qualitative properties of vagueness and 
ambiguities associated with ordinary language and reasoning, by imposing an 
assumption of exactness on the information-knowledge structure or through 
working with the micro-units of conceptual objects in digits that in turn allows 
exact symbolism. If one works with the micro units, then the second sequential 
order problem is to find the conditions that will allow the construct of exact 
symbolic representation of the concepts and thought formation. This is the path 
taken for the development of the classical paradigm with its logic and mathematics 
involving discreteness and digital values [R14.96] [R14.4] [R14.6] [R14.5] [R8.5]. 
This is shown in Figure 6.4.1.1 as the methodological exactness where the 
fundamental discreteness is claimed by doing away with qualitative aspects of 
defective information structure.  
The second path follows a process of accepting the qualitative value of 
vagueness and ambiguities associated with the ordinary language and cognition 
with regard to the defective information-knowledge structure over the 
epistemological space where decision-choice actions and subjective judgments are 
the driving force of the knowledge-production process. This is the path taken for 
the development of the fuzzy paradigm with its logic and mathematics [R3] 
[R3.54] [R3.57] [R4] [R4.117] [R4.118] [R5] [R5.16][R5.32] [R6.26]], and also 
the intuitionalist paradigm with its logic and mathematics that involve analog, 
continuum and interval mathematics where every logical value is a set whose 
boundaries are fixed by a decision-choice rationality with a subjective judgment 
under fuzzy conditionality [R14.5][R14.15] [R14.31][RI4.3]. 
Since much of the discussions in this monograph has been devoted to 
establishing the epistemic foundations of fuzzy paradigm in relation to the 
defective information structure, let us turn our attention to the analysis of the 
conditions of the foundational justification of the classical paradigm with its  

110 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
mathematics and logic in relation to non-defective information structure that will 
allow the use of exact symbolism. The question is what set of conditions must be 
met for the use of exact symbolism. Our main concern now is to relate exact 
symbolism to definitional set, definitional function, explicator set and the fixed 
point theorem in a given language. The objective is to find out the conditions on 
the basis of which exact symbolism can be sustained. The fixed point theorem of 
interest is that of Brouwer [R.11.11]. We have already presented the definitional 
and explicator sets in the fuzzy system under the conditions of defective 
information structure over the epistemological space.  
The claim is that every knowledge sector must deal with defective information 
structure that relates to qualitative and quantitative dispositions of all epistemic 
objects with the passage of time. We shall work with these notions. It is a 
conjecture here that the motivation of Brouwer’s fixed point theorem may have 
been derived from his involvement in the intuitionalist-formalist debate on 
exactness in symbolism and the construct of mathematics. We shall show that 
under the very general conditions, the Brouwer fixed point theorem, as applied to 
linguistic definitions, denies the existence of exact symbolism in the 
epistemological space, in that the conditions of the fixed point in any language is 
so stringent that no language can satisfy it in information-knowledge 
representations, except when words or symbols are taken as linguistic primitives 
[R11.11] [R13.2] [R13.13]] [R14.14]. 
We have stated the relational conditions for definiendum (that which is to be 
defined) and definiens (that which defines). Consider the discussions in Section 
6.2 and definitions 6.2.1.1 (a and b). Now consider the definitional set, M, and a 
continuous mapping 
→
F M
:
T  in a language, L  and the space of definitions 
. The set M is linguistically closed, convex and bounded for the term T  in the 
space . The linguistic closure means that there are limited number of words in 
the language, L , that can serve as definiens for the term T , in the space of 
meanings . The linguistic boundedness means that there is a best definiens that 
serves as an upper bound and a worst definiens that serves as the lower bound for 
the definiendum, T , in the space  of language L . Linguistic convexity implies 
that a linear combination of two definienses also belongs to the definitional set M. 
The definitional function 
( )⋅
F
 is a set to point mapping with a set of fuzzy 
conditionalities. The conditions of any language bring into the analytical structure, 
crisp and fuzzy definitions and explications that may be presented in terms of 
relational pyramids  of definition and explication. 
 
Definition 6.4.2.1: Crisp Definitional Set 
If 
( )
M m
m
 is the distribution of degree of exactness of 
∈
m
M  with respect to the 
meaning of 
∈
T
 in the language L , then M is said to be a crisp definitional set 
if 
( )
1
μ
=
M m
 for all 
∈
m
M . It is said to be a fuzzy definitional set if 
( )
(
]
0,1
μ
∈
M m
 where 
( )
μM m is a membership characteristic function from the 
definitional set M into [
]
0,1 . 

6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point Theorem 
111
 
 
Note 6.4.2.1 
The crispness of the definitional set implies that for all 
∈
m
M , 
( )
F m ≡
∈
T
L  
with 
( )
1,  
μ
=
∀∈
M m
m
M . In this case, any of the definiens meets the conditions 
of substitutability, not only for the definiendum, but also among each other.  
 
Lamma 6.4.2.1 
If M is a fuzzy definitional set for a term 
∈
T
 in a language L , then M is said 
to be bounded from above if 
[
]
0,1
α
∃
∈
 such that 
( )
μ
α
≤
M m
 for all 
∈
m
M . It 
is said to be bounded from below if 
(
]
0,1
∃∈
b
 such that 
( )
0, 
μ
≥
≠
∀∈
M m
m
M
b
 
and it is said to be bounded if 
( ) [
]
[
]
, and 
μ
∀∈
∈
∈
M
m
M
m
b,a
b,a
0,1
, 
 
. The 
m  with a value 
( )
μ
=
M m
a  is called the maximal exact definiens while the one 
with the value 
( )
μ
=
M m
b  is called the minimal exact definiens. 
The fuzziness of the definitional set implies that for all 
∈
m
M , 
( )
F m
∈
= T
L  with 
( )
(
]
0,1 , 
μ
∈
∀∈
M m
m
M . In this case, any of the definiens 
meets the substitutability condition with a qualified degree of exactness for the 
definiendum. The qualification of the degree of exactness is called fuzzy 
conditionality. The definienses are not exactly substitutes among each other. They 
may, however, be substituted among each other with a fuzzy conditionality. 
   DEFINITION 
         CRISP 
      FUZZY 
        EXPLICATION 
           CRISP 
      FUZZY 
 SYMBOLISM 
Fig. 6.4.2.1 The Geometry of the Relational Structure of Definition, Explication, 
Crisp , Fuzziness and Symbolism of Epistemological Information

112 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
Notice that the fuzzy definitional set, just like the crisp definitional set, is convex, 
closed and bounded. It is also a set-to-point mapping where we associate a degree 
of accuracy of meaning of each definiens to the definiendum. The condition of the 
crisp 
definitional 
set 
where 
( )⋅
F
 
is 
a 
set-to-point 
mapping 
with 
( )
1, 
μ
=
∀∈
M m
m
M  is linguistically unattainable and hence can be restructured 
to include a condition that there exists at most, one 
∈
m
M
*
 such that  
(
)
1
μ
=
M m*
. In other words, we transform the set-to-point mapping to a set-to-set 
mapping. If 
( )
(
) (
]
0,1  
μ
∈
∀∈
M F m
m
M for the term T  then we say that T  is 
definable and if 
(
)
(
)
 
1
μ
∃
∈
∋
=
M
m
M
F m
*
*
, then we say that 
∈
m
M
*
 is a 
perfect 
explicator 
for 
T . 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
if 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
 
μ
μ
∈
∃
∈
∋
=
M
M
m M
m
M
F m
F m
**
**
**

, then we say that 
∈
m
M
**
 with an 
associated membership value 
(
)
(
) [
)
0,1
μ
∈
M F m**
 is an inexact or fuzzy 
explicator for T . The existence of fuzzy explicator extends the domain of the 
applicability of terms and concepts of the classical exact explicator. 
 
Lamma 6.4.2.2: A Fixed Point Lemma for Exact Symbolism 
An element 
∈
m
M
*
 is a fixed point of a fuzzy definitional mapping in a language 
L  for a given term T  if and only if m*  is a fixed point of the set-valued mapping 
→
F M
M
:
 with 
(
)
1
μ
=
M m*
 and 
(
)
≡
∈
T
m
F m
*
* . 
 
Theorem: 6.4.2.1: A Fixed Point Theorem for Exact Symbolism 
If 
⊂
M
 is a non-empty, compact and convex fuzzy definitional set for a term 
∈
T
 in a language L , then the definitional function 
( )⋅
F
 from 
⊂
M
 to 
⊂
M
 
has 
a 
fixed 
point 
∈
m
M
*
 
such 
that 
(
) = T
F m*
 
with 
(
)
( )
1
μ
μ
= =
T
M
M
m*
, if and only if 
≡
∈
T
m
M
*
 and the definiendum, T is 
identical to the definiens m*  as an exact definiens. 
The theorem of definitional exactness in relation to a fixed point in the 
definitional set suggests that the condition of exactness of symbolic representation 
is that the definiendum (symbol) is an element of the definitional set containing all 
the definiens in which case x is x and if y is a definitional symbol of x, then y
x
≡
. 
In this case, the fixed point of the definitional function is the perfect explicator 
where in this case T is a linguistic primitive. In general, the explicator set is 
contained in the definitional set. To examine the requirements of definitions in 
scientific practices in any given language and any area of knowledge production, 
we specify the following set of axioms call the axiom of definability and 
explicability. 

6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point Theorem 
113
 
6.4.3   Definability and Explicability Axioms in the Language L  
Axiom 1: Interchangeability  
If m  is a definiens for the definiendum T , then the definiens 
≡
∈
T
m
M
*
 must 
serve as a good substitute for the definiendum T  in the language L  such that if 
( )
μ
α
=
M m
 is a measure of the degree of definitional exactness, then 
(
]
0,1
α ∈
 
and the definiens m  can be substituted for the definiendum T  with an 
(
]
0,1
α ∈
 
degree of exactness in the language L . 
 
Axiom 2: Non-tautology or non-circularity 
The definiendum must not occur as a definiens or the definitional set must not 
contain the definiendum. Similarly, the explicandum must not occur as an 
explicatum or the explicator set must not contain the exlicandum 
 
Axiom 3: Non-ambiguity 
There must be one definiendum (explicandum) that corresponds to the definitional 
set (explicator set). In other words, many definienses (explicata) can correspond to 
the definiendum (explicandum), but there is one and only one definiendum 
(explicandum) where the definiens (explicatum) can serve as a good or exact 
representation of the definiendum (explicandum). 
 
Axiom 4: Non-contradiction 
The equality between the definiendum and the definiens or between the 
explicandum and the explicatum must be such that there should be no 
contradiction in separate definitional or explicator sets. Thus, if there are two or 
more definitional (explicator) sets for a definiendum (explicandum), then the 
definitional (explicator) sets are equal. In other words, the same definiens 
(explicatum) must not serve as a representation of different definienda 
(explicanda), and if it does, then the definienda (explicanda) are the same. 
 
Axiom 5:Functional continuity 
The definitional function must be of a continuous mapping over the definitional 
(explicator) set through its membership characteristic function so as to rank the 
definienses (explicata) in degrees of exactness of meanings associated with  
the definiendum (explicandum), where each degree of exactness is bounded in the 
[0,1] interval. This is the meaning of continuum in languages. 
Axioms 1-5, the fixed point lemma and the theorem on the fixed point-mapping 
of exactness provide us with the conditions under which exact symbolism in the 
information-knowledge structure can be created to support exact logic and exact 
mathematical reasoning in the mathematical language, L . These axioms serve as 
the conditions for constructing a definitional mapping, a definitional set, 

114 
6   Fuzziness, Science, the Knowledge Square and the Problem of Exact Science
 
explicator function and explicator set in any given language and knowledge sector 
for both fuzzy and exact symbolic systems. It may also be reflected on the notion 
that the primary principles in establishing definitional and explicative structures of 
empirical and axiomatic theories in knowledge systems, including relational 
structures of derived and corresponding conceptual sub-systems, in order to 
provide logical closures and the rules in introducing new epistemic elements into 
the knowledge system, form an important foundation of the epistemic process with 
its grammars of thought. From these axioms, we state an impossibility theorem for 
exact symbolism in the information-knowledge representation.  
 
Theorem 6.4.3.1: The Non-existence of Exact Symbolism 
Given the axioms 1-5 and the conditions of definitional mapping of 
→
F M
M
:
, 
there does not exist a definitional set M that contains m*  such that 
(
) = T
F m*
 
with 
(
)
1
=
M m
m
*
, where
(
) =
≡
T
F m
m
*
*  in any language, L , to provide 
conditions of exact symbolism in any knowledge area. Hence an exact symbolism 
of the information-knowledge representation with a defined content is impossible 
and only fuzzy or vague symbolism is possible. 
Proof 
Consider 
the 
definitional 
set 
M 
and 
by 
the 
construct, 
( )
(
) [
]
0,1  
∈
∀∈
⊆
M F m
m
M
m
. For all 
∈
m
, if 
( )
(
)
0
=
M F m
m
 then 
∈
Δ

m
M  (where Δ  is the relative complement of 
and 

M) but 
∉
m
M . 
Similarly, if 
( )
(
)
(
]
0,1
∈
M F m
m
 then 
∈
m
M  and 
∉
ΔΩ
m
M
. By the axiom of 
non-tautology 
∉
T
M  and the definitional set is closed and bounded in the unit 
simplex 
where 
( )
(
)
0,1
∈
F m
 
and 
hence 
there 
does 
not 
exist 
(
)
(
)
1
∈
∋
=
M
m
M
F m
m
*
*
  
 with 
≡T
m*
. If there exist 
(
)
(
)
1
∈
∋
=
M
m
M
F m
m
*
*
  
 
with 
≡T
m*
, then 
∈
T
M  creating circularity that violates the axiom of non-
tautology. Since there is no set M  that contains 
∈
∋
→
m
M
F M
M
*
:
 with 
(
) ≡
≡
T
F m
m
*
*  and 
(
)
(
)
1
=
M F m
m
*
, we conclude that exact symbolism in 
information-knowledge representation is not possible and only vague or fuzzy 
symbolism is possible with 
( )
(
)
(
]
0,1
∈
M F m
m
                                                     
 
Note 6.4.3.1 
The corollary to the impossibility theorem for exact symbolism in an information-
knowledge construct is that the only inputs available to cognitive agents, operating 
over the epistemological space, are defective information structures that constrain 
exact symbolism and exact logic. In other words, the epistemic existence of 
perfect information structures, as inputs into the decision-choice processes in the 
knowledge-production system, is impossible. This corollary to the impossibility 

6.4   Exact Symbolism, Intuitionist Mathematics and the Fixed Point Theorem 
115
 
theorem of the exact symbolism, viewed in terms of information, is consistent 
with analytical work and conclusions by Russell, as a formalist, that we have 
previously quoted, that of the intuitionists, such as Brouwer that we have also 
quoted, as well as those conclusions of Max Black [R8.55], the discussions of the 
philosophical basis of intuitionist logic by Dummett [R14.3], discussions by Max 
Planck on exact science [R8.55] and the essays in Benacerraf and Putnam [R14.5]. 
The discussions of exact and inexact symbolism are extremely important to our 
knowledge-development enterprise as viewed from formal and informal 
information representation that must be operated on with either exact or inexact 
logic. Any position taken will also reflect on digital-analog and discrete-
continuum debates. All these discussions extend to the concepts of dualism and 
duality in relations to the paradigms of thought and how the opposites of polarity 
and duality are relationally examined and connected to create laws of thoughts. 
They also relate to how contradictions are not accepted as truth value with the 
principle of excluded middle and how contradictions are accepted as truth value 
on the principle of continuum. The laws of thought that emerge define conditions 
to accept conclusions on the basis of true-false relations. The nature of acceptance 
and rejection of either truth or falsity depends on exactness and inexactness of 
information representation and reasoning to create thought. 
The methodological point that must be brought into focus is that the concepts of 
digital, discrete, analog and continuum are linguistic tools  that in turn point to the 
nature of analytical tools used in the epistemological space in other to claim 
knowledge or validate the truth of propositions that are essential to the 
organization and management of the social collectivity. Viewed in a set-theoretic 
notion and categories of being, every digit has an analog covering that defines its 
existence and meaning just as every discreteness has a continuum covering while 
every exactness has a fuzzy covering to make sense of the language of knowledge. 
Every digit or discrete is a point set or a singleton set. Every analog or continuum 
is a set or an interval. The analytical results of the digital and discreteness, even 
though are assigned exactness by predetermined logical rules outside the cognitive 
agents, are contained in the sets of analog and continuum which carry with them 
inexactness and whose clarities are decision-choice determined as part of the 
knowledge-production process to deal with quality and complexity. The digital 
and discrete methodology avoids the controversies of subjectivity, complexities of 
qualitative dispositions and concentrates on quantity and time. The analog and 
continuum methodology embraces controversies of subjective judgment and 
complexities of quality in dealing with the knowledge production. The analytical 
result is that the division of science between exactness and inexactness cannot be 
sustained by exactness of logical claims over the epistemological space. The 
universal principle is that, the defective information structure, carrying qualitative 
properties of fuzziness is a characteristic of all knowledge areas and sciences. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 117–138. 
springerlink.com                                           © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 7 
Ontology, Epistemology, Explication  
and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences 
All the questions raised in the previous chapters fall under either the set of questions 
of ontological type or the set of questions of epistemological type. Most of the 
questions are of epistemological type. The theory of the knowledge square is a meta-
theory on epistemology and knowledge production. The point of entry of the meta-
theory is that the information input for knowledge production is defective due to 
fuzziness and incompleteness that create qualitative and quantitative inexactness for 
all sciences. Fuzziness is associated with qualitative disposition of information while 
incompleteness is associated with quantitative disposition of information about 
epistemic objects with neutrality of time. The point of departure is a search for an 
appropriate symbolism that will incorporate fuzziness and incompleteness of 
information with a further search for appropriate logic of operations that will allow 
exact equivalences to be abstracted from inexactness. All the debates in the last 
analysis are about what we claim to know about what there is in the ontological 
space and the process of knowing.  In the epistemic process of knowing, the solution 
to the problem of exactness forces us to choose between two principles that must be 
taken as intuitive assumptions. They are the ontological principle of exactness  
and inexactness, on one hand, and the epistemological principle of exactness  
and inexactness on the other. The inter-relational structures between ontology and 
epistemology regarding exactness and inexactness are displayed in Figure 7.0.1. In 
the process of the knowledge production, are we willing to assume the ontological 
principle of exactness about the elements in the universal object set as defined in the 
potential space relative to knowing? In other words, are we willing to accept the 
fundamental principle that ontological objects, processes and states are exact, and 
hence there are no vague objects and there is no defective ontological information 
structure associated with them as in Cohort II? Alternatively, are we to accept 
ontological vagueness and epistemic exactness as in Cohort III? Another choice that 
is to be faced is that of accepting complete exactness in both spaces where the 
epistemological information is the exact replica of the ontological information as in 
Cohort I. The final choice is to accept complete inexactness in both the spaces with 
vague ontological and epistemic objects as in Cohort IV. Let us examine these in a 
little more detail. 

118 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
 
7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information 
Structure 
The defective information structure (also imperfect information structure) is 
characterized by vagueness, ambiguities and incompleteness.  Under this principle 
of ontological exactness, objects, processes and states are what they are, and hence 
the questions of exactness and inexactness ontologically disappear, in that the 
ontological space is characterized by perfect information structure which cognitive 
agents seek to know from the activities in the epistemological space. We must 
then move on to the epistemological principle of either inexactness or exactness 
relative to the ontological principle of exactness. This limits us to Cohorts I and II 
in the knowledge-production process. In this case, the questions of inexactness 
and exactness characterize the epistemological space as well as involve the logical 
problems of cognition and the methodology of knowledge production. We have 
exact ontological objects that exist outside the creational zone of cognitive agents. 
Similarly, we have the exact and inexact epistemic objects that are created by 
 
EPISTEMOLOGY
O
N
T
O
L
O
G
Y 
     EXACTNESS 
          INEXACTNESS 
E
X
A
C
T
N
E
S
S
I
N
E
X
A
C
T
N
E
S
S
COHORT I 
Exact Ontological Space 
and Exact 
Epistemological Space 
with Non-defective 
Information Structure, 
Perfect information 
Structure for Epistemic 
and Ontological Objects 
COHORT III 
Inexact Ontological 
Space and Exact 
Epistemological Space 
with Non-defective 
information Structure 
and Exact Epistemic 
Objects of vague 
Ontological objects 
 
COHORT II 
Exact Ontological Space and 
Inexact Epistemological 
space, with Defective 
information Structure and 
Fuzzy and Stochastic 
Epistemic Objects with non- 
vague Ontological Objects 
COHORT IV 
Inexact Ontological Space 
and Inexact Epistemological 
Space with Defective 
information Structures over 
both the Ontological and 
Epistemological Spaces with 
vague Ontological Objects 
and fuzzy Epistemic Objects 
 
Fig. 7.0.1 Descriptive Relations of ontological and Epistemological 
Information Structures and the Corresponding Objects of Knowing 

7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information Structure 
119
 
cognitive agents through an information sending-receiving module combined with 
decision-choice actions over the epistemological space.  
The problem confronted by cognitive agents is to answer the question as to the 
degree of isomorphism that exists between each ontological element and the 
corresponding epistemic elements. This is the epistemic problem of knowing and 
knowledge discovery. All the epistemological problems must be settled with 
decision-choice actions in the epistemological space by cognitive agents with an 
input-output process. The logical and methodological problems involving 
vagueness and incompleteness are seen in terms of defectiveness at the level of the 
information structure while the ambiguities and approximations are seen in terms 
of defectiveness at the level of thought. All of these are seen in terms of the 
philosophical basis of information-knowledge representations and reasoning 
through the nature of an accepted symbolism and manipulations at the presence of 
defective information structure in the epistemological space. The epistemological 
space presents us with opportunity to create the technological facility that can take 
information as an input, process it into knowledge as an output, and then check it 
for the degree of closeness between ontological and epistemic objects. The 
distance between an ontological object and corresponding epistemic object is 
defined as the knowledge distance (or an epistemic distance) that can be 
asymptotically closed by increasing cognitive action. This input-output 
transformation technology from information to knowledge has always be a source 
of controversy as well as a power of human existence. 
Over the epistemological space, there are a number of situations that 
knowledge finders find it convenient to assume the existence of Cohort I of  
Figure 7.1.1. This is taken to be an ideal case with perfect epistemological 
information. This case has a number of problems in terms of how one can justify 
the perfect epistemological information structure except by appealing to the 
principle of analytical convenience through the use of assumption. Most 
knowledge finders have their search activities taking place in Cohort II. Let us 
take a look at the information structure of Cohort II which is presented as in 
Figure 7.1.1. In this diagram, attention is on the possible combinations of 
qualitative and quantitative dispositions of information to create the information 
structure for symbolic representations and epistemic processing. Four 
combinations relating to vagueness and completeness of information are presented 
for the creation of the information structure as an input for epistemic processing. 
They are a) qualitative defectiveness and quantitative non-defectiveness with non-
stochastic fuzzy epistemic objects (Cohort I of Figure 7.1.1),  b) qualitative non-
defectiveness and quantitative non-defectiveness with non-fuzzy non-stochastic 
epistemic objects (Cohort II of Figure 7.1.1), c)qualitative defectiveness and 
quantitative defectiveness with fuzzy stochastic epistemic objects (Cohort III of 
Figure 7.1.1), d) qualitative non-defectiveness and quantitative defectiveness 
producing  stochastic non-fuzzy epistemic objects (Cohort IV of Figure 7.1.1). 
 

120 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
 
In this distribution of possible information structures, the dominant practice is 
to assume away the conditions of fuzziness and claim exactness of incomplete 
information structure in order to create non-fuzzy defective information structure 
established by quantitative incompleteness, where the epistemic objects are 
stripped of their qualitative characteristics in order to work in the exact 
epistemological space. The analytical difficulties in this case have been explained 
through the nature of ordinary language and the principles of acquaintance to 
create experiential information structure which is sometimes referred to as the 
sense data. This is Cohort IV in Figure 7.1.1. There is a need of increasing 
importance to deal with the simultaneity of fuzziness and incompleteness of the 
defective information structure in the Cohort II of Figure 7.1.1. This need is taken 
as an essential reference point to examine other analytical frameworks that may be 
carved out from this Cohort. 
 
   INFORMATION
I
N
F
O
R
M
A
T
I
O
N 
    FUZZINESS 
       NON-FUZZINESS 
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E
I
N
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E
COHORT I 
Inexact Epistemological 
Space due to vagueness of 
Information with Complete 
volume of information 
(Qualitative Defectiveness  
and Quantitative Non- 
Defectiveness ) 
(Non-stochastic Fuzzy 
Epistemic Objects) 
 
COHORT III 
Inexact Epistemological 
Space due to vagueness of 
 Information with Incomplete 
volume of information 
(Qualitative Defectiveness 
and Quantitative 
Defectiveness)  
(Fuzzy Stochastic Epistemic 
Objects) 
 
COHORT II
Exact Epistemological Space 
with complete and non-vague  
Information (Qualitative 
None-defectiveness and 
Quantitative Non- 
Defectiveness ) (Perfect 
Non-fuzzy Non-Stochastic 
Epistemic Objects) 
COHORT IV
Inexact Epistemological Space due 
to Incomplete Information with non-
vagueness of information 
(Qualitative Non-defectiveness and 
Quantitative Defectiveness)  
Stochastic 
Non-fuzzy 
Epistemic 
Objects 
Fig. 7.1.1 Descriptive Quality-Quantity Relations of Vagueness and 
Completeness of Epistemological Information Structure 
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E 
I
N
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E 
        FUZZINESS 
       NON-FUZZINESS 
I
N
F
O
R
M
A
T
I
O
N 
          INFORMATION

7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information Structure 
121
 
Alternatively, if we impose the principle of ontological inexactness as our initial 
condition of cognition on the system of the knowledge search, and knowledge 
production, then the elements in the universal object set come to us in vagueness in 
the epistemological space. In this situation, we are restricted to the Cohorts III and 
IV with vague ontological elements. In this case with vague ontological elements, 
the epistemological problem of exactness is simply a phantom one that is 
encapsulated in ontological inexactness. Since objects, processes and states in the 
ontological space are taken to be vague, no analytical and logical process can be 
constructed by cognitive agents to achieve an epistemic exactness, and hence the 
claim to exact science is nothing but a fiction of cognitive delusion, and the 
justification for the use of the classical paradigm for knowledge search and 
production falls apart. Those thinkers who claim the ontological existence of vague 
objects, processes and states must offer some justified principle for the claim of 
exact science. They must also show how the vague ontological objects are 
transformed into exact epistemic objects in the epistemological space. 
The practice of exact science in the epistemological space is not possible given 
a space of ontological inexactness where ontological objects reside under 
conditions of vagueness. Elements in the universal object set as abstracted from 
the space of cognitive potential (the ontological elements) are what they are, and 
the characterization of them as vague by human cognition seems to be logically 
wanting. Exact science and the existence of ontological vagueness (ontological 
imperfect information structure) are incompatible with the epistemological space 
at the level of a search for exact epistemic objects in sciences. Digital and discrete 
information representations are meaningless if the ontological objects are vague, 
and hence methodological discreteness and digital processes are of no help to 
epistemic activities in the epistemological space. 
When we accept the ontological principle of non-vague objects, processes and 
states of elements in the universal object set (that is, when we accept the basic 
principle of ontological perfect information structure), then the problems of concepts 
of vagueness, inexactness and incompleteness in information, discrete and 
continuum in methodology and paradigms of thought are shifted from ontology to 
epistemology, in that the conceptual problems do not depend on the natural order of 
things but rather they depend on the epistemic order of things. The problem of 
defective information structure is defined and solved in the epistemological space. 
The epistemic order of things depends on human perception and decision-choice 
actions in access to ontological information signals by acquaintances, classifications 
and category formations, symbols of representation, ability to know, methods of 
cognition and criteria of knowledge verification and acceptance. Here, exactness, 
inexactness, vagueness and ambiguity become qualitative properties of the epistemic 
items and the knowledge structure but not properties of ontological items. In this 
way, the epistemological space is characterized by defective information structure 
that we may also term epistemologically imperfect information structure with 
phantom candidates for knowledge search that reside in Cohort II of Figure 7.1.1. At 
the level of epistemology, the concepts of exactness and inexactness exist in duality 
under cognitive tension that generates the energy for change from epistemic 
inexactness to epistemic exactness in a continuum. Such a cognitive tension is 
resolved by logical transformation between extremes of opposites.  

122 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
The logical transformations work through categorial conversions under the 
creative forces of categorial moments that provide the forces of conversions from 
varying stages of epistemic inexactness to varying stages of epistemic exactness 
through the decision-choice rationalities of cognitive agents. For the conversion 
process to work, we must identify and establish two categories of a set of 
characteristics that defines an epistemic category of exactness and another set of 
characteristics that also defines an epistemic category of inexactness. We must 
keep in mind that cognition involves the ontological trinity of matter, energy and 
information which are transmitted from the ontological space and received by 
cognitive agents as defective information structures in the epistemological space 
from which exactness is sought from inexactness through a process. All models of 
knowledge production matter, energy and information are the basic elements that 
are defined in categories of polarity, duality and continuum. They are connected in 
a transformational continuum where matter is energy; energy is information; and 
information is matter in the system of categorial conversions as shown in Figure 
7.1.2. The concept of exactness must be seen as a fuzzy characteristic set with a 
membership characteristic function. Corresponding to it is its complement of the 
concept of inexactness with a membership characteristic function. Any epistemic 
object is defined by the union of the two sets to create the identity of the epistemic 
object which is under transformational activities of the set of inexact-exact 
combinations of the defining characteristic sets altering its quality and hence, its 
identity. 
 
 
INFORMATION 
ENERGY 
MATTER 
CATEGORIAL 
CONVERSION 
PROCESSES 
Fig. 7.1.2 Fundamental Relational Trinity of Matter, Energy and Information 

7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information Structure 
123
 
7.1.1 Inexactness, Exactness and Categorial Conversion in the 
Epistemological Space 
The process of categorial conversion is to introduce a categorial moment that acts 
on the inexact category and transforms it into an exact category by changing the 
relationship between exactness and inexactness as they relate to epistemic items. 
Here, we are concerned with the process of epistemic categorial conversions and 
corresponding categorial moments as opposed to the process of ontological 
categorial conversions and ontological moments. At this point it is useful to keep 
in mind that there are two transformations taking place through the forces of 
categorial conversions with corresponding categorial moments and two sets of 
conditions of categorial convertibility. We have ontological categorial conversion 
with ontological categorial moment and the set of conditions for categorial 
convertibility all of which are outside the control of cognitive agents. We also 
have the epistemic categorial conversion with categorial moment and a set of 
conditions of categorial convertibility, all of which are under the control of 
cognitive agents. The epistemic categorial conversion is a vehicle to find out and 
understand the nature and structure of the ontological process. Given the events in 
the ontological space, the task in the epistemic conversion is to create a cognitive 
input-output technology in the epistemological space that will be used in 
transforming the defective information structure into dependable knowledge. The 
cognitive input-output technology is the paradigm of thought with its supporting 
components. 
In the epistemological space, any epistemic item presents itself in an exact-
inexact duality. Any epistemic item or process or state is said to be exact when the 
set of characteristics of exactness in the category is judged to be greater than the 
set of characteristics that defines the inexact category by some rule of human 
decision-choice action. At the level of categorial formation, the exactness and 
inexactness are seen as a cognitive duality under logical tension. At the level of 
categorial conversion, the inexactness and exactness are seen as properties of 
ignorance that are due to lack of some knowledge that is attributable to defective 
information structures relative to the elements in the ontological space. The 
elements in the universal object set are sharp and exact in the sense that what there 
is, is what there is as the ontological elements.  
The process of knowing involves dealing with inexactness due to 
epistemological defective information structure where we assume the existence of 
exact ontological elements and begin the path of knowing with inexact epistemic 
objects that are continually being refined towards exactness as new information is 
revealed. The process of creating exact epistemic elements from inexact epistemic 
elements operates on the basis of human decision-choice actions in the process of 
knowing from the information-perfect ontological space to the information-
imperfect epistemological space that provides us with a separation principle 
between the categories of exactness and inexactness. The cognitive process is such 
that the claim of exactness must satisfy the fuzzy conditionality and the stochastic 
conditionality in the categorial conversion process as we work in the Cohort II in 
Figure 7.1.1. The fuzzy conditionality is a possibilistic qualification in dealing 

124 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
with the qualitative disposition to subjectively interpret vagueness and degree of 
acceptability. The stochastic conditionality is a probabilistic qualification in 
dealing with quantitative disposition to subjectively interpret approximations and 
degree of acceptability. Both of those are expressed on the epistemic belief of 
exactness in processing the defective information structure over the 
epistemological space. 
On this basis, the reflection here is that, from the onset we must dismiss the 
principle of ontological claim that vagueness and inexactness may be properties of 
the elements in the universal object set (the potential space for knowing). All 
ontological objects, processes and states are what they are and exist under exact 
conditions of their natural setting. All discussions must, therefore, center on 
inexactness, exactness, vagueness and ambiguity as properties of epistemic 
objects, processes and states, and the role they play in the cognition of ontological 
elements of the universal object set. It is these properties of epistemic elements 
that create conditions of ignorance-knowledge duality and the dynamics of 
knowing. The structures of exactness and inexactness of epistemic elements reside 
in defective information structure, processing of epistemologically defective 
information structure and faulty reasoning or inefficient laws of thought in the 
geometry of knowing. In this discussion, we arrive at a conclusion that exactness 
is a property of the potential space (universal object set) and inexactness is a 
property of the possibility space, the probability space and the space of the 
epistemic actual in the process of knowing the elements in the potential space. 
Any claim of exact knowledge in the epistemological space is simply conditional 
on decision-choice actions on the part of the cognitive agents as well as 
conditional on the proportion of inexactness contained in it as seen from the 
structure of fuzzy logical conditionality, stochastic logical conditionality and 
fuzzy-stochastic logical conditionality. The existence of the fuzzy logical 
conditionality leads to the development of possibilistic (fuzzy) statistics. The 
existence of stochastic logical conditionality leads to the development of both 
classical and Bayesian statistics. The existence of fuzzy-stochastic logical 
conditionality leads to the development of generalized fuzzy-stochastic statistics.  
The assignment of qualities of vagueness, ambiguity, inexactness and exactness 
as properties of epistemic objects provides us with a useful entry point into the 
discussions on the nature of exact science and inexact science under the principles 
of duality and continuum that provide us with a separation tool through decision-
choice actions in the epistemological space and the knowledge-production 
enterprise. Exactness and inexactness are not characteristics of natural processes; 
they are characteristics of the human cognitive process in the epistemological 
space. The entry point is only analytically useful when we view science as part of 
the global knowledge-production process and the scientific enterprise is viewed as 
an aspect of the knowledge-production enterprise both of which involve human 
actions in social production. The knowledge-production enterprise is an 
organization in support of the process of knowing as well as the process of 
economic production.  
A question, thus, arises as to whether this act of knowing is a mental process or 
a physical process or both. To what extent can exactness or inexactness be claimed 

7.1   Ontology, Epistemology and the Defective Information Structure 
125
 
to characterize a knowing process within the general cognition?  It may be 
emphasized that the postulate that inexactness or vagueness is a property of 
ontological elements in the universal object set renders the existence of exact and 
inexact sciences meaningless. Under this postulate, epistemological exactness 
cannot be found to clean up ontological inexactness no matter how hard we try to 
refine thinking and the composite toolbox of cognition. The problem of epistemic 
exactness under conditions of ontological inexactness becomes a phantom one as 
we have previously stated. Let us keep in mind from the theory of the knowledge 
square discussed in the previous chapters, that the knowledge-production process 
is a cognitive mapping from the epistemological space to itself by the 
methodological constructionism,  then from the epistemological space to the 
ontological space by the methodological reductionism, and further from the 
ontological space to the epistemological space by constructionism. 
The postulate of exactness of ontological elements ensures a meaningful 
categorial formation, development of meaning, creation of definitions and 
production of relations of things in the universal object set by any common 
language that can be explicated for the knowledge production in the 
epistemological space. This may be called a linguistic category. Such a process is 
not possible under the postulate of inexactness or vagueness of ontological 
elements in the universal object set. In the language formation and knowledge 
production, we have ontological elements that exist in the state of exactness under 
natural substitution-transformation processes outside the awareness of cognitive 
agents. They exist as what they are in their environment of their being. As we 
have argued, the number of ontological categories is infinite, and infinitely closed 
under internal categorial conversions in nature itself.  Given the exact ontological 
categories, there are also the epistemic categories that exist in the state of 
inexactness and open under cognitive transformation of logical categories. The 
epistemological categories are related to the ontological categories through the 
creation of linguistic categories. The discovery of epistemic items and the 
cleaning up of the vagueness and ambiguity that allows equality to be established 
between ontological elements and epistemic elements are the works of the 
knowledge-production process and its enterprise. This knowledge production 
process works with the cognitive processing machine of defective epistemological 
information structure to derive conditional epistemic items.  
The number of epistemic categories are always finite, the size of which varies in 
time and expands with an increasing knowledge base as we resolve conflicts in 
exact-inexact duality for different epistemic elements. One may view the 
knowledge-production process as a set-to-point mapping. To see this, consider the 
ontological space as U with generic element 
U
∈
p
. The element 
U
∈
p
 is called an 
ontological item. Now define an epistemological space, 
U
Ψ =
, with a generic term, 
∈Ψ
h
, and the space of the process of knowledge search 
∈Φ
ϕ
. The element 
∈Ψ
h
 is called an epistemic item while the element ϕ ∈Φ  is called cognitive 
transformation function. For each ontological element,
U
∈
p
, there corresponds a 
category of epistemic items, Ψ which may be viewed as belonging to the possible 
world set, 
l
P
Ψ ⊂
⊂P through ϕ ∈Φ . First, we may note that given U  we have 

126 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
Φ Ψ →Ψ
:
 and if 
U
∈
p
, then there exist 
i
i
Φ
Ψ →Ψ
:
 with 
( )
[
]
0,1
i
i
σ
Ψ
=
∈
m
h
, 
and where 
( )
(
)
( )
{
}
,
|
 and
=
 
U
Ψ =
∈
∈
∈Φ

i
i
i
i
i
i
i
,
ϕ
σ
ϕ
ϕ
h
h
p
 with a set of 
claimed knowledge about 
U
∈
p
 with an aggregate degree of confidence of 
( )
[
]
0,1
Ψ
=
∈
i
i
σ
m
h
 where  is an index set of cognitive transformation functions 
such that i ∈. The construct of the aggregate degree of confidence is the 
aggregate epistemic conditionality which is obtained as a sum of fuzzy 
conditionality and stochastic conditionality. Let us note that, Φ  is a set of cognitive 
processing machines, with imperfect information input, to create categorial moments 
for categorial transformations in the epistemological space. 
In order to speak of exactness and inexactness of science, we must first have a 
notion of what science means and what are the defining characteristics of an 
element in one of our linguistic categories that allow an entry of such an element 
into an epistemic category. What characteristics distinguish science from non-
science? In other words, what are the characteristics that demarcate science from 
non-science? Science, itself, belongs to a linguistic category that is used to 
examine the relationship between epistemological categories and ontological 
categories as well as to create associations between ontological elements and 
epistemic elements. Science is neither ontological nor epistemological. Science is 
simply a linguistic variable with degrees of linguistic values in meaning that help 
the cognitive agents to connect the elements in the epistemological space to some 
elements in the ontological space. As a member of linguistic category, it qualifies 
to be characterized as exact from inexact after explication which is decision-
choice determined. When the linguistic concept of science has been explicated, 
then we can deal with any qualification such as exact, political, medical, and 
others that may be attached. Here, the whole concept of science is under 
microscopic investigation as to how science differs from non-science in our 
linguistic categories. At the level of knowing, how does science differ from other 
approaches to knowledge production? The point here is that we cannot speak of a 
scientific theory, methods of science, scientific discovery, exact science, inexact 
science and other exotic terms and phrases that involve science when we do not 
even have a collective agreement on what constitutes science and its linguistic 
category. The collective agreement of the conceptual content of science requires 
us to find a solution to the explication problem of science. 
The solution to the problem of explication of science and its linguistic category 
is very important in solving the methodological problems of the knowledge-
production process and scientific discovery. It will allow us to form a reasonable 
category of knowledge areas and answer questions of general interest. Are 
psychology, economics, mathematics, symbolic logic, engineering and medicine 
members of categories of science? What areas of human knowledge or quest for 
knowing are not sciences? Our interest here is not on the parameters of knowledge 
that we may call science but rather on the problem of exactness and inexactness of 
science. The problem can only be meaningfully dealt with when the concept of  
 

7.2   Science and Non-Science as Linguistic Categories 
127
 
science has been explicated. Viewed from explicator and definitional sets from 
Chapter 6, the explication problem relates to the decision-choice problems 
between the classical and the fuzzy paradigms of thought in dealing with the 
information-knowledge production process. The relationship, whether in 
difference or similarity in thinking to support one paradigm or the other, consists 
in assigning to the world of knowledge the linguistic properties that we hold to 
form categories for information processing.    
7.2   Science and N on- Science as Linguistic Categories 
7.2   Science and Non-science as Linguistic Categories in the 
Information-Knowledge Production Process 
7.2   Scie nce and Non- Science as Linguistic Categories 
In order to know what elements to place in each category of science, we must 
provide a working definition of science that will help in establishing the 
parameters of decision-choice action on the knowledge areas. We shall discuss a 
few interrelated explications that will provide some content to the linguistic 
category of science and hence that of non-science. Some views define science as 
logical processes of formulating models in natural sciences. These models must 
predict outcomes under conditions of uncertainty where the uncertainty is of 
stochastic type (for discussions on types of uncertainty see [R6] [R6.29] 
[R11.21]). The predicted outcome is then tested against the available data to see if 
the future predictions agree with the past and thus connected to the present to 
establish a continuum process. We shall refer to the past-present-future connection 
as the time trinity (this time trinity is best described by sankofa bird in the Akan 
philosophical system in Ghana, which simply states that by retrieving past 
information and connecting it to the current information one can assess the future 
information regarding directions of events [R14.29].). 
7.2.1 Characteristic Sets for Definition and Explication  
of Science 
In the explication process respect, there is an underlying system from which the 
potential space is being approximated by models to connect to the epistemic actual 
by cognition through decision-choice processes. The potential space exists 
independently of human understanding, and hence reflects objective reality with 
perfect ontological information structure in that it is what is there. The existence 
of the known actual depends on human conceptualization and thought processes, 
and hence reflects the subjective reality or an epistemic reality. There are a 
number of approaches to establish the defining characteristics of the subjective 
reality in terms of science as a linguistic category over the epistemic space 
through cognition. One such approach produces the following list as the 
characteristics of science: 

128 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
 
 
Here, a question arises as to the meaning of a model. The concept of a model 
must in turn be explicated if the linguistic category of science is to be useful for 
analytical work. The concept of natural science imposes restrictions on the areas 
of the modeling. It may be kept in mind that while subjectivity is independent of 
what there is, the knowability of what there is a subjective phenomenon and hence 
dependent on the knower. It is this dependency and the relationship between 
knowability and subjectivity that give content and meaning to the question: what 
does the knower know and how does the knower know that he or she knows? 
Alternatively stated, the existence of ontological elements is independent of the 
existence of cognitive agents, while the existence of epistemic elements is firmly 
dependent on the existence of cognitive agents. 
Alternatively, science has been seen as the effort to discover and increase 
human understanding of how physical reality works. This effort is exercised 
through the provision of an alternative set of characteristics on the basis of which 
science may be defined and explicated. These characteristics are provided in  
Table 7.2.1.2. 
From such basic characteristics of science as a linguistic category, a question 
arises as to whether science is defined by its methods of obtaining knowledge or 
exactness in its content of knowledge or defined in terms of the knowledge area. 
To answer this question, methods associated with science are reviewed as a 
framework that allows claims to knowledge to be verified as science through the 
characteristics set as presented in table 7.2.1.3. 
 
a) A process of knowing,  
b) The knowing process is represented by a model,  
c) The model explains the actual and predicts the potential,  
d) The prediction of the potential is tested against the past, and  
e) Objectivity is independent of human cognition.  
 
Table 7.2.1.1 Characteristic Set I for Defining Science 

7.2   Science and Non-Science as Linguistic Categories 
129
 
 
 
 
a) Controlled methods for data collection by observing physical 
evidence of natural phenomena; 
b) Construction of theoretical explanation on the basis of data 
analysis as to how natural phenomena work in the sense that they 
describe human understanding of the physical processes for 
prediction; 
c) The prediction is based on explanatory rationality, and 
experimental and empirical research under the methods of 
generalized hypothesis and tests of these hypotheses under 
controlled conditions. 
Table 7.2.1.2 Characteristic Set II for Defining Science 
a)Reproducible experiment or generally accepted technique 
   that minimizes subjectivity under controlled conditions; 
b) Observation of the object of phenomenon of interest;  
c) The development of a set of empirical evidence from 
   experiment or the observation;  
d) Presenting the phenomenon in terms of a logical or 
    mathematical exact representation from which hypotheses  
    are developed, and claims of knowledge are made; 
e) Peer review of the mathematical model, the experimental 
   results and the drawn conclusions. 
Table 7.2.1.3 Characteristic Set III for Defining Science 

130 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
7.2.2 Explanation, Definition and the Grammar of Knowledge 
Areas 
The linguistic terms of theory and model must be clarified for us to proceed in the 
explication of linguistic category of science. We must then relate them to the 
presence of defective information structure that generates uncertainties, risks and 
general systemic risk in the knowledge-production system. 
 
Definition 7.2.2.1: Theory 
A theory is a logical system of reasoning, with a given information structure, 
under defined rules of thought, that describes (instructs) through explanation 
(prescription), and predicts through analyses or syntheses of the behavior of a 
phenomenon from which hypotheses (decision-choice rules) are advanced for 
empirical verification or falsification or corroboration or all of them as a test of 
validity for acceptance (practice). This definition relates to both explanatory and 
prescriptive theories.  
 
Definition 7.2.2.2: Model 
A model may be viewed as a frame that represents the essential structure of a 
theory, in terms of mathematics and logic that explicitly project the maintained 
hypotheses in the theory for further empirical or sensitivity analysis . It is, 
therefore, an essential skeleton of the theory in a self-contained symbolic or 
mathematical language. 
A model, just like a theory, may represent either explanatory conditions of the 
epistemic actual as revealed by existence or the past  relative to the present, or 
prescriptive conditions of the epistemic potential as contained in the future relative 
to the present. Here, an important distinction between prediction and prescription 
is required. While prediction say something about the repetition of the past in the 
future relative to the present under controlled conditions of a theory, prescriptive 
model may, while saying something about the future,  have no immediate 
connection to the past relative to the present in terms of information structures. It 
is in this connection that the elements in the possible-world set acquire conceptual 
and analytical meaning in the epistemological space and find their associations 
with the possible, the probable and the actual. Both prediction and prescription, 
however, may not relate to the past. Prescriptive theory is a present-future 
phenomenon that may not relate to the past. Explanatory theory is a past-present-
future phenomenon while prediction is a past-future phenomenon [R2.9] [R11.22]. 
In terms of cognition, a model is, thus, contained in a theory without which a 
model acquires no logical authority and analytical consistency. Even statistical 
models of correlation, data analysis and others have theories behind them even 
though such theories may not claim an explanatory or causal rationality. A theory 
is thus a support of a model even though we encounter terms like theoretical 
model and empirical model that sometimes create intense debate and confusion in 
the knowledge-production process and claims to knowing. Explanatory model is 
to explanatory theory as prescriptive model is to prescriptive theory. Mathematics 

7.2   Science and Non-Science as Linguistic Categories 
131
 
is used to express the essential features of the theory as a frame. Logic or laws of 
thought is used to manipulate the essential theoretical links of the model that 
connects both the theory and the model in the time trinity of past, present and 
future in the case of explanation, or present and future relative to the past in the 
case of prescription that is not explanatory based. Prescriptive theory has a 
connection to the possible world set and explanatory theory has connection to the 
possibility set.  
Given the mathematics and the logic rules, computability allows a computing 
power to simulate different environments, as established by information structures 
in the epistemological space and captured by the relevant parameters, for the 
mathematical-model representation of the theory. The information in the model is 
summarized by a set of parameters that defines the applicable area of the theory 
and hence the model. Such parameters may be assumed to be exact or inexact 
(fuzzy) in defining the framework of mathematical-model representation. When 
the parameters are assumes to be exact in the epistemological space, we claim 
exactness of knowledge with no epistemic conditionality or with stochastic 
conditionality. When the parameters are inexact in the epistemological space, we 
designate inexactness of knowledge with either fuzzy or fuzzy-stochastic 
conditionality. 
In all these searches for knowledge in the epistemological space and a search 
for an optimal path to it, philosophy has a critical role to play to help in 
distinguishing knowledge from fiction and simple opinions as well as to 
distinguish science from non-science. Furthermore, it must help to place 
boundaries between exact science and knowledge on one hand and inexact science 
and knowledge on the other hand. Here, some aspects of philosophy claim that 
science, generally considered, is a reasoned-based analysis of sensation upon 
either awareness or acquaintance. From this conceptualization, this particular view 
further claims that a scientific method cannot deduce anything beyond what is 
observable by the existing or theoretical means. The search for an optimal path for 
knowledge production is simply a design of an optimal epistemic input-output 
machine to act on the defective information structure to produce the best output 
from the defective input.  
A number of epistemic questions tend to arise from the cognitive link of 
observations to knowledge. How exact is what is deduced from the observables 
and to what extent are the observables related to the elements of the universal 
object set (the potential or the ontological space)? One thing seems to present 
itself as universal in the knowledge production process. The universality is that 
every epistemic item claimed to be knowledge in science and by any scientific 
method, empirical or formal, is conditional and inexact. Exactness is claimed from 
inexactness by decision-choice actions that allow cognitive agents to abstract 
exact-value equivalences from the epistemic constructs. This follows from the 
basic universal claim that all cognitive agents work with epistemological defective 
information structure and have no unquestionable claim to the ontological perfect 
(non-defective) information structure. There is always a core of irreducible 
inexactness in any area of knowledge production. This core of inexactness 
constitutes the sum of irreducible cores of stochastic and fuzzy uncertainties that 

132 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
are generated by the epistemological defective information structure. The claim of 
the qualitative property of exactness as associated with a category of science is 
subjective, that always has an implied fuzzy-stochastic conditionality which may 
or may not be explicitly stated. The instrumentations of measurements and 
observations in all knowledge areas are human created and cannot be claimed to 
be unquestionably objective and hence exact. We work with vague concepts, 
inexact units of measurements and approximate reasoning in every area of science 
over the epistemological space. The presence of accidents and systems’ failure in 
mechanical systems are testimonies to the inexactness of science and other areas 
of knowledge. This is pointed out by Max Black as: 
The ideal standard of precision which those have in mind who 
use vagueness as a term of reproach, when it is not a shifting 
standard of relatively less vague symbol, is the standard of 
scientific 
precision. 
But 
the 
indeterminacy 
which 
is 
characteristic of vagueness is present also in all scientific 
measurement.  
In support of this statement Black quotes N. R. Campbell as: 
‘There is no experimental method of assigning numericals in a 
manner which is free from error. If we limit ourselves strictly to 
experimental facts we recognize that there is no such thing as 
true measurement, and therefore no such thing as an error 
involved in departure from it.’ Vagueness is a feature of 
scientific as of other discourse [R19.4, p. 429]. 
There are other philosophical claims about naturalism of scientific methods. The 
claims with scientific methods must adhere to an empirical study and must have 
an independent verification as well as a process for properly developing and 
evaluating the natural explanations for observable phenomena. Critical 
rationalism, as it relates to the property of exactness of science, is that unbiased 
observation is an impossible task and hence demarcation between natural and 
supernatural explanation is simply arbitrarily done on the basis of human action in 
decision. The claim of critical rationalism to support the empirical property of 
science is that falsificability must not be the landmark of empirical theories but 
that falsification must be the universal empirical method of science. In this way, 
science must be viewed and assessed in terms of its ability to increase the scope of 
testable knowledge against accumulated experience. 
Interestingly, the position of the critical rationalists fails to acknowledge that 
every scientific knowledge or any knowledge item has seeds of fallibility and 
infallibility that exist as duality in logical unity which functions under the 
principle of continuum, and that every test of scientific knowledge that is accepted 
to meet current accumulated data is conditional, not only on as yet unknown data, 
but relative to hidden component of falsehood, all of which reside in the 
penumbral region defined by vagueness and ambiguities which require 
clarification and acceptance by cognitive agents through judicious judgments and 
decision-choice actions. The process of falsification comes with errors of data, 
vagueness in representation and errors of human judgment regarding the 

7.3   Science, Grammar and Acceptance of Knowledge 
133
 
knowledge-acceptance process in the epistemological space. Over the 
epistemological space, we cannot overlook the presence of epistemic errors which 
come to us as a composite sum of errors of fuzziness, errors of information 
incompleteness and errors of reasoning. It is due to these errors in the 
epistemological space  that we encounter situations where epistemic items which 
are claimed to contain knowledge are rejected and latter found to be knowledge-
wealthy and vice versa. Here, the development of classical mathematics in the 
probability space provides us with error measuring capacity due to the information 
incompleteness. The contemporary expansion of this classical mathematics into 
fuzzy mathematics in both possibility and probability spaces provides us with 
error-measuring capacity due to information vagueness and incompleteness. 
Together, all of these generate a knowledge-production system that is internally 
self-correcting for epistemic progress toward exactness and certainty. 
7.3   Science, Grammar and Acceptance of Knowledge 
The definition of science has gone through and is still going through refinements. 
Definitions of science in our contemporary thought system seem to suggest that 
the linguistic category of science has the properties of : 1) formulation of models 
in natural science; 2) Explanation; 3) Prediction in relation to two structures which 
are presented as characteristic sets in Table 7.3.1 that must be related to the 
characteristic sets I, II and III in  Tables 7.2.1.11 – 7.2.1.3. 
 
 
The Essentials of Definitional Structure I 
a) Process of knowing, b) Knowing is represented by a 
model c) A model explains the actual (present) and predicts the 
potential (future), d) The prediction of the future (potential) is a test 
against the past, and e) Objectivity in the knowledge-construction 
process is independent of human cognition. 
The Essentials of Definitional Structure II 
f) Controlled methods for data collection by observation of 
physical evidence of the phenomenon, g) Construction of 
theoretical explanations of the collected data, h) An experimental 
and empirical research under methods of generalized hypothesis 
and i) Tests of hypotheses under controlled conditions. 
Table 7.3.1 The Characteristic Set for the Definitional Structure of  
                    Contemporary Science   

134 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
Given all these suggested characteristics of science and hence its definition as a 
linguistic category, we may ask the question as to what is the objective of science 
or knowledge in general? The question of the objective of science pushes us into 
asking five related questions.  
 
 
With these properties, and to the extent to which they relate to goals and 
objectives of science as a category of the knowledge-production process, we may 
advance a working definition of science. The working definition will allow us to 
create its linguistic category that will in turn offer us an algorithm of dynamic 
sorting of science and non-science categories at each point of time. Let us keep in 
mind that science and non-science dwell in a dynamic unity of duality and 
continuum where an element of a non-science of today may come to be classified 
as an element of science tomorrow through a process, as new information reveals 
1. Is the objective (goal) of science the focus on understanding nature by 
theory and models of explanation with abstracted explanatory rationality 
about what there is? 
2. Is the objective (goal) of science the focus on offering changes of what 
there is through theory and models of prescription with prescriptive 
rationality in order to improve the general and environmental conditions of 
human existence? 
3. Do the experimental methods used in data-creation process pose  
problems of empirical rationality in such a way that partial answers are  
only available to us regarding the phenomenon of interest? 
4. Do the instruments used in knowledge experiments to answer stated 
questions only produce answers to these questions that are meaningful only 
in terms of the instruments employed? 
5. In all these, what role do axiomatic system with derived axiomatic 
rationality, and empirical system with established empirical rationality  
play in the knowledge production in both explanatory and prescriptive 
thoughts? In other words, what is the relationship between theoretical and 
empirical sciences? Additionally, is the distinction between empirical and 
theoretical sciences universal to all areas in the knowledge-production 
process? 
Table 7.3.2 Questions on the Objective of Science and Knowledge 

7.3   Science, Grammar and Acceptance of Knowledge 
135
 
new possibilities in the knowledge production over the epistemological space. 
Science has been projected as a derivative of knowledge, and as such, we need a 
provision for a working definition of the concept of knowledge before we can 
proceed to the definition of the concept of science. The definition of knowledge is 
a categorial conversion of a linguistic category of information which is the 
connecting element of all the knowledge-production processes. 
The characteristics of knowledge as a linguistic category must be specified. The 
importance of the linguistic category as a framework of definition and analysis 
must not be underestimated. Its cognitive beauty and relevance for our 
understanding rest on our knowledge production which proceeds from conditions 
of ignorance through categorial conversion of linguistic categories to conditions of 
knowing. The categorial conversion is accomplished by logical operations where 
there is always a primary linguistic category and derived linguistic categories 
proceeding through the stages of the knowledge square as we have discussed in 
the previous chapters. The approach of linguistic category-formation and 
categorial conversion is taken to be that which corresponds to cognitive actions 
that deal with epistemic states, processes and time for understanding and knowing. 
Every categorial conversion comes with a categorial moment and transitional 
dynamics of quality and quantity among categories with neutrality of time whether 
such a categorial conversion relates to natural or social phenomenon. The 
linguistic category is closely related to definitions and conditions of definability, 
grammar of knowledge as well as to the explications and conditions of 
explicability. Let us turn our attention to a working definition of knowledge. 
 
Definition 7.3.1: Knowledge 
Knowledge is a set of cognitive properties of epistemic objects with a justified 
true belief from information signals where the structure of such a justification 
must be provided to explain how it relates to the subjective information set as the 
evidential set that provides the justification support of the logical claims of 
epistemic items as knowledge. The knowledge production is a set of cognitive 
actions with epistemic processes that link the ontological space to the 
epistemological space and then to the ontological space by justified claims to 
ensure a minimal difference between the epistemic and ontological realities. 
 
Definition 7.3.2: Justification 
Justification is an interpreted body of information signals with processed relations 
to one another that establish a relational structure between a set of linguistic 
objects and epistemic objects in the universal object set in order to establish a 
belief system of a set of knowledge objects. It is the set of belief conditions that 
supports the claimed relationship between epistemic elements and an ontological 
element by cognitive agents. 
 

136 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
As defined, knowledge is a language composed of syntactics, semantics and 
pragmatics that relate linguistic objects to the elements in the universal object set 
for understanding and use. Knowledge is a linguistic category that allows us to 
sort out that which is simply opinions or non-knowledge in the sense that these 
opinions have no justified belief support. As a category, knowledge constitutes a 
set of elements. In this respect, human experiences, , may be said to be 
composed of knowledge, , and non-knowledge 
′
such that 
′
=



 with 
′
=
= ∅




 in the Aristotelian logical system within dualism operating under 
the principle of excluded middle. We shall refer to this as the Aristotelian 
knowledge category. The conditions where 
′
=



 and 
′
=
≠∅




 
hold in the fuzzy logical system within duality where the principle of continuum 
comes to replace the principle of excluded middle. We shall refer to this as the 
fuzzy knowledge category. The Aristotelian system, in category formation, places 
human cognitive experiences in either knowledge or no-knowledge exact 
categories with surety.  
The fuzzy logical system, in category formation, places human cognitive 
experiences in fuzzy categories of knowledge, no-knowledge and unresolved zone 
where each category has a corresponding distribution of degrees of confidence 
associated with knowledge and no-knowledge. Every knowledge category is 
supported by a justification principle, , that provides its belief support, . 
Every knowledge item has two awareness components of individually subjective 
conditions of awareness, 
i
 and collectively subjective conditions of awareness, 
C
 with 
i
i
i
i
=
≠∅





 in the sense that some of the individual awareness 
conditions may be overlapping. The claim of any social knowledge is a 
combination of awareness condition and justification principle that define a belief 
system in support of a claim that an epistemic item contains knowledge. As 
specified, there is a set of epistemic elements with a corresponding set of 
justification that corresponds to an ontological element. The corresponding 
justifications constitute theories and models that must be tested against the 
correspondence to the an ontological element in the sense that the epistemic 
characteristics correspond to the ontological characteristics where the acceptance 
of the an epistemic item as containing knowledge is a decision-choice action with 
the highest degree of belief as can be ascertained. 
As it has been argued in [R2.9] that our knowledge-production system derives 
its growth and development from transformation dynamics of subjective–objective 
duality that resides in the information polarity, where information on ontological 
reality is under continual categorial conversions to subjective information and the 
subjective information is under categorial conversions into elements of epistemic 
reality in the epistemological space. Alternatively stated, the knowledge dynamics 
is such that the ontological information is transformed into the epistemological 
information by a process. The epistemological information is then transformed 
into epistemic reality. The transitional cognitive dynamics of the knowledge-
production process requires a rational justification which is a justified belief that a 
knowledge item has been obtained; a rational falsification that provides a second 

7.3   Science, Grammar and Acceptance of Knowledge 
137
 
order belief that the justified  information is reasonable  and a rational 
corroboration that provides a third order belief that a knowledge item is found in 
the set of items of cognitive reality; and the three rational conditions must be 
linked by a rational verification that provides a combined justified belief that the 
epistemic item is identical to an item in the ontological reality and hence a 
knowledge has been found in the search process. This process may be illustrated 
as belief and analytical squares that are categorial derivatives from the knowledge 
square which is taken to be a primary category of knowing that revolves around 
the space of epistemic reality as illustrated in Figure 7.3.1.  
 
 
KNOWLEDGE 
ITEMS 
JUSTIFICATION 
PRINCIPLE 
COGNITIVE
REALITY
VERIFICATION 
 PRINCIPLE 
CORROBORATION 
  PRINCIPLE 
KNOWLEDGE 
POSSIBILITY SPACE 
COMPARABILITY 
PRINCIPLE 
COGNITIVE 
REALITY 
ACCEPTABILITY 
PRINCIPLE 
DECISION-CHOICE  
      MODULE
A 
B 
B
E
L
I
E
F
 
S
Q
U
A
R
E 
A
N
A
L
Y
T
I
C
A
L
 
S
Q
U
A
R
E 
Fig. 7.3.1 A) A Belief Square; B) An Analytical Square in an Epistemic Geometry 
of Thinking 

138 
7   Ontology, Epistemology, Explication and Exactness in Mathematics and Sciences
 
The theory of the knowledge square provides us with a universal principle as a 
meta-theory on epistemology for the knowledge-production process. The belief 
square presents a relational structure among subjective knowledge, justification 
conditions and derived corroboration conditions to allow verifications of the 
claimed knowledge items against elements in the space of ontological reality. The 
analytical square is a derived category from the belief square. It is a cognitive 
relational structure among the elements of the possibility space, where each 
element must meet the comparability principle and acceptability principle for an 
entry into epistemic reality space. The conditions for both the belief and analytical 
squares are derived from the possibility and probability spaces. We shall now turn 
our attention to the interactions of knowledge and science. 

K.K. Dompere: The Theory of the Knowledge Square, STUDFUZZ 289, pp. 139–161. 
springerlink.com                                           © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 8 
Knowledge and Science in the Theory  
of the Knowledge Square 
Science is a sub-category of knowledge and hence it must satisfy the general 
conditions of the primary elements of the knowledge square and its derivatives of 
belief and analytical squares.  As a sub-category of knowledge, what distinguishes 
it from other sub-categories of knowledge? This question demands us to produce a 
definition of science that will allow us to create its linguistic dynamic category 
which will offer us the conditions of a sorting algorithm for locating scientific 
items and non-scientific items at any point of time in duality. We have already 
offered a definition of knowledge. We shall now offer a definition of science as a 
sub-category of knowledge. 
8.1   The Identities of Knowledge and Science 
It has been argued that every epistemic element or an ontological element has an 
identity that allows it to be identified. The identity is revealed by a set of 
characteristics that allows us to place the elements in their respective categories. 
The identity of the ontological element is revealed by the ontological 
characteristic set in terms of what there is. The identity of an epistemic element is 
revealed by an epistemic characteristic set in terms of what is claimed to be 
acquainted or known. The linguistic category allows the cognitive construct of 
nominalism, that itself leads to a methodological constructionism and 
reductionism in the epistemological space for knowledge development to create 
the epistemic reality that must be examined against the ontological reality. The 
comparison and reconciliation of the characteristics between epistemic reality and 
ontological reality leads to claims of science and non-science. 
 
Definition 8.1.1: Science 
Science is a knowledge sub-category that is defined by a dynamic set of epistemic 
properties which allows the conditions of dynamic sorting algorithms to be 
developed in order to establish a demarcation between science and other 
categories of knowledge as we travel through time. 

140 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
The definition of science is intentionally broad for flexible accommodation and 
subject-quality dynamics of different areas of knowledge. As defined, science 
cannot be explicated by the content of subject areas of knowledge.  Every subject 
area of knowledge is a candidate to be placed in the linguistic category of science, 
as new and powerful epistemic tools are cognitively uncovered in such a way that 
the knowledge areas may be examined against the specified characteristic of the 
linguistic category of science. If contents cannot be used to define the knowledge 
area as science, then what characteristics should be enlisted to establish the 
boundaries of science as a linguistic sub-category of knowledge? This question is 
troubling; however, we must look not to the content of the knowledge area, but to 
the methods of obtaining and accepting a particular item as knowledge in order to 
establish the domain of science. It has been pointed out that the theory of 
knowledge square with its belief and analytical squares provides a universal 
principle for the knowledge-construction and knowledge-reduction processes 
irrespective of the area and subject matter of interest. The universal principle 
simply states that all knowledge productions take place in the epistemological 
space and that they are the works of information and decision-choice rationality of 
cognitive agents. Additionally, every information structure in the epistemological 
space, as an input into the knowledge-production process is defective, and its 
decision-choice rationality is fuzzy irrespective of the subject area. The fuzzy 
rationality is an enveloping of the classical rationality which is its point-point 
approximations. The methods of epistemic activities will be an enveloping of the 
sequential paths from conditions of cognitive ignorance to a claim and acceptance 
of knowledge. The sequential path and the methodology of knowledge acquisition 
must be explicit and outlined for general discussions and understanding. Here, as 
we have argued in this monograph, methodology is distinguished from 
epistemology while their combined structure constitutes the theory of knowledge. 
When we accept methods and techniques as candidates in defining the 
linguistic category of science in the enterprise of knowledge production, then a set 
of questions comes to the surface for critical deliberation. The set includes:  
a) What role do theoretical or axiomatic methods play in explication of science?  
b) What role do empirical methods play in establishing the boundaries of science? 
c) What relationships exist between theoretical and empirical methods in the 
explication of science? These questions challenge us to distinguish empirical 
methods from theoretical methods and their interpretive roles in defining science. 
In this distinction, an empirical theory has been introduced as a distinct theory 
from axiomatic theory as a system of methods that presents science as a linguistic 
category.  
Here, we may choose to speak of an empirical representation of ideas of what 
there is as an ontological description which is an epistemic representation of 
ontological elements and an empirical explanation of what there is and its 
behavior as an epistemic understanding of an ontological description. The former 
is the empirical ontology as sense data and the latter is the empirical epistemology  
 

8.1   The Identities of Knowledge and Science 
141
 
in the knowledge-production process to reduce human ignorance. The empirical 
ontology presents us with information, on the basis of experience and 
observations, as input for processing while the empirical epistemology presents us 
with a template of information processing capabilities on the basis of empirical 
methods.  We may also choose to speak of an axiomatic representation of ideas of 
what there is as an ontological description and an axiomatic explanation of what 
there is and its behavior as an epistemic understanding of the ontological 
description. The former is an axiomatic ontology and the latter is an axiomatic 
epistemology in the knowledge-production process. Both the axiomatic and 
empirical representations of thought are nothing but reflections or models of sense 
data that one uses to interpret information signals from the ontological space 
[R2.9] [R8.18][R8.36]. The empirical and axiomatic representations of 
experiential information become inputs into the cognitive actions that require 
reasoning (logic) to process them into thoughts, thus establishing connections 
between ontology and epistemology. The relational structure of specifying the 
primary category and derived categories in knowing is presented as a cognitive 
geometry in Figure 8.1.1. 
 
 
 
 
ONTOLOGICAL    
    REALITY 
AXIOMATIC 
ONTOLOGY 
EMPIRICAL 
ONTOLOGY 
EPISTEMIC REALITY 
  AXIOMATIC 
EPISTEMOLOGY 
  EMPIRICAL 
EPISTEMOLOGY 
THE KNOWLEDGE-
PRODUCTION 
PROCESS 
Fig. 8.1.1 The Geometry of the Relational Structure of Ontology and Epistemology 
Relative to the Specification of the Primary Category of Ontological Reality and the 
process of obtaining the Derived Categories of Epistemic Reality 

142 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
The 
knowledge-production 
process 
that 
generates 
the 
ontological-
epistemological relational structure may be linked to the nature of the information 
structure for the initialization of the knowledge search. The axiomatic or the 
empirical information structure may be taken to be fully defective (both vague and 
limited information), partially defective (either full but vague or non-vague and 
limited information) or non-defective (perfect information: non-vague and full 
information).  
One may ask a question as to what are the differences and similarities between 
the empirical ontology and the axiomatic ontology. Similarly, a question may be 
raised as to the differences and similarities between the empirical and axiomatic 
epistemologies. At the level of empirical ontology, direct sense data is its domain 
of characteristic representation to generate the information inputs that present 
identities of epistemic objects in the epistemological space for epistemic 
processing. This requires an acquaintance with what there is as defining the 
primary category of knowing what there is. At the level of axiomatic ontology, 
cognitive intuition in communications provides its domain of characteristic 
representation of abstract properties of what there is that will constitute the 
information inputs in the epistemological space for epistemic processing. At the 
level of empirical epistemology, the cognitive algorithms are developed to process 
the empirical characteristics of what there is to obtain a thought of explanation of 
either what there is or the behavior of what there is. This requires empirical laws 
of thought that may be based on either classical paradigm or fuzzy paradigm.  
Similarly, at the level of axiomatic epistemology, cognitive algorithms are 
developed to process the axiomatic characteristics of what there is into the 
explanation of what there is or the behavior of what there is as seen from the 
internal structure of the axiomatic system. This requires axiomatic laws of thought 
that may also be based on either classical paradigm or fuzzy paradigm. In all these 
cases, decision-choice rationality is required. The processing of empirical 
representations of information by reason to achieve an empirical explanation in 
thought by combining the empirical ontology with the empirical epistemology 
may be called an empirical theory that presents an explanatory view of what there 
is in terms of existence and behavior. Thus, an empirical reasoning module 
becomes the cognitive categorial moment, the force of transformation that 
converts the ontological categories into epistemological categories. In the process 
of knowing, therefore, we have two categories of empirical ontology and 
empirical epistemology that are linked together by cognitive categorial 
conversions through epistemic processes and decision-choice actions. Here, 
ontology and epistemology exist as a duality in logical unity and continuum but 
not as dualism in logical separation and excluded middle of the knowledge-
production process. The empirical ontology provides the conditions to establish 
the primary category while the empirical epistemology creates the conditions to 
construct derived categories for epistemic reality. 
 

8.1   The Identities of Knowledge and Science 
143
 
An axiomatic representation in thought is also nothing but a reflection of the 
properties of that which exists as ontological element. It may or may not flow 
from sense data as representation of information signals taken as self-evident 
truth. In this approach, the axiomatic representation of ontological characteristics 
becomes an input into cognitive actions that require a further reasoning to process 
it into complete thought. The process presents axiomatic ontology and axiomatic 
epistemology as connected by categorial conversion in duality in continuum which 
becomes the dynamic carrier of reasoning that provides the logical energy of 
categorial conversion over the transient process from ontology to epistemology. 
The processing of axiomatic representation in thought by reason to achieve an 
axiomatic explanation in thought may be called axiomatic theory, that presents an 
explanatory view of what there is in terms of existence and behavior. The 
axiomatic ontology, like the empirical ontology, provides the needed conditions to 
establish the primary category while the axiomatic epistemology creates the 
conditions to construct the derived categories of the epistemic reality.  Both the 
empirical and axiomatic conditions may be used in the production of prescriptive 
theories in prescriptive science. 
The knowledge-production process that generates the ontological-epistemological 
relational structure as seen in terms of axiomatic and empirical foundations in  
Figure 8.1.1 may be linked to the possible assumptions of the nature of the 
information structure for the initialization of the knowledge search and to the 
paradigms for the epistemic processes. The axiomatic or the empirical information 
structure that initializes the primary category as an input may be takento be fully 
defective (both vague and limited information), partially defective (either full but 
vague or non-vague and limited information) or non-defective (perfect information: 
non-vague and full information). On the basis of the assumed information structure, 
symbolic representations are developed. From the nature of symbolic representations 
paradigms are formed and advanced for thought processing. To present the relevant 
information assumptions, we shall take up the relational structure of information and 
ontology on one hand, and then information and epistemology on the other hand. 
The epistemic algorithms constitute the laws of thought that are made up of two 
steps. The first step involves the principle of reasoning to define the basic 
transformation characteristics required to convert ontology to epistemology. The 
second step involves the principle of reasoning that determines which of the 
characteristics constitute legitimate derivatives in the epistemology. Here, we must 
distinguish the empirical laws of thought from the axiomatic laws of thought in any 
paradigm even though both of them constitute cognitive conversion moments from 
the ontological categories to the epistemological categories. All these are connected 
to cognitive transformations of knowing but say nothing about the truth of the 
primary and derived categories and the propositions they contain. It will become 
clear that some area of the knowledge production lend themselves to both empirical 
ontology and epistemology, some lend themselves to both axiomatic ontology and 
epistemology, while other areas will require a combination principle of both. 
 
 

144 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
 
 
8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of 
Exact Science 
While it is not difficult to make an argument that the classification of science must 
follow the empirical explication of science, an argument in support of it is not  
 
 
 
E
M
P
I
R
I
C
A
L
  
E
P
I
S
T
E
M
O
L
O
G
Y
    FUZZINESS 
       NON-FUZZINESS 
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E
N
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E
COHORT I 
Inexact Epistemological 
Space due to vagueness of 
Information with Complete 
volume of information 
(Qualitative Defectiveness 
and Quantitative Non- 
Defectiveness ) 
(Non-stochastic Fuzzy 
Epistemic Objects) 
COHORT III 
Inexact Epistemological 
Space due to vagueness of 
Information with Incomplete 
volume of information 
(Qualitative Defectiveness 
and Quantitative 
Defectiveness)  
(Fuzzy Stochastic Epistemic 
Objects) 
COHORT II
Exact Epistemological Space  
with complete and non-vague 
Information (Qualitative Non- 
defectiveness and 
Quantitative Non- 
Defectiveness ) (Perfect 
Non-fuzzy Non-Stochastic 
Epistemic objects) 
COHORT IV
Inexact Epistemological Space due 
to Incomplete Information with non-
vagueness of information 
(Qualitative Non-defectiveness and 
Quantitative Defectiveness)  
Stochastic Non-fuzzy Epistemic 
Objects 
Fig. 8.1.2 Descriptive Quality-Quantity Relations of Vagueness and 
Completeness of Axiomatic and Empirical Epistemology with Axiomatic and 
Empirical Ontology for Primary and Derived Categories of Information 
Structures 
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E 
I
N
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E 
        FUZZINESS 
       NON-FUZZINESS 
  EMPIRICAL ONTOLOGY: INFORMATION 
A
X
I
O
M
A
T
I
C
 
E
P
I
S
T
E
M
O
L
O
G
Y 
AXIOMATIC ONTOLOGY: INFORMATION 

8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of Exact Science 
145
 
easy. The problem is whether the goals and objectives of science should be among  
the explication’s characteristics of science or should science be explicated before 
we establish its goals and objectives. The importance of understanding the nature 
of the set of goals and objectives of science will become clear when we come to 
deal with the problem of vagueness in the content and methods of science. We 
shall now deal with possible goals and objective of science. 
8.2.1   Goals and Objectives of Science 
In conceptualizing the goals and objectives of science, there are few questions, the 
answers of which will help our concept formations, given the explication of 
science. The set of questions may be placed under two classifications: one at the 
level of abstraction and theory, Table 8.2.1.1, and the other, at the level of 
experimentation and empirical work, Table 8.2.1.2. 
 
 
 
 
                Table 8.2.1.1 At the level of abstraction and theory: 
a) Is the objective of science the focus on understanding nature 
through an explanatory theory or is it about the discovery of what 
there is or both? In other words, is science about finding out what 
there is and then explaining the behavior of what there is? 
Alternatively, is the focus of science about ontology or 
epistemology or both? 
b) Is the objective of science the focus on prescription in order to 
change “what there is” so as to improve the quality of nature and 
conditions of human existence as humanly decided through a 
prescriptive theory? 
c) In what framework is the prescriptive process connected to 
either ontology or epistemology or both? 
d) Can we claim exactness of abstraction and theoretical results 
and under what set of conditions?  

146 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 8.2.1.2 At the level of experimentation and empirical work: 
a) 
Do 
the 
instruments 
used 
in 
experimental 
methods 
or  
knowledge experiments produce exact or vague answers to the  
questions that are only meaningful in terms of the instrument  
used? In other words, do experimental processes generate vague  
data relative to ontological elements? 
b) Do the experimental methods used in obtaining empirical  
data about a phenomenon pose problems such that partial  
answers are only possible to us at the level of what there is and  
that 
such 
partial 
answers 
are 
due 
to 
inexactness 
of 
the  
experimental methods? 
c) Are experimenters interacting with the problem during the  
periods 
of 
experimental 
design, 
recording 
of 
the 
results,  
collection of the data and analysis of the data? In other words,  
what 
role 
does 
subjective-objective 
duality 
plays 
in 
the  
experimental 
knowledge 
where 
the 
recorded 
data 
may 
not  
reflect the experimental outcomes? 
d) Can we claim exactness for any of these stages in the process  
of 
knowledge 
production 
through 
experimentation 
and  
empirical work? 

8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of Exact Science 
147
 
When science is taken to deal with the discovery of what there is and the 
explanation of the behavior of what there is, then the ontology precedes the 
epistemology in the sense that what there is must first be anticipated, discovered 
or conceptualized before the justification and explanation of the behavior of what 
there is become of cognitive interest. In this way, an ontological element is first 
transformed into an epistemic element and moved to the possibility space. This 
approach is consistent with all areas of the knowledge-production process but not 
restricted to science. It is also consistent with the exact and inexact knowledge-
production. The thinking system that follows this path of the knowledge-
acquisition process, is called the explanatory epistemic process where ontology 
precedes epistemology, and the area of science is called the explanatory science 
while the corresponding theories are called explanatory theories (see also 
[R14.11] [R14.13] [R14.35] [R14.97] [R14.102]). On the other hand, when 
science is taken to deal with changing what there is and prescribing what ought to 
be for implementations, then epistemology precedes ontology in the sense that 
what ought to be is first anticipated and conceptualized, and the outcome of its 
prescriptive rules after implementations becomes what there is. Similarly, this 
approach is consistent with the general cognitive processes in examining inexact 
and exact knowledge production.  
In this analytical structure, what do we mean by epistemology precedes 
ontology? The epistemic process is viewed as a cognitive map (a blueprint) of 
abstract understanding with a justified principle that allows decision-choice 
algorithms to be constructed and imposed on human actions to create categorial 
conversions that form conditions of ontology to transform what ought to be into 
what there is. What ought to be is conceptualized in the possibility space and the 
cognitive element belongs to both the possibility space and the possible-world 
space. Here, the epistemic element under the prescriptive science belongs to the 
possibility space if it is supported by a possibilistic belief system. If, however,  
the element is not supported by a possibilistic belief system, then it belongs to the 
possible-world space but not to the possibility space. The actualization of what 
ought to be, into what there is, is defined by ontological conditions. The 
characterization of what ought to be and the structure of the developed algorithms 
(optimal decision rules) for its actualization into what there is, is defined by 
epistemological conditions. The thinking system that follows this path of the 
knowledge-production process is called the prescriptive epistemic process where 
epistemology precedes ontology and the area of science is called the prescriptive 
science while the corresponding theories are called prescriptive theories. 
Examples in practice of prescriptive science are space exploration, socioeconomic 
planning, engineering of all kinds, some aspects of medical sciences and 
bioengineering, genetic modifications, artistic creations and many forms that are 
emerging. The geometry of the explanatory-prescriptive relational structure for 
cognitive activities over the epistemological space is provided in Figure. 
 

148 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
 
 
8.2.2   Classification of Science 
Given the defined conditions of science, the space of sciences has been and 
continues to be sub-classified into sub-categories. These sub-categories have their 
own defined characteristics. Some of the sub-categories are based on areas of 
knowledge, methods of research and knowledge acquisition, and the content of 
research and knowledge. The basic structure of such a classification is presented 
in Figure 8.2.2.1. It allows us to place under a proper epistemic position the 
classical and fuzzy paradigms with relative understanding of the relative roles 
played by the law of excluded middle and the law of fuzzy continuum in the 
knowledge-production process as we encounter conditions of inexactness, 
vagueness, quality and quantity. 
In these sub-classifications of science, we must pay a special attention to 
scientific activities and the whole structure of the knowledge-production 
enterprise. Formal science is grounded on the basis of axioms from which  
 
EXPLANATORY 
EPISTEMIC PROCESS 
EXPLANATORY 
THEORIES 
EXPLANATORY 
SCIENCE 
PRESCRIPTIVE 
EPISTEMIC PROCESS 
PRESCRIPTIVE 
THEORIES 
  PRESCRIPTIVE 
SCIENCE 
THE KNOWLEDGE-
PRODUCTION 
PROCESS AND THE 
     NATURE OF  
     SCIENCE 
Fig. 8.2.1.1 The Geometry of the Relational Structures of Explanatory epistemic 
Process, Explanatory Theories and Explanatory Science, Relative to the 
Prescriptive Epistemic Process, Prescriptive Theories and Prescriptive Science in 
Moving from Categories of the Ontological Reality to the Derived Categories of 
Epistemic Reality. 

8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of Exact Science 
149
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCIENCE 
 
 
The Study of Natural 
Phenomena 
 
 
The Study of Social 
and Human Behavior 
in Society
 
 
Formed on the basis 
of Knowledge Area 
and Content 
 
 
Formed on the basis of 
Knowledge Area and 
Content
 
 
On the Basis of 
Sense Data, Rules 
of Inference and 
Reasoning 
 
 
On the basis of a prior 
propositions or believed 
to be Self-evident Truths 
that encompass a formal 
system built on 
theoretical symbols and 
rules of inference 
AXIOMATIC 
EMPIRICAL 
PURE SCIENCE 
APPLIED SCIENCE 
 
 
In Experimentation, 
Measurement, Accounting, 
Observation and Reasoning 
 
 
In Experimentation, 
Measurement, Accounting,  
Observation and Reasoning 
CLASSICAL LOGIC AND 
MATHEMATICS of Classical 
Paradigm 
FUZZY LOGIC AND 
MATHEMATICS of Fuzzy  
Paradigm
NATURAL SCIENCE
SOCIAL SCIENCE
SUB-CATEGORIES
SUB-CATEGORIES
EXACTNESS
INEXACTNESS
KNOWLEDGE-PRODUCTION SYSTEM
Fig. 8.2.2.1 An Epistemic Geometry of Scientific Categories and Available 
Logics 

150 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
theoretical ideas are then developed within the axiomatic system by an acceptable  
mode of reasoning to erect a theoretical system of propositions with truth values 
that are dependent on the truth values of the basic axioms and the method of 
thought. These are the conditions that allow mathematics to be placed in the 
category of science and then into exact science. Thus, the starting point of formal 
science is the basic axioms that constitute its foundation and capture the initial 
information input for categorial conversions. The theoretical propositions are 
hierarchy of derived logical categories whose primary category is the set of the 
basic axioms. The basic elements of the axiomatic system are taken to be self-
evident truths that need no empirical justifications. Experimental science is 
viewed as starting from observations of ontological elements of the real world in a 
defined laboratory to accumulate experiential data, and through some acceptable 
methods of reasoning, one derives, on the basis of the accumulated data, useful 
empirical models as representations of aspects of epistemic reality that are 
consistent with the observations. It is here that the following statement by Max 
Black acquires an epistemic potency in the fuzzy space. 
While the mathematician constructs a theory in terms of ‘perfect 
objects’, the experimental scientist observes objects of which the 
properties demanded by theory are and can, in the very nature 
of measurement, be only approximately true. [R19.4, p. 427] 
It is also, here, that the concept of exact science without qualification looses its 
epistemic relevance and the problem of exact science enters into the class of 
phantom problems. 
Our discussion, here, is not to visit the old debate between empiricism and 
metaphysical rationalism. The objective here is to reexamine thoughts and present 
a relational structure that will allow critical examinations and reflections on the 
concepts and meanings of exactness and inexactness in science and in the 
knowledge-production process. The objective is also to show how their conceptual 
meanings reflect on decision-choice actions as related to assumptions about 
information inputs into the epistemic technological machine and the implied laws 
of thought. This will allow us to place the differences between exact and inexact 
sciences on an appropriate analytical footing for the understanding of new 
sciences such as systemicity and the emerging ones, such as synergetics, 
complexity theory energetics, super-symetric theory, adinkramatics, adinkralogy 
and complexity science for human quest for increasing freedom from ignorance. 
We hope to arrive at a conclusion that certain claims about similarities and 
differences of exact and inexact sciences are ideological and hard to support by 
any justified belief system. We shall also advance a framework that allows us to 
reject the notion of absolute truth in knowledge when we retain the idea that 
knowledge is a model of reality constructed from an inexact epistemological 
space.  
From the structure of the theory of the knowledge square, what we know as 
characterizing reality is a cognitive mapping from the universal object set (the 
universal space) onto the space of epistemic reality, thus producing epistemic 
objects with belief support systems. Let us keep in mind that metaphysics means 

8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of Exact Science 
151
 
everything that is non-experiential and comes to us as rationalism. Mathematics 
and symbolic logic are always associated with axiomatic science and hence 
rationalism. Empiricism is connected to everything experiential. There is a 
complete marriage between methodological empiricism and methodological 
rationalism in the search for knowledge that is accepted as scientific. The two are 
needed for cognitive activities in the totality of the knowledge-production process. 
The needed examination has been made necessary because of an increasing 
development of the fuzzy paradigm in the knowledge-production process. This 
fuzzy paradigm is not limited to any specific area of knowledge production and its 
relevance may be seen in terms of our ability to process defective information 
structure on the path of knowing. 
The characteristics which distinguish the linguistic category of science from 
that of non-science within the organic category of knowledge in the 
epistemological space seem to be nothing but the methods of knowledge 
acquisition where methodological empiricism and methodological rationalism are 
inter-supportive. We have shown from the theory of the knowledge square that 
one of the universal principles for the knowledge-production process, irrespective 
of the knowledge area, is that of the principle of defective information structure 
where every knowledge area must deal with the conditions of inexactness. The 
unifying force is the information signals that are transmitted from the ontological 
space to the epistemological space in order to help to link experiential factors to 
elements of formal factors. In this respect, a-prior and a-posterior propositions are 
merely matters of methodological convenience that depend on the subject matter 
of an analytical interest. In the rationalist-empiricist approach, a preference is 
offered to the investigator in terms of an initial choice of methodological approach 
where rationalism or empiricism may be taken as the starting point of an inquiry. 
The choice will depend on the subject area of the knowledge production, things 
that are taken (assumptions) to initialize the epistemic journey and the vehicle that 
will take us on the path to the house of knowledge. And even, here, we are 
confronted with an awesome problem of dealing with the initial problem of 
inexactness. 
The choice of the initial specification as either exact or inexact information 
structure is similar to the choice between a-prior propositions and a-posterior 
propositions, and also similarly, to the choice between prescriptive propositions 
and explanatory propositions as initializing the knowledge-production process. In 
these discussions, prescriptive propositions flow from the structure of prescriptive 
theory and science as have been presented and discussed in this volume and also 
in [R14.30] [R16.4] [R16.7]. These prescriptive propositions are not derived from 
explanatory theory. They are derived from an axiomatic system. In this respect, it 
is useful to distinguish between real variables that may represent real objects and 
linguistic variables that may represent linguistic objects. The objective of the 
knowledge-production process is to establish relationships among real objects and 
linguistic objects in order to claim knowledge through a process. The real objects 
are not under the domain of human existence and action but rather ontologically 
given. The linguistic objects are under the domain of human existence and action, 
and hence require information processing through cognitive algorithms to abstract 

152 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
and test their correspondence with the real variables in the universal object set. In 
other words, in the knowledge-production enterprise and scientific discovery, we 
take the set of the real objects, processes and states as given and as the primary 
category of reality with linguistic descriptions that represents the potential space 
of knowing.  
This potential space is the ontological space that contains the universal object 
set with cardinality equal to infinity, and is also infinitely closed under natural 
substitution-transformation process without loss of matter and energy, but with 
losses of quality which are compensated by other gains of quality that relate to 
information signals. Here, we proceed on the principles of epistemic 
constructionism where our linguistic objects constitute the derived category from 
the primary category, and where the instruments of transformation are cognitive 
algorithms that create logical conversion moments that help to define qualitative 
and quantitative motions between ignorance and knowledge with neutrality of 
time. The epistemic problem of the knowledge construction, therefore, is how to 
create a linguistic world whose concepts, that define the derived categories, might 
be abstracted from the primitive concepts that correspond to the real objects of the 
primary category. Alternatively, the problem may be seen from the dual in terms 
of methodological reductionism in the knowledge creation in terms of how to take 
the derived categories, massage them and completely reduce them to correspond 
to the primitive concepts that relate to the real objects of the primary category of 
reality. In this process of knowing, empirical science finds a distinction from 
axiomatic science as well as a point of unity under conditions of categorial 
conversion, relationality of thought and logical continuum. As argued, ontological 
reality constitutes the primary category of the knowledge production, while the 
epistemic reality constitutes the derive category of knowledge. 
At the level of empirical methods of knowledge finding and construction, we 
initialize the knowledge production with a set of empirical propositions that has a 
parallel correspondence to the items of the primary category (universal object 
set). If we accept the empirical inferential rules that are taken to reflect or 
represent the objective laws of the primary category, and if the initialized set of 
empirical propositions corresponds to the set of conditions of the primary 
category, then we may come to believe that the derived empirical propositions are 
consistent with the primary category of the universal object set as empirically 
established and with respect to the empirical logical rules. Under these conditions, 
we can claim a knowledge item with justified belief conditions where such 
empirical propositions are provable within the empirical system of thought. Here, 
we speak of empirical completeness. The concept of parallelism must be 
interpreted as consistent and similar. How exact are our empirical methods of 
inference and the derived propositions; and hence how exact is the science that 
employs such methods given the ontological exactness? 
At the level of axiomatic methods of the knowledge construction, one 
initializes the path to knowledge discovery or knowledge search with a set of 
axiomatic propositions that has a correspondence with the elements of the primary 
category. If we accept the use of axiomatic logical inferential rules that provide us 
with a justified reflection of the objective laws of the existence of the primary 

8.2   Objectives and Classification of Science: The Inexactness of Exact Science 
153
 
category, and if the initial set of axioms is shown to correspond to the set of 
conditions of the primary category, then we can construct a belief support for the 
axiomatic claim of knowledge. In this respect, the derived axiomatic propositions 
are consistent with the elements of the primary category of reality. In this 
connection, we speak of axiomatic completeness in the sense that the axiomatic 
system is closed to allow us to justify the claims as knowledge within that system 
of thought. How exact are the axiomatic methods of inference and the derived 
propositions, and hence how exact is the science that employs such methods given 
the ontological exactness?    
As it stands, empirical and axiomatic methods defer from their initialization of 
the road to the knowledge production in terms of what is taken to characterize the 
elements in the primary category of logical reality and the logical rules for 
obtaining the derived category and the knowledge acceptance conditions. Given 
the selected primary category, the process of obtaining the derived categories, at 
each stage of knowing, is governed by a language and rules of combination of 
terms that involve synthetic and semantic theories of the behavior of the elements 
of the linguistic categories in any given language. The words in the language 
constitute different colors with differential shades of meaning that must be 
carefully selected in combination to paint the picture of the claimed truths. As 
colors, words present grey areas of semantics and their syntactic construction 
cannot be claimed to lead to unquestionable conclusions even when the primary 
category is accorded logical legitimacy. 
Science or knowledge in general, viewed either from the empirical or axiomatic 
system, presents itself as a category of spoken words or written characters or 
symbolic representations or both. It is here that empirical system finds unity with 
axiomatic system and methodological positivism finds comfort with philosophical 
rationalism. It is also here that exact and inexact sciences may be shown to have 
an inseparable unity with a common ancestry. It is also here that a distinction 
between formal science and experimental science must be viewed as a choice of 
convenience of linguistic category that must deal with the conditions of 
inexactness. Formal science proceeds with an initialized theoretical system and 
conceptual ideas as a description of the primary category that leads to derived 
categories of a theoretical system by construct. Experimental science, on the other 
hand, proceeds with initialized observational data as the description of the primary 
category that leads to derived categories of an experiential system by construct. 
On the question of claims to knowledge, one may hold a position that nothing 
can be learned about reality from studying formal sciences such as mathematics. 
Similarly, one may hold a position that nothing can be proven to be a reality 
through the use of formal science, and that applied mathematics is a utilization of 
theoretical and mathematical models simply to understand epistemic reality within 
limits. In this connection, are symbolic logic and mathematical logic categories of 
syntax or science of reason? How do they influence or affect the results of 
empirical and axiomatic sciences? The disciplines of formal sciences or axiomatic 
systems rely heavily on the use of mathematics. They, therefore, do not exist until 
favorable mathematical forms are developed into advanced systems. These 
questions lead to an important question as to how do empirical, axiomatic and 

154 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
mathematical sciences deal with the difficulties of processing defective 
information structure. In fact, this is a major problem in theoretical economics and 
mathematical economics where human decision-choice behaviors in the economic 
space are axiomatized into the primary logical reality from which derived 
epistemic realities are constructed in terms of hypothesis and propositions. It is 
also a problem in biology, mathematical bioscience, medical sciences, 
psychology, mathematical psychology, mathematical social sciences and others. 
The problem is that all these are living systems and behave differently from 
physical systems. The differences reflect themselves in qualitative dispositions 
with changing characters through categories of internal qualitative self-motions. 
The users of the classical paradigm with its mathematics and logic in the study 
of non-physical (living) systems have phantom imagination, such that they can 
arrange the mathematical and symbolic epistemic objects of the living systems 
with rigid rules just like those epistemic objects in the chess-board of physical 
systems, with the same great ease as the chess player does on the board of chess 
elements or draft elements. The users of the classical paradigm fail to account for 
the presence of the fundamental principle of internal motions, in that the elements 
on the epistemic game of the chess-board of the physical system retain the same 
qualitative disposition and do not produce counter motion in response. The 
elements on the chess-board, therefore, have easy representations and 
manipulations by the users of the classical paradigm in the chess-board of the 
physical system. In practice, this conceptual system alters its form to incorporate 
quality and quantity in the epistemic chess-board of living systems where every 
epistemic object has imbued in it the principle of qualitative self-motion given the 
quantity. The epistemic objects of living systems present different challenges to 
the mathematical and logical representation and processing of information by the 
logical forces of the classical paradigm. 
The above discussions relate to the questions surrounding the language and 
grammar of science and mathematics in terms of exactness and clarity of 
representation and reason. All intelligible scientific and mathematical states, no 
matter how they are viewed, have a language and a grammar, and these are driven 
by concepts of sets, categories, groups and memberships in terms of information 
characteristics that allow for a partitioning, naming of elements and connectability 
of transformations of elements in the epistemological space. The restriction on the 
exactness of statements to be pure in science or knowledge is imposed by initial 
claims of either exactness or inexactness of the conceptual symbols, syntax and 
semantics that contained in the knowledge system. The reason is that the path to 
the knowledge acquisition or scientific practice is a varying enveloping not of a 
fixed set of clearly defined steps that one can follow to find knowledge. It is a path 
that passes through two types of uncertainties of fuzziness (possibilistic 
uncertainty) and limited information (stochastic uncertainty) that are contained in 
the defective information structure which makes the surface of the path very 
slippery.  
The journey over the path, therefore, must be carefully navigated by the 
knowledge researchers between two sets of characteristics of truth and falsity 
under cognitive tension leading to logical substitution-transformations, where 

8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology 
155
 
information signals are transformed into knowledge, and knowledge is substituted 
for ignorance; and where decision-choice actions are accorded the categorial 
moment in information-knowledge dynamics under an epistemic belief system. 
There are many paths to deciding on truth-falsity dominance depending on the 
knowledge area, but the method of deciding has a common principle which we 
have argued to be captured by cost-benefit rationality. The cost-benefit rationality 
is related to fuzzy-stochastic rationalities of the defective information structure 
that constrains conditions of exactness and inexactness. The question that arises is: 
what are the appropriate conditions of methodology that must justify the use of a 
particular type of methodology in processing the available defective information 
structure? We turn our attention to this question. 
8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology 
With the discussions on the classification of science within the knowledge 
structure, let us look at the relative merits of categories of science and non-science 
as may be seen from the methodology of knowing. The scientific methodology or 
non-scientific methodology is an epistemic framework of reasoning or thinking 
within the acceptable boundaries of rational thought in the knowledge acquisition 
under the conditions of limitation and vagueness of information. What then 
distinguishes natural science from social science, from medical science, from 
mathematics and symbolic logic and from others? The view being presented here, 
is simply that there is an intellectual problem on the part of the tradition to 
distinguish science from non-science, simply on the conditions of methods and 
techniques in cognitive actions to determine the epistemic objects. Similarly, the 
distinction between exact and inexact sciences is restrictive in the process of 
knowledge construction given the continual expansion of knowledge and 
technological spaces. This restriction finds expression in the structure of the 
classical paradigm composed of its logic and mathematics, where vagueness is 
expunged out of words, syntax, semantics and even pragmatism, that makes 
symbolic and mathematical logic devoid of quality and qualitative motion. The 
distinguishing characteristics of science from non-science in accord with the 
classical thought include: 
Here, the progress of knowledge, and hence science, requires the insistence on 
the unity of data and theory in an inseparable whole in a unified setting. Empirical 
observations and data provide inputs as well as point to the direction of a theory 
construction and the type of theory needed. A theory on axiomatic basis may point 
to data requirements for its verification or falsification or corroboration and 
application. It is here, that one may find a unified epistemic beauty between the 
empirical approach to cognition and the axiomatic approach to cognition for both 
the explanatory and prescriptive sciences. The empirical approach may point to 
the direction and the needed explanatory theory while the axiomatic approach may 
point to the required prescriptive theory and the needed empirical observation and 
data requirements. It is here, also, that we must take careful and judicious steps in 
 

156 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
 
defining the concept of observation, and the data requirements relevant to the 
classical explanatory theory and the modern prescriptive theory that is 
independent of explanatory theories. It is also here, that a distinction must be 
established between the explanatory science and the prescriptive science and how 
both of them relate to the empirical and axiomatic sciences, which then allows us 
to place the roles of observation and data requirements in proper perspectives in 
the search for knowledge and epistemic truth. All these categories of sciences, 
theories and data cannot be claimed to be unquestionably exact because their 
inputs are defective information for cognitive actions. 
At the level of explanatory theory, in the framework of explanatory science, the 
data requirements are ex-ante of the theory, where the objective of theoretical 
constructs is to justify what there is, or the observed, as well as to explain its 
behavior under the constructed explanatory rationality given the accepted 
information representation. The explanatory theory implies prediction and 
possible prescription ex-post of its construction. The empirical methodology is its 
principal framework that may be supported by axiomatic methodology for strength 
and completeness within logical bounds. At the level of prescriptive science, the 
Distinguishing Characteristics of Science from Non-science 
a) Observation of phenomenon of interest;  
 b) Observation must be measurable as well as produce accurate data; 
c) Observation must also be experimental and the corresponding  
     experiments must be double blind in method when possible in the use  
     of samples;   
d) The underlining behavior of the phenomenon should have a theory 
    with a derived hypothesis that is based on a logical reasoning;     
e) The logical reasoning must follow some criteria of inference,  
     demonstration and common sense; 
f) The specified propositions of the implied theory must meet the  
    conditions of evidential test as how they help in the understanding of 
    the behavior of the phenomenon of interest through explanation and  
    prediction.  

8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology 
157
 
data requirements are ex-post of the theory. Here, the objective of theoretical 
construct is to design a system of consistent optimal decision rules as a blueprint 
for implementation, in accordance with the constructed prescriptive theory to 
change what there is to what ought to be or to improve what there is under the 
constructed prescriptive rationality.  Prescriptive theory implies explanation and 
prediction ex-post of its implementation. The axiomatic methodology is its 
principal framework which may be supported by an empirical methodology for 
strength and completeness within logical bounds. 
Some care must be exercised in using the techniques and methods of 
investigation and knowledge search to define science and non-science in our 
modern knowledge construction at the face of virtual systems. We must resist the 
easy way of speaking of scientific methods as if the character of science has been 
explicated, unchanging, understood and has a universal agreement in the critical 
works of the knowledge-production enterprise.  The temptation must be avoided in 
claiming the value-neutral domain of science which is always advanced from the 
general conditions of subjectivity, politics, economics, law and the stage of social 
organization, the level of its knowledge and technical know-how. We must also 
resist the temptation to claim that scientific knowledge is unbiased and non-
political in explanation and problem solving. How can science be subjectively 
neutral or value-free while it is cognitively dependent on the personality, 
judgment, social institutions and cognition which are all subjectively entrenched 
on the knowledge agents and the knowledge-production system? The role of 
ideology in thought is essential in knowledge stability as well as its progress 
through its methods of knowledge research, approval and acceptance [R2.9] 
[R7.13] [R7.14] [R7.17][R7.26] [7.30] [R12.8] [R12.18] [R14.63] [R14.64] 
[R14.68]. The essentiality of social ideology lies in the notion that ideology may 
enhance or retard the efficiency of the knowledge-production system. 
To claim a value and subjective neutrality in science is to claim an ideological 
neutrality in human social existence, and hence fail to understand that ideology 
gives content to human social stability and establishes the conversion moments 
that propel social progress including science. The value and subjective neutrality 
in any area of knowledge construction externalizes the knowledge seeker, and 
such externalization is not consistent with the history and sociology of knowledge 
where the knowledge-production system is self-exiting, self-correcting and self-
containing as a nested set. The value-free and subjectivity-free areas of knowledge 
are purely ideological claims that also contaminate methods of the knowledge-
production process. They have no permanency in cognition. The cognitive 
permanence of the framework of knowledge construction is uncertainty and 
subjectivity, where uncertainty relates to vagueness (fuzziness) and information 
limitations (stochasticity) and subjectivity relates to judgment in human decision-
choice actions operating with defective information structure in every aspect of 
human existence in the epistemological space. The statement holds for science and 
non-science, exact science and inexact science. To claim exactness for science, 
one must be able to rid cognition of subjectivity and uncertainty of the two kinds 
in the epistemological space. 

158 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
In this respect, and for the progress of common intellectual heritage of 
humanity, we must resist the tyranny of science as well as the entrenched myths 
about science in discovering reality where such myths help exact science to 
maintain its ideological position in society as pure. For example, the statement that 
claims reality of science to be a physical universe defined by determinable 
properties is subjective and cannot meet the test conditions of objectivity and 
exactness as defined by exact science. The claim is, at best, established by 
decision-choice process at the domain of human thought, and hence operates in 
the penumbral regions of vagueness, ambiguities, subjectivity and randomness in 
the process of knowing. We must further refrain from an easy acceptance of the 
notion that the available methods of science are reliable because they are 
systematic and methodological that are guided by exact language, exact laws of 
thought, exact reasoning and exact logic of inference. Is the mathematical theory 
of personal probability, with its axiomatic foundation, subjective or objective, and, 
is its use in scientific work exact and value-free? The point here is that there is a 
degree of inexactness in exact science just as there are distributions of degrees of 
inexactness and exactness over all knowledge sectors. There are also degrees of 
exactness in inexact science. 
As we have pointed out earlier in the discussions on definition and explication, 
inexactness and exactness constitute a linguistic duality in the space of meanings 
and interpretations.  Let E  represent the term exactness in the language L  and 
 be the space of meanings with F  as a meaning assignment function that takes 
 onto E  to associate meaning to E  in language L ; then a set of meaning is 
formed around E  that may be written as 
( )
{
}
|
 where #
1
M
m
m
M
∈
≥

=
= F
E
 
with a corresponding fuzzy set M of degrees of exactness of meaning, where 
    
(
)
(
)
(
) [
]
{
}
and 
0,1   
M
M
M
m
m
m
m
μ
μ
∈
∈



=
, 
|
          (8.3.1) 
In other words, the meaning of any word is vague which is established by shades 
of meaning and processed into a fuzzy set by a membership characteristic 
function. The function 
(
),
m m
m
M
μ
∀
∈
⊂ shows the degrees to which the words 
are exact definition of the term E  in a language L . 
What history seems to indicate to us in human experiences is that the best path 
of scientific methods is unknown, but we can claim that it exists as a potential, at 
least in abstract, and can be found by a continuous search. The path to knowledge 
is an enveloping of success-failure processes where methodological refinements 
proceed on approximate reasoning to help discover what works and what does not 
work to approach the path of best scientific methods and practices through 
decision-choice processes over the penumbral regions of cognition. The 
penumbral regions are established by the presence of inexactness, vagueness, 
ambiguities and information limitations. The road to the best scientific methods 
and practices is cloudy with vagueness, ambiguities, un-sureness, limited 
information and pitfalls in reasoning. It is a path of discovery that shows that it is 
not exact and hence the practices of science, as we have defined, are not exact and 
cannot follow any exact rigid methodology which is a product of thought under  
 

8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology 
159
 
dynamic tensions. It is a try-and-error process where learning, error corrections 
and adjustments take place through the use of defective information structure as 
defined by incompleteness and vagueness, and supported by accepted decision-
choice rationality constructed on the basis of the principles of what works and 
what does not work.  
The path to knowledge discovery and construction is a path of learning-by-
doing where the knowledge at each stage becomes a guiding light for further 
exploration and discovery. Knowledge discoveries and productions take place 
through critical thinking that is sometimes amplified by luck but not exactness. 
This statement does not support the anarchists position that there are no cannons 
of scientific methods that have not been violated at some time in history, that 
science grows by incorporating new theories is a myth that scientific progress 
occurs because scientists have no philosophy of science, and that the only 
principle that does not inhibit the progress of science is that anything goes. The 
only principle that facilitates progress in the knowledge production is a rationality 
constructed on the basis of success-failure process that has been built in a self-
correction module. 
As we have pointed out, the successful decision-choice processes among 
knowledge seekers are systematized into a framework that will provide some 
guidance and help to increase the chances of successful knowledge discovery. 
Such a framework is usually agreed upon by the social majority among knowledge 
seekers and specified as the framework of scientific methods and techniques 
which is contrary to the position of the anarchists. To command a general 
acceptance and social respect, the framework of decision-choice rationality in 
science is claimed to be exact in representation and reasoning. In other words, the 
framework acquires an ideologically protective covering and then placed into 
social confidence. The fact remains that there is nothing completely exact in 
human cognitive process. What we have is a distribution of degrees of exactness 
in cognition and decision-choice acceptance. The framework of scientific methods 
and techniques is a human construct that has its flaws, its weaknesses, its 
limitations and its strengths. It is obtained by a process and agreed to be 
appropriate in time that is subject to changes, as the house of knowledge is 
expanded with new rooms, new reinforced inter connecting epistemic cords, and 
as new areas of epistemic reflection on the ontological elements come into being.  
For a continual progress towards perfection of the best methods and scientific 
practices, we should not allow the framework to degenerate into ideology with 
unconditional acceptance where the framework looses flexibility and becomes 
encapsulated in rigid ignorance under the classical laws of thought. The irony is 
that all areas of knowledge construction are mimicking this framework of 
exactness, including experimentation and mathematicalization, whether they fit a 
particular area of knowledge production or not. It is this mimicry that has given 
rise to mathematical economics, mathematical political science, mathematical 
psychology, mathematical biology and others. The failure of this understanding 
between the exact-inexact relational structures will move critical thinking into the 
sphere of tyranny of ideology that will restrict the growth of knowledge, shut out 
cognitive possibilities from the possibility space, imprison imagination within the 

160 
8   Knowledge and Science in the Theory of the Knowledge Square
 
ideological boundaries in the probability space and impair social progress in the 
space of the epistemic actual. This is not a criticism of exact science but a 
criticism of the ideology of exact science, and the failure of the proponents to 
admit that there is inexactness in exact science. 
The claim of objectivity and exactness of methods of scientific research by 
those practicing science must be rejected even though these methods form 
essential parts of analytical foundations of the process of knowledge production 
and acceptance of what constitutes truth sometimes without any qualification. 
There is a circularity of reasoning in the process of explication of science. A 
particular set of methods and techniques of knowledge seeking is used to explicate 
science from non-science. The set of techniques and methods is partitioned into 
exact and inexact elements. Exact methods are used to explicate the exact science 
and inexact methods are used to explicate the inexact science where the divisions 
are protected by held beliefs and ideological caveats. There are times in history 
when some of the knowledge sectors belonging to exact sciences are discredited 
from being exact science and banished by other knowledge seekers from the 
rooms of the exact sciences in the house of knowledge. There are also times in 
history when some of the knowledge sectors belonging to inexact sciences are 
upgraded from being inexact science and brought by other knowledge seekers into 
the rooms of exact science or new rooms of exact science are created in the house 
of knowledge. These are the defining structure of the growth of knowledge. 
We have argued that objectivity and exactness are not characteristics of human 
thought process and can not be characteristics of the epistemological space. They 
may be viewed as ideals to which cognitive decision-choice processes work 
toward their attainment. We work always with partial objectivity and exactness 
defined in a spectrum of fuzziness. Nonetheless, the claims of objectivity and 
exactness are important defining elements of cognitive foundation on which 
scientists draw their philosophical existence. It is this cognitive foundation that 
allows the scientists to establish a belief in immutability of hard data on the basis 
of exact science in cognitive reality. As such, it is part of exact scientific cognition 
to reject soft data, as important in the exact science, and classify knowledge-
acquisition processes that rely on soft data as unscientific and sometimes as 
inexact science. Thus, exact science finds explication in exact methods and hard 
data that are devoid of subjectivity and human sentiments, and where the hard 
data are represented by exact symbols and processed with exact reasoning from 
the classical paradigm. This framework and adherence to it, is analytically and 
philosophically unfounded and restrictive to the progress and expansion of our 
knowledge structure and its enterprise. 
In fact, it is the claim of exactness in symbolism and reasoning that forms the 
intense debate between the intuitionist and formalist schools of mathematics. It is 
also on the rejection of the claim of exactness that has given rise to the fuzzy 
paradigm with its logic and mathematics. Central to these epistemic disagreements 
is whether the information structure for cognitive processing over the 
epistemological space is exact or inexact.  If the information structure  is defective 
in the sense of vagueness and incomplete as we have argued and shown from the 

8.3   The Scientific and Non-Scientific Methodology 
161
 
theory of the knowledge square, then what set of assumptions is acceptable to 
develop exact methods of reasoning? 
In the name of the progress of the enterprise of the knowledge production, we 
must always be cognizant of the principle that we must not confuse models of 
reality as projected by cognition with reality as projected in the ontological space. 
Cognition is a model of reality, which we have referred to as an epistemic reality, 
the construction of which is guided by human decision-choice actions on the basis 
of subjective information that becomes accepted as objective information by 
collective decision and agreements. It is possible that epistemic reality may be an 
inexact and subjective projection of thought in the epistemological space where 
ontological reality, what there is, exists independently of thought in the 
ontological space. Such a thought, at any stage of the social knowledge 
development, is shrouded in vagueness, ambiguities, ideological foundation and 
cultural confines of thought, and hence subjective and made objective by 
collective decision-choice action that requires continual refinements. As such, we 
must resist the temptation of claiming the exact science to be free from them. 
The history of cognition is culturally and ideologically shaped. In fact the 
progress of science, knowledge and their exactness are ideologically dependent. 
The degrees of ideological and cultural effects depend on the established 
institutions of tolerance in dealing with free pursuit of knowledge, truth and 
knowledge acceptance. What seems to be a universal principle is that exactness is 
to ontology and inexactness is to epistemology, and that fuzziness is a 
characteristic of science and the knowledge-production processes in the 
epistemological space composed of the spaces of the possibility, probability and 
epistemic actual. It is this universal principle that connects all areas of the 
knowledge production, in addition to its construction that constitute the central 
elements of the theory of the knowledge square as a meta-theory of knowledge. 
The essential elements are defective information structure, inexact symbolism, 
inexact information processing capacity and the claim of epistemic reality as 
knowledge by decision-choice action with epistemic conditionality. The toolbox 
for information processing consists of duality, continuum and subjective action 
and the fuzzy paradigm. These allow the cognitive agent to be integrated into the 
epistemic process in a particular language. The whole process involves the 
answering the following questions: 1) How is information obtained for epistemic 
processing?  2) What is the relative structure of quantity and quality of 
information? 3) How is information represented symbolically? 4) What is the 
culture of information processing? 

References  
R1.  Bounded Rationality in Knowledge Systems 
[R1.1] 
Arthur, W.B.: Designing Economic Agents that Act Like Human Agents: A 
Behavioral Approach to Bounded Rationality. American Economic Review: 
Papers and Proceedings 81, 353–359 (1991) 
[R1.2] 
Dow, J.: Search Decisions with Limited Memory. Review of Economic 
Studies 58, 1–14 (1991) 
[R1.3] 
Gigerenzer, G., Selten, R.: Bounded Rationality: The Adaptive Toolbox. MIT 
Press, Cambridge (2001) 
[R1.4] 
Gigerenzer, G., Goldstein, D.G.: Reasoning the Fast and Frugal Way: Models of 
Bounded Rationality. Psychological Review 103, 650–669 (1996) 
[R1.5] 
Gigerenzer, G.: Bounded Rationality: Models of Fast and Frugal Inference. 
Swiss Journal of Economic Statistics 133, 201–218 (1997) 
[R1.6] 
Honkapohja, S.: Adaptive Learning and Bounded Rationality. European 
Economic Review 37, 587–594 
[R1.7] 
Lipman, B.: Information Processing and Bounded Rationality: A Survey. 
Canadian Jour. of Economics 28, 42–63 (1995) 
[R1.8] 
Lipman, B.: How to Decide How to Decide How...: Modeling Limited 
Rationality. Econometrica 59, 05–1125 (1991) 
[R1.9] 
March, J.G.: Bounded Rationality, Ambiguity and Engineering of Choice. The 
Bell Journal of Economics 9(2), 587–608 (1978) 
[R1.10] 
Neyman, A.: Bounded Rationality Justifies Cooperation in the FinitelyRepeated 
Prisons’ Dilemma Game. Economic Letters 19, 227–229 
[R1.11] 
Radner, R.: Can Bounded Rationality Resolve the Prisoner’s Dilemma? In: Mas-
Colell, A., Hildenbrand, W. (eds.) Essays in Honor of Gerard Debreu. North-
Holland, Amsterdam (1986) 
[R1.12] 
Rieskamp, J., et al.: Extending the Bounds of Rationality: Evidence and 
Theories of Preferential Choice. Journal of Economic Literature 44, 631–661 
(2006) 
[R1.13] 
Rosenthal, R.: A Bounded-Rationality Approach to the Study of Noncooperative 
Games. International Journal of Game Theory 18, 273–292 (1989) 
[R1.14] 
Rubinstein, A.: Modeling Bounded Rationality. MIT Press, Cambridge (1998) 
[R1.15] 
Rubinstein, A.: New Directions in Economic Theory – Bounded Rationality. 
Revista Española de Economia 7, 3–15 (1990) 
[R1.16] 
Sargent, T.: Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics. Clarendon, Oxford (1993) 
[R1.17] 
Simon, H.A.: Theories of Bounded Rationality. In: McGuire, C.B., et al. (eds.) 
Decision and Organization, pp. 161–176. North Holland, Amsterdam (1972) 

164 
References
 
[R1.18] 
Simon, H.A.: Models of Bounded Rationality, vol. 2. MIT Press, Cambridge 
(1982) 
[R1.19] 
Simon, H.A.: From Substantive to Procedural Rationality. In: Latis, S.J. (ed.) 
Methods and Apprasal in Economics, pp. 129–148. Cambridge University Press, 
New York (1976) 
[R1.20] 
Starbuck, W.H.: Levels of Aspiration. Psychological Review 70, 51–60 (1963) 
[R1.21] 
Zemel, E.: Small Talk and Cooperation: A Note on Bounded Rationality. Journal 
of Economic Theory 49, 1–9 
[R1.22] 
Stigum, B.P., et al.: Foundation of Utility and Risk Theory with Application.  
D. Reidel Pub., Boston (1983) 
R 2.  Category Theory in Mathematics, Logic and Sciences 
[R2.1] 
Awodey, S.: Structure in Mathematics and Logic: A Categorical Perspective. 
Philosophia Mathematica 3, 209–237 (1996) 
[R2.2] 
Bell, J.L.: Category Theory and the Foundations of Mathematics. British Journal 
of Science 32, 349–358 (1981) 
[R2.3] 
Bell, J.L.: Categories, Toposes and Sets. Synthese 51, 337–393 (1982) 
[R2.4] 
Black, M.: The Nature of Mathematics. Littlefield, Adams and Co., Totowa 
(1965) 
[R2.5] 
Blass, A.: The Interaction Between Category and Set Theory. Mathematical 
Applications of Category Theory 30, 5–29 (1984) 
[R2.6] 
Brown, B., Woods, J. (eds.): Logical Consequence; Rival Approaches and New 
Studies in exact. Philosophy: Logic, Mathematics and Science, vol. II. Hermes, 
Oxford (2000) 
[R2.7] 
Butts, R.: Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability. Reidel, 
Boston (1977) 
[R2.8] 
Domany, J.L., et al.: Models of Neural Networks III. Springer, New York (1996) 
[R2.9] 
Dompere, K.K.: Fuzzy Rationality: Methodological Critique and Unity of 
Classical, Bounded and Other Rationalities. Springer, New York (2009) 
[R2.10] 
Dompere, K.K.: The Theory of the Knowledge Square: The Fuzzy Analytical 
Foundations of Knowing, A Working Monograph on Philosophy of Science I. 
Howard University, Washington, DC (2011) 
[R2.11] 
Dompere, K.K.: Fuzzy Rational Foundations of Exact and Inexact Sciences, A 
Working Monograph on Philosophy of Science II. Howard University, 
Washington, DC (2011) 
[R2.12] 
Feferman, S.: Categorical Foundations and Foundations of Category Theory. In: 
Butts, R. (ed.) Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability, pp. 149–
169. Reidel, Boston (1977) 
[R2.13] 
Gray, J.W. (ed.): Mathematical Applications of Category Theory (American 
Mathematical Society Meeting 89th Denver Colo. 1983). American 
Mathematical Society, Providence (1984) 
[R.2.14] 
Johansson, I.: Ontological Investigations: An Inquiry into the Categories of 
Nature, Man, and Society. Routledge, New York (1989) 
[R2.15] 
Kamps, K.H., Pumplun, D., Tholen, W. (eds.): Category Theory: Proceedings of 
the International Conference, Gummersbach, July 6-10. Springer, New York 
(1982) 

References 
165
 
[R2.16] 
Kent, B., Peirce, C.S.: Logic and the Classification of the Sciences. McGill-
Queen’s University Press, Kingston (1987) 
[R2.17] 
Kosko, B.: Neural Networks and Fuzzy Systems, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1991) 
[R2.18] 
Landry, E.: Category Theory: the Language of Mathematics. Philosophy of 
Science 66 (suppl.), S14–S27 
[R2.19] 
Landry, E., Marquis, J.P.: Categories in Context: Historical, Foundational and 
Philosophical. Philosophia Mathematica 13, 1–43 (2005) 
[R2.20] 
Marquis, J.-P.: Three Kinds of Universals in Mathematics. In: Brown, B., 
Woods, J. (eds.) Logical Consequence; Rival Approaches and New Studies in 
Exact Philosophy. Logic, Mathematics and Science, vol. II, pp. 191–212. 
Hermes, Oxford (2000) 
[R2.21] 
McLarty, C.: Category Theory in Real Time. Philosophia Mathematica 2, 36–44 
(1994) 
[R2.22] 
McLarty, C.: Learning from Questions on Categorical Foundations. Philosophia 
Mathematica 13, 44–60 (2005) 
[R2.23] 
Rodabaugh, S., et al. (eds.): Application of Category Theory to Fuzzy Subsets. 
Kluwer, Boston (1992) 
[R2.24] 
Taylor, J.G. (ed.): Mathematical Approaches to Neural Networks. North-
Holland, New York (1993) 
[R2.25] 
Van Benthem, J., et al. (eds.): The Age of Alternative Logics: Assessing 
Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics Today. Springer, New York (2006) 
R3.  Fuzzy Logic in Knowledge Production 
[R3.1] 
Baldwin, J.F.: A New Approach to Approximate Reasoning Using a Fuzzy 
Logic. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 2(4), 309–325 (1979) 
[R3.2] 
Baldwin, J.F.: Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy Reasoning. Intern. J. Man-Machine 
Stud. 11, 465–480 (1979) 
[R3.3] 
Baldwin, J.F.: Fuzzy Logic and Its Application to Fuzzy Reasoning. In: Gupta, 
M.M., et al. (eds.) Advances in Fuzzy Set Theory and Applications, pp. 96–115. 
North-Holland, New York (1979) 
[R3.4] 
Baldwin, J.F., et al.: Fuzzy Relational Inference Language. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 14(2), 155–174 (1984) 
[R3.5] 
Baldsin, J., Pilsworth, B.W.: Axiomatic Approach to Implication For 
Approximate Reasoning With Fuzzy Logic. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 3(2), 193–
219 (1980) 
[R3.6] 
Baldwin, J.F., et al.: The Resolution of Two Paradoxes by Approximate 
Reasoning Using A Fuzzy Logic. Synthese 44, 397–420 (1980) 
[R3.7] 
Fukami, S., et al.: Some Considerations On Fuzzy Conditional Inference. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 4(3), 243–273 (1980) 
[R3.8] 
Gaines, B.R.: Fuzzy Reasoning and the Logic of Uncertainty. In: Proc. 6th 
International Symp. of Multiple-Valued Logic, pp. 179–188. IEEE 76CH 1111-
4C (1976) 
[R3.9] 
Gaines, B.R.: Foundations of Fuzzy Reasoning. Inter. Jour. of Man-Machine 
Studies 8, 623–668 (1976) 
[R3.10] Gaines, B.R.: Foundations of Fuzzy Reasoning. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) 
Fuzzy Information and Decision Processes, pp. 19–75. North-Holland, New 
York (1982) 

166 
References
 
[R3.11] 
Gaines, B.R.: Precise Past, Fuzzy Future. International Journal of Man-Machine 
Stududies 19(1), 117–134 (1983) 
[R3.12] 
Gains, B.R.: Fuzzy and Probability Uncertainty Logics. Information and 
Control 38, 154–169 (1978) 
[R3.13] 
Gains, B.R.: Modeling Practical Reasoning. Intern. Jour. of Intelligent 
Systems 8(1), 51–70 (1993) 
[R3.14] 
Gaines, B.R.: Łukasiewicz Logic and Fuzzy Set Theory. International Jour. of 
Man-Machine Studies 8, 313–327 (1976) 
[R3.15] 
Giles, R.: Lukasiewics Logic and Fuzzy Set Theory. Intern. J. Man-Machine 
Stud. 8, 313–327 (1976) 
[R3.16] 
Giles, R.: Formal System for Fuzzy Reasoning. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 2(3), 
233–257 (1979) 
[R3.17] 
Ginsberg, M.L. (ed.): Readings in Non-monotonic Reason. Morgan Kaufmann, 
Los Altos (1987) 
[R3.18] 
Goguen, J.A.: The Logic of Inexact Concepts. Synthese 19, 325–373 (1969) 
[R3.19] 
Gottinger, H.W.: Towards a Fuzzy Reasoning in the Behavioral Science. 
Cybernetica 16(2), 113–135 (1973) 
[R3.20] 
Gottinger, H.W.: Some Basic Issues Connected With Fuzzy Analysis. In: 
Klaczro, H., Muller, N. (eds.) Systems Theory in Social Sciences, pp. 323–325. 
Birkhauser Verlag, Basel (1976) 
[R3.21] 
Gottwald, S.: Fuzzy Propositional Logics. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 3(2), 181–
192 (1980) 
[R3.22] 
Gupta, M.M., et al.: Approximate Reasoning In Decision Analysis. North 
Holland, New York (1982) 
[R3.23] 
Ulrich, H., Klement, E.P.: Non-Clasical Logics and their Applications to Fuzzy 
Subsets: A Handbook of the Mathematical Foundations of Fuzzy Set Theory. 
Kluwer, Boston (1995) 
[R3.24] 
Kaipov, V.K., et al.: Classification in Fuzzy Environments. In: Gupta, M.M.,  
et al. (eds.) Advances in Fuzzy Set Theory and Applications, pp. 119–124. 
North-Holland, New York (1979) 
[R3.25] 
Kaufman, A.: Progress in Modeling of Human Reasoning of Fuzzy Logic. In: 
Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) Fuzzy Information and Decision Process, pp. 11–17. 
North-Holland, New York (1982) 
[R3.26] 
Lakoff, G.: Hedges: A Study in Meaning Criteria and the Logic of Fuzzy 
Concepts. Jour. Philos. Logic 2, 458–508 (1973) 
[R3.27] 
Lee, E.T., et al.: Some Properties of Fuzzy Logic. Information and Control 19, 
417–431 (1971) 
[R3.28] 
Lee, R.C.T.: Fuzzy Logic and the Resolution Principle. Jour. of Assoc. Comput. 
Mach. 19, 109–119 (1972) 
[R3.29] 
LeFaivre, R.A.: The Representation of Fuzzy Knowledge. Jour. of 
Cybernetics 4, 57–66 (1974) 
[R3.30] 
Mitra, S., Pal, S.K.: Logical Operation based Fuzzy MLP for Classification and 
Rule Generation. Neural Networks 7(2), 353–373 (1994) 
[R3.31] 
Mizumoto, M.: Fuzzy Conditional Inference Under Max- ⊙ Composition. 
Information Sciences 27(3), 183–207 (1982) 
[R3.32] 
Mizumoto, M., et al.: Several Methods For Fuzzy Conditional Inference. In: 
Proc. of IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control, Florida, December 12-14, pp. 
777–782 (1979) 

References 
167
 
[R3.33] 
Montero, F.J.: Measuring the Rationality of a Fuzzy Preference Relation. 
Busefal. 26, 75–83 (1986) 
[R3.34] 
Morgan, C.G.: Methods for Automated Theorem Proving in Non- Classical 
Logics. IEEE Trans. Compt. C-25, 852–862 (1976) 
[R3.35] 
Negoita, C.V.: Representation Theorems for Fuzzy Concepts. Kybernetes 4, 
169–174 (1975) 
[R3.36] 
Nguyen, H.T., Walker, E.A.: A First Course In Fuzzy Logic. CRC Press, Boca 
Raton (1997) 
[R3.37] 
Nowakowska, M.: Methodological Problems of Measurements of Fuzzy 
Concepts in Social Sciences. Behavioral Sciences 22(2), 107–115 (1977) 
[R3.38] 
Pinkava, V.: Fuzzification of Binary and Finite Multivalued Logical Calculi. 
Intern. Jour. Man-Machine Stud. 8, 171–730 (1976) 
[R3.39] 
Skala, H.J.: Non-Archimedean Utility Theory. D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1975) 
[R3.40] 
Skala, H.J.: On Many-Valued Logics, Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Logics and Their 
Applications. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 1(2), 129–149 (1978) 
[R3.41] 
Sugeno, M., Takagi, T.: Multi-Dimensional Fuzzy Reasoning. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 9(3), 313–325 (1983) 
[R3.42] 
Tan, S.K., et al.: Fuzzy Inference Relation Based on the Theory of Falling 
Shadows. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 53(2), 179–188 (1993) 
[R3.43] 
Thornber, K.K.: A Key to Fuzzy Logic Inference. Intern. Jour. of Approximate 
Reasoning 8(2), 105–129 (1993) 
[R3.44] 
Tong, R.M., et al.: A Critical Assessment of Truth Functional Modification and 
its Use in Approximate Reasoning. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 7(1), 103–108 
(1982) 
[R3.45] 
Van Fraassen, B.C.: Comments: Lakoff’s Fuzzy Propositional Logic. In: 
Hockney, D., et al. (eds.) Contemporary Research in Philosophical Logic and 
Linguistic Semantics Holland, Reild, pp. 273–277 (1975) 
[R3.46] 
Whalen, T., et al.: Usuality, Regularity, and Fuzzy Set Logic. Intern. Jour. of 
Approximate Reasoning 6(4), 481–504 (1992) 
[R3.47] 
Yager, R.R., et al. (eds.): An Introduction to Fuzzy Logic Applications in 
Intelligent Systems. Kluwer, Boston (1992) 
[R3.48] 
Yan, J., et al.: Using Fuzzy Logic: Towards Intelligent Systems. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs (1994) 
[R3.49] 
Ying, M.S.: Some Notes on Multidimensional Fuzzy Reasoning. Cybernetics 
and Systems 19(4), 281–293 (1988) 
[R3.50] 
Zadeh, L.A.: Quantitative Fuzzy Semantics. Inform. Science 3, 159–176 (1971) 
[R3.51] 
Zadeh, L.A.: A Fuzzy Set Interpretation of Linguistic Hedges. Jour. 
Cybernetics 2, 4–34 (1972) 
[R3.52] 
Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy Logic and Its Application to Approximate Reasoning. In: 
Information Processing 1974, Proc. IFIP Congress, vol. 74(3), pp. 591–594. 
North Holland, New York (1974) 
[R3.53] 
Zadeh, L.A.: The Concept of a Linguistic Variable and Its Application to 
Approximate Reasoning. In: Fu, K.S., et al. (eds.) Learning Systems and 
Intelligent Robots, pp. 1–10. Plenum Press, New York (1974) 
[R3.54] 
Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy Logic and Approximate Reasoning. Syntheses 30, 407–428 
(1975) 
[R3.55] 
Zadeh, L.A., et al. (eds.): Fuzzy Logic for the Management of Uncertainty. Wily 
and Sons, New York (1992) 

168 
References
 
[R3.56] 
Zadeh, L.A., et al. (eds.): Fuzzy Sets and Their Applications to Cognitive and 
Decision Processes. Academic Press, New York (1974) 
[R3.57] 
Zadeh, L.A.: The Birth and Evolution of Fuzzy Logic. Intern. Jour. of General 
Systems 17(2-3), 95–105 (1990) 
R4.  Fuzzy Mathematics in Approximate Reasoning  
under Conditions of Inexactness and Vagueness 
[R4.1] 
Bandler, W., et al.: Fuzzy Power Sets and Fuzzy Implication Operators. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 4(1), 13–30 (1980) 
[R4.2] 
Banon, G.: Distinction between Several Subsets of Fuzzy Measures. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 5(3), 291–305 (1981) 
[R4.3] 
Bellman, R.E.: Mathematics and Human Sciences. In: Wilkinson, J., et al. (eds.) 
The Dynamic Programming of Human Systems, pp. 11–18. MSS Information 
Corp., New York (1973) 
[R4.4] 
Bellman, R.E., Glertz, M.: On the Analytic Formalism of the Theory of Fuzzy 
Sets. Information Science 5, 149–156 (1973) 
[R4.5] 
Buckley, J.J.: The Fuzzy Mathematics of Finance. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 21(3), 257–273 (1987) 
[R4.6] 
Butnariu, D.: Fixed Points For Fuzzy Mapping. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 7(2), 
191–207 (1982) 
[R4.7] 
Butnariu, D.: Decompositions and Range For Additive Fuzzy Measures. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 10(2), 135–155 (1983) 
[R4.8] 
Cerruti, U.: Graphs and Fuzzy Graphs. In: Fuzzy Information and Decision 
Processes, pp. 123–131. North-Holland, New York (1982) 
[R4.9] 
Chakraborty, M.K., et al.: Studies in Fuzzy Relations Over Fuzzy Subsets. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 9(1), 79–89 (1983) 
[R4.10] 
Chang, C.L.: Fuzzy Topological Spaces. J. Math. Anal. and Applications 24, 
182–190 (1968) 
[R4.11] 
Chang, S.S.L.: Fuzzy Mathematics, Man and His Environment. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, SMC-2, 92–93 (1972) 
[R4.12] 
Chang, S.S.L., et al.: On Fuzzy Mathematics and Control. IEEE Transactions, 
System, Man and Cybernetics, SMC-2, 30–34 (1972) 
[R4.13] 
Chang, S.S.: Fixed Point Theorems for Fuzzy Mappings. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 17, 181–187 (1985) 
[R4.14] 
Chapin, E.W.: An Axiomatization of the Set Theory of Zadeh. Notices, 
American Math. Society, 687-02-4 754 (1971)  
[R4.15] 
Chaudhury, A.K., Das, P.: Some Results on Fuzzy Topology on Fuzzy Sets. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 56, 331–336 (1993) 
[R4.16] 
Cheng-Zhong, L.: Generalized Inverses of Fuzzy Matrix. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. 
(eds.) Approximate Reasoning In Decision Analysis, pp. 57–60. North Holland, 
New York (1982) 
[R4.17] 
Chitra, H., Subrahmanyam, P.V.: Fuzzy Sets and Fixed Points. Jour. of 
Mathematical Analysis and Application 124, 584–590 (1987) 
[R4.18] 
Cohn, D.L.: Measure Theory. Birkhauser, Boston (1980) 
[R4.19] 
Cohen, P.J., Hirsch, R.: Non-Cantorian Set Theory. Scientific America, 101–116 
(December 1967) 

References 
169
 
[R4.20] 
Czogala, J., et al.: Fuzzy Relation Equations On a Finite Set. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 7(1), 89–101 (1982) 
[R4.21] 
Das, P.: Fuzzy Topology on Fuzzy Sets: Product Fuzzy Topology and Fuzzy 
Topological Groups. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 100, 367–372 (1998) 
[R4.22] 
Dinola, A., et al.: The Mathematics of Fuzzy Systems. Verlag TUV Rheinland, 
Koln (1986) 
[R4.23] 
Dombi, J.: A General Class of Fuzzy Operators, the DeMorgan Class of Fuzzy 
Operators and Fuzzy Measures Induced by Fuzzy Operators. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 8(2), 149–163 (1982) 
[R4.24] 
Dubois, D., Prade, H.: Fuzzy Sets and Systems. Academic Press, New York 
(1980) 
[R4.25] 
Dubois: Fuzzy Real Algebra: Some Results. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 2(4),  
327–348 (1979) 
[R4.26] 
Dubois, D., Prade, H.: Gradual Inference Rules in Approximate Reasoning. 
Information Sciences 61(1-2), 103–122 (1992) 
[R4.27] 
Dubois, D., Prade, H.: On the Combination of Evidence in various Mathematical 
Frameworks. In: Flamm, J., Luisi, T. (eds.) Reliability Data Collection and 
Analysis, pp. 213–241. Kluwer, Boston (1992) 
[R4.28] 
Dubois, D., Prade, H.: Fuzzy Sets and Probability: Misunderstanding, Bridges 
and Gaps. In: Proc. Second IEEE Intern. Conf. on Fuzzy Systems, San 
Francisco, pp. 1059–1068 (1993) 
[R4.29] 
Dubois, D., Prade, H.: A Survey of Belief Revision and Updating Rules in 
Various Uncertainty Models. Intern. J. of Intelligent Systems 9(1), 61–100 
(1994) 
[R4.30] 
Erceg, M.A.: Functions, Equivalence Relations, Quotient Spaces and Subsets in 
Fuzzy Set Theory. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 3(1), 79–92 (1980) 
[R4.31] 
Feng, Y.-J.: A Method Using Fuzzy Mathematics to Solve the Vectormaximum 
Problem. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 9(2), 129–136 (1983) 
[R4.32] 
Filev, D.P., et al.: A Generalized Defuzzification Method via Bag Distributions. 
Intern. Jour. of Intelligent Systems 6(7), 687–697 (1991) 
[R4.33] 
Foster, D.H.: Fuzzy Topological Groups. Journal of Math. Analysis and 
Applications 67, 549–564 (1979) 
[R4.34] 
Goetschel Jr., R., et al.: Topological Properties of Fuzzy Number. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 10(1), 87–99 (1983) 
[R4.35] 
Goodman, I.R.: Fuzzy Sets As Random Level Sets: Implications and Extensions 
of the Basic Results. In: Lasker, G.E. (ed.) Applied Systems and Cybernetics, 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. VI, pp. 2756–2766. Pergamon Press, New York 
(1981) 
[R4.36] 
Goodman, I.R.: Fuzzy Sets As Equivalence Classes of Random Sets. In: Yager, 
R.R. (ed.) Fuzzy Set and Possibility Theory: Recent Development, pp. 327–343. 
Pergamon Press, New York (1992) 
[R4.37] 
Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.): Fuzzy Antomata and Decision Processes. North-
Holland, New York (1977) 
[R4.38] 
Gupta, M.M., Sanchez, E. (eds.): Fuzzy Information and Decision Processes. 
North-Holland, New York (1982) 
[R4.39] 
Higashi, M., Klir, G.J.: On measure of fuzziness and fuzzy complements. Intern. 
J. of General Systems 8(3), 169–180 (1982) 

170 
References
 
[R4.40] 
Higashi, M., Klir, G.J.: Measures of uncertainty and information based on 
possibility distributions. International Journal of General Systems 9(1), 43–58 
(1983) 
[R4.41] 
Higashi, M., Klir, G.J.: On the notion of distance representing information 
closeness: Possibility and probability distributions. Intern. J. of General 
Systems 9(2), 103–115 (1983) 
[R4.42] 
Higashi, M., Klir, G.J.: Resolution of finite fuzzy relation equations. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 13(1), 65–82 (1984) 
[R4.43] 
Higashi, M., Klir, G.J.: Identification of fuzzy relation systems. IEEE Trans. on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 14(2), 349–355 (1984) 
[R4.44] 
Ulrich, H.: A Mathematical Theory of Uncertainty. In: Yager, R.R. (ed.) Fuzzy 
Set and Possibility Theory: Recent Developments, pp. 344–355. Pergamon, New 
York (1982) 
[R4.45] 
Jin-Wen, Z.: A Unified Treatment of Fuzzy Set Theory and Boolean Valued Set 
theory: Fuzzy Set Structures and Normal Fuzzy Set Structures. Jour. Math. Anal. 
and Applications 76(1), 197–301 (1980) 
[R4.46] 
Kandel, A.: Fuzzy Mathematical Techniques with Applications. Addison-
Wesley, Reading (1986) 
[R4.47] 
Kandel, A., Byatt, W.J.: Fuzzy Processes. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 4(2), 117–
152 (1980) 
[R4.48] 
Kaufmann, A., Gupta, M.M.: Introduction to fuzzy arithmetic: Theory and 
applications. Van Nostrand, New York (1991) 
[R4.49] 
Kaufmann, A.: Introduction to the Theory of Fuzzy Subsets, vol. 1. Academic 
Press, New York (1975) 
[R4.50] 
Kaufmann, A.: Theory of Fuzzy Sets. Merson Press, Paris (1972) 
[R4.51] 
Kaufmann, A., et al.: Fuzzy Mathematical Models in Engineering and 
Management Science. North-Holland, New York (1988) 
[R4.52] 
Kim, K.H., et al.: Generalized Fuzzy Matrices. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 4(3), 
293–315 (1980) 
[R4.53] 
Klement, E.P.: Fuzzy σ-Algebras and Fuzzy Measurable Functions. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 4, 83–93 (1980) 
[R4.54] 
Klement, E.P.: Characterization of Finite Fuzzy Measures Using Markoff-
kernels. Journal of Math. Analysis and Applications 75, 330–339 (1980) 
[R4.55] 
Klement, E.P.: Construction of Fuzzy σ-Algebras Using Triangular Norms. 
Journal of Math. Analysis and Applications 85, 543–565 (1982) 
[R4.56] 
Klement, E.P., Schwyhla, W.: Correspondence Between Fuzzy Measures and 
Classical Measures. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 7(1), 57–70 (1982) 
[R4.57] 
Klir, G., Bo, Y.: Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River 
(1995) 
[R4.58] 
Kokawa, M., et al.: Fuzzy-Theoretical Dimensionality Reduction Method of 
Multi-Dimensional Quality. In: Gupta, M.M., Sanchez, E. (eds.) Fuzzy 
Information and Decision Processes, pp. 235–250. North-Holland, New York 
(1982) 
[R4.59] 
Kramosil, I., et al.: Fuzzy Metrics and Statistical Metric Spaces. Kybernetika 11, 
336–344 (1975) 
[R4.60] 
Kruse, R.: On the Construction of Fuzzy Measures. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 8(3), 323–327 (1982) 
[R4.61] 
Kruse, R., et al.: Foundations of Fuzzy Systems. John Wiley and Sons, New 
York (1994) 

References 
171
 
[R4.62] 
Lasker, G.E. (ed.): Applied Systems and Cybernetics, vol. VI. Pergamon Press, 
New York (1981) 
[R4.63] 
Lientz, B.P.: On Time Dependent Fuzzy Sets. Inform. Science 4, 367–376 
(1972) 
[R4.64] 
Lowen, R.: Fuzzy Uniform Spaces. Jour. Math. Anal. Appl. 82(2), 367–376 
(1981) 
[R4.65] 
Lowen, R.: On the Existence of Natural Non-Topological Fuzzy Topological 
Space. Haldermann Verlag, Berlin (1986) 
[R4.66] 
Martin, H.W.: Weakly Induced Fuzzy Topological Spaces. Jour. Math. Anal. 
and Application 78, 634–639 (1980) 
[R4.67] 
Michalek, J.: Fuzzy Topologies. Kybernetika 11, 345–354 (1975) 
[R4.68] 
Mizumoto, M., Tanaka, K.: Some Properties of Fuzzy Numbers. In: Gupta, 
M.M., et al. (eds.) Advances in Fuzzy Sets Theory and Applications, pp. 153–
164. North Holland, Amsterdam (1979) 
[R4.69] 
Negoita, C.V., et al.: Applications of Fuzzy Sets to Systems Analysis. Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1975) 
[R4.70] 
Negoita, C.V.: Representation Theorems for Fuzzy Concepts. Kybernetes 4, 
169–174 (1975) 
[R4.71] 
Negoita, C.V., et al.: On the State Equation of Fuzzy Systems. Kybernetes 4, 
213–216 (1975) 
[R4.72] 
Negoita, C.V.: Fuzzy Sets in Topoi. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 8(1), 93–99 (1982) 
[R4.73] 
Netto, A.B.: Fuzzy Classes. Notices, American Mathematical Society 68T-H28, 
945 (1968) 
[R4.74] 
Nguyen, H.T.: Possibility Measures and Related Topics. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. 
(eds.) Approximate Reasoning in Decision Analysis, pp. 197–202. North 
Holland, New York (1982) 
[R4.75] 
Nowakowska, M.: Some Problems in the Foundations of Fuzzy Set Theory. In: 
Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) Approximate Reasoning in Decision Analysis, pp. 
349–360. North Holland, New York (1982) 
[R4.76] 
Ovchinnikov, S.V.: Structure of Fuzzy Binary Relations. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(2), 169–195 (1981) 
[R4.77] 
Pedrycz, W.: Fuzzy Relational Equations with Generalized Connectives and 
Their Applications. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 10(2), 185–201 (1983) 
[R4.78] 
Raha, S., et al.: Analogy Between Approximate Reasoning and the Method of 
Interpolation. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 51(3), 259–266 (1992) 
[R4.79] 
Ralescu, D.: Toward a General Theory of Fuzzy Variables. Jour. of Math. 
Analysis and Applications 86(1), 176–193 (1982) 
[R4.80] 
Rao, M.B., et al.: Some Comments On Fuzzy Variables. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(2), 285–292 (1981) 
[R4.81] 
Rodabaugh, S.E.: Fuzzy Arithmetic and Fuzzy Topology. In: Lasker, G.E. (ed.) 
Applied Systems and Cybernetics, Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. VI, pp. 2803–
2807. Pergamon Press, New York (1981) 
[R4.82] 
Rodabaugh, S., et al. (eds.): Application of Category Theory to Fuzzy Subsets. 
Kluwer, Boston (1992) 
[R4.83] 
Roubens, M., et al.: Linear Fuzzy Graphs. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 10(1), 798–
806 (1983) 
[R4.84] 
Rosenfeld, A.: Fuzzy Groups. Jour. Math. Anal. Appln. 35, 512–517 (1971) 

172 
References
 
[R4.85] 
Rosenfeld, A.: Fuzzy Graphs. In: Zadeh, L.A., et al. (eds.) Fuzzy Sets and Their 
Applications to Cognitive and Decision Processes, pp. 77–95. Academic Press, 
New York (1974) 
[R4.86] 
Ruspini, E.H.: Recent Developments in Mathematical Classification Using 
Fuzzy Sets. In: Lasker, G.E. (ed.) Applied Systems and Cybernetics, Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems, vol. VI, pp. 2785–2790. Pergamon Press, New York (1981) 
[R4.87] 
Santos, E.S.: Maximin, Minimax and Composite Sequential Machines. Jour. 
Math. Anal. and Appln. 24, 246–259 (1968) 
[R4.88] 
Santos, E.S.: Fuzzy Algorithms. Inform. and Control 17, 326–339 (1970) 
[R4.89] 
Sarkar, M.: On Fuzzy Topological Spaces. Jour. Math. Anal. Appln. 79, 384–
394 (1981) 
[R4.90] 
Slowinski, R., Teghem, J.: Stochastic versus Fuzzy Approaches to 
Multiobjective Mathematical Programming Under Uncertainty. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht (1990) 
[R4.91] 
Stein, N.E., Talaki, K.: Convex Fuzzy Random Variables. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(3), 271–284 (1981) 
[R4.92] 
Sugeno, M.: Inverse Operation of Fuzzy Integrals and Conditional Fuzzy 
Measures. Transactions SICE 11, 709–714 (1975) 
[R4.93] 
Yager, R.R., Filver, D.P.: Essentials of Fuzzy Modeling and Control. John 
Wiley and Sons, New York (1994) 
[R4.94] 
Triantaphyllon, E., et al.: The Problem of Determining Membership Values in 
Fuzzy Sets in Real World Situations. In: Brown, D.E., et al. (eds.) Operations 
Research and Artificial Intelligence: The Integration of Problem-solving 
Strategies, pp. 197–214. Kluwer, Boston (1990) 
[R4.95] 
Tsichritzis, D.: Participation Measures. Jour. Math. Anal. and Appln. 36, 60–72 
(1971) 
[R4.96] 
Tsichritzis, D.: Approximation and Complexity of Functions on the Integers. 
Inform. Science 4, 70–86 (1971) 
[R4.97] 
Turksens, I.B.: Four Methods of Approximate Reasoning with Interval-Valued 
Fuzzy Sets. Intern. Journ. of Approximate Reasoning 3(2), 121–142 (1989) 
[R4.98] 
Turksen, I.B.: Measurement of Membership Functions and Their Acquisition. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 40(1), 5–38 (1991) 
[R4.99] 
Wang, L.X.: Adaptive Fuzzy Sets and Control: Design and Stability Analysis. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1994) 
[R4.100] Wang, P.P. (ed.): Advances in Fuzzy Sets, Possibility Theory, and Applications. 
Plenum Press, New York (1983) 
[R4.101] Wang, P.P. (ed.): Advances in Fuzzy Theory and Technology, vol. 1. 
Bookwright Press, Durham (1992) 
[R4.102] Wang, Z., Klir, G.: Fuzzy Measure Theory. Plenum Press, New York (1992) 
[R4.103] Wang, P.Z., et al. (eds.): Between Mind and Computer: Fuzzy Science and 
Engineering. World Scientific Press, Singapore (1993) 
[R4.104] Wang, P.Z.: Contactability and Fuzzy Variables. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 8(1), 
81–92 (1982) 
[R4.105] Wang, S.: Generating Fuzzy Membership Functions: A Monotonic Neural 
Network Model. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 61(1), 71–82 (1994) 
[R4.106] Wierzchon, S.T.: An Algorithm for Identification of Fuzzy Measure. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 9(1), 69–78 (1983) 
[R4.107] Wong, C.K.: Fuzzy Topology: Product and Quotient Theorems. Journal of Math. 
Analysis and Applications 45, 512–521 (1974) 

References 
173
 
[R4.108] Wong, C.K.: Fuzzy Points and Local Properties of Fuzzy Topology. Jour. Math. 
Anal. and Appln. 46, 316–328 (1987) 
[R4.109] Wong, C.K.: Categories of Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Topological Spaces. Jour. 
Math. Anal. and Appln. 53, 704–714 (1976) 
[R4.110] Yager, R.R.: On the Lack of Inverses in Fuzzy Arithmetic. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 4(1), 73–82 (1980) 
[R4.111] Yager, R.R. (ed.): Fuzzy Set and Possibility Theory: Recent Development. 
Pergamon Press, New York (1992) 
[R4.112] Yager, R.R.: Fuzzy Subsets with Uncertain Membership Grades. IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 14(2), 271–275 (1984) 
[R4.113] Yager, R.R., et al. (eds.): Fuzzy Sets, Neural Networks, and Soft Computing. 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1994) 
[R4.114] Yager, R.R.: On the Theory of Fuzzy Bags. Intern. Jour. of General 
Systems 13(1), 23–37 (1986) 
[R4.115] Yager, R.R.: Cardinality of Fuzzy Sets via Bags. Mathematical Modelling 9(6), 
441–446 (1987) 
[R4.116] Zadeh, L.A.: A Computational Theory of Decompositions. Intern. Jour. of 
Intelligent Systems 2(1), 39–63 (1987) 
[R4.117] Zadeh, L.A., et al.: Fuzzy Logic for the Management of Uncertainty. John 
Wiley, New York (1992) 
[R4.118] Zimmerman, H.J.: Fuzzy Set Theory and Its Applications. Kluwer, Boston 
(1985) 
R5.  Fuzzy Optimization, Decision-Choices and Approximate 
Reasoning in Sciences  
[R5.1] 
Bose, R.K., Sahani, D.: Fuzzy Mappings and Fixed Point Theorems. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 21, 53–58 (1987) 
[R5.2] 
Buckley, J.J.: Fuzzy Programming And the Pareto Optimal Set. Fuzzy Set and 
Systems 10(1), 57–63 (1983) 
[R5.3] 
Butnariu, D.: Fixed Points for Fuzzy Mappings. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 7, 191–
207 (1982) 
[R5.4] 
Carlsson, G.: Solving Ill-Structured Problems Through Well Structured Fuzzy 
Programming. In: Brans, J.P. (ed.) Operation Research, vol. 81, pp. 467–477. 
North-Holland, Amsterdam (1981) 
[R5.5] 
Carlsson, C.: Tackling an AMDM – Problems with the Help of Some Results 
From Fuzzy Set Theory. European Journal of Operational Research 10(3), 270–
281 (1982) 
[R5.6] 
Cerny, M.: Fuzzy Approach to Vector Optimization. Intern. Jour. of General 
Systems 20(1), 23–29 
[R5.7] 
Chang, S.S.: Fixed Point Theorems for Fuzzy Mappings. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 17, 181–187 (1985) 
[R5.8] 
Chang, S.Y., et al.: Modeling To Generate Alternatives: A Fuzzy Approach. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 9(2), 137–151 (1983) 
[R5.9] 
Dubois, D.: An Application of Fuzzy Arithmetic to the Optimization of 
Industrial Machining Processes. Mathematical Modelling 9(6), 461–475 (1987) 

174 
References
 
[R5.10] 
Edwards, W.: The Theory of Decision Making. Psychological Bulletin 51, 380–
417 (1954) 
[R5.11] 
Eaves, B.C.: Computing Kakutani Fixed Points. Journal of Applied 
Mathematics 21, 236–244 (1971) 
[R5.12] 
Feng, Y.J.: A Method Using Fuzzy Mathematics to Solve the Vector Maxim 
Problem. Fuzzy Set and Systems 9(2), 129–136 (1983) 
[R5.13] 
Hannan, E.L.: Linear Programming with Multiple Fuzzy Goals. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(3), 235–248 (1981) 
[R5.14] 
Heilpern, S.: Fuzzy Mappings and Fixed Point Theorem. Journal of 
Mathematical Analysis and Applications 83, 566–569 (1981) 
[R.15] 
Ignizio, J.P., et al.: Fuzzy Multicriteria Integer Programming via Fuzzy 
Generalized Networks. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 10(3), 261–270 (1983) 
[R5.16] 
Kacprzyk, J., et al. (eds.): Optimization Models Using Fuzzy Sets and Possibility 
Theory. D. Reidel, Boston (1987) 
[R5.17] 
Kakutani, S.: A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theorem. Duke 
Mathematical Journal 8, 416–427 (1941) 
[R5.18] 
Kaleva, O.: A Note on Fixed Points for Fuzzy Mappings. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 15, 99–100 (1985) 
[R5.19] 
Kandel, A.: On Minimization of Fuzzy Functions. IEEE Trans. Comp. C-22, 
826–832 (1973) 
[R5.20] 
Kandel, A.: On the Minimization of Incompletely Specified Fuzzy Functions. 
Information, and Control 26, 141–153 (1974) 
[R5.21] 
Lai, Y., et al.: Fuzzy Mathematical Programming. Springer, New York (1992) 
[R5.22] 
Leberling, H.: On Finding Compromise Solution in Multcriteria Problems, 
Using the Fuzzy Min-Operator. Fuzzy Set and Systems 6(2), 105–118 (1981) 
[R5.23] 
Lee, E.S., et al.: Fuzzy Multiple Objective Programming and Compromise 
Programming with Pareto Optimum. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 53(3), 275–288 
(1993) 
[R5.24] 
Lodwick, W.A., Kacprzyk, J.: Fuzzy Optimization: Recent Advances and 
Applications. STUDFUZZ, vol. 254. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 
[R5.25] 
Lowen, R.: Convex Fuzzy Sets. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 3, 291–310 (1980) 
[R5.26] 
Luhandjula, M.K.: Compensatory Operators in Fuzzy Linear Programming with 
Multiple Objectives. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 8(3), 245–252 (1982) 
[R5.27] 
Luhandjula, M.K.: Linear Programming Under Randomness and Fuzziness. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 10(1), 45–54 (1983) 
[R5.28] 
Negoita, C.V., et al.: Fuzzy Linear Programming and Tolerances in Planning. 
Econ. Group Cybernetic Studies 1, 3–15 (1976) 
[R5.29] 
Negoita, C.V., Stefanescu, A.C.: On Fuzzy Optimization. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. 
(eds.) Approximate Reasoning in Decision Analysis, pp. 247–250. North-
Holland, New York (1982) 
[R5.30] 
Negoita, C.V.: The Current Interest in Fuzzy Optimization. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(3), 261–270 (1981) 
[R5.31] 
Negoita, C.V., et al.: On Fuzzy Environment in Optimization Problems. In: 
Rose, J., et al. (eds.) Modern Trends in Cybernetics and Systems, pp. 13–24. 
Springer, Berlin (1977) 
[R5.32] 
Orlovsky, S.A.: On Formulation of General Fuzzy Mathematical Problem. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 3, 311–321 (1980) 
[R5.33] 
Ostasiewicz, W.: A New Approach to Fuzzy Programming. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 7(2), 139–152 (1982) 

References 
175
 
[R5.34] 
Pollatschek, M.A.: Hieranchical Systems and Fuzzy-Set Theory. Kybernetes 6, 
147–151 (1977) 
[R5.35] 
Ponsard, G.: Partial Spatial Equilibra With Fuzzy Constraints. Journal of 
Regional Science 22(2), 159–175 (1982) 
[R5.36] 
Prade, M.: Operations Research with Fuzzy Data. In: Want, P.P., et al. (eds.) 
Fuzzy Sets, pp. 155–170. Plenum, New York (1980) 
[R5.37] 
Ralescu, D.: Optimization in a Fuzzy Environment. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) 
Advances in Fuzzy Set Theory and Applications, pp. 77–91. North-Holland, 
New York (1979) 
[R5.38] 
Ralescu, D.A.: Orderings, Preferences and Fuzzy Optimization. In: Rose, J. (ed.) 
Current Topics in Cybernetics and Systems. Springer, Berlin (1978) 
[R5.39] 
Tanaka, K., et al.: Fuzzy Programs and Their Execution. In: Zadeh, L.A., et al. 
(eds.) Fuzzy Sets and Their Applications to Cognitive and Decision Processes, 
pp. 41–76 (1974) 
[R5.40] 
Tanaka, H., et al.: On Fuzzy-Mathematical Programming. Journal of 
Cybernetics 3(4), 37–46 (1974) 
[R5.41] 
Vira, J.: Fuzzy Expectation Values in Multistage Optimization Problems. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 6(2), 161–168 (1981) 
[R5.42] 
Verdegay, J.L.: Fuzzy Mathematical Programming. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) 
Fuzzy Information and Decision Processes, pp. 231–238. North-Holland, New 
York (1982) 
[R5.43] 
Warren, R.H.: Optimality in Fuzzy Topological Polysystems. Jour. Math. 
Anal. 54, 309–315 (1976) 
[R5.44] 
Weiss, M.D.: Fixed Points, Separation and Induced Topologies for Fuzzy Sets. 
Jour. Math. Anal. and Appln. 50, 142–150 (1975) 
[R5.45] 
Wilkinson, J.: Archetypes, Language, Dynamic Programming and Fuzzy Sets. 
In: Wilkinson, J., et al. (eds.) The Dynamic Programming of Human Systems, 
pp. 44–53. Information Corp., MSS New York (1973) 
[R5.46] 
Zadeh, L.A.: The Role of Fuzzy Logic in the Management of Ucertainty in 
expert Systems. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 11, 199–227 (1983) 
[R5.47] 
Zimmerman, H.-J.: Description and Optimization of Fuzzy Systems. Intern. 
Jour. Gen. Syst. 2(4), 209–215 (1975) 
[R5.48] 
Zimmerman, H.J.: Applications of Fuzzy Set Theory to Mathematical 
Programming. Information Science 36(1), 29–58 (1985) 
R6.  Fuzzy Probability, Fuzzy Random Variable and Random 
Fuzzy Variable 
[R6.1] 
Bandemer, H.: From Fuzzy Data to Functional Relations. Mathematical 
Modelling 6, 419–426 (1987) 
[R6.2] 
Bandemer, H., et al.: Fuzzy Data Analysis. Kluwer, Boston (1992) 
[R6.3] 
Kruse, R., et al.: Statistics with Vague Data. D. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht 
(1987) 
[R6.4] 
Chang, R.L.P., et al.: Applications of Fuzzy Sets in Curve Fitting. Fuzzy Sets 
and Systems 2(1), 67–74 
[R6.5] 
Chen, S.Q.: Analysis for Multiple Fuzzy Regression. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 25(1), 56–65 

176 
References
 
[R6.6] 
Celmins, A.: Multidimensional Least-Squares Fitting of Fuzzy Model. 
Mathematical Modelling 9(9), 669–690 
[R6.7] 
Dumitrescu, D.: Entropy of a Fuzzy Process. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 55(2), 
169–177 (1993) 
[R6.8] 
Delgado, M., et al.: On the Concept of Possibility-Probability Consistency. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 21(3), 311–318 (1987) 
[R6.9] 
Devi, B.B., et al.: Estimation of Fuzzy Memberships from Histograms. 
Information Sciences 35(1), 43–59 (1985) 
[R6.10] 
Diamond, P.: Fuzzy Least Squares. Information Sciences 46(3), 141–157 (1988) 
[R6.11] 
Dubois, D., et al.: Fuzzy Sets, Probability and Measurement. European Jour. of 
Operational Research 40(2), 135–154 (1989) 
[R6.12] 
El Rayes, A.B., et al.: Generalized Possibility Measures. Information 
Sciences 79, 201–222 (1994) 
[R6.13] 
Fruhwirth-Schnatter, S.: On Statistical Inference for Fuzzy Data with 
Applications to Descriptive Statistics. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 50(2), 143–165 
(1992) 
[R6.14] 
Fruhwirth-Schnatter, S.: On Fuzzy Bayesian Inference. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 60(1), 41–58 (1993) 
[R6.15] 
Gaines, B.R.: Fuzzy and Probability Uncertainty logics. Information and 
Control 38(2), 154–169 (1978) 
[R6.16] 
Geer, J.F., et al.: Discord in Possibility Theory. International Jour. of General 
Systems 19, 119–132 (1991) 
[R6.17] 
Geer, J.F., et al.: A Mathematical Analysis of Information-Processing 
Transformation Between Probabilistic and Possibilistic Formulation of 
Uncertainty. International Jour. of General Systems 20(2), 14–176 (1992) 
[R6.18] 
Goodman, I.R., et al.: Uncertainty Models for Knowledge Based Systems. 
North-Holland, New York (1985) 
[R6.19] 
Grabish, M., et al.: Fundamentals of Uncertainty Calculi with Application to 
Fuzzy Systems. Kluwer, Boston (1994) 
[R6.20] 
Guan, J.W., et al.: Evidence Theory and Its Applications, vol. 1. North-Holland, 
New York (1991) 
[R6.21] 
Guan, J.W., et al.: Evidence Theory and Its Applications, vol. 2. North- Holland, 
New York (1992) 
[R6.22] 
Hisdal, E.: Are Grades of Membership Probabilities? Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 25(3), 349–356 (1988) 
[R6.23] 
Ulrich, H.: A Mathematical Theory of Uncertainty. In: Yager, R.R. (ed.) Fuzzy 
Set and Possibility Theory: Recent Developments, pp. 344–355. Pergamon, New 
York (1982) 
[R6.24] 
Kacprzyk, J., Fedrizzi, M. (eds.): Combining Fuzzy Imprecision with 
Probabilistic Uncertainty in Decision Making. Plenum Press, New York (1992) 
[R6.25] 
Kacprzyk, J., et al.: Combining Fuzzy Imprecision with Probabilistic 
Uncertainty in Decision Making. Springer, New York (1988) 
[R6.26] 
Klir, G.J.: Where Do we Stand on Measures of Uncertainty, Ambignity, 
Fuzziness and the like? Fuzzy Sets and Systems 24(2), 141–160 (1987) 
[R6.27] 
Klir, G.J., et al.: Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty and Information. Prentice Hll, 
Englewood Cliff (1988) 
[R6.28] 
Klir, G.J., et al.: Probability-Possibility Transformations: A Comparison. Intern. 
Jour. of General Systems 21(3), 291–310 (1992) 

References 
177
 
[R6.29] 
Kosko, B.: Fuzziness vs Probability. Intern. Jour. of General Systems 17(1-3), 
211–240 (1990) 
[R6.30] 
Manton, K.G., et al.: Statistical Applications Using Fuzzy Sets. John Wiley, 
New York (1994) 
[R6.31] 
Meier, W., et al.: Fuzzy Data Analysis: Methods and Indistrial Applications. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 61(1), 19–28 (1994) 
[R6.32] 
Nakamura, A., et al.: A logic for Fuzzy Data Analysis. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 39(2), 127–132 (1991) 
[R6.33] 
Negoita, C.V., et al.: Simulation, Knowledge-Based Compting and Fuzzy 
Statistics. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York (1987) 
[R6.34] 
Nguyen, H.T.: Random Sets and Belief Functions. Jour. of Math. Analysis and 
Applications 65(3), 531–542 (1978) 
[R6.35] 
Prade, H., et al.: Representation and Combination of Uncertainty with belief 
Functions and Possibility Measures. Comput. Intell. 4, 244–264 (1988) 
[R6.36] 
Puri, M.L., et al.: Fuzzy Random Variables. Jour. of Mathematical Analysis and 
Applications 114(2), 409–422 (1986) 
[R6.37] 
Rao, N.B., Rashed, A.: Some Comments on Fuzzy Random Variables. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 6(3), 285–292 (1981) 
[R6.38] 
Sakawa, M., et al.: Multiobjective Fuzzy linear Regression Analysis for Fuzzy 
Input-Output Data. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 47(2), 173–182 (1992) 
[R6.39] 
Schneider, M., et al.: Properties of the Fuzzy Expected Values and the Fuzzy 
Expected Interval. Fuzzy Sets and Systems 26(3), 373–385 (1988) 
[R6.40] 
Slowinski, R., Teghem, J. (eds.): Stochastic versus Fuzzy Approaches to 
Multiobjective Mathematical Programming Under Uncertainty. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht (1990) 
[R6.41] 
Stein, N.E., Talaki, K.: Convex Fuzzy Random Variables. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 6(3), 271–284 (1981) 
[R6.42] 
Sudkamp, T.: On Probability-Possibility Transformations. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 51(1), 73–82 (1992) 
[R6.43] 
Tanaka, H., et al.: Possibilistic Linear Regression Analysis for Fuzzy Data. 
European Jour. of Operational Research 40(3), 389–396 (1989) 
[R6.44] 
Walley, P.: Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities. Chapman and 
Hall, London (1991) 
[R6.45] 
Wang, G.Y., et al.: The Theory of Fuzzy Stochastic Processes. Fuzzy Sets and 
Systems 51(2), 161–178 (1992) 
[R6.46] 
Wang, X., et al.: Fuzzy Linear Regression Analysis of Fuzzy Valued Variable. 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 36(1) 
[R6.47] 
Zadeh, L.A.: Probability Measure of Fuzzy Event. Jour. of Math Analysis and 
Applications 23, 421–427 (1968) 
R7.  Ideology and the Knowledge Construction Process   
[R7.1] 
Abercrombie, N., et al.: The Dominant Ideology Thesis. Allen and Unwin, 
London (1980) 
[R7.2] 
Abercrombie, N.: Class, Structure, and Knowledge: Problems in the Sociology 
of Knowledge. New York University Press, New York (1980) 
[R7.3] 
Aron, R.: The Opium of the Intellectuals. University Press of America, Lanham 
(1985) 

178 
References
 
[R7.4] 
Aronowitz, S.: Science as Power: Discourse and Ideology in Modern Society. 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (1988) 
[R7.5] 
Barinaga, M., Marshall, E.: Confusion on the Cutting Edge. Science 257, 616–
625 (1992) 
[R7.6] 
Barnett, R.: Beyond All Reason: Living with Ideology in the University. Society 
for Research into Higher Education and Open University Press, Philadelphia 
(2003) 
[R7.7] 
Barth, H.: Truth and Ideology. University of California Press, Berkeley (1976) 
[R7.8] 
Basin, A., Verdie, T.: The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the 
Dynamics of Preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97, 298–319 (2001) 
[R7.9] 
Beardsley, P.L.: Redefining Rigor: Ideology and Statistics in Political Inquiry. 
Sage Publications, Bevery Hills (1980) 
[R7.10] 
Bikhchandani, S., et al.: A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and Cultural 
Change. Journal of Political Economy 100, 992–1026 (1992) 
[R7.11] 
Robert, B., Richerson, P.J.: Culture and Evolutionary Process. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago (1985) 
[R7.12] 
Buczkowski, P., Klawiter, A.: Theories of Ideology and Ideology of Theories. 
Rodopi, Amsterdam (1986) 
[ R7.13] 
Chomsky, N.: Manufacturing Consent. Pantheo Press, New York (1988) 
[R7.14] 
Chomsky, N.: Problem of Knowledge and Freedom. Collins, Glasgow (1972) 
[R7.15] 
Cole, J.R.: Patterns of Intellectual influence in Scientific Research. Sociology of 
Education 43, 377–403 (1968) 
[R7.16] 
Cole Jonathan, R., Cole, S.: Social Stratification in Science. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago (1973) 
[R7.17] 
Debackere, K., Rappa, M.A.: Institutioal Varations in Problem Choice and 
Persistence among Scientists in an Emerging Fields. Research Policy 23, 425–
441 (1994) 
[R7.18] 
Fraser, C., Gaskell, G.: The Social Psychological Study of Widespread Beliefs. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford (1990) 
[R7.19] 
Gieryn, T.F.: Problem Retention and Problem Change in Science. Sociological 
Inquiry 48, 96–115 (1978) 
[R7.20] 
Harrington Jr., J.E.: The Rigidity of social Systems. Journal of Political 
Economy 107, 40–64 
[R7.21] 
Hinich, M., Munger, M.: Ideology and the Theory of Political Choice. 
University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (1994) 
[R7.22] 
Hull, D.L.: Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and 
Conceptual Development of Science. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
(1988) 
[R7.23] 
Mészáros, I.: Philosophy, Ideology and Social Science: Essay in Negation and 
Affirmation, Brighton Wheatsheaf, Sussex (1986) 
[R7.24] 
Mészáros, I.: The Power of Ideology. New York University Press, New York 
(1989) 
[R7.25] 
Newcomb, T.M., et al.: Persistence and Change. John Wiley, New York (1967) 
[R7.26] 
Pickering, A.: Science as Practice and Culture. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago (1992) 
[R7.27] 
Therborn, G.: The Ideology of Power and the Power of Ideology. NLB 
Publications, London (1980) 
[R7.28] 
Thompson, K.: Beliefs and Ideology. Tavistock Publication, New York (1986) 
[R7.29] 
Ziman, J.: The Problem of ‘Problem Choice’. Minerva 25, 92–105 (1987) 

References 
179
 
[R7.30] 
Ziman, J.: Public Knowledge: An Essay Concerning the Social Dimension of 
Science. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1968) 
[R7.31] 
Zuckerman, H.: Theory Choice and Problem Choice in Science. Sociological 
Inquiry 48, 65–95 (1978) 
R 8.  Information, Thought and Knowledge 
[R8.1] 
Aczel, J., Daroczy, Z.: On Measures of Information and their Characterizations. 
Academic Press, New York (1975) 
[R8.2] 
Angelov, S., Georgiev, D.: The Problem of Human Being in Contemporary 
Scientific Knowledge. Soviet Studies in Philosophy, 49–66 (Summer 1974) 
[R8.3] 
Anderson, J.R.: The Architecture of Cognition. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1983) 
[R8.4] 
Angelov, S., Georgiev, D.: The Problem of Human Being in Contemporary 
Scientic Knowledge. Soviet Studies in Philosophy, 49–66 (Summer 1974) 
[R8.5] 
Ash, R.: Information Theory. John Wiley and Sons, New York (1965) 
[R8.6] 
Barlas, Y., Carpenter, S.: Philosophical Roots of Model Validation: Two 
Paradigms. System Dynamic Review 6, 148–166 (1990) 
[R8.7] 
Barrett, T.W.: Quantum Statistical Foundations for Structural Information 
Theory and Communication Theory. In: Lakshmikantham, V. (ed.) Nonlinear 
Systems and Applications, pp. 389–407. Academic Press, New York (1977) 
[R8.8] 
Bergin, J.: Common Knowledge with Monotone Statistics. Econometrica 69, 
1315–1332 (2001) 
[R8.9] 
Bestougeff, H., Ligozat, G.: Logical Tools for Temporal Knowledge 
Representation. Ellis Horwood, New York (1992) 
[R8.10] 
Brillouin, L.: Science and information Theory. Academic Press, New York 
(1962) 
[R8.11] 
Bruner, J.S., et al.: A Study of Thinking. Wiley, New York (1956) 
[R8.12] 
Brunner, K., Meltzer, A.H. (eds.): Three Aspects of Policy and Policy Making: 
Knowledge, Data and Institutions. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series, 
vol. 10. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1979) 
[R8.13] 
Burks, A.W.: Chance, Cause, Reason: An Inquiry into the Nature of Scientific 
Evidence. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1977) 
[R8.14] 
Calvert, R.: Models of Imperfect Information in Politics. Hardwood Academic 
Publishers, New York (1986) 
[R8.15] 
Cornforth, M.: The Theory of Knowledge. International Pub., New York (1972) 
[R8.16] 
Coombs, C.H.: A Theory of Data. Wiley, New York (1964) 
[R8.17] 
Crawshay-Willims: Methods and Criteria of Reasoning. Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, London (1957) 
[R8.18] 
Dretske, F.I.: Knowledge and the Flow of Information. MIT Press, Cambridge 
(1981) 
[R8.19] 
Dreyfus, H.L.: A Framework for Misrepresenting Knowledge. In: Ringle, M. 
(ed.) Philosophical Perspectives in Artificial Intelligence. Humanities Press, 
Atlantic Highlands (1979) 
[R8.20] 
Fagin, R., Halpenn, J.Y.: Reasoning About Knowledge and Probability. In: 
Vardi, M. (ed.) Proceedings of the Second Conference of Theoretical Aspects of 
Reasoning About Knowledge, pp. 277–293. Morgan Kaufmann, Asiloman 
(1988) 

180 
References
 
[R8.21a] Fagin, R., et al.: Reasoning About Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge (1995) 
[R8.21b] Fedoseyev, P.N.: Scientific Cognition Today, Its Specific Features and 
Problems. In: Philosophy in the USSR: Problems of Dialectical Materialism 
(1977) (Translated by Robert Daglish, Moscow, Progress Publishers) 
[R8.22] 
Geanakoplos, J.: Common Knowledge. In: Moses, Y. (ed.) Proceedings of the 
Fourth Conference of Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning About Knowledge. 
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo (1992) 
[R8.23] 
Geanakoplos, J.: Common Knowledge. Journal of Economic Perspectives 6,  
53–82 (1992) 
[R8.24] 
George, F.H.: Models of Thinking. Allen and Unwin, London (1970) 
[R8.25] 
George, F.H.: Epistemology and the problem of perception. Mind 66, 491–506 
(1957) 
[R8.26] 
Harwood, E.C.: Reconstruction of Economics. American Institute for Economic 
Research, Great Barrington (1955) 
[R8.27] 
Hintikka, J.: Knowledge and Belief. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1962) 
[R8.28] 
Hirshleifer, J.: The Private and Social Value of Information and Reward to 
inventive activity. American Economic Review 61, 561–574 (1971) 
[R8.29] 
Hirshleifer, J., Riley, J.: The Analytics of Uncertainty and Information: An 
expository Survey. Journal of Economic Literature 17, 1375–1421 (1979) 
[R8.30] 
Hirshleifer, J., Riley, J.: The Economics of Uncertainty and Information. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1992) 
[R8.31] 
Kapitsa, P.L.: The Influence of Scientific Ideas on Society, pp. 52–71. Soviet 
Studies in Philosophy (Fall 1979) 
[R8.32] 
Kedrov, B.M.: The Road to Truth. Soviet Studies in Philosophy 4, 3–53 (1965) 
[R8.33] 
Klatzky, R.L.: Human Memory: Structure and Processes. W. H. Freeman Pub., 
San Francisco (1975) 
[R8.34] 
Koopmans, T.C.: Three Essays on the State of Economic Science. McGraw-Hill, 
New York (1957) 
[R8.35] 
Kreps, D., Wilson, R.: Reputation and Imperfect Information. Journal of 
Economic Theory 27, 253–279 (1982) 
[R8.36] 
Kub́at, L., Zeman, J.: Entropy and Information. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1975) 
[R8.37] 
Kurcz, G., Shugar, W., et al. (eds.): Knowledge and Language. North-Holland, 
Amsterdam (1986) 
[R8.38] 
Lakemeyer, G., Nobel, B.: Foundations of Knowledge Representation and 
Reasoning. Springer, Berlin (1994) 
[R8.39] 
Lektorskii, V.A.: Principles involved in the Reproduction of Objective in 
Knowledge. Soviet Studies in Philosophy 4(4), 11–21 (1967) 
[R8.40] 
Levi, I.: The Enterprise of Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge (1980) 
[R8.41] 
Levi, I.: Ignorance, Probability and Rational Choice. Synthese 53, 387–417 
(1982) 
[R8.42] 
Levi, I.: Four Types of Ignorance. Social Science 44, 745–756 
[R8.43] 
Levine, D., Aparicio IV, M.: Neural Networks for Knowledge Representation 
and Inference. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Hillsdale (1994) 
[R8.44] 
Marschak, J.: Economic Information, Decision and Prediction: Selected Essays, 
Part II, vol. II. Dordrecnt-Holland, Boston (1974) 
[R8.45] 
McDermott, J.: Representing Knowledge in Intelligent Systems. In: Ringle, M. 
(ed.) Philosophical Perspectives in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 110–123. 
Humanities press, Atlantic Highlands (1979) 

References 
181
 
[R8.46] 
Menges, G. (ed.): Information, Inference and Decision. D. Reidel Pub., 
Dordrecht (1974) 
[R8.47] 
Masuch, M., Pólos, L. (eds.): Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Under 
Uncertainty. Springer, New York (1994) 
[R8.48] 
Moses, Y. (ed.): Proceedings of the Fourth Conference of Theoretical Aspects of 
Reasoning about Knowledge. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo (1992) 
[R8.49] 
Nielsen, L.T., et al.: Common Knowledge of Aggregation Expectations. 
Econometrica 58, 1235–1239 (1990) 
[R8.50] 
Newell, A.: Unified Theories of Cognition. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1990) 
[R8.51] 
Newell, A.: Human Problem Solving. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliff (1972) 
[R8.52] 
Ogden, G.K., Richards, I.A.: The Meaning of Meaning. Harcourt-Brace 
Jovanovich, New York (1923) 
[R8.53] 
Planck, M.: Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers. Westport, Conn., 
Greenwood (1968) 
[R8.54] 
Pollock, J.: Knowledge and Justification. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
(1974) 
[R8.55] 
Polanyi, M.: Personal Knowledge. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London (1958) 
[R8.56] 
Popper, K.R.: Objective Knowledge. Macmillan, London (1949) 
[R8.57] 
Price, H.H.: Thinking and Experience. Hutchinson, London (1953) 
[R8.58] 
Putman, H.: Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(1981) 
[R8.59] 
Putman, H.: Realism and Reason. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(1983) 
[R8.60] 
Putman, H.: The Many Faces of Realism. Open Court Publishing Co., La Salle 
(1987) 
[R8.61] 
Rothschild, K.W.: Models of Market Organization with Imperfect Information: 
A Survey. Journal of Political Economy 81, 1283–1308 (1973) 
[R8.62] 
Russell, B.: Human Knowledge, its Scope and Limits. Allen and Unwin, London 
(1948) 
[R8.63] 
Russell, B.: Our Knowledge of the External World. Norton, New York (1929) 
[R8.64] 
Samet, D.: Ignoring Ignorance and Agreeing to Disagree. Journal of Economic 
Theory 52, 190–207 (1990) 
[R8.65] 
Schroder, H.M., Suedfeld, P. (eds.): Personality Theory and Information 
Processing. Ronald Pub., New York (1971) 
[R8.66] 
Searle, J.: Minds, Brains and Science. Harvard University Press, Cambridge 
(1985) 
[R8.67] 
Sen, A.K.: On Weights and Measures: Information Constraints in Social Welfare 
Analysis. Econometrica 45, 1539–1572 (1977) 
[R8.68] 
Shin, H.: Logical Structure of Common Knowledge. Journal of Economic 
Theory 60, 1–13 (1993) 
[R8.69] 
Simon, H.A.: Models of Thought. Yale University Press, New Haven (1979) 
[R8.70] 
Smithson, M.: Ignorance and Uncertainty, Emerging Paradigms. Springer, New 
York (1989) 
[R8.71] 
Sowa, 
J.F.: 
Knowledge 
Representation: 
Logical, 
Philosophical 
and 
Computational Foundations. Brooks Pub., Pacific Grove (2000) 
[R8.72] 
Stigler, G.J.: The Economics of Information. Journal of Political Economy 69, 
213–225 (1961) 

182 
References
 
[R8.73] 
Tiukhtin, V.S.: How Reality Can be Reflected in Cognition: Reflection as a 
Property of All Matter. Soviet Studies in Philosophy 3(1), 3–12 (1964) 
[R8.74] 
Tsypkin, Y.Z.: Foundations of the Theory of Learning Systems. Academic 
Press, New York (1973) 
[R8.75] 
Ursul, A.D.: The Problem of the Objectivity of Information. In: Kubát, L., 
Zeman, J. (eds.) Entropy and Information, pp. 187–230. Elsevier, Amsterdam 
(1975) 
[R8.76] 
Vardi, M. (ed.): Proceedings of Second Conference on Theoretical Aspects of 
Reasoning about Knowledge. Morgan Kaufman, Los Altos (1988) 
[R8.77] 
Vazquez, M., et al.: Knowledge and Reality: Some Conceptual Issues in System 
Dynamics Modeling. Systems Dynamics Review 12, 21–37 (1996) 
[R8.78] 
Zadeh, L.A.: A Theory of Commonsense Knowledge. In: Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.) 
Aspects of Vagueness, pp. 257–295. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R8.79] 
Zadeh, L.A.: The Concept of Linguistic Variable and its Application to 
Approximate reasoning. Information Science 8, 40–80 (1975) (Also in Vol. 9, 
pp. 40 – 80) 
R9.  Language and the Knowledge-Production Process 
[R9.1] 
Aho, A.V.: Indexed Grammar - An Extension of Context-Free Grammars. 
Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery 15, 647–671 (1968) 
[R9.2] 
Black, M. (ed.): The Importance of Language. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1962) 
[R9.3] 
Buchler, J.: Metaphysics of Natural Complexes. Columbia University Press, 
New York (1966) 
[R9.4] 
Carnap, R.: Meaning and Necessity: A Study in Semantics and Modal Logic. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1956) 
[R9.5] 
Chomsky, N.: Linguistics and Philosophy. In: Hook, S. (ed.) Language and 
Philosophy, pp. 51–94. New York University Press, New York (1968) 
[R9.6] 
Chomsky, N.: Language and Mind. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York 
(1972) 
[R9.7] 
Cooper, W.S.: Foundations of Logico-Linguistics: A Unified Theory of 
Information, Language and Logic. D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1978) 
[R9.8] 
Cresswell, M.J.: Logics and Languages. Methuen Pub., London (1973) 
[R9.9] 
Dilman, I.: Studies in Language and Reason. Barnes and Nobles, Books, Totowa 
(1981) 
[R9.10] 
Fodor, J.A.: The Language and Thought. Thomas Y. Crowell Co., New York 
(1975) 
[R9.11] 
Ginsbury, S.: Algebraic and Automata – Theoretical properties of Formal 
Languages. North-Holland, New York (1975) 
[R9.12] 
Givon, T.: On Understanding Grammar. Academic Press, New York (1979) 
[R9.13] 
Gorsky, D.R.: Definition. Progress Publishers, Moscow (1974) 
[R9.14] 
Greibach, S.A.: An Infinite Hierarchy of Contex-Free Languages. Journal of 
Associazion for Computing Machinery 16, 91–106 (1969) 
[R9.15] 
Hintikka, J.: The Game of Language. D. Reidel Pub., Dordrecht (1983) 
[R9.16] 
Johnson-Lair, P.N.: Mental Models: Toward Cognitive Science of Language, 
Inference and Consciousness. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (1983) 

References 
183
 
[R9.17] 
Kandel, A.: Codes Over Languages. IEEE Transactions on Systems Man and 
Cybernetics 4, 135–138 (1975) 
[R9.18] 
Keenan, E.L., Faltz, L.M.: Boolean Semantics for Natural Languages. D. Reidel 
Pub., Dordrecht 
[R9.19] 
Lakoff, G.: Linguistics and Natural Logic. Synthese 22, 151–271 (1970) 
[R9.20] 
Lee, E.T., et al.: Notes On Fuzzy Languages. Information Science 1, 421–434 
(1969) 
[R9.21] 
Mackey, A., Merrill, D. (eds.): Issues in the Philosophy of Language. CT. Yale 
University Press, New Haven (1976) 
[R9.22] 
Nagel, T.: Linguistics and Epistemology. In: Hook, S. (ed.) Language and 
Philosophy, pp. 180–184. New York University Press, New York (1969) 
[R9.23] 
Pike, K.: Language in Relation to a Unified Theory of Structure of Human 
Behavior. Mouton Pub., The Hague (1969) 
[R9.24] 
Quine, W.V.O.: Word and object. MIT Press, Cambridge (1960) 
[R9.25] 
Russell, B.: An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. Penguin Books (1970) 
[R9.26] 
Salomaa, A.: Formal Languages. Academic Press, New York (1978) 
[R9.27] 
Tamura, S., et al.: Learning of Formal Language. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. 
Cybernetics, SMC 3, 98–102 (1973) 
[R9.28] 
Tarski, A.: Logic, Semantics and Matamathematics. Clarendon Press, Oxford 
(1956) 
[R9.29] 
Whorf, B.L. (ed.): Language, Thought and Reality. Humanities Press, New York 
(1956) 
[R9.30] 
Winogrand, T.: Understanding Natural Language. Cognitive Psychology 3,  
1–191 (1972) 
R10.  Probabilistic Concepts and Reasoning 
[R10.1] 
Anscombe, F., Aumann, R.J.: A Definition of Subjective Probability. Annals of 
Mathematical Statistics 34, 199–205 (1963) 
[R10.2] 
Billingsley, P.: Probability and Measure. John Wiley and Sons, New York 
(1979) 
[R10.3] 
Boolos, G.S., Jeffrey, R.C.: Computability and Logic. Cambridge University 
Press, New York (1989) 
[R10.4] 
Carnap, R.: Logical Foundation of Probability. Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 
London (1950) 
[R10.5] 
Cohen, L.J.: The Probable and Provable. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1977) 
[R10.6] 
de Finetti, B.: Probabilities of Probabilities a Real Problem or Misunderstanding? 
In: Aykac, A., et al. (eds.) New Developments in the Applications of Bayesian 
Methods, Amsterdam, pp. 1–10 (1977) 
[R10.7] 
Dempster, A.P.: Upper and Lower Probabilities Induced by Multivalued 
Mapping. Annals of Math Statistics 38, 325–339 (1967) 
[R10.8] 
Domotor, Z.: Higher Order Probabilities. Philosophical Studies 40, 31–46 
(1981) 
[R10.9] 
Doob, J.L.: Stochastic Processes. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester (1990) 
[R10.10] Fellner, W.: Distortion of Subjective Probabilities as a Reaction to Uncertainty. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 75, 670–689 (1961) 
[R10.11] Fishburn, P.C.: The Axioms of Subjective Probability. Statistical Sciences 1(3), 
335–358 (1986) 

184 
References
 
[R10.12] Fishburn, P.C.: Decision and Value. John Wiley and Sons, New York (1964) 
[R10.13] Gaifman, C.: A Theory of Higher Order Probabilities. In: Halpern, J.Y. (ed.) 
Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowledge, pp. 275–292. Morgan 
Kaufman, Los Alamitos (1986) 
[R10.14] George, F.H.: Logical Networks and Probability. Bulletin of Mathematical 
Biophysics 19, 187–199 (1957) 
[R10.15] Good, I.J.: Probability and the Weighing of Evidence. Charles Griffin and Co. 
Ltd., London (1950) 
[R10.16] Good, I.J.: Subjective Probability as the Measure of Non-measurable Set. In: 
Nagel, E., et al. (eds.) Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy of Science, pp. 
319–329. Stanford University Press, Stanford (1962) 
[R10.17] Good, I.J.: Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and Applications. 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis (1983) 
[R10.18] Goutsias, J., et al. (eds.): Random Sets: Theory and Applications. Springer, New 
York (1997) 
[R10.19] Hacking, I.: The emergence of Probability. Cambridge University Press, London 
(1975) 
[R10.20] Harsanyi, J.C.: Acceptance of Empirical Statements: A Bayesian Theory without 
Cognitive Utilities. Theory and Decision 18, 1–30 (1985) 
[R10.21] Ulrich, H., Klement, E.P.: Plausibility Measures: A General Framework for 
Possibility and Fuzzy Probability Measures. In: Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.) Aspects 
of Vagueness, pp. 31–50. D. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R10.22] Holmos, P.R.: Measure Theory. Van Nostrand, New York (1950) 
[R10.23] Hoover, D.N.: Probabilistic Logic. Annals of Mathematical Logic 14, 287–313 
(1978) 
[R10.24] Jeffery, R.: The Present Position in Probability Theory. British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science 5, 275–280 (1955) 
[R10.25] Kahneman, D., Tversky, A.: Sujective Probability: A Judgment of 
representativeness. Cognitive Psychology 3, 430–454 (1972) 
[R10.26] Keynes, J.M.: A treatise on Probability. MacMillan and Co., London (1921) 
[R10.27] Kolmogrov, A.N.: Foundation of the Theory of Probability. Chelsea Pub. Co., 
New York (1956) 
[R10.28] Koopman, B.O.: The Axioms and Algebra of Intuitive Probability. Annals of 
Mathematics 41, 269–292 (1940) 
[R10.29] Kraft, C., et al.: Intuitive Probability on Finite Sets. Annals of Mathematical 
Statistics 30, 408–419 (1959) 
[R10.30] Kullback, S., Leibler, R.A.: Information and Sufficiency. Annals of Math. 
Statistics 22, 79–86 (1951) 
[R10.31] Kyburg, H.E.: Probability and the Logic of Rational Belief. Wesleyan University 
Press, Middleton (1961) 
[R10.32] Kyburg, H.E., Smokler, H.E.: Studies in Subjective Probability. Wiley, New 
York (1964) 
[R10.33] Laha, R., Rohatgi, V.K.: Probability Theory. John Wiley and Sons, New York 
(1979) 
[R10.34] Laplace, P.S.: A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities. Constable and Co., 
London (1951) 
[R10.35] Matheron, G.: Random Sets and Integral Geometry. John Wiley and Sons, New 
York (1975) 

References 
185
 
[R10.36] Marschak, J.: Personal Probabilities of Probabilities. Theory and Decision 6, 
121–153 (1975) 
[R10.37] Nagel, E.: Principles of the Theory of Probability. In: Neurath, O., et al. (eds.) 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1-10, pp. 343–422. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 
[R10.38] Nilsson, N.J.: Probabilistic Logic. Probabilistic Logic 28, 71–87 (1986) 
[R10.39] Parrat, L.G.: Probability and Experimental Errors in Science. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1961) 
[R10.40] Patty Wayne, C.: Foundations of Topology. PWS Pub. Co., Boston (1993) 
[R10.41] Parthasarath, K.R.: Probability Measure on Metric Spaces. Academic Press, 
New York (1967) 
[R10.42] Ruspini, E.: Epistemic Logics, Probability and Calculus of Evidence. In: 
Proceedings of 10th International Joint Conference on AI (IJCAI 1987), Milan, 
pp. 924–931 (1987) 
[R10.43] Savage, L.J.: The Foundations of Statistics. John Wiley and Sons, New York 
(1954) 
[R10.44] Schneeweiss, H.: Probability and Utility – Dual Concepts in Decision Theory I. 
In: Menges (ed.) Information, Inference and Decision. Reidel, Dordrecht (1974) 
[R10.45] Shafer, G.: A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton (1976) 
[R10.46] Shafer, G.: Constructive Probability. Synthese 48, 1–60 (1981) 
[R10.47] Shannon, C.E., Weaver, W.: The Mathematical Theory of Communication. 
University of Illinois Press, Urbana (1949) 
[R10.48] Tiller, P., Green, E.D. (eds.): Probability and Inference in the Law of Evidence: 
The Uses and Limits of Bayesianism. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht 
(1988) 
[R10.49] von Mises, R.: Probability, Statistics and Truth. Dover Pub., New York (1981) 
[R10.50] Wagon, S.: The Banach-Tarski Paradox. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(1985) 
R11.  Optimality, Classical Exactness and Equilibrium  
in Knowledge Systems 
[R11.1] 
Agassi, J., Jarvie, I.C. (eds.): Rationality: The Critical View. M. Nijhoff Pub., 
Boston (1987) 
[R11.2] 
Amsterdamski, S.: Between History and Method: Disputes about the Rationality 
of Science. Kluwer Academic Pub., Dordrecht (1992) 
[R11.3] 
Anderson, G.: Rationality in Science and Politics. D. Reid Pub. Co., Dordrecht 
(1984) 
[R11.4] 
Arrow, K.J.: Rationality of self and Others in an Economic System. Journal of 
Business 59, 385–399 (1986) 
[R11.5] 
Baumol, W., Quant, R.: Rules of Thumb and Optimally Imperfect Decisions. 
American Economic Review 54, 23–46 (1964) 
[R11.6] 
Benn, S.I., Mortimore, G.W. (eds.): Rationality and the Social Sciences: 
Contributions to the Philosophy and Methodology of the Social Sciences. 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London (1976) 

186 
References
 
[R11.7] 
Bicchieri, C.: Rationality and Coordination. Cambridge University Press, New 
York (1993) 
[R11.8] 
Biderman, S., Scharfstein, B.-A.: Rationality in a question: East and Western 
View of Rationality. E.J. Brill Pub., New York (1989) 
[R11.9] 
Black, F.: Exploring General Equilibrium. MIT Press, Cambridge (1995) 
[R11.10] Boland, L.A.: On the Futility of Criticizing the Neoclassical Maximization 
Hypothesis. The American Economic Review 71, 1031–1036 (1981) 
[R11.11] Border, K.C.: Fixed Point Theorems with Applications to Economics and Game 
Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985) 
[R11.12] Bowman, E.H.: Consistency and Optimality in Managerial Decision Making. 
Management Science 9, 310–321 (1963) 
[R11.13] Brubaker, R.: The Limits of Rationality: An Essay on the Social and Moral 
Thought of Max Weber. Allen and Unwin, London (1984) 
[R11.14] Churchman, C.W.: Prediction and Optimal Decision. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs (1961) 
[R11.15] Cohen, L.J.: Can Human Irrationality be Experimentally Demonstrated? 
Behavioral and Brain Science 4, 317–370 (1981) 
[R11.16] Cohen, M., Jaffray, J.-Y.: Is Savage’s Independence Axiom a Universal 
Rationality Principle? Behavioral Science 33, 38–47 
[R11.17] Cornwall, R.R.: Introduction to the use of General Equilibrium Analysis. North-
Holland, New York (1984) 
[R11.18] De Sousa, R.: The Rationality of Motion. MIT Press, Cambridge 
[R11.19] Dompere, K.K.: Fuzziness, Rationality, Optimality and Equilibrium in Decision 
and Economic Theories. In: Lodwick, W.A., Kacprzyk, J. (eds.) Fuzzy Optimization. 
STUDFUZZ, vol. 254, pp. 3–32. Springer, Heidelberg (2010) 
[R11.20] Dompere, K.K.: On Epistemology and Decision-Choice Rationality. In: Trappl, 
R. (ed.) Cybernetics and System Research, pp. 219–228. North-Holland, New 
York (1982) 
[R11.21] Dompere, K.K.: Epistemic Foundations of Fuzziness: Unified Theories of 
Decision-Choice Processes. STUDFUZZ, vol. 236. Springer, New York (2009) 
[R11.22] Dompere, K.K.: Fuzziness and Approximate Reasoning: Epistemics on 
Uncertainty, Expectations and Risk in Rational Behavior. STUDFUZZ, vol. 237. 
Springer, New York (2009) 
[R11.23] Elster, J.: Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality. 
Cambridge University Press, New York (1979) 
[R11.24] Elster, J.: Studies in the Subversion of Rationality. Cambridge University Press, 
New York (1983) 
[R11.25] Ernst, G.C., et al.: Principles of Structural Equilibrium, a Study of Equilibrium 
Conditions by Graphic, Force Moment and Virtual Displacement (virtual work). 
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln (1962) 
[R11.26] Fischer, R.B., Peters, G.: Chemical Equilibrium. Saunders Pub., Philadelphia 
(1970) 
[R11.27] Fisher, F.M.: Disequilibrium Foundations of Equilibrium Economics. 
Cambridge University Press, New York (1983) 
[R11.28] Fourgeaud, C., Gouriéroux, C.: Learning Procedures and Convergence to 
Rationality. Econometrica 54, 845–868 (1986) 
[R11.29] Freeman, A., Carchedi, G. (eds.): Marx and Non-Equilibrium Economics. 
Edward Elgar, Cheltenham (1996) 

References 
187
 
[R11.30] Newton, G., Hare, P.H. (eds.): Naturalism and Rationality. Prometheus Books, 
Buffalo (1986) 
[R11.31] Ginsburgh, V.: Activity Analysis and General Equilibrium Modelling. North-
Holland, New York (1981) 
[R11.32] Hahn, F.: Equilibrium and Macroeconomics. MIT Press, Cambridge (1984) 
[R11.33] Hansen, B.: A Survey of General Equilibrium Systems. McGraw-Hill, New 
York (1970) 
[R11.34] Hilpinen, R. (ed.): Rationality in Science: Studies in the Foundations of Science 
and Ethics. D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1980) 
[R11.35] Hogarth, R.M., Reder, M.W. (eds.): Rational Choice: The Contrast between 
Economics and Psychology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1986) 
[R11.36] Hollis, M., Lukes, S.: Rationality and Relativism. MIT Press, Cambridge (1982) 
[R11.37] Martin, H., Nell, E.J.: Rational Economic Man: A Philosophical Critique of 
Neo-classical Economics. Cambridge University Press, New York (1975) 
[R11.38] Howard, N.: Paradoxes of Rationality. MIT Press, Cambridge (1973) 
[R11.39] Hurwicz, L.: Optimality Criteria for Decision Making Under Ignorance, 
Mimeographed, Cowles Commission Discussion Paper. Statistics 370 (1951) 
[R11.40] Istratescu, V.I.: Fixed Point Theory: Introduction. D. Reidel Pub. Co, Dordrecht 
(1981) 
[R11.41] Keita, L.D.: Science, Rationality and Neoclassical Economics. University of 
Delaware Press, Newark (1992) 
[R11.42] Kirman, A. (ed.): Elements of General Equilibrium Analysis. Blackwell, Malden 
(1998) 
[R11.43] Kirman, A., Salmon, M. (eds.): Learning and Rationality in Economics. Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford (1993) 
[R11.44] Kornia, J.: Anti-Equilibrium. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1971) 
[R11.45] Kramer, G.H.: A Dynamic Model of Political Equilibrium. Journal of Economic 
Theory 16, 310–334 (1977) 
[R11.46] Kramer, G.: On a Class of Equilibrium Conditions for Majority Rule. 
Econometrica 41, 285–297 (1973) 
[R11.47] Kuenne, R.E.: The Theory of General Economic Equilibrium. Princeton 
University Press, Princeton (1967) 
[R11.48] Marschak, J.: Actual Versus Consistent Decision Behavior. Behavioral 
Science 9, 103–110 (1964) 
[R11.49] McKenzie, L.W.: Classical General Equilibrium Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge 
(2002) 
[R11.50] McMullin, E. (ed.): Construction and Constraint: The Shaping of Scientific 
Rationality. University of Notre Dame Press, Notre Dame Ind. (1988) 
[R11.51] Jozef, M.: The Problem of Rationality in Science and its Philosophy: Popper vs. 
Polanyi (The Polish Conferences). Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston (1995) 
[R11.52] Mongin, P.: Does Optimization Imply Rationality. Synthese 124, 73–111 (2000) 
[R11.53] Negishi, T.: Microeconomic Foundations of Keynesian Macroeconomics. North-
Holland, Amsterdam (1979) 
[R11.54] Newton-Smith, W.H.: The Rationality of Science. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
Boston (1981) 
[R11.55] Page, S.E.: Two Measures of Difficulty. Economic Theory 8, 321–346 (1996) 
[R11.56] Parfit, D.: Personal Identity and Rationality. Synthese 53, 227–241 (1982) 
[R11.57] Pitt, J.C., Pera, M.: Rational Changes in Science: Essays on Scientific 
Reasoning. D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1987) 

188 
References
 
[R11.58] Plott, C.R.: A Notion of Equilibrium and Its Possibility under Majority Rule. 
Amer. Econ. Rev. 57, 787–806 (1967) 
[R11.59] Preston, C.J.: Random Fields. Springer, Berlin (1976) 
[R11.60] Quirk, J., Saposnik, R.: Introduction to General Equilibrium Theory and Welfare 
Economics. McGraw-Hill, New York (1968) 
[R11.61] Radner, R.: Competitive Equilibrium Under Uncertainty. Econometrica 36, 31–
58 (1968) 
[R11.62] Rapart, A.: Escape from Paradox. Scientific American, 50–56 (July 1967) 
[R11.63] Rescher, N.: Reason and Rationality in Natural Science: A Group of Essays. 
University Press of America, Lanham (1985) 
[R11.64] Sen, A.: Rational Behavior. In: Eatwell, J., et al. (eds.) Utility and Probability, 
pp. 198–216. Norton, New York (1990) 
[R11.65] Shackle, G.: Epistemics and Economics. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1973) 
[R11.66] Simon, H.A.: Rational Choice and the Structure of Environment. Psychological 
Review 63, 129–138 (1956) 
[R11.67] Simon, H.A.: Rationality as Process and as Product of Thought. American 
Economic Review 68, 1–16 (1978) 
[R11.68] Simon, H.A.: A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 69, 99–118 (1955) 
[R11.69] Simon, H.A.: Models of Man: Social and Rational. Wiley, New York (1957) 
[R11.70] Smart, D.R.: Fixed Point Theorems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(1980) 
[R11.71] Stambaugh, J.: The Real is not the Rational. State University of New York 
Press, Albany (1986) 
[R11.72] Tamny, M., Irani, K.D. (eds.): Rationality in Thought and Action. Greenwood 
Press, New York (1986) 
[R11.73] Turski, W.G.: Toward a Rationality of Emotions; Essay in the Philosophy of 
Mind. Ohio University Press, Athens (1994) 
[R11.74] Torr, C.: Equilibrium, Expectations, and Information: A Study of General 
Theory and Modern Classical Economics. Westview Press, Boulder Colo (1988) 
[R11.75] Valentinuzzi, M.: The Organs of Equilibrium and Orientation as a Control 
System. Hardwood Academic Pub., New York (1980) 
[R11.76] Walsh, V.C., Gram, H.: Classical and Neoclassical Theories of General 
Equilibrium: Historical Origins and Mathematical Structure. Oxford University 
Press, New York (1980) 
[R11.77] Weintraub, E.R.: General Equilibrium Analysis: Studies in Appraisal. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985) 
[R11.78] Weintraub, E.R.: Microfoundations: The Compatibility of Microeconomics and 
Macroeconomics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1980) 
[R11.79] Whittle, P.: Systems in Stochastic Equilibrium. Wiley, New York (1986) 
R.12.  Possible Worlds and the Knowledge Production Process 
[R12.1] 
Adams, R.M.: Theories of Actuality. Noûs 8, 211–231 (1974) 
[R12.2] 
Allen, S. (ed.): Possible Worlds in Humanities, Arts and Sciences. Proceedings 
of Nobel Symposium, vol. 65. Walter de Gruyter Pub., New York (1989) 

References 
189
 
[R12.3] 
Armstrong, D.M.: A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility. Cambridge University 
Press (1989) 
[R12.4] 
Armstrong, D.M.: A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1997) 
[R12.5] 
Bell, J.S.: Six Possible Worlds of Quantum Mechanics. In: Allen, S. (ed.) 
Proceedings of Nobel Symposium on Possible Worlds in Humanities, Arts and 
Sciences, vol. 65, pp. 359–373. Walter de Gruyter Pub., New York (1989) 
[R12.6] 
Bigelow, J.: Possible Worlds Foundations for Probability. Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 5, 299–320 (1976) 
[R12.7] 
Bradley, R., Swartz, N.: Possible World: An Introduction to Logic and its 
Philosophy. Bail Blackwell, Oxford (1997) 
[R12.8] 
Castañeda, H.-N.: Thinking and the Structure of the World. Philosophia 4, 3–40 
(1974) 
[R12.9] 
Chihara, C.S.: The Worlds of Possibility: Modal Realism and the Semantics of 
Modal Logic. Clarendon (1998) 
[R12.10] Chisholm, R.: Identity through Possible Worlds: Some Questions. Noûs 1, 1–8 
(1967); reprinted in Loux, The Possible and the Actual 
[R12.11] Divers, J.: Possible Worlds. Routledge, London (2002) 
[R12.12] Forrest, P.: Occam’s Razor and Possible Worlds. Monist 65, 456–464 (1982) 
[R12.13] Forrest, P., Armstrong, D.M.: An Argument Against David Lewis’ Theory of 
Possible Worlds. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62, 164–168 (1984) 
[R12.14] Grim, P.: There is No Set of All Truths. Analysis 46, 186–191 (1986) 
[R12.15] Heller, M.: Five Layers of Interpretation for Possible Worlds. Philosophical 
Studies 90, 205–214 (1998) 
[R12.16] Herrick, P.: The Many Worlds of Logic. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1999) 
[R12.17] Krips, H.: Irreducible Probabilities and Indeterminism. Journal of Philosophical 
Logic 18, 155–172 (1989) 
[R12.18] Kuhn, T.S.: Possible Worlds in History of Science. In: Allen, S. (ed.) Possible 
Worlds in Humanities, Arts and Sciences, Proceedings of Nobel Symposium, 
vol. 65, pp. 9–41. Walter de Gruyter Pub., New York (1989) 
[R12.19] Kuratowski, K., Mostowski, A.: Set Theory: With an Introduction to Descriptive 
Set Theory. North-Holland, New York (1976) 
[R12.20] Lewis: David On the Plurality of Worlds. Basil Blackwell, Oxford (1986) 
[R12.21] Loux, M.J.: The Possible and the Actual: Readings in the Metaphysics of 
Modality. Cornell University Press, Ithaca & London (1979) 
[R12.22] Parsons, T.: Nonexistent Objects. Yale University Press, New Haven (1980) 
[R12.23] Perry, J.: From Worlds to Situations. Journal of Philosophical Logic 15, 83–107 
(1986) 
[R12.24] Rescher, N., Brandom, R.: The Logic of Inconsistency: A Study in Non-
Standard Possible-World Semantics And Ontology. Rowman and Littlefield 
(1979) 
[R12.25] Skyrms, B.: Possible Worlds, Physics and Metaphysics. Philosophical 
Studies 30, 323–332 (1976) 
[R12.26] Stalmaker, R.C.: Possible World. Noûs 10, 65–75 (1976) 
[R12.27] Quine, W.V.O.: Word and Object. M.I.T. Press (1960) 
[R12.28] Quine, W.V.O.: Ontological Relativity. Journal of Philosophy 65, 185–212 
(1968) 

190 
References
 
R13.  Rationality, Information, Games, Conflicts and Exact 
Reasoning 
[R13.1] 
Aumann, R.: Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian Rationality. 
Econometrica 55, 1–18 (1987) 
[R13.2] 
Border, K.: Fixed Point Theorems with Applications to Economics and Game 
Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985) 
[R13.3] 
Brandenburger, A.: Knowledge and Equilibrium Games. Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 6, 83–102 (1992) 
[R13.4] 
Campbell, R., Sowden, L.: Paradoxes of Rationality and Cooperation: Prisoner’s 
Dilemma and Newcomb’s Problem. University of British Columbia Press, 
Vancouver (1985) 
[R13.5] 
Crawford, V., Sobel, J.: Strategic Information Transmission. Econometrica 50, 
1431–1452 (1982) 
[R13.6] 
Scott, G., Humes, B.: Games, Information, and Politics: Applying Game 
Theoretic Models to Political Science. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor 
(1996) 
[R13.7] 
Gjesdal, F.: Information and Incentives: The Agency Information Problem. 
Review of Economic Studies 49, 373–390 (1982) 
[R13.8] 
Harsanyi, J.: Games with Incomplete Information Played by ‘Bayesian’ Players 
I: The Basic Model. Management Science 14, 159–182 (1967) 
[R13.9] 
Harsanyi, J.: Games with Incomplete Information Played by ‘Bayesian’ Players 
II: Bayesian Equilibrium Points. Management Science 14, 320–334 (1968) 
[R13.10] Harsanyi, J.: Games with Incomplete Information Played by ‘Bayesian’ Players 
III: The Basic Probability Distribution of the Game. Management Science 14, 
486–502 (1968) 
[R13.11] Harsanyi, J.: Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in Games and 
Social Situations. Cambridge University Press, New York (1977) 
[R13.12] Haussmann, U.G.: A Stochastic Maximum Principle for Optimal Control of 
Diffusions. Longman, Essex (1986) 
[R13.13] Istratescu, V.I.: Fixed Point Theory: An Introduction. Reidel Pub. Co., 
Dordrecht (1981) 
[R13.14] Krasovskii, N.N., Subbotin, A.I.: Game-theoretical Control Problems. Springer, 
New York (1988) 
[R13.15] Kuhn, H. (ed.): Classics in Game Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
(1997) 
[R13.16] Lagunov, V.N.: Introduction to Differential Games and Control Theory. 
Heldermann Verlag, Berlin (1985) 
[R13.17] Luce, D.R., Raiffa, H.: Games and Decisions. John Wiley and Sons, New York 
(1957) 
[R13.18] Maynard Smith, J.: Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge (1982) 
[R13.19] Milgrom, P., Roberts, J.: Rationalizablility, Learning and Equilibrium in Game 
with Strategic Complementarities. Econometrica 58, 1255–1279 (1990) 
[R13.20] Myerson, R.: Game Theory: Analysis of Conflict. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1991) 
[R13.21] Rapoport, A., Chammah, A.: Prisoner’s Dilemma: A Study in Conflict and 
Cooperation. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor (1965) 

References 
191
 
[R13.22] Roth, A.E.: The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and 
Computation as Tools for Design Economics. Econometrica 70, 1341–1378 
(2002) 
[R13.23] Shubik, M.: Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts and Solutions. MIT 
Press, Cambridge (1982) 
[R13.24] Smart, D.R.: Fixed point Theorems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(1980) 
[R13.25] Ulrich, H.: Fixed Point Theory of Parametrized Equivariant Maps. Springer, 
New York (1988) 
[R13.26] Von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O.: The Theory of Games in Economic 
Behavior. John Wiley and Sons, New York (1944) 
R14.  Rationality and Philosophy of Exact and Inexact Sciences 
in the Knoeledge Production 
[R14.1] 
Achinstein, P.: The Problem of Theoretical Terms. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) 
Reading in the Philosophy of Science. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.2] 
Amo Afer, A.G.: The Absence of Sensation and the Faculty of Sense in the 
Human Mind and Their Presence in our Organic and Living Body, Dissertation 
and Other essays 1727-1749. Jena, Martin Luther Universioty Translation, Halle 
Wittenberg (1968) 
[R14.3] 
Beeson, M.J.: Foundations of Constructive Mathematics. Springer, New York 
(1985) 
[R14.4] 
Benacerraf, P.: God, the Devil and Gödel. Monist 51, 9–32 (1967) 
[R14.5] 
Benecerraf, P., Putnam, H. (eds.): Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected 
Readings. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983) 
[R14.6] 
Black, M.: The Nature of Mathematics. Adams and Co., Totowa (1965) 
[R14.7] 
Blanche, R.: Contemporary Science and Rationalism. Oliver and Boyd, 
Edinburgh (1968) 
[R14.8] 
Blanshard, B.: The Nature of Thought. Allen and Unwin, London (1939) 
[R14.9] 
Bloomfield, L.: Linguistic Aspects of Science. In: Neurath, O., et al. (eds.) 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1-10, pp. 219–277. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 
[R14.10] Braithwaite, R.B.: Models in the empirical Sciences. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) 
Reading in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 268–275. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs (1970) 
 [R14.11] Braithwaite, R.B.: Scientific Explanation. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1955) 
[R14.12] Brody, B.A. (ed.): Reading in the Philosophy of Science. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.13] Brody, B.A.: Confirmation and Explanation. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading in 
the Philosophy of Science, pp. 410–426. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.14] Brouwer, L.E.J.: Intuitionism and Formalism. Bull. of American Math. Soc. 20, 
77–89 (1913); Also in Benecerraf, P., Putnam, H.(eds.) Philosophy of 
Mathematics: Selected Readings, pp. 77–89. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1983) 

192 
References
 
[R14.15] Brouwer, L.E.J.: Consciousness, Philosophy, and Mathematics. In: Benecerraf, 
P., Putnam, H. (eds.) Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, pp. 90–96. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983) 
[R14.16] Brouwer, L.E.J.: Collected Works. In: Heyting, A. (ed.) Philosophy and 
Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 1. Elsevier, New York (1975) 
[R14.17] Campbell, N.R.: What is Science? Dover, New York (1952) 
[R14.18] Carnap, R.: Foundations of Logic and Mathematics. In: International 
Encyclopedia of Unified Science, pp. 143–211. Univ. of Chicago, Chicago 
(1939) 
[R14.19] Carnap, R.: Statistical and Inductive Probability. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading 
in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 440–450. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1970) 
[R14.20] Carnap, R.: On Inductive Logic. Philosophy of Science 12, 72–97 (1945) 
[R14.21] Carnap, R.: The Two Concepts of Probability. Philosophy and Phenomenonological 
Review 5, 513–5532 (1945) 
[R14.22] Carnap, R.: The Methodological Character of Theoretical Concepts. In: Feigl, 
H., Scriven, M. (eds.) Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. I, pp. 
38–76 (1956) 
[R14.23] Charles, D., Lennon, K. (eds.): Reduction, Explanation, and Realism. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford (1992) 
[R14.24] Cohen, R.S., Wartofsky, M.W. (eds.): Methodological and Historical Essays in 
the Natural and Social Sciences. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht (1974) 
[R14.25] Church, A.: An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory. American 
Journal of Mathematics 58, 345–363 (1936) 
[R14.26] Dalen van, D. (ed.): Brouwer’s Cambridge Lectures on Intuitionism. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1981) 
[R14.27] Davidson, D.: Truth and Meaning: Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford (1984) 
[R14.28] Davis, M.: Computability and Unsolvability. McGraw-Hill, New York (1958) 
[R14.29] Dompere, K.K.: Polyrhythmicity: Foundations of African Philosophy. Adonis 
and Abbey Pub., London (2006) 
[R14.30] Dompere, K.K., Ejaz, M.: Epistemics of Development Economics: Toward a 
Methodological Critique and Unity. Greenwood Press, Westport (1995) 
[R14.31] Dummett, M.: The Philosophical Basis of Intuitionistic Logic. In: Benecerraf, P., 
Putnam, H. (eds.) Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, pp. 97–129. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1983) 
[R14.32] Feigl, H., Scriven, M. (eds.): Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 
vol. I (1956) 
[R14.33] Feigl, H., Scriven, M. (eds.): Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 
vol. II (1958) 
[R14.34] Frank, P.: Between Physics and Philosophy. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1941) 
[R14.35] Garfinkel, A.: Forms of Explanation: Structures of Inquiry in Social Science. 
Yale University Press, New Haven (1981) 
[R14.36] Georgescu-Roegen, N.: Analytical Economics. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1967) 
[R14.37] George, F.H.: Philosophical Foundations of Cybernetics. Tunbridge Well, Great 
Britain (1979) 
[R14.38] Gillam, B.: Geometrical Illusions. Scientific American, 102–111 (January 1980) 

References 
193
 
[R14.39] Gödel, K.: What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem? In: Benecerraf, P., Putnam, H. 
(eds.) Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, pp. 470–486. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1983) 
[R14.40] Gorsky, D.R.: Definition. Progress Publishers, Moscow (1974) 
[R14.41] Gray, W., Rizzo, N.D. (eds.): Unity Through Diversity. Gordon and Breach, 
New York (1973) 
[R14.42] Grattan-Guinness, I.: The Development of the Foundations of Mathematical 
Analysis From Euler to Riemann. MIT Press, Cambridge (1970) 
[R14.43] Hart, W.D. (ed.): The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (1996) 
[R14.44] Hausman, D.M.: The Exact and Separate Science of Economics. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1992) 
[R14.45] Helmer, O., Oppenheim, P.: A Syntactical Definition of Probability and Degree 
of confirmation. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 10, 25–60 (1945) 
[R14.46] Helmer, O., Rescher, N.: On the Epistemology of the Inexact Sciences, P-1513. 
Rand Corporation, Santa Monica (October 13, 1958) 
[R14.47] Hempel, C.G.: Studies in the Logic of Confirmation. Mind, Part I 54, 1–26 
(1945) 
[R14.48] Hempel, C.G.: The Theoretician’s Dilemma. In: Feigl, H., Scriven, M. (eds.) 
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. II, pp. 37–98 (1958) 
[R14.49] Hempel, C.G.: Probabilistic Explanation. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading in the 
Philosophy of Science, pp. 28–38. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.50] Hempel, C.G., Oppenheim, P.: Studies in the Logic of Explanation. Philosophy 
of Science 15, 135–175 (1948); Also in Brody, B. A.(ed.): Reading in the 
Philosophy of Science, pp. 8–27. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.51] Hempel, C.G., Oppenheim, P.: A Definition of Degree of Confirmation. 
Philosophy of Science 12, 98–115 (1945) 
[R14. 52] Heyting, A.: Intuitionism: An Introduction. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1971) 
[R14.53] Hintikka, J. (ed.): The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford University Press, 
London (1969) 
[R14.54] Hockney, D., et al. (eds.): Contemporary Research in Philosophical Logic and 
Linguistic Semantics. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht-Holland (1975) 
[R14.55] Hoyninggen-Huene, P., Wuketits, F.M. (eds.): Reductionism and Systems 
Theory in the Life Science:Some Problems and Perspectives. Kluwer Academic 
Pub., Dordrecht (1989) 
[R14.56] Kedrov, B.M.: Toward the Methodological Analysis of Scientific Discovery. 
Soviet Studies in Philosophy 1, 45–65 (1962) 
[R14.57] Kedrov, B.M.: On the Dialectics of Scientific Discovery. Soviet Studies in 
Philosophy 6, 16–27 (1967) 
[R14.58] Kemeny, J.G., Oppenheim, P.: On Reduction. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading in 
the Philosophy of Science, pp. 307–318. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1970) 
[R14.59] Klappholz, K.: Value Judgments of Economics. British Jour. of Philosophy 15, 
97–114 (1964) 
[R 14.60] Kleene, S.C.: On the Interpretation of Intuitionistic Number Theory. Journal of 
Symbolic Logic 10, 109–124 (1945) 
[R14.61] Kmita, J.: The Methodology of Science as a Theoretical Discipline. Soviet 
Studies in Philosophy, 38–49 (Spring 1974) 

194 
References
 
[R14.62] Krupp, S.R. (ed.): The Structure of Economic Science. Prentice-Hall, 
Englewood Cliffs (1966) 
[R14.63] Kuhn, T.: The Structure of Scientific Revolution. University of Chicago Press, 
Chicago (1970) 
[R14.64] Kuhn, T.: The Function of Dogma in Scientific Research. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) 
Reading in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 356–374. Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.65] Kuhn, T.: The Essential Tension:Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and 
Change. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1979) 
[R14.66] Lakatos, I. (ed.): The Problem of Inductive Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam 
(1968) 
[R14.67] Lakatos, I.: Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Discovery. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1976) 
[R14.68] Lakatos, I.: Mathematics, Science and Epistemology: Philosophical Papers. In: 
Worrall, J., Currie, G. (eds.) vol. 2. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (1978) 
[R14.69] Lakatos, I.: The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes, vol. 1. 
Cambridge University Press, New York (1978) 
[R14.70] Lakatos, I.: The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes, vol. 1. 
Cambridge University Press, New York (1978) 
[R14.71] Lawson, T.: Economics and Reality. Routledge, New York (1977) 
[R14.72] Lenzen, V.: Procedures of Empirical Science. In: Neurath, O., et al. (eds.) 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1-10, pp. 280–338. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 
[R14.73] Levi, I.: Must the Scientist make Value Judgments? In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) 
Reading in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 559–570. Prentice- Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.74] Lewis, D.: Convention: A Philosophical Study. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1969) 
[R14.75] Mayer, T.: Truth versus Precision in Economics. Edward Elgar, London (1993) 
[R14.76] Menger, C.: Investigations into the Method of the Social Sciences with Special 
Reference to Economics. New York University Press, New York (1985) 
[R14.77] Mirowski, P. (ed.): The Reconstruction of Economic Theory. Kluwer Nijhoff, 
Boston (1986) 
[R14.78] Mueller, I.: Philosophy of Mathematics and Deductive Structure in Euclid’s 
Elements. MIT Press, Cambridge (1981) 
[R14.79] Nagel, E.: Review: Karl Niebyl, Modern Mathematics and Some Problems of 
Quantity, Quality, and Motion in Economic Analysis. The Journal of Symbolic 
Logic, 74 (1940) 
[R14.80] Nagel, E., et al. (eds.): Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy of Science. 
Stanford University Press, Stanford (1962) 
[R14.81] Narens, L.: A Theory of Belief for Scientific Refutations. Synthese 145,  
397–423 (2005) 
[R14.82] Niebyl, K.H.: Modern Mathematics and Some Problems of Quantity, Quality 
and Motion in Economic Analysis. Philosophy of Science 7(1), 103–120 (1940) 
[R14.83] Neurath, O., et al. (eds.): International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1 -
10. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 
[R14.84] Otto, N.: Unified Science as Encyclopedic. In: Neurath, O., et al. (eds.) 
International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1-10, pp. 1–27. University 
of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 

References 
195
 
[R14.85] Nkrumah, K.: Consciencism. Heinemann, London (1964) 
[R14.86] Planck, M.: The philosophy of Physics. Norton and Co., New York (1936) 
[R14.87] Planck, M.: Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers. Conn. Greenwood, 
Westport (1971) 
[R14.88] Planck, M.: The Meaning and Limits of Exact Science. In: Planck, M. (ed.) 
Scientific Autobiography and Other Papers, pp. 80–120. Conn. Greenwood, 
Westport (1971) 
[R14.89] Polanyi, M.: Genius in Science. In: Cohen, R.S., Wartofsky, M.W. (eds.) 
Methodological and Historical Essays in the Natural and Social Sciences, pp. 
57–71. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht (1974) 
[R14.90] Popper, K.: The Nature of Scientific Discovery. Harper and Row, New York 
(1968) 
[R14.91] Putnam, H.: Models and Reality. In: Benecerraf, P., Putnam, H. (eds.) Philosophy 
of Mathematics: Selected Readings, pp. 421–444. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1983) 
[R14.92] Reise, S.: The Universe of Meaning. The Philosophical Library, New York 
(1953) 
[R14.93] Robinson, R.: Definition. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1950) 
[R14.94] Rudner, R.: The Scientist qua Scientist Makes Value Judgments. Philosophy of 
Science 20, 1–6 (1953) 
[R14.95] Russell, B.: Our Knowledge of the External World. Norton, New York (1929) 
[R14.96] Russell, B.: Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits. Allen and Unwin, London 
(1948) 
[R14.97] Russell, B.: Logic and Knowledge: Essays 1901-1950, pp. 1901–1950. 
Capricorn Books, New York (1971) 
[R14.98] Russell, B.: An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. Norton, New York (1940) 
[R14.99] Russell, B.: Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. George Allen and Unwin, 
London (1919) 
[R14.100] Russell, B.: The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(1978) 
[R14.101] Ruzavin, G.I.: On the Problem of the Interrelations of Modern Formal Logic and 
Mathematical Logic. Soviet Studies in Philosophy 3(1), 34–44 (1964) 
[R14.102] Scriven, M.: Explanations, Predictions, and Laws. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading 
in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 88–104. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1970) 
[R14.103] Sellars, W.: The Language of Theories. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading in the 
Philosophy of Science, pp. 343–353. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1970) 
[R14.104] Sterman, J.: The Growth of Knowledge: Testing a Theory of Scientific 
Revolutions with a Formal Model. Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change 28, 93–122 (1995) 
[R14.105] Tullock, G.: The Organization of Inquiry. Liberty Fund Inc., Indianapolis (1966) 
[R14.106] Van Fraassen, B.: Introduction to Philosophy of Space and Time. Random 
House, New York (1970) 
[R14.107] Veldman, W.: A Survey of Intuitionistic Descriptive Set Theory. In: Petkov, P.P. 
(ed.) Mathematical Logic: Proceedings of the Heyting Conference, pp. 155–174. 
Plenum Press, New York (1990) 
[R14.108] Vetrov, A.A.: Mathematical Logic and Modern Formal Logic. Soviet Studies in 
Philosophy 3(1), 24–33 (1964) 

196 
References
 
[R14.109] von Mises, L.: Epistemological Problems in Economics. New York University 
Press, New York (1981) 
[R14.110] Wang, H.: Reflections on Kurt. MIT Press, Cambridge (1987) 
[R14.111] Watkins, J.W.N.: The Paradoxes of Confirmation. In: Brody, B.A. (ed.) Reading 
in the Philosophy of Science, pp. 433–438. Prentice- Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1970) 
[R14.112] Whitehead, A.N.: Process and Reality. The Free Press, New York (1978) 
[R14.113] Wittgenstein, L.: Ttactatus Logico-philosophicus. The Humanities Press Inc., 
Atlantic Highlands (1974) 
[R14.114] Woodger, J.H.: The Axiomatic Method in Biology. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1937) 
[R14.115] Zeman, J.: Information, Knowledge and Time. In: Kubát, L., Zeman, J. (eds.) 
Entropy and Information. Elsevier, Amsterdam (1975) 
R15.  Riskiness, Decision-Choice Process and Paradoxes  
in Knowledge Constuction 
[R15.1] 
Allais, M.: The Foundations of the Theory of Utility and Risk: Some Central 
Points of the Discussions at the Oslo Conference. In: Hagen, O., Wenstøp, F. 
(eds.) Progess in Utility and Risk Theory, pp. 3–131. D. Reidel Pub., Dordrecht 
(1984) 
[R15.2] 
Allais, M., Hagen, O.: Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox. D. 
Reidel Pub., Dordrecht (1979) 
[R15.3] 
Anand, P.: Foundations of Rational Choice Under Risk. Oxford University 
Press, New York (1993) 
[R15.4] 
Anderson, N.H., Shanteau, J.C.: Information Integration in Risky Decision 
Making. Journal of Experimental Psychology 84, 441–451 (1970) 
[R15.5] 
Bar-Hillel, M., Margalit, A.: Newcombe’s Paradox Revisited. British Journal of 
Philosophy of Science 23, 295–304 (1972) 
[R15.6] 
Campbell, R., Sowden, L. (eds.): Paradoxes of Rationality and Cooperation: 
Prisoner’s Dilemma and Newcomb’s Problem. Universith of British Columbia 
Press, Vancouver (1985) 
[R15.7] 
Crouch, E.A., et al.: Risk/Analysis. Ballinger, Cambridge (1982) 
[R15.8] 
Einhorn, H., Hogarth, R.M.: Ambiguity and Uncertainty in Probabilistic 
Inference. Psychological Review 92, 433–461 (1985) 
[R15.9] 
Ellsberg, D.: Risk, Ambiguity and the Savage Axioms. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 75, 643–669 (1961) 
[R15.10] Friedman, M., Savage, L.J.: The Utility Analysis of Choice Involving Risk. 
Journal of Political Economy 56, 279–304 
[R15.11] Peter, G., Sahlin, N.: Unreliable Probabilities, Risk taking, and Decision 
Making. Synthese 53, 361–386 (1982) 
[R15.12] Handa, J.: Risk, Probability and a New Theory of Cardinal Utility. Journal of 
Political Economy 85, 97–122 (1977) 
[R15.13] Harsanyi, J.C.: Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of 
Risk-Taking. Jour. Polit. Econ. 61, 434–435 (1953) 

References 
197
 
[R15.14] Hart, A.G.: Risk, Uncertainty and Unprofitability of Compounding Probabilities. 
In: Lange, O., et al. (eds.) Mathematical Economics and Econometrics, pp. 110–
118. Cicago University Press, Chicago (1942) 
[R15.15] Hurley, S.L.: Newcomb’s Problem, Prisoner’s Dilemma, and Collective Action. 
Synthese 86, 173–196 (1991) 
[R15.16] Kahneman, D., Tversky, A.: Prospect Theory. Econometrica 47, 263–292 (1979) 
[R15.17] Karmarkar, U.S.: Subjectively Weighted Utility and Allais Paradox. 
Organization Behavior and Human Performance 24, 67–72 (1979) 
[R15.18] Kogan, N., Wallach, M.A.: Risk Taking: A Study in Cognition and Personality. 
Hold Rinehart and Winston, New York (1974) 
[R15.19] Levi, I.: Ignorance, Probability and Rational Choice. Synthese 53, 387–417 
(1982) 
[R15.20] Levi, I.: Four Types of Ignorance. Social Research 44, 745–756 (1977) 
[R15.21] MacCrimmon, Larsson, S.: Utility Theory: Axioms Versus ‘Paradoxes’. In: 
Allais, M., Hagen, O. (eds.) Expected Utility Hypotheses and the Allais Paradox, 
pp. 333–409. D. Reidel Pub., Dordrecht (1979) 
[R15.22] Priest, G.: Sorites and Identity. Logique et Analyse 34, 293–296 (1991) 
[R15.23] Raiffa, H.: Risk, Ambiguity, and Savage Axioms:Comment. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 77, 327–337 (1963) 
[R15.24] Roberts, H.V.: Risk, Ambiguity, and Savage Axioms:Comment. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 75, 690–695 (1961) 
[R15.25] Sainsbury, R.M.: Paradoxes. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1995) 
[R15.26] Savage, L.J.: The Foundations of Statistics. Wiley, New York (1954) 
[R15.27] Shubik, M.: Information, Risk, Ignorance and Indeterminacy. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 75, 643–669 (1961) 
[R15.28] Simpson, P.B.: Risk Allowance for Price Expectation. Econometrica 18, 253–
259 (1950) 
[R15.29] Stigum, B.P., et al. (eds.): Foundations of Utility and Risk Theory with 
Applications. D. Reidel Publishing Com., Boston (1983) 
[R15.30] Williamson, T.: Knowledge and its Limits. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(2000) 
[R15.31] Theil, H.: The Allocation of Power that Minimizes Tension. Operations 
Research 19, 977–982 (1971) 
[R15.32] Theil, H.: On Estimation of Relationships Involving Qualitative Variables. 
American Journal of Sociology 76, 103–154 (1970) 
R16.  The Prescriptive Science, Theory of Planning  
and Cost-Benefit Analysis in Knowledge Construction 
[R16.1] 
Alexander Ernest, R.: Approaches to Planning. Gordon and Breach, Philadelphia 
(1992) 
[R16.2] 
Bailey, J.: Social Theory for Planning. Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 
(1975) 
[R16.3] 
Burchell, R.W., Sternlieb, G. (eds.): Planning Theory in the 1980’s: A Search 
for Future Directions. Rutgers University Center for Urban and Policy Research, 
New Brunswick (1978) 

198 
References
 
[R16.4] 
Camhis, M.: Planning Theory and Philosophy. Tavistock Publication, London 
(1979) 
[R16.5] 
Chadwick, G.: A Systems View of Planning. Pergamon, Oxford (1971) 
[R16.6] 
Cooke, P.: Theories of Planning and Special Development. Hutchinson, London 
(1983) 
[R16.7] 
Dompere, K.K., Lawrence, T.: Planning. In: Hussain, S.B. (ed.) Encyclopedia of 
Capitalism, vol. II, pp. 649–653. Facts On File, Inc., New York (2004) 
[R16.8] 
Dompere, K.K.: Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Theory of Fuzzy Decision: 
Identification and Measurement Theory. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 
[R16.9] 
Dompere, K.K.: Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Theory of Fuzzy Decision: Fuzzy 
Value Theory. Springer, Heidelberg (2004) 
[R16.10] Dompere, K.K.: Fuzziness and the Market Mockery of Democracy: The Political 
Economy of Rent-Seeking and Profit-Harvesting. A Working Monograph on 
political Economy, vol. II. Department of Economics, Howard University, 
Washington, DC 
[R16.11] Dompere, K.K.: Social Goal-Objective Formation, Democracy and National 
Interest: Political Economy under Fuzzy Rationality. A Working Monograph on 
Political Economy, vol. I. Department of Economics, Howard University, 
Washington, DC 
[R16.12] Faludi, A.: Planning Theory. Pergamon, Oxford (1973) 
[R16.13] Faludi, A. (ed.): A Reader in Planning Theory. Pergamon, Oxford (1973) 
[R16.14] Kickert, W.J.M.: Organization of Decision-Making A Systems-Theoretic 
Approach. North-Holland, New York (1980) 
[R16.15] Kickert, W.J.M.: Organization of Decision-Making A Systems-Theoretic Approach. 
North-Holland, New York (1980) 
[R16.16] Knight, F.H.: Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. University of Chicago Press, Chicago 
(1971) 
[R16.17] Knight, F.H.: On History and Method of Economics. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago (1971) 
R17.  Social Sciences, Mathematics and the Problems of Exact 
and Inexact Methods of Thought 
[R17.1] 
Ackoff, R.L.: Towards a System of Systems Concepts. Management 
Science 17(11), 661–671 (1971) 
[R17.2] 
Angyal, A.: The Structure of Wholes. Philosophy of Sciences 6(1), 23–37 
(1939) 
[R17.3] 
Bahm, A.J.: Organicism: The Philosophy of Interdependence. International 
Philosophical Quarterly VII(2) (1967) 
[R17.4] 
Bealer, G.: Quality and Concept. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1982) 
[R17.5] 
Black, M.: Critical Thinking. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1952) 
[R17.6] 
Brewer, M.B., Collins, B.E.: Scientific Inquiry and Social Sciences. Jossey-Bass 
Pub., San Francisco (1981) 
[R17.7] 
Campbell, D.T.: On the Conflicts Between Biological and Social Evolution and 
Between Psychology and Moral Tradition. American Psychologist 30, 1103–
1126 (1975) 

References 
199
 
[R17.8] 
Churchman, C.W., Ratoosh, P. (eds.): Measurement: Definitions and Theories. 
John Wiley, New York (1959) 
[R17.9] 
Foley, D.: Problems versus Conflicts Economic Theory and Ideology. In: 
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, vol. 65, pp. 231–237 
(1975) 
[R17.10] Garfinkel, A.: Forms of Explanation:Structures of Inquiry in Social Science. 
Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn. (1981) 
[R17.11] Georgescu-Roegen, N.: Analytical Economics. Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge (1967) 
[R17.12] Gilolispie, C.: The Edge of Objectivity. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
(1960) 
[R17.13] Hayek, F.A.: The Counter-Revolution of Science. Free Press of Glencoe Inc., 
New York (1952) 
[R17.14] Laudan, L.: Progress and Its Problems: Towards a Theory of Scientific Growth. 
University of California Press, Berkeley (1961) 
[R17.15] Marx, K.: The Poverty of Philosophy. International Pub., New York (1971) 
[R17.16] Phillips, D.C.: Holistic Thought in Social Sciences. Stanford University Press, 
Stanford (1976) 
[R17.17] Popper, K.: Objective Knowledge. Oxford University Press, Oxford (1972) 
[R17.18] Rashevsky, N.: Organismic Sets: Outline of a General Theory of Biological and 
Social Organism. General Systems  XII, 21–28 (1967) 
[R17.19] Roberts, B., Holdren, B.: Theory of Social Process. Iowa University Press, Ames 
(1972) 
[R17.20] Rudner, R.S.: Philosophy of Social Sciences. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs 
(1966) 
[R17.21] Simon, H.A.: The Structure of Ill-Structured Problems. Artificial Intelligence 4, 
181–201 (1973) 
[R17.22] Toulmin, S.: Foresight and understanding: An Enquiry into the Aims of Science. 
Harper and Row, New York (1961) 
[R17.23] Winch, P.: The Idea of a Social Science. Humanities Press, New York (1958) 
R18.  Theories of Utility, Expected Utility and Exact Problems of 
Exact Methods 
[R18.1] 
Allais, M., Hagen, O. (eds.): Expected Utility Hypothesis and Allias Paradox. D. 
Reidel Pub., Dordrecht (1979) 
[R18.2] 
Chipman, J.S.: Foundations of Utility. Econometrica 28(2), 193–224 (1960) 
[R18.3] 
Eatwell, J., et al.: Utility and Probability. Norton, New York (1990) 
[R18.4] 
Fishburn, P.C.: The Foundations of Expected Utility. D. Reidel, Dordrecht 
(1982) 
[R18.5] 
Fishburn, P.C.: Utility Theory for Decision Making. Wiley, New York (1970) 
[R18.6] 
Luce, R.D., Suppes, P.: Preferences, Utility, and Subjective Probabilities. In: 
Luce, D.R., et al. (eds.) Handbook of Mathematical Psychology, pp. 42–49. 
Wiley, New York (1965) 
[R18.7] 
Mac Crimmon, K., Larsson, S.: Utility Theory Versus Paradoxes. In: Allais, M., 
Hagen, O. (eds.) Expected Utility Hypothesis and Allias Paradox. D. Reidel 
Pub., Dordrecht (1979) 

200 
References
 
[R18.8] 
Samuelson, P.: Probability and Attempts to Measure Utility. Economic 
Review 1, 167–173 (1950) 
[R18.9] 
Samuelson, P.: Probability, Utility, and Independence Axiom. Econometrica 20, 
670–678 (1952) 
[R18.10] Schoemaker, P.: The Expected Utility Model: Its Variants, Purposes, Evidence 
and Limitations. Journal of Economic Literature 20, 529–563 (1982) 
[R18.11] Stigler, G.J.: The Development of Utility Theory I. Journal of Political 
Economy 58, 307–327 (1958) 
[R18.12] Stigler, G.J.: The Development of Utility Theory II. Journal of Political 
Economy 58, 373–396 (1958) 
[R18.13] Suppes, P., Winet, M.: An Axiomatization of Utility based on the Notion of 
Utility Differences. Management Science 1, 259–270 (1955) 
[R18.14] Von Mises, L.: The Ultimate Foundations of Economic Science. Sheed Andrews 
and McMeel, Kansas City (1962) 
[R18.15] von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O.: Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton (1947) 
R19.  Vagueness, Approximation and Reasoning  
in the Knowledge Construction 
[R19.1] 
Adams, E.W., Levine, H.F.: On the Uncertainties Transmitted from Premises to 
Conclusions in deductive Inferences. Synthese 30, 429–460 (1975) 
[R19.2] 
Arbib, M.A.: The Metaphorical Brain. McGraw-Hill, New York (1971) 
[R19.3] 
Becvar, J.: Notes on Vagueness and Mathematics. In: Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.) 
Aspects of Vagueness, pp. 1–11. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R19.4] 
Black, M.: Vagueness: An Exercise in Logical Analysis. Philosophy of 
Science 17, 141–164 (1970) 
[R19.5] 
Black, M.: Reasoning with Loose Concepts. Dialogue 2, 1–12 (1973) 
[R19.6] 
Black, M.: Language and Philosophy. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1949) 
[R19.7] 
Black, M.: The Analysis of Rules. In: Black, M. (ed.) Models and Metaphors: 
Studies in Language and Philosophy, pp. 95–139 (1962) 
[R19.8] 
Black, M.: Models and Metaphors: Studies in Language and Philosophy. Cornell 
University Press, NewYork (1962) 
[R19.9] 
Black, M.: Margins of Precision. Cornell University Press, Ithaca (1970) 
[R19.10] Boolos, G.S., Jeffrey, R.C.: Computability and Logic. Combridge University 
Press, New York (1989) 
[R19.11] Cohen, P.R.: Heuristic Reasoning about uncertainty: An Artificial Intelligent 
Approach. Pitman, Boston (1985) 
[R19.12] Darmstadter, H.: Better Theories. Philosophy of Science 42, 20–27 (1972) 
[R19.13] Davis, M.: Computability and Unsolvability. McGraw-Hill, New York (1958) 
[R19.14] Dummett, M.: Wang’s Paradox. Synthese 30, 301–324 (1975) 
[R19.15] Dummett, M.: Truth and Other Enigmas. Harvard University Press, Cambridge 
(1978) 
[R19.16] Endicott, T.: Vagueness in the Law. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2000) 
[R19.17] Evans, G.: Can there be Vague Objects? Analysis 38, 208 (1978) 
[R19.18] Fine, K.: Vagueness, Truth and Logic. Synthese 54, 235–259 (1975) 

References 
201
 
[R19.19] Gale, S.: Inexactness, Fuzzy Sets and the Foundation of Behavioral Geography. 
Geographical Analysis 4(4), 337–349 (1972) 
[R19.20] Ginsberg, M.L. (ed.): Readings in Non-monotonic Reason. Morgan Kaufman, 
Los Alamitos (1987) 
[R19.21] Goguen, J.A.: The Logic of Inexact Concepts. Synthese 19, 325–373 (1968) 
[R19.22] Grafe, W.: Differences in Individuation and Vagueness. In: Hartkamper, A., 
Schmidt, H.-J. (eds.) Structure and Approximation in Physical Theories, pp. 
113–122. Plenum Press, New York (1981) 
[R19.23] Goguen, J.A.: The Logic of Inexact Concepts. Synthese 19 (1968-1969) 
[R19.24] Graff, D., Timothy (eds.): Vagueness. Ashgate Publishing, Aldershot (2002) 
[R19.25] Hartkämper, A., Schmidt, H.J. (eds.): Structure and Approximation in Physical 
Theories. Plenum Press, New York (1981) 
[R19.26] Hersh, H.M., et al.: A Fuzzy Set Approach to Modifiers and Vagueness in 
Natural Language. J. Experimental 105, 254–276 (1976) 
[R19.27] Hilpinen, R.: Approximate Truth and Truthlikeness. In: Prelecki, M., et al. (eds.) 
Formal Methods in the Methodology of Empirical Sciences, pp. 19–42. Reidel, 
Ossolineum, Dordrecht, Wroclaw (1976) 
[R19.28] Hockney, D., et al.: Contemporary Research in Philosophical Logic and 
Linguistic Semantics. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht-Holland (1975) 
[R19.29] Ulrich, H., et al.: Non-Clasical Logics and their Applications to Fuzzy Subsets: 
A Handbook of the Mathematical Foundations of Fuzzy Set Theory. Kluwer, 
Boston (1995) 
[R19.30] Katz, M.: Inexact Geometry. Notre-Dame Journal of Formal Logic 21, 521–535 
(1980) 
[R19.31] Katz, M.: Measures of Proximity and Dominance. In: Proceedings of the Second 
World Conference on Mathematics at the Service of Man, Universidad 
Politecnica de Las Palmas pp. 370–377 (1982) 
[R19.32] Katz, M.: The Logic of Approximation in Quantum Theory. Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 11, 215–228 (1982) 
[R19.33] Keefe, R.: Theories of Vagueness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(2000) 
[R19.34] Keefe, R., Smith, P. (eds.): Vagueness: A Reader. MIT Press, Cambridge (1996) 
[R19.35] Kling, R.: Fuzzy Planner: Reasoning with Inexact Concepts in a Procedural 
Problem-solving Language. Jour. Cybernetics 3, 1–16 (1973) 
[R19.36] Kruse, R.E., et al.: Uncertainty and Vagueness in Knowledge Based Systems: 
Numerical Methods. Springer, New York (1991) 
[R19.37] Ludwig, G.: Imprecision in Physics. In: Hartkämper, A., Schmidt, H.J. (eds.) 
Structure and Approximation in Physical Theories, pp. 7–19. Plenum Press, New 
York (1981) 
[R19.38] Kullback, S., Leibler, R.A.: Information and Sufficiency. Annals of Math. 
Statistics 22, 79–86 (1951) 
[R19.39] Lakoff, G.: Hedges: A Study in Meaning Criteria and Logic of Fuzzy Concepts. 
In: Hockney, D., et al. (eds.) Contemporary Research in Philosophical Logic and 
Linguistic Semantics, pp. 221–271. Reidel Pub. Co., Dordrecht-Holland (1975) 
[R19.40] Lakoff, G.: Hedges: A Study in Meaning Criteria and the Logic of Fuzzy 
Concepts. Jour. Philos. Logic 2, 458–508 (1973) 
[R19.41] Levi, I.: The Enterprise of Knowledge. MIT Press, Cambridge (1980) 
[R19.42] Łucasiewicz, J.: Selected Works. Studies in the Logical Foundations of 
Mathematics. North-Holland, Amsterdam (1970) 

202 
References
 
[R19.43] Machina, K.F.: Truth, Belief and Vagueness. Jour. Philos. Logic 5, 47–77 
(1976) 
[R19.44] Menges, G., et al.: On the Problem of Vagueness in the Social Sciences. In: 
Menges, G. (ed.) Information, Inference and Decision, pp. 51–61. D. Reidel 
Pub., Dordrecht (1974) 
[R19.45] Merricks, T.: Varieties of Vagueness. Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 53, 145–157 (2001) 
[R19.46] Mycielski, J.: On the Axiom of Determinateness. Fund. Mathematics 53,  
205–224 (1964) 
[R19.47] Mycielski, J.: On the Axiom of Determinateness II. Fund. Mathematics 59, 203–
212 (1966) 
[R19.48] Naess, A.: Towards a Theory of Interpretation and Preciseness. In: Linsky, L. 
(ed.) Semantics and the Philosophy of Language. Ill. Univ. of Illinois Press, 
Urbana (1951) 
[R19.49] Narens, L.: The Theory of Belief. Journal of Mathematical Psychology 49, 1–31 
(2003) 
[R19.50] Narens, L.: A Theory of Belief for Scientific Refutations. Synthese 145, 397–
423 (2005) 
[R19.51] Netto, A.B.: Fuzzy Classes. Notices, Amar., Math. Society 28, 945 (1968) 
[R19.52] Neurath, O., et al.: International Encyclopedia of Unified Science, vol. 1- 10. 
University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1955) 
[R19.53] Niebyl, K.H.: Modern Mathematics and Some Problems of Quantity. Quality 
and Motion in Economic Analysis. Science 7(1), 103–120 (1940) 
[R19.54] Orlowska, E.: Representation of Vague Information. Information Systems 13(2), 
167–174 (1988) 
[R19.55] Parrat, L.G.: Probability and Experimental Errors in Science. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York (1961) 
[R19.56] Raffman, D.: Vagueness and Context-sensitivity. Philosophical Studies 81, 175–
192 (1996) 
[R19.57] Reiss, S.: The Universe of Meaning. The Philosophical Library, New York 
(1953) 
[R19.58] Russell, B.: Vagueness. Australian Journal of Philosophy 1, 84–92 (1923) 
[R19.59] Russell, B.: An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. Norton, New York (1940) 
[R19.60] Shapiro, S.: Vagueness in Context. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2006) 
[R19.61] Skala, H.J.: Modelling Vagueness. In: Gupta, M.M., Sanchez, E. (eds.) Fuzzy 
Information and Decision Processes, pp. 101–109. North-Holland, Amsterdam 
(1982) 
[R19.62] Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.): Aspects of Vagueness. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R19.63] Sorensen, R.: Vagueness and Contradiction. Oxford University Press, Oxford 
(2001) 
[R19.64] Tamburrini, G., Termini, S.: Some Foundational Problems in Formalization of 
Vagueness. In: Gupta, M.M., et al. (eds.) Fuzzy Information and Decision 
Processes, pp. 161–166. North Holland, Amsterdam (1982) 
[R19.65] Termini, S.: Aspects of Vagueness and Some Epistemological Problems Related 
to their Formalization. In: Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.) Aspects of Vagueness, pp. 
205–230. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R19.66] Tikhonov, A.N., Arsenin, V.Y.: Solutions of Ill-Posed Problems. John Wiley 
and Sons, New York (1977) 

References 
203
 
[R19.67] Tversky, A., Kahneman, D.: Judgments under Uncertainty: Heuristics and 
Biases. Science 185, 1124–1131 (1974) 
[R19.68] Ursul, A.D.: The Problem of the Objectivity of Information. In: Kubát, L., 
Zeman, J. (eds.) Entropy and Information, pp. 187–230. Elsevier, Amsterdam 
(1975) 
[R19.69] Vardi, M. (ed.): Proceedings of Second Conference on Theoretical Aspects of 
Reasoning about Knowledge. Morgan Kaufman, Asiloman (1988) 
[R19.70] Verma, R.R.: Vagueness and the Principle of the Excluded Middle. Mind 79, 
66–77 (1970) 
[R19.71] Vetrov, A.A.: Mathematical Logic and Modern Formal Logic. Soviet Studies in 
Philosophy 3(1), 24–33 (1964) 
[R19.72] von Mises, R.: Probability, Statistics and Truth. Dover Pub., New York (1981) 
[R19.73] Williamson, T.: Vagueness. Routledge, London (1994) 
[R19.74] Wiredu, J.E.: Truth as a Logical Constant With an Application to the Principle 
of the Excluded Millde. Philos. Quart. 25, 305–317 (1975) 
[R19.75] Wright, C.: On Coherence of Vague Predicates. Synthese 30, 325–365 (1975) 
[R19.76] Wright, C.: The Epistemic Conception of Vagueness. Southern Journal of 
Philosophy 33(suppl.), 133–159 (1995) 
[R19.77] Zadeh, L.A.: A Theory of Commonsense Knowledge. In: Skala, H.J., et al. (eds.) 
Aspects of Vagueness, pp. 257–295. D. Reidel Co., Dordrecht (1984) 
[R19.78] Zadeh, L.A.: The Concept of Linguistic Variable and its Application to 
Approximate reasoning. Information Science 8, 199–249 (1975) (Also in vol. 9, 
pp. 40–80) 

Index
A 
 
Absolute truth   150–151 
Adinkramatics   150–151 
Adinkralogy   150–151 
Ambiguity   17–23 
Analog   15–18, 115 
Analytical logic   61–63 
Analytical square   137–138 
Applied science   148–154 
Approximate reasoning   168–175 
Approximation   200–203 
Aristotelian knowledge category    
136–138 
Aristotelian logical opposites   2–4  
Axiom of definability   112–115 
Axiom of explicability   112–115 
Axiomatic completeness   153–155 
Axiomatic epistemology   141–144 
Axiomatic ontology   141–144  
Axiomatic science   149–154 
Axiomatic theory   140–144 
 
B 
 
Belief square   137–138 
Belief-system   3–5 
Black, Max   29, 84–86, 150 
Bounded rationality   163–164 
Brouwer, L E. J.   29, 84–86 
Brouwer’s fixed point theorem    
110–113 
 
C 
 
Causal rationality   130–131 
Categorial conversion   66–67 
Categorial moment   66–67 
Categorial conversion   6–7, 35–37,  
66–67, 122–127 
Categorial convertibility   123–125 
Categories   80–84 
Categories of laws of thought   75–78 
Category of inexactness   122–127 
Category theory   164–165 
Certainty-uncertainty duality   50–51  
Characteristic set   9–12, 79–84 
Chemical science   60–61  
Classification of science   30–32,  
144–155  
Classical epistemic system   73–93 
Classical exactness   185–188 
Classical laws of thought   49–51, 81–86  
Classical mathematical variable   22–23 
Classical mathematics   83–85 
Classical paradigm   2–7, 28–30,  
75–90, 109–111  
Classical possibility set   44–45 
Closed possibility set   45–47 
Cognitive categorial moment   142–144 
Cognitive frame   61–63 
Cognitive potential   9–12  
Cognitive reality   160–161 
Complete information   120–123 
Complexity theory   50–51, 96–97 
Concept of actual   56–60 
Concept of definition   98–102 
Concept of possibility   43–47 
Construction of probability space    
44–45  
Constructive-destructive duality   3–5 
Contingency   26–29 
Continuum   12, 19–21, 63–64, 81–82 
Cost-benefit Analysis   197–198 
Cost-benefit rationality   155 
Crisp definitional set   110–11 
 
D 
 
Decision-choice process   196–197 
Defective information structure    
35–37, 48–50, 67–72, 103–113,  
118–125, 151–155 
Definiendum   110–113 

206 
Index
 
Definiens   110–113 
Definition   98–102 
Definition of knowledge   130–138 
Definition of science   127–130 
Degree of intuitive confidence   21–23 
Degree of impossibility   44–45 
Degree of possibility   44–45 
Derived category of knowledge   32–35 
Derived linguistic category   135–136 
Derived logical category   6–7 
Development of laws of thought   78–80 
Digital   15–18, 115 
Digital-analog duality   49–51 
Discreteness   19–20, 63–64 
Dualism   44–47, 78–86 
Duality   44–47, 78–96 
 
E 
 
Economics   60–61 
Empirical completeness   152–155 
Empirical epistemology   140–144 
Empirical ontology   140–144 
Empirical science   149–154 
Empirical theory   140–144 
Energetics   50–51 
Epistemic actual   10–12, 56–60 
Epistemic category   10–12, 125–127 
Epistemic decision-choice system    
69–72  
Epistemic distance   119–121 
Epistemic elements   18–20 
Epistemic frame   61–63 
Epistemic geometry   36–37, 40–41,  
83, 149 
Epistemic order   121–122 
Epistemic process   30–32 
Epistemic pillars   92–93 
Epistemic reality   24–25, 32–33  
140–144 
Epistemic unity   48–52 
Epistemological concepts   65–70 
Epistemological exactness   100–103 
Epistemological path   2–3 
Equilibrium in knowledge systems    
185–188 
Epistemological reality   15–16 
Epistemological space   10–12, 103–109 
Epistemology   36–37, 60–63, 117–138,  
140–144  
 
Exact methods   160–161 
Exact science   5–7, 61–63 
Exactness-inexactness duality   49–50 
Exactness   1–7, 18–21 
Exactness in mathematics   117–138 
Exactness in science   117–138 
Exact reasoning   190–191 
Exact science   5–7, 124–127  
Exact symbolism   106–115 
Exact-value equivalences   131–132 
Excluded middle   21–23, 44–45,  
148–152 
Existence of primary category   33–34 
Expected utility   200–203 
Experiential information structure    
34–41 
Experimental information   48–57 
Experimental science   153–155 
Explanatory epistemic process    
147–152 
Explanation of knowledge   130–138 
Explanatory possibilistic category    
36–41 
Explanatory rationality   40–41, 46–47 
Explanatory science   34–41, 51–54 
Explanatory theory   130–133 
Explication of science   127–130 
Explicandum   97–101 
Explicator set   99–103 
Explication    98–103, 118–138  
Explicatum   97–101 
 
F 
 
Falsifiability   132–133 
Fixed point theorem   106–115 
Fundamental continuum   21–23, 67–69  
Fundamental discreteness   21–23 
Fuzziness of information   120–123 
Fuzzy conditionality   90–93, 111–113,  
123–127 
Fuzzy continuum   148–152 
Fuzzy decomposition   56–57 
Fuzzy definitional set   99–101, 111–113 
Fuzzy epistemic system   73–93 
Fuzzy knowledge category   136–138 
Fuzzy laws of continuum   5–7 
Fuzzy laws of thought   22–23, 86–91 
 Fuzzy logic   165–168 
Fuzzy mathematics   23–29, 168–173  
 

Index 
207
 
Fuzzy-non-stochastic risk   90–91 
Fuzzy-non-stochastic topological space    
90–91 
Fuzzy-non-stochastic uncertainty    
90–91 
Fuzzy optimization   173–175 
Fuzzy paradigm   2–7, 28–30, 75–90,  
109–111 
Fuzzy phenomenon   58–61 
Fuzzy probability index   53–54 
Fuzzy-random variable   51, 175–177 
Fuzzy residual   101–103 
Fuzzy risk   53–54 
Fuzzy-stochastic process   90–91 
Fuzzy thought system   44–45, 48–49 
Fuzzy variable   23–25, 34–35 
 
G 
 
Geometry of thinking   6–7 
Geometry of information   19–20 
Geometry of knowledge   20–21 
Grammar of knowledge   130–136 
 
H 
 
Hard computable systems   84–85 
Hard data   160–161 
Humanistic system   2–7 
 
I 
 
Identities of knowledge   141–144 
Identities of science   141–144 
Ideology   5–7, 159–161, 177–179  
Ignorance-knowledge duality   100–101 
Ill-posed problems   97–98 
Imagination   160–161 
Imaginative information structure    
35–40  
Impossibility   26–29 
Impossibility theorem   114–115 
Incomplete information   120–123 
Index of probability   50–51 
Inexact methods   160–161 
Index of possibility   50–51 
Inexact probability   2 
Inexact problems of linguistic  
variables   35–40 
Inexact science   5–7, 61–63, 124–127 
Inexactness   1–7, 18–21, 168–173 
Inexactness of exact science   144–155 
Information   179–182 
Information incompleteness   100–103 
Information clarity   100–103 
Information-decision-interactive  
processes   75–78 
Information-knowledge duality   66–67 
Information-knowledge representation   
98–103 
Information limitationality   46–50 
Information limitativeness   46–50 
Information signals   151–155 
Information-processing modules   60–61 
Information vagueness   100–103 
Input-output technology   123–124 
Intelligent technology   96–97 
Intuitionist mathematics   30–32,  
106– 112  
Intuitive process   36–38 
Irreducible core of fuzzy uncertainty   
52–54 
Irreducible core of fuzzy risk   52–54 
Irreducible core of inexactness   52–54 
Irreducible core of vagueness   101–103 
 
J 
 
Justification   135–138 
 
K 
 
Knowledge-acquisition process   58–60 
Knowledge distance   119–121 
Knowledge items   74–75 
Knowledge-production process   75–78,  
182–183, 188–189 
Knowledge square   43–47 
    Points of departure   2–7 
    Points of entry   2–7 
Knowledge square and probability    
43–47 
Knowledge square and probability  
space   43–47 
 
L 
 
Language   16–23, 182–183 
Limited information   154–155 
Linguistic boundedness   110–112 
Linguistic categories   125–135 
Linguistic objects   151–154 
Linguistic primitive   112–114 
Linguistic world   152–154 

208 
Index
 
Linguistic variables   22–25, 68–72 
Logical transformation   122–123 
Logical objects   49–51 
Logical variable   22–23 
Logical unity   132–133 
Logico-mathematical space   86–87 
 
M 
 
Mathematical formalists   28–32 
Mathematical objects   49–51 
Maximal exact definiens   111–113 
Measure of possibilistic belief   46,  
57–68 
Medical science   60–61 
Methodological continuum   68–72 
Methodology   60–63, 140–144 
Minimal exact definiens   111–113 
Model   130–133 
 
N 
 
Natural actual   10–15 
Natural category   10–12 
 Natural Science   5–7, 59–60 
Necessity   26–29 
Non-existence of exact symbolism    
104–115 
Non-experimental information   48–57 
Non-fuzziness of information   120–123 
Non-humanistic system   2–7 
Non-science   5–7, 127–136 
Non-scientific methodology   155–161 
Non-uniqueness of the primary  
category   33–34 
Nothingness-somethingness duality    
100–101 
 
O 
 
Objectives of science   133–135,  
144–148 
Ontological categories   125–127 
Ontological concepts   63–64 
Ontological exactness   100–103 
Ontological information   64–70 
Ontological reality   140–144 
Ontological space   10–12, 103–109 
Ontological reality   15–17 
Ontology   36–37, 117–138 
Organic enveloping   1–2 
 
P 
 
Parallel correspondence   152–154 
Paradigm of inexact flexible  
determination   108–109 
Paradigms of thought   73–93 
Paradoxes   196–197 
Path of knowing   73–75 
Penumbral regions   132–133, 158–160 
Phantom problems   125, 97–98 
Philosophy of exact science   191–196 
Philosophy of Science   1–2 
Point of entry   96–97 
Polarity   88–91 
Political science   60–61 
Possibilistic belief   14–16 
Possibilistic belief structures   103–106 
Possiblilistic epistemic elements    
22–23, 33–34, 57–60 
Possibilistic epistemic variable   46–47 
Possibilistic reasoning   43–46 
Possibilistic uncertainty   13–15 
Possibilistic risk system   14–16 
Possibility complex   15–17 
Possibility measure   44–45 
Possibility space   3, 8–11, 25–41,  
113–120 
Possibility   26–29 
Possible worlds   15–18, 25–30,  
188–189   
Possible-world set   25–27, 130 
Possible-world space   25–30, 36–41 
Prescriptive epistemic process   147–152 
Prescriptive rationality   37–41, 46–47 
Prescriptive science   34–41, 51–54,  
197–198 
Prescriptive theory   37–41 
Primary category of knowledge   32–35 
Primary logical category   6–7, 135–136 
Principle of continuum   44–45, 115 
Principle of duality   12 
Principle of exactness   49–51 
Principle of excluded middle   88–91 
Principle of fuzzy decomposition    
90–91 
Principle of duality   44–45 
Principle of ontological continuum    
64–65 
Probabilistic ambiguities   60–63 
Probabilistic reasoning   43–46,  
183–185  
 

Index 
209
 
Probability space   43–54 
Propositional calculus   27 
Problems of exact methods   198–200 
Problem of exact science   95–101 
Problems of explication   97–101 
Problems of inexact methods   198–200 
Problem of macro-systems   96–97 
Pure science   148–154 
 
Q 
 
Qualitative disposition   106–109 
Qualitative motion   23–24 
Qualitative volume of information    
53–54  
Quality-quantity changes   3–6 
Quality – quantity continuum   27–28 
Quality-quantity-time space   86–87 
Quality-quantity transformation   5–7 
Quantum units   12 
 
R 
 
Random-fuzzy variable   49–50,  
175–177  
Rational corroboration   137–138 
Rational falsification   136–138 
Rational Justification   136–138 
Rational verification   137–138 
Rationality   190–196 
Reality   56–57 
Relational geometry   8, 19–21 
Riskiness   196–197 
Russell, B.   28–29 
 
S 
 
Scientific methodology   155–161 
Scientific methods   159–160 
Science   5–7, 127–136, 141–151 
Self- evident truth   2–6 
Self-regulating system   5–7 
Self-organizing system   84–85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Set-to-point mapping   112–113, 
125–126 
Social institutional configuration   5–6 
Social science   5–7, 59–60, 198–199 
Soft computable systems   84–85 
Soft data   160–161 
Space of acquaintance   16–23 
Space of actual   57–63 
Space of methodology   108–110 
Stochastic conditionality   123–127 
Stochastic-fuzzy conditionality   90–93,  
124–126 
Stochastic risk   53–54 
Subjective neutrality   157–161 
Subjective-objective duality   136–138 
Substitution-transformation process    
58–60 
Symbolic variable   22–23 
Synergetic structures   5–7 
Synthetic logic   61–63 
 
T 
 
Theories of utility   199–200 
Theory   130–133 
Theory of planning   197–198 
Time trinity   54 
Toolbox frame   61–63 
Toolbox of duality   88–91 
True-false duality   3–5 
 
U 
 
Ultimate certainty   105–106 
Unity of science   24–25 
Universal object set   9–10, 27–28 
Universal principle   7, 140–141 
Universal principle of knowing   10–12 
 
V 
 
Vagueness   6–7, 17–29, 100–115,  
157–161, 167–168 
Vagueness problem   109–111 
 
 
 
 
 
 

