


PREFACE 
The discovery of the Sanskrit language by European scholars 
at the end of the eighteenth century was the starting point from 
which developed the study of the comparative philology of the 
Indo-European languages and eventually the whole science of 
modern! linguistics. 
In spite of this there does not exist in 
English :~ny book presenting a systematic account of Sanskrit 
in its relation to the other Indo-European languages. One may 
even go further and say that there is no work in any language 
which adequately fulfils this purpose. 
Wackernagel's great 
work, begun sixty years ago, still remains to be completed, 
although, with the recent appearance of a further instalment, 
its completion has been brought nearer. Thumb's Handbuch 
des Sanskrit which was of service to many generations of students 
is now very much dated, and always fell between the two 
stools of trying to be an elementary text-book of Sanskrit and 
a treatise on its comparative grammar at the same time. 
On account of its antiquity and well-preserved structure 
Sanskrit is of unique importance for the study of Indo-European, 
and an up-to-date account of its comparative grammar is 
necessary, not only to students of Sanskrit itself, but also to 
those interested in any branch of Indo-European philology. 
Consequently when I was asked to contribute a book on 
Sanskrit to the series The Great Languages, it ¥Vas clear that by 
concentrating on the study of Sanskrit from this point of view 
the greatest need would be met. This is particularly true since 
for the history of Indo-Aryan inside India, from Sanskrit down 
to modern times, students already have at their disposal the 
excellent work of Jules Bloch. 
Providing a reliable account of Sanskrit in its relation to 
Indo-European is at the present moment not altogether a simple 
matter. Forty years ago there existed a generally agreed doc­
trine of Indo-European theory wpich had been systematically 
presented in the early years of the century in Brugmann's 
Grundriss. At that time it would merely have been a question 
v 

vi 
PREFACE 
of adopting this corpus of agreed doctrine to the needs of the 
student and general reader. and of the particular language 
described. Since then theJiiscovery of Hittite has revolution­
ised Indo-European studies and a considerable part of the older 
theory has been unable to stand up to the new evidence. 
Consequently Indo-European studies can now be said to be in 
a state of flux. 
New theories have appeared, and are clearly 
necessary I but the process is not yet completed. There IS no 
generally received body of doctrine replacing the old. and many 
of the fundamental points at issue remain disputed. Further­
more attention has tended to be largely concentrated on 
phonetic questions raised by Hittite, and matters of morpho­
logy. on which its evidence is also of fundamental importance. 
have been less exhaustively studied. 
In th/.:se circumstances I have attempted to present a reason­
ably consistent account of the comparative grammar of Sanskrit 
based on the evaluation of the new evidence. A work like this 
is not the .place to enter into discussion of the various conflicting 
theories that are in the field. if only for reasons of space. and 
bibliographical references have been systematically omitted. 
What has been written in recent years on these problems has 
been taken into account, and such theories as appear acceptable 
are incorporated in this exposition. It is hoped that it will go 
some way to providing ,an up-to-date synthesis of a subject 
which in its present state is hardly accessible outside the widely 
scattered specialist literature. 
The study of Sanskrit has advanced recently in another direc­
tion also. 
Investigation of the influence of the pre-Aryan 
languages of India on Sanskrit and on Indo-Aryan in its later 
stages, has shown that this is considerable and solid results 
have been achieved. As far as the structure of the language is 
concerned, particularly in its early stage, which is the only one 
relevant to the comparative study of Indo-European. this influ­
ence hardly counts at alL 
On the other hand in the field of 
vocabulary it is very important that the Indo-European and 
non-Indo-European elements should be separated. The last 
chapter of the book contains a summary of the main findings 
on the part of the subject so far as established at the present 
stage. Future work will no doubt add more. 
T. BURROW 

" 
~ 
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
A number of alterations to the text of the The Sanskrit Language 
have been made in this edition, the principal ones being as 
follows. 
In Chapter I the latter part of Section 6 has been 
rewritten to conform with the now prevailing opinion that the 
Aryan vestiges of the ancient Near East are to be connected 
specifically with Indo-Aryan. Also rewritten are Section II and 
t,  
(in part) Section 17 of Chapter III to take account of the 
conclusions reached on those topics in the articles of mine which 
are quoted in the Appendix. Chapter VIII has been renamed 
Loanwords in Sanskrit, so that loanwords from Greek and 
Iranian (Section 2) can be dealt with in it as well as loanwords 
from AustIo-Asiatic and Dravidian (Section I). 
The list of 
loanwords from Dravidian in this chapter has been shortened by 
the omission of some items now considered to. be false or 
dubious, 
At the'.end an Appendix has been added containing references 
to the rrla~t important contributions to the subject which have 
appeared since 1955, and also some supplementary notes. 
September I972  
T. BURROW 
.# 
vii 

r .. 
1. 
II. 
III. 
\­
IV. 
V. 
VI. 
vn. 
VIII. 
,. 
CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
page v 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
I 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
35 
PHONO'LOGY 
67 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
118 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
220 
NUMEHALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
258 
THE VERB 
289 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
374 
APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
390 
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
399 
INDEX 
402 
ix 

:1..  
CHAPTER I 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
§ 1. 
INDO-ARYAN AND INDO-IRANIAN 
In the greater part of India today languages are spoken which 
are derived from a single form of speech which was introduced 
into India by invaders from the north-west more than three 
thousand years ago. The invading peoples were known in their 
own language as iirya-, a word which is also commonly used as 
an adjective meaning' noble, honourable '. Behind them in 
Central Asia remained kindred peoples who eventually occupied 
the plateau of Iran, as well as large tracts of Central Asia. 
These peoples used the same name of themselves, in A vestan 
airya-. and from the genitive plural of this word the modern 
name Iran is ultimately derived. In conformance with this 
usage the term A ryan is now used as the common name of these 
peoples and their languages; alternatively the term Indo­
Iranian is commonly used. To distinguish the Indian branch 
from the Iranian, the term Indo-Aryan has been coined, and as 
applied to language, it covers the totality of languages and 
dialects derived fronl this source from the earliest times to the 
present day. It is practical to distinguish three periods, Old, 
Middle and Modern Indo-Aryan. The classical form of Old 
Indo-Aryan eventually came to be designated by the term 
Sa1JZskrta- meaning · polished, cultivated, correct (according to 
the rules of grammar) " in contradistinction to Priikrta the 
speech of the uneducated masses, which was the same Indo­
Aryan in origin, but was subject to a process of steady change 
and evolution. As a term to distinguish Indo-Aryan from the 
non-Aryan languages the adjective arya-· was used in opposition 
to mlecchd- ' barbarian '. In addition we may note that one of 
the terms for' speech', bhiirati (sc. viik) had originally an ethnic 
sense, meaning' language of the Bharatas ',1 
1 At an early period the most prominent of the Indo~Aryan trillf's. whence 
also the indigenous name of India bhiirata(-lIar-?a). 

2 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
Sanskrit in its narrower sense applies to standard classical 
Sanskrit as regulated by the grammarians but may be con­
veniently used'more widely as equivalent to Old Indo-Aryan. 
In this sense it covers both classical Sanskrit and the pre­
classical or Vedic language. Middle Indo-Aryan, that is Prakrit 
in the widest sense of the term, comprises three successive 
stages of developmen.t: (r) The earliest stage is represented in 
literature by P<lli, the language of the canonical writings of the 
Thera-vada school of Buddhism. This is a language of the cen­
turies immediately preceding the Christian era. On the same 
level of development are the various dialects recorded in the 
inscriptions of Asoka (c. 250 B.C.), and also the language of other 
early inscriptions. (2) Prakrit in the narrower sense of the word, 
or Standard Literary Prakrit, represents the stage of develop­
ment reached some centuries after the Christian era. 
It is 
found mainly in the Drama and in the religious writings of the 
Jains. The various literary forms of Prakrit were stabilised by 
grammarians at this period and, as a written language, it re­
mains essentially unchanged during the succeeding centuries. 
(3) Apabhrarpsa is known from texts of the tenth century A.D. 
but as a literary language it was formed some centuries earlier. 
It represents the final stage of Middle Indo-Aryan, the one 
immediately preceding the emergence of the Modem Indo­
Aryan languages. The Modern languages, Bengali, Hindi, 
Gujarati, Marathi, etc., begin to be recorded from about the end 
of the first millennium A.D., and from then their development can 
be followed as they gradually acquire their present-day form. 
Thus we have before us in India three thousand years of 
continuous linguistic history, recorded in literary documents. 
During the course of this period a single, and originally alien 
idiom has spread over the greater part of the country, and, 
evolving by slow degrees, has resulted in the various languages 
now spoken in Northern and Central India. Enormous changes 
have taken place during this time, and the languages we meet 
today are very different indeed frOITl the ancient speech 
spoken by the invading Aryan tribes. Nevertheless the docu­
ment:ltion available enables us to follow in detail the various 
intermediate stages of development and to observe how. 
by changes hardly noticeable from generation to generation, an 
original language has altered into descendant languages which 
superficially at any rate, are now barely recognisable as the same. 

3 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
The earliest document of the linguistic history of Indo­
Aryan is the lJgveda, which, by rough guess-work, is placed in 
the region of 1000 B.C. The language we find there is the source 
from which all later developments in India have arisen. But 
this language itself had evolved out of a yet earlier form of 
speech, by precisely the same kind of slow change and altera­
tion which caused it to evolve later into something else. This 
earlier evolution is unrecorded by any direct documentation, 
but it can be reconstructed in considerable detail by means of 
comparison with related languages. By this method two stages 
in the prehistory of the language can be established: (1) By 
comparison of early Indo-Aryan with the very closely related 
Iraniallr it is possible to form a fairly accurate idea of the 
original Indo-Iranian or Aryan language from which both have 
evolved. {z} By comparing Indo-Aryan and Iranian with the 
other Indo-European languages (enumerated below) it is P()S­
sible atso togo beyond this, and to reconstruct in general out­
line the characteristics of the original language from which all 
these are derived. 
Since Iranian in view of its very close relationship with Indo­
Aryan is of the first importance for the study of Indo-Aryan 
philology, a short account of its distribution and documentation 
is desirable. The migration of the Indo-Aryans to India brought 
about, or perhaps was the final stage of, the separation of the 
primitive Aryan community into two distinct divisions which 
henceforth evolved separately in linguistic as in other respects. 
The Iranians left behind in the region of the Ox us valley 1 
proceeded to expand rapidly in various directions, occupying 
not only the Iranian plateau which remaint;d -their centre of 
gravity, but also large tracts of Central Asia, extending on the 
one hand to the confines of China and on the other hand to the 
plains of South Russia. From an early period Iranian showed a 
much stronger tendency to differentiation into separate dialects 
which soon became independent languages than was the case 
with Indo-Aryan, which for geographical and other reasons 
maintained a comparative unity over most of North India for 
a very long period. 
For the old period Iranian is represented by documents in 
Avestan and Old Persian, and it is these texts which are of 
1 A recollection ofChorasmia as their original home is preserved in the 
traditions of the ancient Iranians. 

4 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
prime importance for comparison with Vedic Sanskrit. Avesta 
is the name given to the ancient collection of sacred writings 
preserved by the adherents of the Zoroastrian religion, and it is 
after this that the language is named. It is an eastern Iranian 
dialect, the exact location· of which has not been precisely 
determined. The oldest section of the A vesta f the Ga8as are 
attributed to Zoroaster himself. Concerning his date there has 
been much dispute, and it seems that the traditional date of the 
Zoroastrians themselves, which places him around 600 B.C. 
can hardly be correct. The language of the Ga8as is no less 
ancient than that of the f!.gveda. and for this and other reasons 
the composition of the two texts must 
roughly to the 
same period. 
Old Persian, a south-western dialect, and one 
showing tendencies to modernisation in comparison with the 
earliest A vestan, is preserved in inscriptions of the Achaemenian 
kings in a special cuneiform alphabet invented for the purpose. 
The relations between this ancient Iranian and the language 
of the Veda are so close that it is not possible satisfactorily to 
study one without the other. Gramlnatically the differences 
are very small; the chief differentiation in the earliest period 
lies in certain characteristic and well-defined phonetic changes 
which have affected Iranian on the one hand and Indo-Aryan 
on the other. It is quite possible to find verses in the oldest 
portion of the Avesta, which simply by phonetic substitutions 
according to established laws can be turned into intelligible 
Sanskrit. The greater part of the vocabulary is held in common 
and a large list could be provided of words shared between the 
two which are absent from the rest of Indo-European. This 
resemblance is particularly striking in the field of culture and 
religion, and may be illustrated by a few examples: Ski. 
hiratJya-~ Av. zaranya- ' gold', Skt. sena, Av. haena, O. Pers. 
hainii 'army', Skt. .r~ti-, Av., O. Pers. arsti- 'spear', Skt. 
k~atrd-, Av. xsa8ra- 'sovereignty t, Skt. dsura-, Av. ahura­
( lord " Skt. 
Av. yasna- 'sacrifice', Skt. h6tar-, Av. 
zaotar- ' sacrificing priest', Skt. s6ma-, A v. haoma- ' the sacred 
drink Soma " Skt. dthar1.ltw- ' a class of priest 't Av. a8aurvan-, 
a(Jravan- ' fire-priest " Skt. aryal"ilan-, Av. airyaman- ' member 
of a religious sodality'. In the same way we find the names of 
divinities and mythological personages held in common, e.g., 
Skt. l\1itra-, Av. mi8ra-, Skt, Ya1na-, son of Vivdsvant-, Av. 
Yima, son of Vr~'aJJ7.'ant-, Skt. AptttJt Napat, Av. ap'Itn napat 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
5 
( Grandson of the waters J (a divinity), etc. In this field, how­
ever, movements of religious reform with which the name of 
Zarathustra is associated have tended to alter the picture from 
the Iranian side. For instance Av. daeva-, O. Pers. daiva-, 
corresponding to Sanskrit deva- ( god' has acquired the meaning 
of < devil J. In the same way some Vedic divinities appear in 
the Avesta as evil spirits: Skt. lndra-, Niisatya-: Av. Indra. 
Nd!Jhai()ya-. 
The material for Old Iranian is somewhat restricted both as to 
quantity and as regards the number of dialects represented. 
For the MiddJ.e Iranian period, thanks mainly to discoveries of 
the present century, the documentation is much wider. We 
now have, in addition to Middle Persian proper (Pahlavi) ex­
tensive documents in two important East Iranian languages 
which are not represented in the early period, namely Sogdian 
and Saka (mainly in the dialect of Khotan, but with a few texts 
in a neighbouring dialect). The publication and interpreta­
tion of the material in these languages has progressed rapidly 
and successfully, but the results are not yet in the main avail­
able in a form easily accessible to students of general Indo-Aryan 
or Indo-European philology. Eventually a considerable contri­
bution should be available from this source, because, although 
they cannot compete in antiquity with the Avestan and Old 
Persian texts, they constitute independent branches of Iranian 
which were not previously known aI1d therefore have preserved 
things which were lost elsewhere from an early period.! 
In the mediaeval period the domain of Iranian became very 
much restricted, mainly on account of Turkish expansion. 
Over large tracts of Central Asia Iranian has long since died out. 
It has remained principally in Iran or Persia proper, where 
modern Persian can look back to a continuous literary tradition 
of over a thousand years. On the periphery of this area, par­
ticularly on the Indo-Iranian frontier, there are still many 
minor languages surviving in small areas, and one which is still 
important, namely Pasta, the official language of Afghanistan. 
At the other side of the territory in· the Northern Caucasus 
Ossetic still survives from one of the numerous Iranian invas­
ions of South Russia. 
1 For Instance the IE word for' (young) pig " Lat. porcus. Lith. paiSas, was 
not previously known in Indo-Iranian, but has now turned up in Khotanese : 
pa.'sa-. 

SANSKRIT" AND INDO-EUROPEAN
6 
§2. 
PRIMITIVE INDO-EuROPEAN 
The Indo-Iranian languages which have been briefly out­
lined form together one branch of the Indo-European family. 
The discovery of the historical relationship of -the members of 
the -Indo-European family was a direct result of the discovery 
of the Sanskrif language and literature by European scholars 
towards the dose of the eighteenth century. The similarity of 
the Sanskrit language, both in grammar and vocabulary to the 
classical languages of Europe is so far-reaching that scholars 
familiar with Latin and Greek could not fail to be struck by the 
resemblance. Since up to this time there had existed no clear 
idea of the real nature of the development of languages and of 
their relations with each othert the explanation of this unex­
pected but quite undeniable affinity could not be provided 
without a completely new and scientific approach to the study of 
language. In his famous address to the Royal Asiatic Society of 
Bengal in I786, Sir William Jones indicated in broad outlines 
the significance of the new discovery: 
'The Sanscrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of 
wonderful structure; more perfect than the Greek, more 
copious than the Latin, and more exquisitely refined than 
either; yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity both in 
the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar, than could 
possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed 
that no philologer could examine them at all without believing 
them to have sprung from sante common source, which perhaps 
no longer exists. There is a similar reason though not quite so 
forcible, for supposing that both the Gothick and the Celtick, 
though blended with a differ~nt idiom, had the same origin with 
the Sanscrit; and the old Persian might be added to the same 
family.' 
The truth of these remarks has been adequately demon­
strated by the subsequent development of the science of Corn-­
parative Philology, which dates from this time. During the past 
century and a half the languages of the Indo-European family 
have been the subject of intensive scientific study. The main 
features of the parent language have been reliably recon­
structed, and the historical and prehistorical deVelopment of 
the several branches has been worked out in detail. The 
methods and principles employed have been subject to pro­

7 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
gressive improvement and refinement, and new discoveries 
have continued and still continue to produce a wider and deeper 
understanding of the subject. The methods first evolved in the 
study of the Indo-European languages have further been 
successfully employed in the study of independent linguistic 
families (Semitic, Finno-ugrian, Bantu, etc.). 
The whole 
science of linguistics has come into existence as a result of the 
stimulus provided by the discovery of Sanskrit. 
The Indo-European languages are divided into ten major 
branches, in addition to which there are known to have been 
other branches which have died out without leaving adequate 
record. The ten major branches are as follows: 
L Aryan or Indo-Iranian, summarised above. 
II. Baltic (Lithuanian, Lettish and the extinct Old Prussian) 
and Slavonic (Old Church Slavonic or Old Bulgarian t Russian, 
Polish, Czech, Serbo-Croatian, Bulgarian, etc.). These two 
groups are very closely related to each ather, though not as 
closely as Indo-Aryan and Iranian. There are some ancient 
divergencies between them which make it impossible to recon­
struct a primitive Balto-Slavonic language, intermediate be­
tween Indo-European and the existing languages in the same 
way as Indo-Iranian can be reconstructed. Nevertheless in view 
of their many close resemblances it is convenient to group them 
together under a common name,' Balto-Slavonic. The earliest 
recorded Slavonic is the Old Bulgarian of the ninth century; 
Lithuanian is known only from the sixteenth century. 
III. Armenian, known from the fifth century A.D. 
IV. Albanian, known only from modern times. 
These four groups are collectively known as the satJm-Ianguages 
for reasons which will be explained below. Opposed to them are 
the centum-languages, which are as follows: 
V. Greek, with numerous dialects. 
The literature begins 
with the Homeric poems, c. 800 B.C., but during the last twenty­
five years the decipherment of documents in the linear B script 
and Mycenean dialect has pushed back the history of the 
language by 500 years. 
VI. Latin, which has developed into the various Romance 
Languages (French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Rumanian l 
etc.). It is known in literature from c. 200 B.C., and there are 
scanty inscriptionalremains from an earlier date. 
VII. Celtic. consisting of Continental Celtic or Gallic, 

8 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
which is extinct, and Insular Celtic which is divided into Irish 
(Gaelic) and Brittanic (Welsh, Cornish, Breton). Literary records 
of Celtic begin with the Old Irish glosses of the eighi!l century. 
VIII. Germanic, which may be divided into East Germanic or 
Gothic (extinct), Nordic or Scandinavian. and West Germanic, 
to which belong the English and Gennan languages. The 
earliest literary monument of Germanic is the Gothic translation 
of the Bible by Ulfila (A.D. fourth cent.). 
The two major members of the family which remain to be 
mentioned are known from discoveries made in the present 
century. They are: 
IX. The so-called' Tocharian J preserved in Buddhist manu­
scripts discovered in Chinese Turkestan, dating from the sixth 
to the tenth centuries A.D. It is divided into two dialects which 
are for convenience termed A and B. 
X. Hittite, which is preserved in cuneiform tablets recQvered 
from Boghaz-koi in Anatolia, the site of the capital of the 
ancient Hittite kingdom. The time covered by these records is 
the period from c. 1700 to C. 1200 B.C., the 1?ulk of them being 
dated towards the end of this period. It is the oldest recorded 
IE language, and at the same time in many ways aberrant from 
the usual type. 
Its discovery has raised many new and 
interesting problems. 
In addition to the major languages listed above, there existed 
in antiquity a considerable number of other IE languages which 
have become extinct and are known only from scanty remains 
in the form of inscriptions, proper names and occasional 
glosses. To put the Indo-European family into proper perspec­
tive the more important of these are enumerated below. 
In the first place there are certain ancient languages of Asia 
Minor which together with Hittite form a special group. The 
cuneiform texts from Boghaz-koi include texts in 1\":0 such 
languages, -Luwian and Palaean, which show close relationship 
Vitl-th Hittite. The so-called Hittite Hieroglyphic inscriptions 
which have now been partially deciphered, have revealed a 
language which is closely related to the Luwian of the cuneiform 
texts. Later the Lycian language, in which there are inscrip­
tions in alphabetic script, has been shown to have relationship 
with Luwian. 1\,lost recently the Ly'dian language, known from 
inscriptions from SardiS, has been shown to belong with the 
above languages in the Anatolian group. 
I 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
9 
Fragmentary records of other Indo-European languages have 
been preserved from the Italian and Balkan peninsulas, and, 
resulting from a later movement of peoples_ and separate from 
the above Anatolian group, in 'Western Asia Minor. In Italy 
Oscan and Umbrian are known from a fair number of inscrip­
tions, and together with Latin they are classed as the Italic 
group. The language of the Sieuli in Sicily is also considered to 
belong with Italic. In the south-east corner of Italy. Messapian 
is held to be a later introduction from across the Adriatic, 
possibly related to Illyrian. Venetie in North East Italy is 
classed as a separate Indo-European language, though showing 
some signs of relationship with Italic. In the Balkan peninsula 
the Illyrian language is known only from proper names, and 
there is an unsettled debate as to whether or not it is the 
ancestor of Albanian. The information of Thracian, the other 
main Balkan language in ancient times is equally scanty, and 
its position remains obscure. 
In Asia Minor fresh invasions 
from the Balkans brought to an end the Hittite empire (c. I200 
and introduced new Indo-European languages into the 
area. Of these Phrygian is scantily preserved in inscriptions. 
The languages of the Indo-European family have become 
more widely diffused over the world than those of any other 
. linguistic family. They also form the majority of the cultivated 
languages of mankind. It is not surprising therefore that the 
question of the original home of Indo-European has been the 
subject of much speculation. In the early days it was usually 
held that this lay in Central Asia, and that from there successive 
waves of emigration had carried the various members of the 
family to Europe. This was mainly due to the exaggerated 
importance attached to Sanskrit and to confusion between the 
primitive Aryans of whom we have spoken with the much 
earlier Indo-Europeans. It is as we have seen reasonably cer­
tain that it was from Central Asia, more specifically the Oxus 
valley, that the Indians and Iranians set out to occupy their 
respective domains. But there is not the slightest trace of 
evidence or probability that the ancestors_.-Of the Germans, 
Celts, Greeks and other European members of the family were 
ever near this area. Consequently it is now usually held that 
the original home lay somewhere in Europe. The main argu­
ment for this is the simple but effective one that it is in Europe 
that the greatest number of Indo-European languages, and !he 

10 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
greatest diversity of them is to be found, and this from the 
earliest recorded times. At an ancient period we find enormous 
stretches of Asia in the occupation of Indo-Iranian, a single 
member of the family, and as yet little differentiated; in 
Europe on the other hand a concentration of many languages 
occupying comparatively restricted areas, and already markedly 
different from each other. It follows of necessity that the pres­
ence of Indo-European in the Indo-Iranian area is the result of 
late colonial expansion on a vast scale, while in Europe the 
existence of such great diversity at the earliest recorded period 
indicates the presence there of Indo-European from remote 
antiquity. 
It is true that the discovery of the two Tocharian dialects in 
Chinese Turkestan has slightly modified this picture, and it has 
led some to think again of an Asiatic home. But the addition of 
one new branch only in Asia is obviously insufficient to tum the 
balance. Moreover the nature of Tocharian, which has under­
gone profound and far-reaching phonetic changes strongly sug­
gestive o"f alien influence, makes it clear that this language has 
travelled far from its original home. Somewhat similar changes 
have taken place in Hittite and the allied languages of Asia 
Minor, and this is held to have been due to the influence of the 
pre-Indo-European, languages which existed in that area 
(Proto-Hittite, Churrian, Urartean, etc.). So we may conclude 
that these languages also have been brought in by invaders, 
and since in ancient times the distribution of languages in this 
area was such that the non-Indo-European languages mentioned 
lay to the East and the Indo-European languages to the West, 
it becomes clear that the direction of the invasions must have 
been from the West, that is to say from Europe, across the 
Hellespont. Further it has been pointed out that the character­
istics of this Asianic branch of Indo-European are such as can 
only be explained by the assumption that it was separated from 
the main branch of Indo-European at a period very much 
earlier than the movements which lead to the final break-up of 
IE linguistic unity. This means that the earliest of all the 
Indo-European migrations which can be deduced from our 
evidence, and one that must have antedated the migration of 
the Indo-Iranians by a very long period of time, already points 
to the existence in Europe of the Indo-European tongue. 
Within Europe it is possible to narrow down considerably the 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-E UROPEAN 
II 
territorial limits within which the cradle of the Indo-European 
languages is to be sought. It is known with reasonable cer­
tainty that the Italian and Greek peninsulas were colonised 
from the North. The occupation of France and the British Isles 
by Celts from Central Europe occurred at a comparatively late 
date (c. 500 B.c.). The Iberian peninSUla remained predomin­
antly non-Indo-European till Roman times, and in modern 
Basque lhere still exists a survival of pre-Indo-European 
speech. The .Eastern limit is indicated by the fact that before 
the two Asiatic migrations (Tocharian and Indo-Iranian) Indo­
European must have been bounded to the East by an early 
form of Finno-ugrian, and there is some evidence of contact be­
tween these two families in the primitive period. There is 
reason to believe that the original centre of Finno-ugrian expan­
sion lay between the Volga and the Urals and this forms the 
extreme limit beyond which Indo-European was not to be 
found in the early stages of its history. This leaves the central 
portion of Europe extending from the Rhine to Central and 
Southern Russia, and it is probable that by the time of the 
Indo-Iranian migrations the larger part of this area had long 
been occupied by various Indo-European dialects. 
It is not possible to define the original Indo-European home­
land in terms any narrower than these, nor is it desirable to try, 
since those who have attempted to do so have usually suffered 
from misconceptions about the nature of (Primitive Indo­
European' and about the time when the earliest divisions 
began. The evolution of the Indo-European should not be re­
garded as being on a par with that of the Romance languages 
from Latin. In the latter case the various languages are derived 
from a single unitary language, the language to begin with of 
one city. But in the case of Indo-European it is certain that 
there was no such unitary language which can be reached by 
means of comparison. It would be easy to produce, more or less 
ad infinitum a list of forms like Skt. nitbhi~, Gk. oJ.L~aA6~ , navel', 
which although inherited directly from the primitive IE period, 
and radically related are irreducible to a single originaL In fact 
detailed comparison makes it clear that the Indo-European that 
we can reach by this means was already deeply split up into a 
series of varying dialects. 
It is from this point of view that the question of the' split­
ting' of Indo-European should be regarded. It has not been 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN
12 
uncommon to find in works of general history or linguistics a 
conception that somewhere about the second half of the third 
millennium B.C. a single undivided Indo-European occupying a 
comparativelyrrestricted area being taken by a series of migra­
tions to the various countries where IE languages are later 
found, after which migrations the various individual languages. 
were evolved. But it is now becoming clear that by this peried. 
the various members of the family must have already begun to 
assume their historic form. 
For instance when the Indo­
Iranians first set off on their migrations from Europe, very 
likely about 2000 B.C. as is often suggested, they took with them 
not Indo-European which they subsequently proceeded to 
change into Indo-Iranian, but the Indo-Iranian which we can 
reconstruct, which had already assumed its essential features in 
the original European homeland. It is clear that once the 
migrations began over such wide territories all opportunities for 
unitary development of Indo-Iranian must have ceased, and 
since, as we have observed there quite undoubtedly was at one 
time a unitary development of Indo-Iranian, this must have 
taken place before any migrations began. 
What applies to Indo-Iranian must apply with equal force 
to the other members of the family. We have already remarked 
on the deep divergencies between the various European mem­
bers of the family, and this can only be accounted for by pushing 
back the period of original division to a period much earlier than 
is usually assumed. If there ever existed a unitary Indo­
European which spread from a restricted area, this lies long 
behind the earliest period which can be reached by any com­
parison. · Primitive Indo-European' must be regarded as a 
continuum of related dialects occupying an extensive territory 
in Europe (very like1y the major part of the area indicated 
above), dialects which already before the period of the great 
migrations had begun to assume the character of separate 
languages. 
§ 3. 
DIVISIONS OF INDo-EuRoPEAK 
The question of the early Indo-European dialects has been 
the subject of considerable study and some useful results have 
been acquired. It is possible to form a fair idea of their distribu­
tion in the period preceding the emergence of the individual 

13 
SANSKRIT AN D INDO-EUROPEAN 
languages. The most striking and important early dialect dis­
tinction is that which separates the salam-languages from the 
centum-languages. These two groups are so named from the 
way they treat IE k in the word for (hundred' (IE *k1ptdm). 
The centum-languages preserve it as such (Lat. centum, Gk. 
EKa:rov, Ir. cet, Toch. A. klint); in the satam-Ianguages it is 
changed to some kind of sibilant (Skt. satdm, Av. sat"m, Lith. 
siiiitas, O. S1. soUto). Similar changes occur in the case of IE g 
and th. The languages participating in this change are Indo­
Iranian, Balto-Slavonic, Annenian, Albanian. Since this fea­
ture is so wide-spread, and since it occurs without any variation 
of the conditions in all the languages concerned, it must be 
assumed that the change took place in the Indo-European 
period, before the dispersal of the several languages, and that it 
affected a group of contiguous dialects within the Indo-Euro­
pean area. The unity of these dialects, and of the languages 
derived from them is further confinned by the fact that the loss 
of the labial element in the IE series kill, gw, gwh (e.g. Skt. ka­
t who ? • , Lith. kds as opposed to Gk. 1TO-()EV, Lat. quo-d, 
Goth. /vas) is characteristic of precisely this same group of 
languages. 
Before the discovery of Tocharian and Hittite it was common 
to regard the centum-satnn division as a division between 
Western and Eastern Indo-European, and it was customary to 
regard the centum-languages as a united group like the satam­
languages. This was never altogether satisfactory, since not 
only ts Greek cut off from the Western IE languages by the 
intervening sat<1m-Ianguage Albanian, but also because apart 
from this it displays no special similarities with them, but 
rather with the satam-Ianguages. The discovery of the new 
·languages, which were unmistakeably centum-languages, made 
it quite impossible to speak of an East-West division any 
longer, and also made it clear that there was no unitary centum­
group. The centum-languages are alike only in preserving 
original k, g. gk as occlusives, and it is a commonplace of lin­
guistics that common preservations are not necessarily a sign 
that dialects or languages are closely related. We may there­
fore substitute a division of the Indo-European dialects into: 
1. A central group which can be equated with thesatmt­
-languages. and is characterised by the innovations mentioned 
above. 

14 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
II. Four peripheral dialect groups surrounding the central 
group, namely (1) West Indo-European comprising Italic, Celtic 
and Germanic; (2) Greek, which however has special relations 
with the central group; (3) Eastern Indo-European which has 
survived as • Tocharian '; (4) Hittite and other IE languages 
of Asia Minor which separated earliest from the original IE 
stock. 
The historical distribution of the IE languages corresponds 
on the whole to this, but in the case of Sanskrit migrations at a 
comparatively late date took it to the extreme East of the Indo­
European domain. Before this period its ancestor, primitive 
Indo-Iranian must have held a fairly central position, being 
directly in contact with the other dialects of the satam-group, 
and having to the East of it that form of Indo-European which 
eventually turned into the dialects A and B of Chinese Turke­
stan. Its position can further be determined by the specially 
close relations which are found to exist between it and Balto­
Slavonic. Since the Baits and the Slavs are not likely to have 
moved far from the positions in which they are to be found in 
their earliest recorded history, the original location of Indo­
Iranian towards the South-East of this area becomes highly 
probable. 
The Western group of Indo-European languages consisting of 
Italic, Celtic and Germanic, is distinguished by certain com­
mon features in grammar and vocabulary, which indicate a 
fairly close mutual connection in prehistoric times. These ties 
are· particularly close in the case of Italic and Celtic, even 
though they are not sufficient to justify the theory of common 
Italo-celtic. The connections of Germanic with the other two 
groups are less close, but they are quite definite. At the same 
time it has some special affinities with Slavonic, and further with 
the central group in general (e.g. absence of the medio-passive 
terminations in -r). 
There is an almost complete absence of special features com­
mon to Indo-Iranian and Western Indo-European. All that 
has been pointed out so far consists of certain common elements 
of vocabulary which have been largely eliminated in the rest of 
Indo-European. These words are i~ many respects highly inter­
esting and important, but they consist entirely of ancient Indo­
European words which have been preserved independently by 
two groups which otherwise have no special connection. Such 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
15 
words are: Lat. credo. Ir. cretim, Skt. srad-dhii-
believe' ;.-
s~.
I 
Lat. rex, Ir. ri king'; Skt. rdj-, rdjan-, Ir. rigain ' queen' ;
I 
Skt. Tdjn!, Ir. rige ' kingdom'; Skt. rdjya-; Lat. 'ius' justice " 
<t4M·
iustus, Ir. uisse ' just, righteous " Skt. yos, Av. yaos' rightness, 
If'} purity'; Lat. ensis ' sword I, Skt. asi-; Lat. res' property' ; 
, 
Skt. rai-; Ir. bro ' millstone'; Skt. grilvan- (also, differently yr." 
formed Goth. qairnus, etc.); Ir. gert 'milk', Skt. ghrtd­
, ghee '; Ir. aire (gen. s. airech) 'chief, noble'; Skt. aryti-, 
..i.rt:
iirya- ' master, lord, noble, Aryan'. ..More dubious is the old 
ftfJ''-'  equation Lat. flamen, Skt. brahmdn- ' priest'. Many of these  
words are conttected with religion, law, etc., and the fact that  
~ 
they are preserved "in these two branches alone is due to the 
highly conservative tendencies which characterised the societies 
concerned. They do not imply any close connection between 
the original dialects on which the languages are based. 
Greek shows little sign of close connection with any of the 
other centum-groups. On the contrary its closest connection 
appears to be with the sat<7m-languages, particularly with Indo­
Iranian and Armenian. It is sufficient to glance through a 
comparative grammar of Sanskrit to see that the correspond­
ences between Sanskrit and Greek are much more numerous 
than those between' Sanskrit and any other language of the 
family outside Indo-Iranian. This is particularly so in the case 
of verbal inflection. The fact that the two languages are 
recorded from such an early period is partly responsible for this 
state of affairs, but it is by no means entirely so. Some of the 
common features in\'olved are of late Indo-European origin, 
and must be regarded as common innovations, and not as cases 
of the common preservation of ancient forms. For instance 
the Indo-European languages have no common form of the 
genitive singular of o-stems. The form -osyo which is common 
to Greek (-ow, ov), Armenian (-oy) and Indo-Iranian (Skt. 
-asya, Av. -ahya) has no more claim to antiquity than Italo­
Celtic -i or the Hittite form (-as, <os) which appears to be 
identical with the nominative. In fact the great variations in 
case suggest that the various forms have developed in the late 
Indo-European period when the language was already widely 
divided into dialects. It is therefore important evidence of 
close prehistoric connection. Likewise the augment is found 
only in Greek (it/>£p£), Indo-Iranian (Skt. dbharat) and Armen­
ian (eber), 'with traces of Phyrgian. Since there is no reason to 

16 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
believe that it ever existed as a regular component of the verbal 
inflection in those languages in which it is not recorded, its 
development in Indo-Iranian, Greek and Armenian must be 
regarded as a common innovation of the closely related dialects 
on which they are based. The elimination of the r- endings of 
the medio- passive in Sanskrit and Greek is a significant common 
characteristic. Phonetically Sanskrit and Greek show a common 
treatment of the sonant nasals (IE tz, 1lZ'), replacing them by the 
vowel a. In view of the close connection that exists between 
them in other respects this is unlikely to be a matter of chance. 
In other respects, e.g. in the matter of prothetic vowels Greek 
seems to be closest to Armenian, and there are also some 
remarkable coincidences of vocabulary between them. 
The fact that Greek shows more signs of close connection 
with the sat~m-languages Armenian and Indo-Iranian than with 
any other is in striking contrast to the absence in it of the dis­
tinctive sound changes of the sai(}m group. We must assume 
that the IE dialect on which Greek is based was originally in the 
closest contact with the central dialect group, but that this 
contact was severed at a period preceding the satam sound 
changes. 
The most striking thing about the two Tocharian languages 
is that they have no special connections whatever with Indo­
Iranian, the only other Asiatic family. They are no closer to 
Indo-Iranian-in some respects they appear more different"­
than to languages far to the \Vest like Italic and Celtic. This is 
in accordance with the fact that the parent dialect of Indo­
Iranian was originally a central dialect, and as such would have 
with a dialect on the Eastern periphery, from which Tocharian 
is descended, no more in common than with the percursors of 
Italic and Celtic on the extreme West. Neither have they any 
special relations with any other of the individual groups of 
Indo-European. The prevalence of the middle terminations in r 
in Tocharian does not indicate any close relationship with Italo­
Celtic on the one hand or with Hittite on the other, but merely 
a type of inflection that was characteristic of early Indo­
European. but was tending to be reduced or eliminated in the 
later period in dialects of the central area. Attempts to find 
other evidence of connection with one group or another have 
been singularly lacking in results. The two languages have 
become much altered from the original Indo-European. The 

SANSKRIT  AND 
I~DO-EeROPEA:-J 
17 
old system of nominal inflection has to a large extent broken 
down, and the percentage of words in the vocabulary for which 
it is possible to find satisfactory etymologies is comparatively 
small. At the same time some features of the two languages 
'", 
have an ancient aspect which suggests that they are derived 
from a comparatively early form of Indo-European. This 
would imply a comparatively early migration in the case of 
Tocharian, and such an assumption accounts best for the great 
difference between Tocharian and Indo-Iranian. We must 
assum~ that an Eastern Indo-European dialect group had for 
centuries existed in isolation before the comparatively late 
-...  
migration which took Indo-Iranian to Asia from the central 
Indo-European area. 
The separation of Hittite and the languages allied to it from 
the main body of Indo-European must have taken place 
earliest of all. This is the only way to explain the great differ­
ences which exist between it and the type of Indo-European 
that has been reconstructed from the previously known mem­
bers of the family. The most striking feature of Hittite is the 
preservation of tJ" which has elsewhere disappeared. In addition 
to this the language deviates from the usual type in many 
other respects. In the formation of nouns the percentage of 
consonantal stems, and in particular the old neuter types in 1 
and r alternating with n, is much greater than in the standard 
types of Indo-European. The feminine gender is undeveloped. 
t 
The inflection of nouns is much simpler than in the type of 
Indo-European represented by Sanskrit, and there is no reason 
to believe that this is due to losses on the part of Hittite. Above 
all, the conjugation of the verb differs widely from the systero 
reconstructed largely by the comparison of Sanskrit and Greek,
~ 
which at one time passed for primitive Indo-European. Con­
sideration of these facts has led some scholars, notably E. Stur­
tevant, to separate Hittite from the Indo-European family 
proper, and to postulate an earlier Indo-Hittite from which 
Hittite on the one hand and Indo-European on the other are 
separately descended. The majority of opinion is against this 
extreme view and it seems more satisfactory to speak of Early 
and Late Indo~European, rather than of Indo-Hittite and Indo­
EHropean. It has already been pointed out that the dialect 
divisions of Indo-European go back to a period long antedating 
the migration of Indo-Iranian. Even though the separation of 

18 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
Hittite must have been very early indeed, it need not have 
preceded the beginning of these dialectal divergences of Indo­
European. Certainly there was no united Indo-European in 
the late period, which the Indo-Hittite theory demands. It is 
true that much of the evolution which has taken place in Indo­
European outside Hittite, and which must be placed in the 
period following the separation of Hittite, is evolution common 
to all the branches (e.g. the developlnent of the feminine), but 
this is easily understandable as long as the various dialects 
remained in contiguity. The important difference now is that 
instead of thinking simply in the terms of Primitive Indo­
European we may now distinguish Early Indo-European of the 
time previous to the separation of Hittite, and Late Indo­
European characterised by certain developments which can be 
determined, in which different dialects evolving in common were 
gradually beginning to assume the character of different lan­
guages. 
§4. 
INDO-IRANIAN AND BALTO-SLAVONIC 
The satam-Ianguages, apart from Indo-Iranian are only known 
from times much more recent than most of the centum-:-Ian­
guages. 
Further there is the possibility that some ancient 
members of this group, notably in the Balkan and Danubian 
regions, have disappeared without record. It is therefore not 
possible to form a precise idea of the position of Indo-I~anian 
within the satmt group as a whole at an early period. The only 
thing that emerges clearly is that there did at one time exist a 
special relationship between early Indo-Iranian and those 
dialects of Indo-European which developed eventually into the 
Baltic and Slavonic languages. Since this is important for the 
location of the early home of Indo-Iranian, the evidence may be 
given in some detail. 
Phonetically the most noteworthy common feature is the 
change of s to s(>Slav. ch) after k, r,'; and u in Indo-Iranian and 
Slavonic, and after r also in Lithuanian. l This is unlikely to be a 
matter of chance, since the conditions under which the change 
takes place are so closely paraliel. The conclusion which must 
be drawn is that at one time the two branches were in close 
geographical proximity. and that this innovation affecting IE s 
1 For examples see p. 19. 

SANSKRIT AND INDO·EUROPEAN 
19 
established itself over a limited area comprising Slavonic and 
Indo-Iranian, but excluding the rest of Indo-European. The 
fac! that the change appears only to a very small extent in 
Baltic demonstrates that the Baltic group was to a certain 
• 
~ 
extent autonomous of Slavonic even at this early date. 
Another change which has occurred in both groups is that of 
k to l before the vowels I, i.1 This however seems to be a case of 
parallel independent development. In Old Slavonic the paradig­
matic alternation occasioned by this change, and by the second 
Slavonic palatalisation, remains in full force (e.g. Nom. S. 
vluku, Voc. vlule, Loc. vluce). Such alternation has been elim­
inated in Sanskrit even at the earliest period, and it is unlikely 
that it could have maintained itself in Slavonic over the very 
long period that it would be necessary to assume if the change 
in Slavonic had been so ancient. 
r 
In grammar a fair number of special features common to both 
groups can be enumerated, though there are also some notable 
divergences. The most important of these latter is the existence 
in Balto-Sla vonic in common with Germanic of an element -m­
which appears regularly in place of the -bh- which is familiar 
from Sanskrit and other IE languages (e.g. Dat. abl. PI. Lith. 
vilkdms, 51. vlukom·:r., Goth wulfam: Skt. vtkebhyas). This is an 
ancient Indo-European divergence cutting across the usual 
dialect divisions. Another idiosyncrasy of Balto-Slavonic is the 
use of the old ablative to form the genitive singular of o-stems : 
Lith. vilko, O. S1. vluka. 
In spite of these divergences there are many special gram­
matical features uniting the two groups. The more important 
of these may be briefly enumerated: 
A. Nominal Inflection: (1) Nominative witho,!lt r of r- sterns, 
Skt. matd ' mother', svdsii 'sister': O. S1. mati, Lith. motl, 
sesuo. (2) The locative plural in -su (as opposed to -<1, in Greek) 
is found only in these two groups: Skt. vfke~u, O. S1. vlucechu. 
(3) The Dual inflection is closely similar, containing a good deal 
that is not found elsewhere, e.g. Skt. Nom. D. bale, yuge, 
namani, mdnasi, ak~t, sunu: O. S1. zene, ize, imeni, telesi, oli 
(Lith. aki), syny {Lith. stinu}, Gen. D. Skt. tayos, dvayos: O. S1. 
toju,dvoju. (4) A similar development in the singular stem of 
feminine nouns in -a: e. g. Instr. Skt. tdya, senaya: O. S1. toje, 
'qkojf}, Loc. Skt. senayam, Av. haenaya: Lith. rankoje. (5) 
1 For examples see p. 76. 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EURoPEAN
20 
Close similarity in the declension of i- and fI,- stems, as 
illustrated by equations like Dat. S. Skt. sunave: O. S1. synovi. 
B. Pronouns and Adverbs: (1) Common characteristics in the 
form of the personal pronouns, e.g. Nom. S. in -om, Skt. aham, 
O. S1. azu, nasalised accusative, Skt. miim, O. S1. m~, Gen. S. 
A.v. mana, O. S1. mene (as opposed to Skt. mama). (2) The 
extended stem of the demonstrative pronoun, etc., in certain 
cases, e.g. Dat. S. Masc. Skt. tdsmai, O. Pruss. kasmu stesmu; 
O. S1. tomu, Fern. Skt. tasyai, O. Pruss. stessiei. (3) Preference 
for the interrogative stem kwo- as opposed to the stem kwi-, 
Skt. kd-, Lith. kas. (4) The possession of certain common pro­
nominal stems, e.g. Av. ava-, O. S1. ovu, Skt. Av. ana-, Lith. 
41&"S, O. S1. onu. (5) Various adverbs, Skt. kuha, Av. kudii 
'where " O. S1. kude, Skt. kadd ' when? " tada ' then " Lith. 
kada, tada, Skt. nd • like', Lith. nei, Skt. bahis ' outside'. O. S1. 
bezu 'without', Skt. vina, O. Sl. vune ' outside', O. Pers. 
(avahya) r(idi ' on account of (that)" O. S1. (togo) radio 
C. The Verb. In the conjugation of the verb features special 
to Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavonic are not remarkably com­
mon. This may partly be due to the fact that Slavonic (and to a 
greater extent, Baltic) is only recorded late, and in the verbal 
inflection is less conservative than it is in the nominal inflection 
(e.g. loss of the perfect and the middle). Points of note are 
(I) similarities in the s- aorist, e.g. vrddhi of root (S1. vesti: 
vlsu, Skt. vdhati dvak~am) and termination -om of Isg. (as 
opposed to Gk. a); (2) The future in -syo- is found with cer­
tainty only in Indo-Aryan and Lithuanian: Skt. ddsyami . I 
will give', Lith. duosiu; (3) The causative is well developed in 
both groups, and many identical forms can be quoted, e.g. Skt. 
bodhdyati ' he awakens " O. SL buzdp, buditi. 
In the sphere of vocabulary Indo-Iranian shares with Baltic 
and Slavonic a considerable number of words which are not 
found in the other Indo-European languages. These corres­
pondences are much more numerous than those which can be 
discovered between Indo-Iranian and any other member of the 
family, and they supply important evidence for the early con­
nection of the two families. There is for instance no common 
Indo-European word for 'goat'. Sanskrit ajd- is connected 
with Lith. ozys, but parallels are absent in other IE languages. 
Greek and Armenian which go together in this case, as frequently 
have a similar word (atg, aif), but one that cannot be united 
1 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
21 
with it according to the laws of IE phonology. Another word is 
peculiar to the Western IE languages (Lat. haedus, Engl. goat, 
etc.). The distribution of these words corresponds roughly to 
the dialectal division sketched above, and illusti-ates the impor­
tance of vocabulary in the study of this question. The deriva­
tive ajma- ' skin • corresponds to O. S1. az{nu, jazinD, and in 
both languages an original meaning goat's skin' has been 
l 
widened to the meaning t skin ' in general. There is also a class 
of words in which the root is common to many IE languages, 
but the particular suffix found in Indo-Iranian is found else­
where only in 'Slavonic and Baltic. Examples of these are: 
Skt. pMna- ' foam " O. Pro SpOa)lnO, Lith. spdine, as opposed to 
the Western IE words with m-suffix (Lat. spuma, Engl. foam). 
Skt. ddk§i1Ja- 'right(-hand) 1 corresponds exactly to O. 51. 
desinu, Lith. desint, whereas various different suffixes appear in 
other languages (Gk. 
D€~tO!)J 
8€~/:T£p6!). Lat. dexter, Goth. 
tafhswa). Similarly Skt. gri'vd neck' and O. 51. griva ' mane'
l 
correspond exactly in formation, but ca,9 be compared only as 
far as the root is concerned with Gk. DEPT} 'neck! (JgWer). 
The n- suffix of Skt. majjan- reappears only in Slavonic (0. 51. 
mozdanu) and Baltic (0. Pruss. muzgeno). A form corresponding 
precisely to Skt. misra- ' mixed' appears only in Lith. misras. 
Another feature which deserves consideration is the existence 
of special meanings common to the two groups. The meaning 
, wake ! is common to Skt. budh- and the related Balto-51a vonic 
words, but is not found in other languages. The meaning 
I write' of Iranian (ni-)pis- recurs in O. S1. pisati. 
Of the remaining words which are peculiar to Indo-Iranian 
and Balta-Slavonic the following are the most important: 
Av. spanta~ 'hoIy " O. Sl. svr:.tu, Lith. !ventas; Skt. savya­
, left " Av. haoya-, O. S1. sujT,; Skt. barhis I bed of Kusa grass'~ f{,
Av. barniS · cushion, pillow', O. Sl. blazina' cushion'; Skt. 
kr$1Jd- 'black', O. S1. crunu, O. Pruss. kirsnan: Skt. bhara-
I fight, battle', d. O. S1. borjo 'fight'; Skt. o#ha- 'lip', 
O. SL usta, O. Pruss. austin ' mouth J; Skt. avatd- 'spring, 
t.",< 
well', Lett. avuots; Av. varasa- 'hair', O. S1. vlasu, Russ. 
voios; Skt. giri- / mountain', Av. gairi-, O. 51. gora 'id', 
Lith. giria, gire forest'; Skt. (u~<dm 'silently', Av. tusni­
l 
· silent " O. Pruss. tusnan; Skt. tucchyd- . empty', Khotanese 
ttussaa-, O. S1. tusU, Lith. t·uscias (id'; Skt. dddhi (gen. 
dadhnds) 'curds', O. Pruss. dadan; Skt. pdyas ' milk " Av. 

22 
SANSKRIT AND 
I~DO-EUROPEAN 
paema, Lith. pi-nas (with varying suffixes) ; Av. xsvid- • milk " 
d. Lith. sviestas butter'; Skt. angara- · coal', O. S1. pgU,
f 
Russ. ugol'; Skt. bradhna- ' yellowish, light-coloured', O. S1. 
bronu ' white'; Skt. arbha- 'small, child', d. Russ. rebenok 
, child'; Skt. vrata- 'yOW', Av. urvata-, O. S1. rota' oath' ; 
Skt. atp!a- • egg, testicle' (Kalasa ondrak ' egg '), O. S1. j€dro 
t testicle'; Skt. patftsu- 'dust' Av. PCJsn1t-, O. S1. pisuku 
, sand'; Skt. dhiina 'corn, grain', Pers. dana, Lith. duona 
I bread '; Skt. ~yama-. syavd- 'dark-coloured', Lith. simas 
· grey', Ski. sandra- ' thick, viscid', d. O.S1. sedry krlvlnyje, 
sjadry krovnyja { thickened, congealed blood'; Pers. raz' vine, 
vine-tendril " O. S1. loza; A v. f sarama-, Pers. farm ( shame " 
O. S1. sramu; Skt. sriima- · lame " O. S1. chromu; Av. hama-
I the same " Pali samam adv. ' self, of oneself', O. 51. samu 
. self'; Skt. vispat£-' h~ad of settlement ~r clan " Av. vispa£ti-, 
Lith. viespats ' lord'; Av. sar~ta- ' cold " Lith. saltas; Skt. 
saka- ' vegetables, greens', Lith. sekas ' green fodder'; Ski. 
saphara- . Cyprinus sophore " Lith. sapalas' Cyprinus dobula ' ; 
Skt. sakuna-
< (1arge) bird', O. S1. sokolu ' falcon'; Skt. sapa-
I drift wood', Lith. sapai; Ski. bhaizga- ' wave', Lith. ban-gao 
Among verbs which are common to the two groups we may 
mention Skt. havate ' calls', Av. zavaiti, O. S1. zovetu; Skt. 
svil- • to be bright, white " Lith. sviteti, O. S1. sviteti; Skt. bhi-, 
bhdyate' fear " O. S1. bojf{ s~, Lith. bijaus; Skt. pru$-, pru$1;lati 
, sprinkle', O. S1. prysnQti; Skt. dham-, dhma- 'to blow', 
O. S1. d'i'!mfj. dQii, Lith. dtan-iu, diunti; Skt. br111h-, brt!thate 
, (elephant) trumpets', Lith. brenzg11, brauzgu . to sound, make 
a noise'; Skt. muc- ( to release, Lith. ntlmkit, middi ' to get 
loose'; Skt. gt-, gn~ati . praises', O. Pruss. girtwei ' to praise " 
Lith. giriit, girti. 
The list of common words and other features which are 
special to the two groups is dearly impressive, and the whole 
of the material must be referred to the period of Primitive 
Indo-Iranian. \Vhen on the contrary we look for signs of 
special contact between Iranian itself and Slavonic (or Baltic) 
we find that there are practically none. it is true that some of 
the words that are listed above are found only in Iranian and 
not in Sanskrit, but it is equally possible to point out others in 
which the reverse is the case. Furthermore if we take such a 
word, e.g. Av. spJnta-, O. S1. sv,U'I, Lith. sveiitas, it is immedi­
ately clear that the form of the Baltic and Slavonic words is 

SA!'SKHIT AND INDO-EUROPEA!' 
23 
such that they cannot be derived either from the Primitive 
Iranian form (*svanta-) or the Primitive Indo-Iranian (*svanta-), 
but that all the words must be referred to an earlier saiam form 
(*svento-). 
Attempts to find examples of Iranian loanwords in Slavonic 
have been singularly unsuccessful. There is a Russian word 
wbdka dog' which is plausibly derived from ~Iedian (J1TaKa
I 
(Herod.) but the word is not pan-Slavonic, and it remains quite 
obscure by what means the wor~ has reached Russian. In the 
case of Russ. topar ' axe'J Pers. tabar, we are dealing with a 
migratory word of uncertain origin. Iranian origin has been 
assumed for S1. suto 
100 ' because the form of the word does 
I 
not agree with Slavonic phonology, but neither is it the form 
we would expect to be derived from Iranian salam (which 
should give sot-). There is a remarkable coincidence between 
the Slavonic word for' god • (D. S1. bogu) and O. Pers. baga-, 
but in view of the complete absence of other loanword.:; it is 
better to see in these words a case of common inheritance. 
This absence of Iranian influence on Slavonic is surprising in 
view of the repeated incursions of Scythian tribes into Europe, 
and the prolonged occupation by them of extensive territories 
reaching "to the Danube. Clearly at this later period the Slavs 
must have remained almost completely uninflueilced politically 
and culturally by the Iranians. On the other hand at a much 
earlier period (c. 2000 B.C.) before the primitive Aryans left 
their European homeland, Indo-Iranian and the prototypes of 
Baltic and Slavonic must have existed as close neighbours for a 
considerable period of time. Practically all the contacts which 
can be found between the two groups are to be referred to this 
period and this period alone. 
§ 5. 
INDO-IRANIAN AND FINNO-UGRIAN 
During the same period there is conclusive evidence of con­
tact between Indo-Iranian and Finno-ugrian, a neighbouring 
family of non-Indo-European languages. This latter family 
consists of three European languages which have attained the 
status of literary languages, Finnish, Esthonian and Hungarian, 
and a number of now minor languages which are spoken by a 
small number: Lapp, Mordwin. (eremis, Zyryan, Votyak, 
Vogul, Dstyak. Of these Vogul and Dstyak are now found to 
B 

24 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-E UROPEAN 
the East of the Urals, but are considered to have moved there 
from the West. These two, with Hungarian form the Ugrian 
sub-group, and are distinguished from the rest by certain com­
mon features. The Hungarians moved from the region of the 
Volga to the territory they now occupy in the ninth century. 
I n Siberia there are several Samoyede languages which as a 
group are related to Finno-Ugrian. The two families arc 
classed together as the UraHan languages. 
Even before the Indo-Iranian period there is evidence of 
contact between Indo-European and Finno-ugrian. Certain 
remarkable coincidences (e.g. Lat. sal · salt', Finn. suola; 
Skt. madhu ' honey', Gk. /LEOV: Finn. mete-; Skt. niiman-, 
Gk. oJlo/La (name': Finn. nime-. Goth. walo < water', etc. :
Fi. vete-) have long since attracted attention, but there is lack of 
agreement as to how exactly they are to be interpreted. One 
theory is that the two families are ultimately related, but the
available evidence is not sufficient to establish this with any
certainty. On the whole it seems more probable that the
coincidences, insofar as they are not due to chance, are the 
result of mutualcontact and influence in the early prehistoric
period. 1 
Evidence is both more abundant and easier to interpret when
it comes to early Indo-Iranian contacts with Finno-ugrian. 
Here it is possible to point out a considerable number of words
in Finno-ugrian whiCh can be shown to have been borrowed
from Indo-Iranian at this stage. The IIlOst important of the
Finno-ugrian words which have been ascribed to Indo-Iranian
are as follows : 
(I) Finn. sata 
IOO', Lapp. cuotte, Mordv. sado, Ler. !USo,
f 
Zyry. SO, Voty. SUI Vog. stit, sat, Osty. sot, StU, Hung. szaz: 
Skt. satdm, Av. sat;nn. (2) Mordv. azoro, azor fiord '. Voty. 
uziT, Zyry. ozir rich'; Vog. oter, dter hero': Skt. dsura, 
f 
f 
i 
I
lord '. Av. ahura- ' id '. (3) Finn. vasara 
hammer " Lapp.
valer, Mordv. viiir, uler: Skt. vdjra- (Indra's weapon', Av. 
vazra- (club, mace'. 
(4) Finn. porsas, Zyry. pors, porys,
1 BoITowings are likely to have OCCUITed in both directions, and usually it 15
difficult to decide which family has been the borrower,· As an example of a 
probable loan from Finno-ugrian we may quote Eng!. whale, O.N. #I val",
O. Pruss. kalis: Av. kara- • mythical fish living in the RaUhi (=Volga) :
Finn. kala • fish 'etc. The restriction of the meaning indicates that the IE
languages are the borrowers. and it is likely that Iranian and the northern
IE languages have done so separately.. 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
25 
Voty. pars, paris 
was ascribed to an Aryan *parsa­
t 
1 
(= Lat. parctls) and this is now attested by Khotanese pifsa-. 
(5) Finn. oras '(castrated) boar' J Mordv. ures · id ': Skt.  
7'araha-, Av, varaza- ' boar '. (6) Finn. 'Uta" Mordy. adar, e,er.  
'Dodar 'udder': Skt. iidhar 'id'; (7) Finn. ora, Mordv.  
uro, Hung. ar 'awl': Skt. ard • id' ( 
OHG ala, etc.);  
(8) Hung. astor' whip', Vog. oj"ter, Cer. wostyr: Skt. d~trii,  
.Av. astra' whip' (,.Faj-' to drive '); (9) Hung. arany' gold "  
Vog. !\uren, saren, Mordv. sirne, Zyry. Voty. zarni: Skt.  
hlrat}ya-, Av. zaranya-; (10) Finn. arvo ' value, price'. Hung. ,../
ar, etc.: Skt. arghd., Osset. ary , id ' (Lith. alga, etc.); (II)  
Finn. sisar ' sister', Mordy. saZOT, eer. suzar: Skt. svasar-.  
Av. x"a1Jhar-; (12) Hung. sor ' beer " Voty. sur, Vog. sor, Osty.  
saT: Skt. sura 'strong drink', Ay. hura; (I3) Finn. sarvi  
, horn', Mordy. suro, Cer. sur, Lapp coarvve. Hung. szaTV:  
Av. sr1~-, srva . horn' (=Gk. KEpas, etc.); (14) Vog. SHorp,  
sarp' elk': Skt. sarabhd- ' a kind of deer' (from the root of the  
last); (IS) Mordv. sed' 'bridge ': Skt. settt-, Av. haetu-;  
(I6) Mordy. vargas · wolf', Zyry. vlirkas: Skt. vfka-, Av.  
11ahrka-; (17) Zyry. Voty. turin • grass ': Skt. tf1)a-; (18)  
Zyry. viJrk • kidney' : Skt. vrkkd-, Av. var:J8ka-' id J 
; (19) Vag.  
tas • stranger': Skt. dasa- · non-Aryan~ slave'; (20) Hung.  
vaszon ' Hnen ': Skt. vdsana- ' garment, cloth'. (21) Fi. mehi­
liiinen' bee " Mordv. mek!, ter. milk!, Zyry. Voty. mus, Hung.  
men: Skt. mdk~-, mdk~ii. mdk#ka '"i?ee, fly', .Av. maXSf < fly , ;  
(22) Fi. siika-nen ' beard of grain, etc.', Mordv. suva, Ler. sU,  
Zyry. su: Skt. suka- 'id'; (23) Mordv. sava, seja ' goat' :  
Skt. chiiga-.  
The detailed problems raised by these and other comparisons 
are not without complications, but certain general conclusions 
emerge clearly. Most important of all is the fact that, taking 
the words as a whole, the primitive forms which have to be 
assumed after acornparison of the Finno-ugrian fornls, are 
identical with those which have been reconstructed for primi­
tive Indo-Iranian, and are free of any of the later sound 
changes which are characteristic of Iranian on the one hand and 
Indo-Aryan on the other. This is quite well illustrated by the 
first word which represents a primitive form sata- (the Indo­
Iranian and Sanskrit form) and not sata- (the Iranian form). 
The characteristic Iranian change of s to h is uniformly absent 
(3 Mordv. azoro, II Mordv. saz01', 15 Mordv. sed', etc.). Like­

26 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
wise characteristic Indo-Aryan changes such as of ih, jh to h 
are not to be found (5 Finn, oras, etc.). There is therefore not 
the slightest doubt that the period when these borrowings took 
place was the primitive Indo-Iranian period, and it appears 
probable that the seat of this primitive Indo-Iranian must have 
been in the region of the middle Volga and the Urals for thi:; 
contact to have been possible. 
One point that is noticeable when looking at a few of these 
words is that the change of Indo-European l, I to Aryan r, r has 
already taken place (7 Finn. ora, 9. Vog. saren, etc., 16. Mordv. 
vargas). This is a change which is complete in Iranian, but in­
complete in Indo-Aryan. That is to say that there were dialects 
in early Indo-Aryan which preserved IE l (not I), as well as 
those (the Rigvedic) which agreed with Iranian in this respect. 
The Finno-ugrian forms show that this feature must have 
. already been widespread in the earlier, Indo-Aryan period, and 
the existence of r-forms in the Aryan of the Near East cor­
roborat~s this. It cannot however have been universal, faT 
in that case no I-forms. would have been found in Sanskrit 
at all. 
It is usually quite clear that these words have been borrowed 
by Finno-ugrian from Indo-Iranian and not vice versa. We 
have equivalents of the words in other IE languages, and before 
being borrowed into Finno-ugrian they have undergone the 
changes characteristic of the Aryan branch. Even where an 
Indo-Iranian word has no actual equivalent in the other IE 
languages, its structure and the possibility of deriving it from a 
known IE root will often show it to be an old inherited word. 
For instance Skt. vdjra-. Av. vazra-, is formed with the well­
known suffix -ra (IE -ro), and can be derived from the IE root 
which appears in Gk. (F)ayvvp.L' break, smash'. There are 
however a few words in the above list where it is not possible to 
be certain in this way. Nothing like the Indo-Iranian word for 
( bee' (No. 21) is found in any other IE language, and this 
makes it more likely on the whole that in this case the Indo­
Iranians have adopted a Finno-ugrian word. Similar considera­
tions apply to Nos. 22 (Skt. suka-) and 23 (Skt. chaga-). There 
may be further examples of Finno-ugrian words in Indo­
Iranian, but the matter has never been investigated from this 
point of view. 
As plausible equations we may mention: 
Skt. kapka-
phlegm', Av. kafa-, Pers. kaj 'foam, scum:
t 
J  

SANSKRIT AND 
I~DO-EUROPEAN 
27 
Hung. hab 'foam, froth, cream', Veps. kobe 
I wave, foam " 
Sam. (Kam.) khowu ( foam'; Skt. kB,pa ' pit, well': Fi. kuoppa 
1(.olI
I pit', Lapp guoppe, teL kup, Voty. gop, etc.; Skt. saliiku 
<:,1
i splinter, etc:: Hung. szilank ' chip, splinter', Fi. sale, 3. sateen 
~"'<'
, id ',etc. In cases like these, and others could be added, no 
IE etymology has been found for the Sanskrit words. Since it is 
certain that we must assume long contact between the early 
Indo-Iranians and the neighbouring Finno~ugrians, and since 
there is no reason why the movement of words should have been 
entirely one way, we should consider Finno-ugrian to be a 
likely source of Aryan words in cases like the above where 
striking similarity in form and meaning is found. 
§6. 
ARYANS IN THE NEAR EAST 
The earliest recorded traces of the Aryan peoples come 
neither from India nor from Iran, but from the Near East. 
The presence of Aryans in this area is recorded principally in 
documents of the l\fitanni kingdom of North Mesopotamia 
during the period 15°0-13°0 B.C. The list of royal names pre­
served in a variety of cuneiform documents has a distinctly 
Aryan appearance, even though their interpretation is not 
absolutely certain in all cases. The names of these kings are as 
follows: Sutarna, Parsasaiar, Saussatar, Artadtbna, Artasumara, 
Tusratha, Matiwaza, i.e. in Indo-Aryan form Sutara1;ta- (d. Ved. 
sutdrman-), Prasiistdr- 'director, ruler'. *Sauk~atra- (son of 
Suk~atrll- (?)', IJtadh(lman- (nom. lJ.tddhamii) V.S., lj.tasmara­
• mindful of right'. 
*Tvi~ratha-, d. V. tve$dratha- (having 
rushing chariots', *M ativiija- 'victorious through prayer'. 
In addition there are found in private documents from this area 
written in Assyrian a number of proper names of local notables 
which can be interpreted as Aryan, e.g. Artamna, Bardasva, 
Biryasura, Purusa, Saimasura, Satawaza, i.e.lJ.tamna-
i mindful 
of the law', Varddhiisva- • son of V rddhiisva- " Viryasura­
, hero of valour', Puru~a- ' man, male', K$emasura- ' hero of 
peace or security', Siitaviija- 'who has won prizes' (Bvr. ct. 
v. Viijasa.ti-) . 
This was a period .of the expansion of Mitanni influence in 
the surrounding territories. 
Consequently we come across 
rulers of neighbouring principalities having similar Aryan 
names, and this extends as far as Syria and Palestine. The 
dearest examples of Aryan names among these are Suvardata: 

28 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
*svardata- 'given by heaven', Satuara: *Satvara-, a stem 
bearing the same relation to Skt. sdtvan-
4 powerful, victorious: 
a warrior', as does Skt. iSvara- · lord' to Av. isvan-; Arta­
manya: lJ.tamanya-
thinking on the law', Biridasva: Vrdd­
l 
hiisva-
· possessing large horses', Biryawiiza: 
Viryaviija­
I having the prize of valour J J Indarota: lndrotd- (RV) · helped 
by Indra " Subandu: Subandhu-. 
The contemporary Hittite kingdom had close relations both 
of peace and war with the Mitanni kingdom, and some of the 
documents from the Hittite capital provide important evidence 
for the presence of Aryans in the Mitanni country. The most 
interesting of these documents is a treaty concluded between 
the Hittite king Suppiluliuma and the Mitanni king Matiwaza 
(c. 1350 B.c.). Among the divinities sworn by in this document 
there occur four wel1 known Vedic divine names. They are 
Indara. J\.{itra!(il) , lVasatia(nna), Uruvanass(il) , which stripped 
of their non-Aryan terminations are unmistakeably Ved. Indra-, 
l'rfitra-, Niisaty", and Vant~a-. It is clear that not only Aryan 
language, but also Aryan religion in a form closely resemb1ing 
that known from the Egveda, was current in this region of the 
Near East during this period. 
The introduction of the horse to the countries of the Near 
East which took place during the eady part of the second 
millenium B.C. seems to have been due mainly to these Aryans. 
The usefulness of this animal in war soon made it popular in 
the neighbouring kingdoms, among them the Hittites. Among 
the archives of the Hittite capital there exists a treatise on the 
care and training of horses. This is written in the Hittite 
language, but the author.. who had charge of the royal horses 
was a Mitannian called Kikkuli. Furthermore some of the 
technical terms used in the work are Aryan words. These are 
aika vaTtanna, tera va, panza va, satta VO and navartanna (hap!. 
for nava-v~) = Skt. eka-vartana- • one turn (of the course) " and 
likewise for the numbers 3. 5. 7 and 9. The existence of these 
loanwords in the Hittite text shows clearly the priority of the 
Aryans in this field. 
In addition to the above evidence there are a few Aryan 
traces among the do<::uments of the Kassite dynasty of Babylon 
(t;. 1750:-1170 B.C.). The Kassites· themselves were invaders 
from the East, from the Iranian plateau, and their language, of 
which something is known, has no connection whatever with 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
29 
Aryan or Indo-European. Nevertheless in a list of names of 
gods with Babylonian equivalents we find a sun god Surias 
(rendered Samas) which must clearly be identified with Skt. 
s'iirya-. In addition M aruttas the war god (rendered En-urta) 
has been compared with Skt. marut-, though here some diffi­
culty is caused by the fact that the Skt. word always occurs in 
the plural. Among the kings of this dynasty one has a name 
which can be interpreted as Aryan: A birattas: abhi-ratha­
• facing chariots (in battle) '. 
The existence of Aryans in this area was unsuspected until 
the discovery of these Aryan names in cuneiform documenfs~and 
a long discllssion has proceedpd for many years concerning them. 
Even though the material is small, it- can nevertheless be con­
cluded that a significant migration of Aryans in this direction 
had taken place at this early period. Although the chief centre 
of the Aryan influence, as far as our records go is the Hurrian 
state of Mitanni, what we find there is an Aryan dynasty ruling 
over a RUffian population, with no evidence of any sizeable 
Aryan settlement. The kings of the Mitanni belonging to the 
dynasty with the Aryan names use Rurrian as their official 
language, and it is considered unlikely that in this situation 
they would have retained their original Aryan speech for long. 
The question that then arises is to decide from what base the 
conquest of the Mitanni state had proceeded, ,since such a base, 
with an Aryan population, is necessary to account for it. A 
due to the answer to this problem is probably to be found in the 
fact that Aryan influence is found not only alTIOng the Hurrians, 
but also among the Kassites, a people originating in the 
mountainous regions of Western Iran. A settlement of Aryans 
in North-Western Iran, to the East of the RUffian country, and 
to the North of the Kassites, would account for both of these 
developmen ts. 
Since the first discovery of Aryan traces in the ancient Near 
East discussion has proceeded as to whether these Aryans are 
to be connected with the Indo-Aryans or the Iranians, whether 
they are to be identified with the Proto-Aryans from which 
those two branches are descended. or whether they are to be 
regarded as a third branch of Aryans beside the other two. 
The predominant opinion at present is that they are to be 
connected specifically with the Indo-Aryans. This conclusion 
is founded partly on linguistic grounds. and partly on the fact 

30 
SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
that the Aryan gods mentioned in the above mentioned treaty 
are specifically Vedic gods. The linguistic argument for this 
conclusion is illustrated by the word aika- ' one · whichcorre-· 
sponds to Sanskrit eka- wehereas Iranian has aiva- with a 
different suffix (d. p. 258). Likewise the name of the sungod 
SuriyaA corresponds to Sanskrit Saryas, whereas Iranian shows 
no such form, but only the base (hvar 
Vedic svar) form which 
sat:ya- is derived. As far as the treaty gods are concerned, they 
are prominent in the ~gveda, and are indeed all mentioned 
together in one hymn (RV. IO.125.I), but they cannot be 
shown to be all Proto-Aryan or Proto-Iranian, and there are in 
fact some reasons for believing that they were not so. 
If the Aryans of the ancient Near East are to be connected 
specifically with the Indo-Aryans, then we must assume that 
they were two migrations proceeding from the same source, a 
massive one into North-West India and a smaller one in the 
direction of North-Western Iran. 
Since the Vedic Aryans 
certainly entered India across the mountain barrier separating 
the subcontinent from North--Eastern Iran, we must conclude 
that the closely related section of the Aryans who appear in the 
Near East started from the same source, taking a route which 
was to be followed early in the next millennium by the Medes 
and Persians. 
The chronology of these two movemen ts corresponds very 
closely. The Aryan invasion of N.\V. India can be dated by the 
end of the Indus civilisation, for which no doubt they were 
largely responsible, and it may be assumed to have taken place 
in successive waves over a considerable period of time. In the 
ancient Near East their presence is established by 1500 B.C. at 
latest, and the process of Inigration and settlement must have 
occupied a considerable period before that. 
§7. THE EMERGENCE OF INDO-ARYAN 
The pre-history of the Aryan language of India takes us far 
from the North-West India of the Vedic period both in space 
and time. Comparison with other languages renders possible a 
reconstruction of linguistic history which is nowhere directly 
recorded., and establishes as a fact· important migrations and 
movements of peoples which otherwise would be unknown to 
history. It has also been possible to say something definite, 

31
SA:"SI{lUT A~D I~DO-EUROPEA~ 
though naturally within fairly wide limits, about the origin of 
these movements, and about their chronology. The distribu­
tion of the IE languages suggests that th'eir origin is to be sought 
in Central and Eastern Europe. The special relations of Indo­
Iranian with the sabm-group of languages, and with Balto­
Slavonic in particular, together with evidence of contact be­
tween it and Finno-ugrian in the Primitive Indo-Iranian period, 
point to its original location in Central Russia. From there the 
movement 'vas eastward and southward, with the result that 
Central Asia became for a time the home of the Aryans. There 
is evidence that the division into the two branches, Indo-Aryan 
and Iranian, had already commenced at this early period. The 
Indo-Aryan group was the filst to move south, first into eastern 
Iran, and then into India on the one hand, and into western 
Iran on the other. The second wave of migratiQn was that of 
the Iranians, who established themselves first in eastern Iran, 
thereby cutting off the Indo-Arya~s to the east from the Proto­
Indoaryans to the west. Later the advance of the Iranians west­
wards resulted in the submprgence of the latter, but their 
original presence there is attested by these documents from the 
Near East. 
Chronologically there is not much direct information to rely 
on. The earliest and most important data are those relating to 
the presence of Aryans in the Near East from 1500 B.C. on­
wards. This is an important pointer to the period of the migra­
tions, which to judge by historical analogies are likely to have 
taken place during a limited period of time. The first half of the 
second millennium B.C. which would seem to be indicated by 
this evidence as the general period of the migrations is one 
which agrees comfortably with all the general considerations 
which can be adduced. The next direct information about the 
Aryans refers to the Iranians. The presence of Medes and 
Persians in Iran proper is attested in the Assyrian annals from 
the ninth century B.C. onwards. and it is unlikely that they had 
occupied this area in any force for very long before this period. 
For the Indo-Aryan invasion of India no direct eviden~e is 
available. Nevertheless the very great sitnilarity between the 
Vedic language and the earliest Iranian precludes any long 
period of separation between the two, and makes it impossible 
that the age of the Vedic hymns can be pushed back to the third 
or fourth millennium B.C. The average rough guess which places 

32 
SA:-rSKRIT AND 
I~DO-EUROPEAN 
the period of the Indo-Aryan invasions c. 1700-1400 B.C. and the 
period of the composition of the ~gveda c. 1200-1000 B.C. is not 
likely to be many centuries out. either one way or the other. 
There is some linguistic evidence to show that the Indo­
Aryan invasion took place in successive phases, and not in one 
simultaneous movement. There are dialectal differences be­
tween the Vedic language of the North West and the later 
classical language of Madhyadesa, The most striking of these is 
that the Vedic language turns I into r whereas the classical 
language, to a large extent, preserves the distinction between, 
and t. 
This Vedic feature is characteristic of the whole of 
Iranian, and furthermore it can be traced in the Aryan of the 
Near East and in some Aryan words in Finno-ugrian. Clearly 
the fact that the more easterly dialects of early Indo-Aryan 
have avoided this change indicates a comparatively early 
separation from the main body. in comparison with the Vedic 
dialect which has undergone this change in common with the 
rest of Aryan before being introduced into India. 
Certain features of the Kafiri languages of the North West 
indicate important dialectal divergencies of ancient Aryan at a 
time preceding the invasion of fndia. In some ways these 
languages stand half way between Indo-Aryan and Iranian. 
They agree with Indo-Aryan in retaining s which Iranian 
changes to h, but with Iranian in the treatment of the two 
palatal series (e.g. zim (snow': Ski. himd-, jJ- { kill ': Skt. 
han}. In this respect they form simply an intermediate dialect 
group, as might be expected from their position between the 
two main groups. On the other hand in their treatment of the 
sound which appears in Sanskrit as s they have preserved a 
form which is more archaic than anything found elsewhere in 
Indian and Iranian (c in cuna- ' dog t. due' 10', etc.). This can 
only be satisfactorily explained as the isolated preservation of a 
very ancient dialectal feature within Indo-Iranian. The same 
considerations apply to the absence of cerebralisation of s after 
u in words like dos 'yesterday' and mus~ 'mouse'. The 
change of s to s (>Skt. ~) under specified conditions is, as we 
have seen, so ancient as to be shared by both Indo-Aryan and 
Slavonic, but it seems that some peripheral dialect of Indo­
Aryan must have escaped it in connection with·.a., and it is 
from this source that the Kafiri forms are derived. The evid­
ence would suggest that the Aryan dialect which preserved 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN 
33 
these archaisms was the very first to reach the borders of India, 
and that later successive waves of Indo-Aryan invaders con­
fined it into a narrow space in the mountain valleys of the 
North-West frontier, where it has survived in isolation to 
this day. 
The history of Indo-Aryan begins with the first introduction 
of Aryan speech into India, but between this event and the 
composition of the first recorded document of Indo-Aryan, the 
hymns of the lJ.gveda, a considerable period must have elapsed. 
This is clear from the fact that in the text of the I).gveda itself, 
although histo{ical 2.11usions are not uncommon, there is no 
reference anywhere to the fact of the migration, nor any definite 
indication that it was still remembered. Linguistic reasons also 
compel us to assume such a period, since the number of lin­
guistic (mainly phonetic) changes that have taken place since 
the common Indo-Iranian stage is considerable. No doubt the 
beginnings of dialectal cleavage go back to the Indo-Aryan 
period, but there is no doubt that the bulk of the characteristic 
changes of Indo-Aryan and Iranian reSpectively have taken 
place after the complete separation of the two groups, that is to 
say, after the Aryan invasion of India. 
Some of the more important changes that affected Indo­
Aryan during this period may be briefly listed: (I)}h and ih 
become h (= Ir. j and z), (2) j and i are confused asj (= Ir. j and 
z), (3) a single group k$ results from the two combinations k + s 
and oS +s; these are kept apart in Iranian, (4) Aryan voiced 
groups of the type gih, bih are replaced by unvoiced k$/ ps 
(Skt. dipsa-: Av. diwza-), (5) Aryan z is elided in all positions 
(Skt. medha-, d. Av. mazda), (6) Elision of Aryan ibefore d gives 
rise to cerebral 4 (ni4d-) and this, in conjunction with other 
combinatory changes (a$tau, vit, kiira1Ja-) is the beginning of a 
new series of consonants previously foreign to Aryan, as well as 
to the rest of Indo-European. (7) s (~) is elided between two 
consonants (dbhakta, s-aor.). (8) All final consonant groups are 
simplified and only the first remains (Skt. vak: Av. vaxs). 
(9) A tendency begins to weaken the aspirates dh and bh to h 
(ihd' here' : Av. ioa, but Pa. idha has retained the older form). 
(10) The Aryan diphthongs ai, au are turned into the simple 
vowels i, O. 
This list of changes is impressive enough, and of great import­
ance for the future history of Indo-Aryan, and a reasonable 

SANSKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN
34 
length of time must be assumed for their completion. At the 
same time we have the impression that the period of fairly rapid 
linguistic change preceded the Vedic period. With the estab­
lishment of a recognised literary language. and a tradition of 
education associated with it, this rapid evolution was stopped 
as far as classical Sanskrit is concerned. The phonetic changes 
that distinguish Classical Sanskrit from the Vedic language are 
negligible in comparison with those that took place in the 
immediate pre-Vedic period. On the other hand the popular 
language, developing soon into the Prakrits, continued to sho\v 
this tendency to rapid change. In particular it is interesting to 
note that the type of change seen in the examples listed above is 
similar to that of the later Middle Indo-Aryan changes. The 
assimilation of consonant groups in final position is the be­
ginning of a process that affects all consonant groups. The 
development of voiced aspirates to h, which is general in the 
case of Jh, ih and sporadic elsewhere, is continued in Pali and 
Prakrit. The cerebral consonants once created become more 
and more prevalent. Fronl the first Indo-Aryan is affected by 
certain characteristic tendencies to change which continue to 
be influential in later periods. These changes which set in from 
the beginning were rapid, and in the language of the people 
continued to be rapid. It was only the standardisation of San­
skrit at a very early period by organisers of Brahman civilisa­
tion, that arrested this development, in the case of the classical 
language, before it had proceeded too long. and thereby pre­
served for us a form of language which in most respects is more 
archaic and less altered from original Indo-European than any 
other member of the family. 

CHAPTER II 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
§ 1. 
THE VEDIC LANGUAGE AND THE CLASSICAL 
LANGUAGE 
About the pre-history of Indo-Aryan, both in India where it 
emerged as an independent form of speech, and outside India 
through the successive stages of Indo-Iranian and Indo-Euro­
pean, much can be deduced, and deduced with certainty with 
the help of comparative philology. But of all these stages of the 
language no direct record is preserved. The historical period of 
the language begins-probably. as we have seen, round about 
the period I200-1000 B.c.-with the composition and compila­
tion of the Jl.gveda. From this time the literary tradition is con­
tinuous and uninterrupted, and the gradual development of 
Indo-Aryan~ through the various stages until the period of the 
modern languages is reached, can be followed in detail. 
During this period great changes have taken place. and their 
operation has been continuous throughout the whole period. 
By all this change and development Sanskrit has been affected 
only to a small extent. From the beginning, from the time of 
the composition of the Vedic hymns and the establishment 
thereby of a recognised literary language, there was a strong 
tendency among the Brahmins, the guardians of this literature 
and of the religious and social system that went with it, to pre­
serve the language against change. This applied not only to the 
preservation of the sacred texts themselves, which have been 
handed down with scrupulous accuracy by oral tradition, or to 
the composition of literary works on ancient models, but also to 
the language of everyday speech among the Brahmins, and in 
the royal courts with which they were always closely associated. 
This led to a growing divergence between the language of the 
educated classes and that of the people, which was subject to a 
fairly rapid alteration in the direction of Middle Indo-Aryan 
from an early period. 
35 

36 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SAN SKRIT 
At the same time the language of the elite did not remain 
without change, in spite of all the influence of conscious con­
servatisIll. The classical language as fixed by PaQini (fourth 
cent. B.C.) is a noticeably younger form of language than that 
found in the Vedic texts, though much less altered from it than 
the spoken language of the masses, which is known slightly later 
from the inscriptions of Asoka. \Ve have in fact up to this 
period two parallel developments of Indo-Aryan occurring side 
by side in different strata of the community, slow and gradual 
change in the dominant Brahman community restrained by 
education and a literary tradition, and beside it a rapid evo]u­
tion among the mass of the population unhindered by education 
and tradition. \Vith PaI)ini's work Sanskrit in its external form 
became finally stabilised and no more change was allowed. 
From then on the history of Indo-Aryan is the history of Middle 
Indo-Aryan in its various phases (Pali, Prakrit, ApabhraJTlsa) 
and then of Modern Indo-Aryan. In this evolution Sanskrit 
took no part, but remained as it was fixed by PaQini at a period 
long antedating the bulk of the classical literature. 
The differences between Vedic and Classical Sanskrit affect 
to a very small extent the pnoneti~ structure of the language. 
and in this respect the contrast between Classical Sanskrit and 
Early Middle Indo-Aryan is most striking. They are more 
noticeable in the field of vocabulary and grammar, though here 
also they are comparatively restricted in scope. 
Phonetically, apart from some dialectal phenomena such as 
rJ" 4h for /, Ih, and the replacement of r by l in certain words, the 
differences are mainly concerned with innovations of Sandhi. 
This is noticeable for instance in the case of -iy- -uv- of the Veda 
which are normally replaced by y, v. The rule has been applied 
to the accepted text of the lJ.gveda, so that for instance what is 
written tanvas is, from the evidence of the metre, to be pro­
nounced tanuvas. Among Vedic peculiarities of final Sandhi 
we may note that s is only inserted between final n and initial t 
when it is etymologically justified (sarvii'f!l.s tan, but var~man 
tasthau, maghavan tava, ajagmiran te), and that before vowels 
the terminations of the acc. pI. -an, in, un appear as -am, i.,r,.,. 
and u,;",. (sarga& iva. paridhi~r ali). In such cases later San­
skrit has regularised the Sandhi by the analogical extension of a 
form that was originally justified only in a certain context 
(e.g. -an, -in, -un was the regular phonetic development before 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
37 
voiced consonants and in final position, and from there its 
use was extended to cases where a vowel followed). 
Apart 
from such comparatively minor changes Classical Sanskrit pre­
serves the basic phonetic structure of the Vedic language intact. 
The tendency to change is a good deal more noticeable in the 
morphology, and in Classical Sanskrit the wealth of forms pre­
valent in the earlier language is considerably reduced. 
Nominal stem-formation shows a reduction in variety in the 
classical language, and with the disuse of certain suffixes whole 
classes of words so formed tend to become obsolete. For instance, 
the suffix -yu is productive in the Vedic language producing not 
only primary derivatives (ydjyu- ' pious ') but also a number of 
secondary fonnations connected with denominative verbal 
stems (devayu- ' devoted to the gods', vajayu- ' eager to win '). 
After the early Vedic period it ceases to be productive, and in 
consequence most of the words so formed went out of use. 
Only those that were common enough to survive as individual 
words remained: 
manyu- 'anger', dasyu-
'robber'. etc. 
Examples could be given of the same tendency over the whole 
field of nominal stem formation. 
In nominal composition the Vedic type of governing com­
pound seen in examples like bharddvaja- ' carrying off the prize', 
etc., became early obsolete. In other respects we see not a 
diminution in nominal composition, but a steady extension in 
its use. The members of a compound are rarely more than two 
in number in the Veda, and the conditions under which they 
ma}T be formed are limited. As the language advances greater 
freedom is observed both as to the number of members in a 
compound. and as to the type of syntactical construction allowed 
to be so expressed. Finally the stage is reached where compounds 
of any length may be formed ahnost without restriction, the 
whole character of the literary language being thereby changed. 
In this respect the later classical language goes far beyond 
anything that would have been countenanced by PaI).ini. 
There is considerable simplification and modernisation in 
nominal declension. Older forms of inflection in a-stems such 
as instr. sg. in -a (viryd beside uiry~a) and nom. pI. nt. in -a 
(bhuvana beside bhuvanani) are given up in favour of the new 
formations. At the same time some innovations of the Vedic 
language (nom. pI. m. -iisas, instr. pI. -ebhis beside -as, -ais) are 
discarded. One type of inflection of i- and u- stems (dryas. 

38 
0 r T LIN E S 0 F T If E HIS TOR Y 0 F SAN S K R I T 
krdtvas) is abandoned, though one type of special neuter inflec­
tion is preserved (varit.last mddhunas) and a new type of 
feminine inflection is introduced from the i- stems (gdtyiis, 
dhen'l.liis). Of the two types of inflection of i- stems, the vrkt 
type is abandoned in favour of the devi type with some influence 
of the former on the latter (nom. pI. devyas as opposed to devis 
of the Vedic language), and some isolated survivals (nom. sg. 
lak~mts). The irregular vocatives in -s of the van- and vant­
stems (bhaga'Vas, etc.) are abandoned. Endingless locatives of 
the type ak$dn are abandoned in favour of the fully inflected 
forms Cak~titti or ak$tti}. The Vedic locative formations from the 
personal pronouns in -l (asnu!, etc.) disappear. In the dual the 
number of cases that can be formed from these pronouns is 
reduced from five to three by the elimination of the nominative 
and ablative forms (iival1l,yuvam; avdt,yuvat). In the conjuga­
tion of the verb the classical language simplifies considerably 
the complicated morphology of theearlier language. The alter­
native termination -masi of the 1St pers. plural is abandoned, 
and likewise the long forms of the 2nd plural in -tana, -thana. 
That form of conjugation in the middle which is characterised 
by the absence of t in the 3rd singular and the termination r in 
the 3rd plural (duke, duhrl, impf. dduha, dduhra) is abandoned. 
The old imperatives in -si disappear. The s- aorist is enlarged 
in the 2nd and 3rd singular to produce forms more easily recog­
nisable (dnai~it for dttais). The root aorist is confined to roots 
in ]ong a and the root bhu. Pluperfect forms are eliminated. 
The most important loss in the verbal structure is that of the 
subjunctive. This mood is very common indeed in the Veda, 
and also later till the close of the BrahmaI}a period, but by 
P<lQini's time, apart from forms of the first person incorporated 
in the Jmperative, it had fallen quite out of use. The use of the 
unaugmented forms classed as Injunctive is confined to con­
structions with the prohibitive mil. Modal forms outside the 
present system cease to be used, as also participles from aorist 
bases. In place of the great variety of infinitive forms in the 
Veda, only one, that in -tum is used in the classical language. 
Similarly old variant forms of the gerund (e.g. in -tvi, -tvaya) 
and gerundive (e.g. in ·tva, -enya) disappear. 
An important difference between the Vedic and the c~assical 
language lies in the· treatment of the prepositional prefixes 
attached to verbal roots. In the classical language the prefix 
I 

OUT LIN E S 0 F THE HIS TOR Y 0 F S A !'Ii S l{ R I 1 
39 
stands immediately before the verbal form with which it is 
compounded. On the other hand in the Vedic language its 
position is quite free, and it may be separated from the verb 
by several words, or, on occasion, come after it. This freedom 
was characteristic of Indo-European, and elsewhere the tendency 
has generally been to associate the prefix more closely with the 
verb as time went on. There is the same difference in this 
respect between Homeric and classical Greek as between Vedic 
and classical Sanskrit. 
Finally there are changes in vocabulary. This has already 
been noticed in connection with disuse of certain types of 
nominal stem formation, but it applies equally to the whole 
field of vocabulary. A number of old Indo-European words 
which are current in the Veda are no longer used in the classical 
period. Such are dtka- ' garment' (Av. a8ka-), dpas · work' 
(Lat. opus), dndhas 'juice of soma plant' (d. Gk.a.v{)os 
· flower • ?), ama- · strength' (Av. ama-) , arvant- ' steed' (Av. 
aurvant- • swift '), avata- • spring' (Lett. avuols), adhra- ' mean, 
lowly' (Av. adra-), apf- ' friend, ally' (cf. Gk. 7jTno~ • kind '), . 
i~ira- ' vigorous, strong' (cf. Gk. ;'€p6~ , sacred '), irma- ' fore­
leg J 
(Lat. armus, etc.), usij- ' a kind of priest' (Av. usig-), 
r~vd- ' high • (Av. J73Sva-) , kravi~- • raw flesh' (cf. Gk. KPEaS), 
gatu~ • way, course; abode' (Av. giiiu-), gnii. ' wife of god' (Av. 
g3nti 
< wife', Gk. ytJv~. etc.), cdnas- 'pleasure. satisfaction' 
(Av. canah-), cyautnd- · deed, enterprise' (Av. syaoOna-), Janas 
· race' (Gk. yEvo~, Lat. genus), jdni-
woman' (Av. Jaini-),
f 
jinya- ( under the care of,entrusted to ' (Sogd. zynyh, Khotanese 
ySiniya-, whence Central Asian Prakrit jheniga ' id '), jrdyas­
, expanse, flat surface' (Av. zrayah- • lake '), lUau- ' sieve' (for 
*titaHu-, d. Gk. l)l.arrdw ' sift " etc.), tokd- • offspring " tOkman­
• offshoot 1 (Av. taoxman- ' seed '), tvak$- • to be active, ener! 
getic' (Av. Owaxs-) , dasmd-, dasrd- • accomplished, clever " 
dd1Jtsas-
'wonderful deed' (d. A v. dahma-
instructed " 
I 
da1Jra-
• accomplished '. da1Jhah-
• cleverness ., 
Gk. 
8~l)aE 
I taught " dSa~s • uninstructed', Sa~J.Lwv • instructed', etc.), 
ddma- ' house • (Lat. domus, etc.), d4nu- ' moisture' (Av. danu 
t stream " Osset. don), diisvds- ' worshipper', drapsd- • banner J 
(Av. drafsa~), ndkt-' night' RV 7. 71, I (Lat. nox, etc.; ad­
verbialndktam remains), ndhu$-·· neighbour', nitna- 'half' 
(Av.naema-), pan- 'to praise, extol', pasty&. • habitation', 
pitu- 'nourishment, food' (Av. pitu.. ' id ., Lith.·petus • midday 

ii 
I 
40 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
meal', etc.), 
bhr~~{.-
< spike' (Av. °bar~sti-, d. EngL bristle, 
etc.), pd,jas-
<surface' (Khat. piiysa-, Sogd. p'z< face ')' 
mr¢ika-
mercy' and related words (Av. marazdika-), mdrya­
t 
young man J (d. Gk. ,.u:fpag < lad' and the Marianni of the 
Mitanni documents), miyedha-
sacrificial offering' (Av.
t 
myazda-), mi¢hd-
t reward, prize' (Av. mizda-, Gk. 
fL'(Je6~, 
etc.), ydhu-, yahvd- 'young, youngest, latest' (Av. yazu-, 
Vi( 
f. yezivi ' id '), yos (welfare, rightness' (Av. yaas, Lat. ius), 
....t>~I.I.A."\ -p rodasi the two surfaces (of heaven and earth) (Av. raodah-,
I 
I' 
raada- ( face " Pers. roy , id '), vddhri-
castrated' (Gk. fjJpts
t 
( castrated ram '), vasna- ' price, value • (d. Lat. venum, Gk. 
J)vos. etc., Hitt. ussania- 'to sell '), viija- ' prize, booty', vitju­
t strong, firm " ven-
t to long for', sdma- ( hornless' (cf. Gk. 
KEJ.H3.S 'young deer', Lith. smUlas 
< without horns'), siprii 
· moustache', sund- ' welfare " syetd- ( orphan J RV. 1. 71 • 4 
(d. Av. StU, O. S1. siru, etc.), sap-, saparya- ' to attend to re­
ligious ceremonies' (Gk. €7TW < attend to'. Lat. sepelio bury')'
f 
sas-
to sleep • (Hitt. se!-) sligh- ' to step, stride' (Gk. rrTElxw,
f 
Goth. steigan, etc.), syand- ( soft, gentle', hdras- ' heat' (Gk. 
8lpos 
# summer J, Arm. jer < warm weather'), hary- 'to be 
pleased, exhilarated' (Gk. Xatpw ' rejoice '). 
The existence of homonyms frequently results in the sup­
pression of one of such pairs. The early Vedic language pos­
sessed dsura- 1 {lord' (Av. ahura-) and dsura- 2 (demon'. 
Only the latter is in use from the later Vedic period onwards. 
Similarly of the pair ari- 1 'devoted, trustworthy' (whence 
drya-, arya-, d. Ritt. ara- 'friend, ally', etc.) and ari- 2 
• enemy' «*ali-, d. Lat. alius, etc.), only the latter is pre­
served. Vedic karu- 1 'singer' (kf- (to celebrate', cf. Gk. 
K'T/pvg, 
K;J.pij~ 'herald ') yields to classical kar'U- 2 
artisan '
t 
(kr- ' to do, make), and Vedic rajas 1 space' (raj- ' to stretch
f 
out " d. Lat. regio, etc.) is abandoned on account of the COffi­
'petition of rajas 2 ( dust, dirt J. Similarly of the pairs pal'u$d- 1 
'light grey' (Av. pozfrusa-, d. Eng!. fallow, etc.) and paru$a-
2; 
f knotty, rough ' (Pdru~~, parvan- • knot '), piiyU.. 1 'protector' 
and piiyu- 2 
anus I, phalgu- 1 
• reddish, pink', phalgu- 2
t 
, hollow, without substance', the homonym listed first ceases to 
be used in the later language. 
Changes of meaning naturally occurred over so long a period. 
Many of these occurred in the· natur~ growth of the language. 
For instance vdhni- in the Veda means simply ( carrier J and it is 

OUTLI~ES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
41 
applied to Agni in his capacity of carrying the oblations to the 
gods. Later it means ' fire • in general by a perfectly natural 
extension of meaning. The term ddsyu- is primarily ethno­
logical, meaning the non-Aryan inhabitants of India; later it 
acquires the meaning' robber, brigand'. Similarlydiisd-' slave' 
was originally a tribal name (d. the Dahae of Central Asia). and 
the same may apply to S1"~drd- ' member of the fourth caste;, 
since a tribe with this name is known to have existed in N.'''. 
India from both Indian and Classical sources. 
In other cases the change of meaning in the later language is 
due simply to a misunderstanding of the Vedic word. This is 
the case with kratu- 'sacrifice' as opposed to Vedic krdtu­
· wisdom, insight'. Here there is no change of meaning, but 
simply a failure to understand properly the meaning of the 
Vedic texts. In classical Sanskrit matarlS'oan- means' wind' ; 
originally it meant the divine being who discovered fire by the 
method of rubbing two sticks, and also Agni himself (from 
*mataris-
· fire-stick', etymologically equivalent to Lat. 
matrix); the change of meaning can only be due to the fading 
of the old mythology in the popular mind. Vedic kilrlla- meant 
a certain milk preparation (cf. Khowar kitii! ' a kind of cheese ') ; 
its use in classical Sanskrit to mean ' blood' is due to a mis­
understanding of the old texts. 
False popular etymology in the case of the old words dsura­
( demon' and dsita- ( black' led to the creation of two new 
words. Since the initial a- in these words was falsely inter­
preted as the negative a-, sura- ' god J and sita- ' white I were 
created as their opposites. 
The above examples show that the losses in vocabulary 
during this period of the history of the language were consider­
able. As elsewhere the Indo-European heritage of Indo-Aryan 
was steadily reduced with the passage of time. One result was 
that many of the old words of the Veda ceased to be understood 
in later times. The difficulties that ensued gave rise at an early 
period to a special school of interpretation (nirukta-) of the 
Veda. Collections of difficult vocables were made and attempts 
to explain them on an etymological basis were made. These 
labours were summed up in the work of Yaska, who may be 
roughly contemporary with PaI)ini. These attempts at inter­
pretation were successful to only a limited degree, and it 
emerges quite clearly there existed no reliable tradition as to 

42 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
the meaning of many Vedic words, with the result that the 
authors were frequently reduced to guessing. The same applies 
to the lafer commentatorial works culminating in the great 
Bha~ya of SayaI).a. In modern times the labours of scholars, 
equipped with greater resources than the ancients1 have done 
much to reduce the field of uncertainty. but even now there 
remains over a considerable amount of material which defies 
certain interpretation. 
In contrast to the losses of the old vocabulary, classical San­
skrit has acquired a large number of new words from various 
sources. These gains far more than counterbalance the losses, 
and the vocabulary of classical Sanskrit is one of the richest 
known. Of course there are many words which appear first in 
the later language and at the same time belong to the most 
ancient layer of Indo-Aryan. The absence of such words from 
the older texts is partly accidental, since, extensive though they 
are, the Vedic texts do not contain the whole linguistic material 
of pre-classical Sanskrit. Partly also it is a question of dialect; 
the widening of the horizon in the case of later as opposed to 
Vedic Sanskrit led to the inclusion of Old Indo-Aryan material 
which may not have been current in the dialects which underlay 
the early standard language. For instance the adverb parut1last 
year' is not recorded before Pal)ini, but it is an ancient IE word as 
is shown by the Greek equivalent TT£pVat. Similarly the related 
partin' year before last 1 is, ,we may be sure, absent from the 
early texts only by accident. 'There are many words which must 
be ancient because their formation is of an ancient type, e.g. 
viputa-
abundant ' from the root Pf- ' to fill'. In this case the 
I 
preservation of IE l. elsewhere not found with this root, suggests 
that its absence from the early Vedic texts is a matter of dialect. 
A large number of the new words are fresh fonnations based 
on the existing stock of roots and formatives. As long as the 
suffixes of derivation retained their living character, there was 
ample scope for the creation of new terms as occasion demanded. 
This was particularly so since it was combined with the facility 
of compounding verbal roots with prepositional prefixes, and in 
this way terms could be created at will for any conceivable 
need. From the rootk{-' to do' alone, by means of the suffixes 
of derivation, and with the help of some' score of prepositional 
prefixes, many hundreds of words were manufactured, whose 
meanings cover every field of practical and theoretical expression. 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
43 
The vocabulary was further enriched from outside Indo­
Aryan itself. The pre-existing vernaculars made a sizeable con­
tribution to the Sanskrit vocabulary. This influence is strongest, 
it seems, in the case of Dravidian words and that can be identified 
with certainty as Dravidian run into several hundred. Though 
a few are found already in the Vedic language. the majority do 
not become current before the classical language. A smaller 
proportion was provided by the Kolarian languages. 
Some 
words were introduced from outside India, e.g. from Iranian 
(viirabii1)a-, • breast plate ') or from Greek (horii ( hour '). See 
farther Chapter VIII. 
Even when all these new words have been accounted for 
there remains a considerable number of words in classical San­
skrit whose origin is unknown. Most were no doubt originally 
desi words in the Indian terminology, and since the linguistic 
complexity of pre-Aryan India must have been greater than 
anything that now appears, we should not be surprised to find 
so many words whose origin remains unexplained. 
Such in brief are the main changes which took place in San­
skrit between the early Vedic and the classical period. In the 
pre-classical literature this evolution can be traced in its suc~ 
ceeding stages. This literature, which is devoted entirely to 
religion and ritual, falls into three main sections. 
I. The Sarphitas of the ~gveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda and 
Atharvaveda. 
II. The BrahmaQ-as. prose texts devoted to the mystical in­
terpretation of the ritual. 
III. The Sutras, containing detailed instructions for per­
forming the ritual, of which the Srautasutras deal with the 
great public sacrifices, and the Grhyasutraswithhousehold ritual. 
The periods which are conventionally assumed for the com­
position of this literature are (I) Sa111hitas 1200-800 B.C., 
{2} BrahmaQ-as, 800-500 B.C., (3) Siitras 600-300 B.C. 
In the absence of any definite information, such chronology 
rests mah"1ly on guess-work. On the other hand. the relative 
chronology of the succeeding strata can be established beyond 
all doubt by means of linguistic data contained in the texts 
themselves. The linguistic changes summarised above took 
place gradually and the language of the sllcceeding phases of the 
literature becomes steadily more and more similar to the 
classical norm. The gulf that separates the language of the 

44 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
~gveda .from classical Sanskrit is very much greater than that 
separating the language of even the ear1iest prose texts from it. 
The later Sarphit3s can be shown on the basis of language to be 
later in date than the l}gveda, and within that work itself the 
tenth book is known to be the latest for the same reason. In the 
same way a chronological distinction can be made between 
earlier and later Br:1hmal)as. 
Since the BrahmaI!as are in prose, their language may be 
taken as reasonably representative of the spoken language of 
the upper classes in the later Vedic period. It still retains pre­
classical features, such as the use of the old subjunctive, but 
already the majority of the old Vedic forms have fallen into 
disuse. By the time of the composition of the Siitras the lan­
guagehas reached in all essentials the stage at which it was 
codified by P:1l)ini. In all the Siltras it is possible to find 
grammatical forms which do not conform strictly to the 
PaI,linean rules. But in contrast to the earlier literature these 
forms are not as a rule archaisms. The difference is rather that 
their usage is somewhat more lax and careless than that 
allowed by the strict formulation of the grammarians, and in 
this respect they accurately reflect the spoken usage of the 
period of PaJ:).ini himself and of the period immediately pre­
ceding. Their language is based, not like the later classical 
Sanskrit on an established and traditional grammatical system, 
but on that same spoken language of the educated Brahmins, 
which is the source of the grammatical system of PaQini. 
These texts are very important in linguistic history: they 
stand side by side with P:ll}ini as an independent authority on 
the living Sanskrit language during the period immediately 
preceding its final codification. It is here} and not in the later 
literature, that we must look for a living illustration of the lan­
guage that Pal)ini established in its final form. 
§2. OLD INDO-ARYAN 
The Sanskrit language, in its Vedic and Classical form, had~ 
as already observed, a definite geographical location. In the 
very earliest period this lay in the Punjab, but the centre soon 
moved eastward to the countries of Kuru and Paficala, and 
there it remained during the whole later Vedic period. Certain 
dialectal divergencies between the language of the ~gveda and 
that of the later literature-notably the use of I instead of Vedic 

45 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
,-can be ascribed to this. In addition there existed dialect 
areas containing features which find no place in Sanskrit. 
Quite early in the Vedic period there were extensive settlements 
of Indo-Aryans to the East (Kosala, etc.) and to the South 
(Avanti, etc.). The spoken language outside the area which was 
the home of classical Sanskrit differed in certain respects from 
the spoken language of this area. The term Old Indo-Aryan is 
sometimes used as alternative to Sanskrit, but this is incorrect, 
since there were other dialects of Indo-Aryan in addition to 
those on which Sanskrit is founded. The term Old Indo-Aryan 
should be used for the whole body of Indo-Aryan during the 
early period, and Sanskrit is not co-extensive with this. 
Of the non-Sanskritic dialects of Old Indo-Aryan no direct 
remains are preserved, and there would not be much to be said 
about it, if it were not for the fact that in the later Middle Indo­
Aryan dialects a fair amount of material exists which cannot be 
explained out of Sanskrit, Vedic or Classical, but only out of 
equally ancient, but different forms of Indo-Aryan such as have 
been referred to above. A complete collection of sp.ch material 
has never been put together, but enough evidence is available 
to demonstrate the one-tilne existence of non-Sanskritic dialects 
of Old Indo-Aryan. The differences involved were not very 
great (as compared for instance with the early dialects of Iran­
ian), but they are sufficient tq be worth taking into account. 
Among the phonetic features we may note primarily the 
change .of final-as to -e in contrast to its treatment as -0 in San­
skrit and the later Prakrit dialects of the central area. This was 
a distiQguishing feature of Eastern Indo-Aryan, but examples 
are alSqfound in the extreme North-West. In sare duhit4 
t daught~r of the sun • one dialectal form of this type is pre:­
served in the ~gveda. In place of Sanskrit k$ Middle Indo­
Aryan forms sOmetimes show jh. J jjh-, ggh in cases where Iran­
ian has the sonant combination yi (Pkt. jharai ( flows', Pa. 
paggharati, Skt:N.kfaf'-J Av. yiar-. etc.). There are dialectal vari­
ations in the treatment of ancieat fH (f); OIA ur in place of 
Skt. ir is attested in some cases: Pkt. jU1)1)a- « old 
*jur1Jd­
(: Skt. jir1)d-), tuha-
ford 
*turtha- (: Skt. tirthd-). In some
t 
dialects ancient -id- was replaced by -44- instead of by single
-4- with compensatory lengthening as in Sanskrit, e.g. Pa. 
ni44a-: Skt. ni4d- ' nest J. In Pa. idha there ' a more ancient 
fonn of the word is preserved than in Skt. ihd, Pkt. sir!hila­

46 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
l slack' (out of *s#IIila-) and Skt. sithird- (Ola-) arc parallel inft 
dependent developments from earlier *srth-ira... (sratk- (to 
loosen '). 
A number of grammatical differences can be observed, 
though the loss of so much of the old inflection in Middle Indo­
Aryan has eliIninated much of tRis. Forms of the third plural 
atmanepada like Pa. vijjare' are seen J (>*viti.'yare) indicate that 
such r- endings were more extensively used in some Old Indo­
Aryan dialects than in Sanskrit. Pa. jigucchati is disgusted ' 
l 
(Skt. jugupsateJ shows i- reduplication of the desiderative in the 
case of roots containing the vowel -u- which is absent in San­
skrit but known to Old Iranian (Av. cixsnusa-' desire to please') 
Pa. hariiyati ( is angry' continues an Old Indo-Aryan form 
bearing the same relation to Skt. hr1J,fte as Vedic grbhaydti to 
grk'f)titi. In viheseti · injures " vihesii 'injury: «*vihe~ayatiJ 
*vike~a, J-hi1!ts-) Old Indo-Aryan forms unknown to Sanskrit 
are represented. In Pa. sabbadhi l everywhere ' an old adverbial 
termina~ion is preserv£d which has a parallel in Gk. -8e 
Pa. kiihiimi l I will do' represents an Old Indo-Aryan ani! future 
*kar~yami as opposed to Skt. kari:;ytimi. Pa. sa11ta~ , oneself', 
which is unknown to Sanskrit, is the equivalent of Av. hama-, 
O. S1. samu. Participial forms like mukka-
released " rU'f)'f)a­
j 
( weeping' continue' old formations in -na, as opposed to the 
Skt. formations in -tao The Ardha-Magadhi participles in -mitta 
seem to repreSent an ancient Indo-Aryan variant of Skt. -man-a. 
The participle dinna- '. given' implies an old formation re­
duplicating with i as in Greek (*didami: Gk.8{ow;,u). The parti­
ciples in -tiivi1t (vijitavin-
who has conquered ') are an ancient
t 
formation equivalent to the -tavant- participles of Sanskrit. In 
etase to go • we have a Vedic type of infinitive not elsewhere 
t 
found. The absolutives in -tuna (Pkt. 
Guna) , gantuna, etc., 
differ in apophony from the Vedic forms in -tvana. Difference 
in apophony is frequently observable in stem formations: e.g. 
supina-
C dream I == Gk. V1TVOS as opposed to Skt. svdpna- with 
guJ)a; garu-' heavy' has gUJ)a of the root as opposed to Skt. 
guru-; compare in the same way turita- 'hastening', tkina­
- slothful t « *stina-) with Skt. tvarit.a-, styana-. Nominal stem 
fonnations unrepresented in Sanskrit are not uncOlnmon, e.g, 
Pa. nakaru- • sinew', theta- • firm' theva- 'drop'<.sniiru-, 
.stiJeta-, ·stepa- (stip- 'to drip'); Pkt. mahafta- • brahmin' 
(lit. • great one '), cf. V. m4hina- ' great '. 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTOHY OF SANSKRIT 
47 
A number of words with IE etymol0gy appear first in the 
1ater stages of Indo-Aryan: e.g. Kharo;;thi Prakrit ata • flour', 
Hindiata' id', ct. Pers. (irdfrom the root in Gk.dA£w' togrind '; 
Pa. lamaka- ' inferior, wretched', Pj. lava' maimed', d. EngL 
lame, Russ. 10m. etc., Pkt. (Apabhrarpsa) tiira- ' cheese;, ct. 
Gk. TVpOl). 
Fronl evidence such as this we can form some idea, fragmen­
tary though it is, of the dialectal variety of Old Indo-Aryan. 
It is necessary to bear this in mind so that the evolution 
of Sanskrit can be seen in its proper perspective. The form­
a tion of a standard language implies a rigorous process of selec­
tion and exclusion. In all spoken language there is continuous 
variation from area to area and from class to class. Sanskrit 
was based on the spoken language of the higher classes of 
Madhyadesa, influenced by the older sacred language of the 
I~gveda which had originated further ""est. This was the 
centre of propagation of Brahmin religion, in its orthodox form; 
and of a fixed standard language which was the property of the 
Brahmin community in whatever part of Aryavarta they re­
sided. pfiQini speaks occasionaHy of differences in speech be­
tween the Easterners and the Northerners. But these are 
always trivialities. Sanskrit as a spoken language was essenti­
ally the same over the whole of North India, and from an early 
period also in the Deccan. 
Under the surface there were 
dialectal differences which for the earliest period can be dimly 
perceived, and which come out into the light of day during the 
next stage of the language. Middle Indo-Aryan. 
§3.' THE GRAMMARIANS-
The importance of the grammarians in the history of Sanskrit 
is unequa.lled anywhere in the world. Also the accuracy of their 
linguistic analysis is unequalled until comparatively modern 
times. The whole of the classical literature of Sanskrit is 
written in a form of language which is regulated to the last de­
tail by the work of Pclt:lini and his successors. 
Grammatical interest in India arose in the first place in con­
nection with the necessity of preserving intact the sacred texts 
of the Veda. It was of the utmost ritual significance that every 
word used in the recitals at the sacrifices should be pronounced 
absolutely correctly. Among the means by which the correct 

48 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
transmission of the Vedic texts was achieved was the Pada­
pii.!ha. in which each word of the text was repeated separately. 
To do this correctly, as it is done in the main. involved the be­
ginning of grammatical analysis and, since it involved the 
resolution of Sandhi, phonetic analysis. 
The phonetic teaching necessary for the correct recitation of 
the Vedas is embodied in the Prrit£sakhyas. There are several 
of these attached to various Vedic schools, and they deal with 
the subject in great detail and with accuracy. They are a very 
important source for our knowledge of ancient pronunciation. 
It is disputed whether any of these texts in their present form 
are earlier than Pal}ini. but in some form or other instruction of 
this sort must be as old as the Vedic schools themselves. 
Later works dealing with phonetics are the Sik$iis which exist 
in large numbers and contain valuable observations. 
Difficulties in the interpretation of the Vedic texts owing to 
the obsolescence of words led to the beginnings of lexicography. 
The earliest work of this kind, the NighaI)tu consists of lists of 
difficult Vedic words, of divinities, etc., drawn up for the use of 
teachers. The commentary on these by 
who is probably 
not far removed from Pal}ini in. time, contains the earliest 
systematic discussions on questions of grammar. Here we find 
the parts of speech already distinguished as 1Ulman {noun 't 
sarvaniiman-
r pronoun ., iikhyiita- {verb I, upasarga- • preposi­
tion > and nipata- i· particle'. The derivation of nouns by means 
of krt and taddhita affixes has become a well established theory> 
and an interesting argument between Sakatayana and Gargya 
is reported as to whether all nouns can be derived in this way 
from verbal roots. The former maintained that they could, and 
in spite of the cogent arguments on the other side advanced by 
Gargya, this was the theory that generally held the field in 
Sanskrit grammatical theory. It is a fact that a larger propor­
tion of the Sanskrit vocabulary is capable of such analysis than 
is the case in most languages. 
". The date of Pal}ini is most commonly fixed in the fourth 
century B.C. which is in accordance with the native tradition 
which connects him with the Nanda king of Magadha. Nothing 
is known of his life except the fact that he was born in the 
extreme North-West of India at Salatura. His A$fiidhyayi 
which fixed the form of Sanskrit grammar once and for all, 
consists of some 4.000 aphorisms of the greatest brevity. This 

49 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
brevity is achieved by the invention of an algebraical system of 
notation of a kind not found outside the grammatical schools. 
The system is so idiosyncratic that it could not possibly have 
been invented there and then by one man and imposed immed­
iately on all his colleagues. It is clearly the growth of many 
centuries and PaQini is to be regarded as the final redactor of a 
traditional Vyakara~a who superseded all others on account of 
his superior comprehensiveness and accuracy. Many of the pre­
decessors of PaQmi are in fact cited in the text, but the merits 
of his own work condemned theirs to early oblivion. 
The brevity which the Siitra style aimed at and achieved was 
due to the fact that all instruction was still oral and dependent 
on memory. It implies also from the very beginning the exist­
ence of a commentary (vrtti) , also oral, in which the examples 
were contained. When this was first written down is not known, 
but the earliest existing commentary on PaQini, the Kiisikii, 
dates from a thousand years after his time (c. A.D. 700). 
A 
ga1Japiitha containing lists of words referred to in the Siitra by 
citation of the first word in them followed by -iidi, and a 
dhiitupii!ha, containing a list of verbal roots, formed essential 
parts of his system. 
The Siitras of PaQini were supplemented and to some extent 
corrected by Katyayana at adate not long after the composi­
tion of the A~!adhyiiyi itself. These notes (Viirttika-) are of the 
same brevity as the original work, but were fortunately soon 
made the subject of an extensive commentary (Mahiibha~ya) by 
Patanjali. His date is fortunately known through contemporary 
references, notably to the Suilga king Pu~yamitra and to an 
invasion of the Bactrian Greeks, which fix him definitely in the 
second century B.C. 
Later grammatical works exist in abundance, and many 
diverse schools arose, but none of them have any independent 
authority, being completely derivative from PaQini. 
The 
earliest is the Kiitantra which arose about the Christian era, and 
whose author Sarvavarman is said by tradition to have been 
connected with the Satavahana dynasty of the Deccan. The 
work aimed at introducing the study of correct Sanskrit to a 
wider public than the educated Brahmins for whom PaQini and 
his immediate successors had written. Of later works mention 
may be made of the Grammar of Candra (A.D. sixth century) 
which achieved great popularity among the Buddists, and the 

50 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
jllinendra Vyakara~a (Co 678) which was composed on behalf 
of the Jains. 
Later the polymath Hemacandra produced 
also for the Jains the liaima Vyakara~a. In addition, a 
number of minor systems are known which were popular 
in various localities, but which have nothing original to 
contribute. 
The object of all these later grammars was to present the 
material contained in Pal}ini in a form comparatively easy to 
assimilate, and in this respect they performed a service to very 
many who were not equal to the arduous task of mastering the 
original text itself. How useful they were is shown by their 
continuous popularity. They contain little that is original since 
for thelll there existed no other source from which they could 
draw except the work of their illustrious predecessor. To 
Pa1).ini the main source of his work was the living speech of 
himself and his contemporaries. It is the merit of his gram­
matical system that by means of the Sutra and commentary, 
and by such subsidiary compilations as Dhatupafha, Gatz,a­
piilha, etc.• the vast bulk of the contemporary linguiStic usage 
was incorporated, analysed and codified in the teachings trans­
mitted from teacher to pupil in the schools of the Grammarians. 
The rapid process of linguistic change that took the vernaculars 
through the various stages of Middle Indo-Aryan enhanced pro­
gressively the value of this codification. It is characteristic of 
Ancient India that the founders of schools and doctrines should 
be exalted to semi-divine status and regarded as omniscient. 
In the case of Pa:Q.ini this was more justified than in other cases 
since he had direct knowledge of the living Sanskrit languag~of 
the fourth century B.C. which is the source of all his statements. 
As a result of his labours and the labours of his school this fonn 
of language was accepted as a standard throughout the long 
period that remained of the classical civilisation of India. As 
the gap between this and the vernaculars grew con tinuall y wider, 
the usage of the speakers and Wliters of Sanskrit grew more de­
pendent on Pal}ini, and his authority more absolute. Pal}ini's 
grammar was based on the language of his contemporaries, and 
conversely the language of Kalidasa and his Sllccessors is based 
on the grammar of PaI)ini. The Sanskrit of the dassicallitera­
ture was a living language in the sense that it was written and 
spoken by the educated ill preference to any other, but at the 
same time it was a language that had to be learnt in schools by 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
SI 
means of an arduous discipline. It was a prerequisite for all men 
of letters of the period that they should know by heart the 
-
A~tiidhyiiyf, and evidence of this dependence appears continu­
ally in their works. 
As time went on, the cultivation of classical Sc.:1skrit also 
came to depend on the K osas or lexica. Apart from the Vedic 
nigha1Jtus lexicography is a later growth in India than grammar. 
The extant lexica are mostly late and are compilations out of 
earlier works. Amarakosa, the earliest existing, has not been 
accurately dated, but it is put approximately in the period 
A.D. 600-800. Earlier works are known and sometimes quoted, 
but not preserved. These works are in metre and intended to be 
learnt by heart, a practice which in the traditional schools has 
continued to this day. When this first became an essential re­
quirement of a literary education is not clearly known, but 
certainly for the later period of Sanskrit. literature we may 
assume that the writers were so equipped. 
In spite of their late date and, in general, unscientific method, 
the lexica are of considerable value, since they preserve a large 
number of words which are not recorded in available texts. At 
the same time careless copying and inaccurate transmission has 
created some ghost 'words, which careful comparison of the 
various 'lexica may remove. 
§4. 
EPIC SANSKRIT 
The bulk of the classical Sanskrit literature was -composed at 
a period very much later than the fixing of the language by 
PaI).ini. An earlier period in literary and linguistic history is 
represented by the two great popular epics, the Mahabharata 
and the RamayaQa. It does not seem that either of these two 
works reached its final form until well after the Christian era, 
but the tradition of epic recitation goes back into the Vedic age. 
The Mahabharata in particular was a long time in forming, and 
a good deal of what is incorporated in the final recension may 
claim an earlier date. 
We have therefore in the Epics extensive documents of 
Sanskrit belonging to a period nearer to PaI).ini than the classicaJ 
literature in the narrow sense. They provide also evidence of 
the wide popularity of one type of Sanskrit literature among the 
masses of the people, since these works were reserved for no 

52 
OUTLI;\IES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
special or cultivated audience, but intended for public recital to 
the population in general. Their popular charaCter is evidenced 
by their language. 
This is Sanskrit definitely enough as 
opposed to the contemporary Middle Indo-Aryan, but it is a 
Sanskrit which frequently violates the rules which Pal,lini had 
laid down and which were always observed in the more orthodox 
literary circles. Among the common deviations of the Epic 
language a few characteristic types may be quoted. The dis­
tinction between the active and middle forms of the verb, 
which was still fully alive in PaI)ini's time, and for which he 
caters in some detail, is beginning to be blurred in the Epic. 
Active forms are used for middle and vice-versa, and even the 
passive verb sometimes takes active endings (sruyanti 'are 
heard " etc.). There is some confusion between the gerunds in 
-tva and -ya, and the rule of PaI)ini which restricts the former 
to uncompounded and the latter to compounded verbs is not 
always observed. Unaugmented preterites occur, a character­
isticwhich is also found in the Veda, as well as in early middle 
Indo-Aryan. Conversely the augmented forms are occasionally 
found with the prohibitive particle (mii ... agama!z, 'do not 
go '). The particle ma is not used exclusively with the unaug­
mented aorist according to rule but indifferently with impera­
tive (ma bhava) optative (ma bruyalt) future (ma drak~yasi) and 
so on. The tenth class and causative verbs make a middle parti­
ciple in -ayana (codayana- as opposed to correct codayamana-) a 
usage to which metrical convenience has contributed. The care­
ful rules of PaI)ini concerning the use of the alternative forms 
-ati and -anti in forming the feminine of present participles are 
not strictly observed. The distribution of set and ani! forms fre­
quently does not conform to rule. 
These and other irregular forms correspond to what is found 
in early middle Indo-Aryan, indicating that Epic Sanskrit is a 
later form of Sanskrit than that of PaI)ini. No pre-PaI)inean 
forms are found in the Epic, which means that although the 
epic tradition goes back to the Vedic period, and although the 
Mahabharata story was familiar to people before PaI)ini's time, 
even the eadiest portions of the present text must be distinctly 
later than him. Since for centuries the transmission of the epic 
stories depended on oral tradition, and not a fixed oral tradition 
like that of the Vedic schools, it is not surprising that a circle of 
stories originating in the Vedic period should in their final form 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
53 
appear in a language of a much later date with no archaic 
fornas preserved. 
The recitation and transmission of the Epic legends was not 
the business of the Brahnaans, but of the Sutas, a class of royal 
servants whose duties had originally included that of charioteer. 
It was natural that their language should be of a more popular 
nature than that of the educated classes par excellence, the 
Brahnaans. At the same tinae it is interesting that all along, in 
spite of the conapetition of Prakrit, Sanskrit was cultivated in 
nauch wider circles than in the priestly schools for whona 
PaI).ini's work 'Was intended. Outside the brahnaanical schools 
the knowledge of grammatical theory naust have been ele­
naentary to say the least, and in the early period at least the 
knowledge of Sanskrit on the part of the epic reciters must have 
depended primarily on usage and not on formal instruction. 
From this arose the tendency to approximate the language to 
some extent to the prevailing type of Middle Indo-Aryan. 
Later when the gulf between the two became greater formal 
instruction in Sanskrit became a universal necessity, but by 
this period the epic style and the epic language had already 
established itself in its own right, and linguistic features such as 
those mentioned above were accepted and retained. 
The language of the Epics served also as a model for the lan­
guage of the Pural).as, of which the earliest core dates to the 
same period. It is continued in the numerous later compila­
tions, and further in a variety of sectarian agamas, etc. Lin­
guistically these compilations are not of great interest, except 
occasionally in the matter of vocabulary, and many, particu­
larly the later ones, testify to the deficient education of their 
authors in gramnaar. 
§ 5. THE SANSKRIT OF THE CLASSICAIJ LITERATURE 
The special characteristics of classical Sanskrit arise from the 
fact that most of the literature dates from a period very much 
later than the period in which the form of the language was 
fixed. If Kalidasa is to be dated c. A.D. 450 a period of no less 
than eight hundred years separates him from the grammarian 
Pal).ini. The work of Ka.lidasa stands almost at the beginning 
of the body of classical literature which is preserved, and the 
greater part of this is separated by more than a millennimn from 
the regulator of the language. This accounts largely for· the 

54 
0 l' T L I XES 0 F T 11 E Ii 1ST 0 H Y 0 I; SA l'\ S K HIT 
artificiality of style and language which is 110,t absent from the 
best authors, and which in some is exaggerated beyond reason. 
The literary gap in the period immediately preceding and 
succeeding the Christian era is due to the loss of the bulk of the 
pre-Kalidasan literature, since it is known that kiivya in all its 
forms was actively practised during all this time. The earliest 
Sanskrit inscriptions (e.g. of Rudrad.:\man, A.D. ISO) show the 
existence of a developed Sanskrit Kavya. 
Patanjali (c. ISO 
B.C.) quotes some kimya fragments and mentions by name a 
poet Vararuci. His own \vork is a valuable example of the 
prose style of the period, and it enables us to form a picture of 
early Pa1).inean Sanskrit at a time when it was still a fully 
living language. The works of Asvagho~a who flourished under 
Kani~ka (A. D. 78 +-) preserved in Nepal (and fragmentarily in 
Central Asia), though long forgotten in India, have survived 
by fortunate chance, as the sole examples of Sanskrit I<avya 
literature in its earlier phase. 
The gap, only partially to be filled, between Pal)ini and the 
classical literature, is responsible for certain changes in style 
and usage, which have affected the language of the litter, in 
spite of strict adherence to the rules of grammar. These changes 
comprise certain losses and also a number of iimovations. Of 
the losses the most important was that of the old system of 
accentuation. This was still in full force in the time of Patai'ijali 
and it must have continued in being for some time after that, 
but by the time the bulk of the classical literature was composed 
it had certainly disappeared from ordinary use. Certain of 
Pa1).ini's grammatical forms though recognised were not in 
practice used. Already Patafijali remarks that forms of the 
second plural of the perfect like 21~a, fera, cakra are no longer in 
use, their place being taken by the participial forms u#tii)x, 
iir~abl krtavantab. Later a good deal else was tacitly ignored. 
There are many constructions and idioms taught by PaI)ini 
which are not recorded in the later literature (anvaje- Qr 
upiije.kr ' to strengthen " nivacane-kr · to be silent', etc.), and 
many others which have obviously been employed by the later 
authors as evidence of their grammatical learning (e.g. in 
N ai~adhacarita, darsayitahe, first person of the periphrastic future 
middle). There are losses in vocabulary and stich words as 
llnvavasarga-
i allowing one his own way', niravasita-
# excom­
municated' and abhr~a- 'fitness, propriety' are no longer 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
55 
used. In particular the Ga'l;tapa~ha contains numerous terms 
which are founp nowhere else, and since this text was handed 
down without meanings for a long time, it is often impossible 
now to discover the meaning of such words. The old distinction 
in meaning between the three past tenses (Imperfect, Aorist, 
Perfect) was not normally observed. The Aorist, though culti­
vated by the learned, seems to have gone out of common use. 1 
The middle perfect participles in -ana are entirely disused, and 
the active participles in -vas appear only rarely. 
The innovations of the later classical Sanskrit affect mainly 
syntax and vocabulary. The most striking syntactical develop­
ment is the increasing tendency to use compound words and the 
increasing length and complexity of the compounds used. In 
the earliest Sanskrit the use of compounds is not noticeably 
more predominant than in the Greek of HOlner. In the lan­
guage of Pal)ini's day there were still strict rules and limitations 
in the formation of compound words, as is clearly evident from 
his own stat.ements and examples. In the later language they 
are formed. without restriction (e.g. any adjective" may be so 
construed with any noun, as opposed to the original arrange­
menthy which this could only be done when the term had a 
special significance, k!~t}asarpa-
I cobra " etc.), and not infre­
quently. in· direct contradiction to P<iIJ.ini's rules (e.g. jagat­
kartar-
wQrld-creator' against P. 2. 2. 15-16). But the main
i 
thing is that there ceases to be any limitation to the nUluber of 
members a compound may contain, since compound words 
treated as units may be compounded with further words, and 
by a process of accumulation long complexes are built up in 
which the syntactical relation of the members is expressed 
without recourse to inflection. This practice is not only at vari­
ance with the earlier usage and with Indo-European usage in 
general, but is also obviously incompatible with any form of 
popular speech which can have prevailed in India during the 
period 
This linguistic development is a purely literary de­
velopment, and it is a sign of the growing artificiality of the 
Sanskrit language as the gifference between it and the ver­
nacular Middle Indo-Aryan grew wider. 
1 The hero of the drama Padmapriibhrtaka (c. second or third cent. A.D.) asks 
a grammarian who speaks pedantically to use6idinary Sanskrit (vyavahii,ikii. 
bhii#i). The pedantry which is illustrated consi::.ts iu the liberal use of aorists 
and desideratives. 
c 

56 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
Another syntactical development affects the verb, but this is 
based on popular usage. Of the past tenses the aorist, with the 
amalgamation of some imperfect forms, survived in Early 
Middle Indo-Aryan, but by the time of the later Prakrit all 
traces of the old preterites have disappeared. Their place was 
taken by passive constructions with the past participle passive, 
and it is from this usage that the preterites of modern Indo­
Aryan derive. The tendency is also reflected in Sanskrit litera­
ture, and the passive construction becomes gradually more 
predominant~- It had obviously the advantage of simplicity, 
since the complicated verbal inflection of Sanskrit could be 
dispensed with, and in works of deliberately simple style like 
the Hitopadesa it is evidently chosen for this purpose. For 
active use the participle in -tavant is adapted to serve as an 
alternative to the past tense: krtaviin' he did I. The nominal 
phrase in which the meaning is expressed by the juxtaposition 
of subject and predicate, without any verb becomes increasingly 
popular. This is particularly so in the philosophic literature, 
and since that language also favours long compounds, we may 
find long passages of exposition in which the only grammar 
consists of a few case inflections of abstract nouns. 
The vocabulary of Sanskrit was on the whole remarkably 
stable. Nevertheless it is possible to collect from the later 
literature a considerable body of words which do not appear in 
the earlier period. In some cases it may be an accident that 
they are not recorded earlier, but even making this allowance, 
there must remain a fair number of new words. Increases in 
vocabulary derive from the following sources: 
(I) They cou1d be created. when required, on the basis of 
existing Sanskrit roots, prefixes and suffixes, and by the forma­
tion of new compounds with special senses. 
(2) In the course of time some Prakrit words were adopted 
into Sanskrit, though proportionally the number is never very 
large. No certain examples of this kind appear in the Vedic 
language, but they begin to appear in small numbers in the 
Epic and classical period. 
W-ords of this type are bha#a-, 
bhattiira- bhattiiraka- ' master, lord I (Skt. bharlar-), na!a- ' actor' 
(Skt . nrt- ' to dance ') and dohada-, dohala- ' morbid desire of a 
pregnant woman' which occur (more commonly) beside the 
regular Sanskrit daurhrda-. Skt. ur.Ju- • star' derives from a 
Prakrit u¢uvai-
moon ' misinterpreted as meaning lord of 
I 
l 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
57 
the stars' though it is actually derived from a Skt. rtupati­
< lord of the seasons I. I n the medical texts ko!ha- ' a form of 
leprosy' occurs beside ku~tha- ' leprosy' of which it is a Prakrit 
development. Among other words originating in Prakrit we 
may mention kola- ' breast, lap; beside the original kro¢a- < id " 
khu¢¢aka- ' small' beside k~udraka-, vaiyavrtya- with Prakritic 
-v-, more commonly used than the original vaiyaprtya- {busi­
ness or commission entrusted to one', vicchitti- · carelessness in 
dress or decoration • which probably derives from vik~iPti-, and 
oja- ' odd (of numbers) , which in later texts tends to replace the 
original ayttjd-. 
In the case of some words taken over from 
Prakrit there are nG Sanskrit originals, e.g. avahittha- {dis­
simulation', challi ' heap, mass' (Pkt. cha¢a) etc. Some words 
are disguised by false Sanskritisation; e.g. karpa/a- ( ragged 
doth' is taken fronl Pkt. kappa¢a- which itself represents 
*kat-paf,a- 'inferior cloth'. 
Likewjse Pkt. ludda- 'hunter' 
(ultimately identical with the name of the god Rudrd-) is Sans­
kritised as lubdhaka- .as,cif derived from lubh- ' to be greedy', 
and Pkt. piiraddhi- 'hunting I (from rabh- 'to attack ') is 
Sanskritised as paparddhi- meaning literally' evil gain'. 
(3) The Greek and Iranian invasions of India from the N orth­
West resulted in a limited number of loanwords from these 
sources being admitted into Sanskrit. These are dealt with in 
Chapter VIII. 
(4) Sanskrit received a considerable number of words from 
the substrate languages, Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian, parti­
cularlyfrom the latter. These are also dealt with in Chapter VIII. 
(5) -TIre.-rum.desi' is applied to those words in_Prakrit which 
are derived frolP no Sanskrit equivalent. The number of such 
words which can be explained out of Dravidian or some other 
source is comparatively small and will probably always remain 
so. They become still more abundant in the Modern Indo­
Aryan period and present a philological problem which is not 
easy to solve~.Onthe whole classical Sanskrit avoids such 
words, but a number are incorporated, and in particular the 
Jain writers have adopted a fair number. 
§6. 
SANSKRIT AND PRAKRIT 
During the whole period of its existence Classical Sanskrit 
had beside it as competitor Middle Indo-Aryan in its various 
forms, not only as a spoken language but also as a language of 

58 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
literature. In the early period this competition was much more 
important than it was later; though it appears paradoxical at 
first sight, the Sanskrit language only reached its full develop­
ment as a language of culture and administration at a time 
when it had ceased to be a mother tongue. 
The rise of Middle Indo-Aryan as a literary language coin­
cided with the foundation of the new religions of Buddhism and 
Jainism round about 500 B.C. The founders of these religions 
deliberately chose the vernacular-the dialect of Magadha in 
the first instance-as the vehicle of their teaching. In the third 
century B.C. Asoka had his inscriptions engraved in various local 
dialects and ignored Sanskrit. It follows that the language of 
administration of the Mauryan empire was also in Middle Indo­
Aryan, and not as universally the case later, in Sanskrit. If this 
process had not been reversed Sanskrit might have yielded 
place to the younger language, but quite the reverse happened 
and from the end of the Maurya period a steady process set in 
which resulted in Sanskrit becoming the predominant language 
of literature, culture and administration. 
The epigraphical tradition established by Asoka continued for 
some centuries. Until after the Christian era the vernacular 
language alone was used for epigraphical purposes, and this 
means that business and administrative documents-all of which 
were written on perishable materials and have not survived­
were composed in the same language. After the Christian era 
Sanskrit too begins to appear in inscriptions, at first in competi­
tion with Prakrit, and finally in exclusive use. The inscription of 
Rudradaman (A,D. 150) marks the victory of Sanskrit in one 
part of India. In the South Prakrit remained in use longer and 
was not finally ousted by Sanskrit until the fourth or fifth 
century A.D. Eventually the use of Prakrit was discontinued 
entirely and from the Gupta period to the Mahommedan in­
vasions Sanskrit-admittedly often incorrect Sanskrit-re­
mained in exclusive use. 
The linguistic revolution in epigraphy is paralleled in other 
fields. 
The early Buddhist scriptures were exclusively in 
Middle Indo-Aryan. Towards the beginning of the Christian 
era a change took place, and the northern Buddhists adopted 
Sanskrit instead. ASvagho~a (c. A.D. 100) is a master of polished 
Sanskrit. and that he should choose this language as a vehicle 
of propaganda is an indication of the ascendancy which San­

OUTLINE S OF THE HISTORY OF SAN S KRIT 
59 
skrit had achieved at this time. Here also we may observe that 
Sanskrit established its ascendancy first in the north. The 
Theravadins of South India and Ceylon remained faithful to Pali. 
The Jains were slower in making a change than the Buddhists; 
They were the most conservative of Indian sects and up to the 
time of the final constitution of the present canon of the Svet­
a.mbaras (at the council of Valabhi in A.D. 526) they used Prakrit 
exclusively. But even they turned to the use of Sanskrit in the 
succeeding period. At the same time they continued to culti­
vate Prakrit seriously, beside Sanskrit, at a time when in other 
literary circles the traditional Prakrit was being employed as 
little more than a literary exercise. 
In these fields we may observe the transition which led to 
the predominance of Sanskrit. Elsewhere lack of material 
makes a clear picture more difficult. In poetic literature there 
was under the Sa tavahanas and their successors an active 
tradition of lyrical poetry in Mahara~trl of which fragments are 
preserved in the anthology of Hala. At the same time the 
major poetic works of the early period were in Sanskrit. The 
Mahabharata and the Ramayal).a have an importance in the 
literary history of India which nothing in Prakrit could even 
remotely approach, and they were the productions of a period 
when ~o judge by inscriptions Prakrit had almost superseded 
Sanskrit in everyday use. Thus it is obvious that the inscrip­
tional evidence gives a very one~sided picture of contemporary 
linguistic conditions. Outside the sectarian religions Sanskrit 
was always, even when the use of Prakrit was most flourishing, 
the primary literary language of India. 
The growing predominance of Sanskrit as opposed to Prakrit 
in the period succeeding the Christian era can be attributed to 
two reasons, one ideological and one practical. In the Maurya 
period the heterodox religions of Buddhism and Jainism had 
attained such influence as to threaten the existence of the old 
Brahmanical order. In the succeeding period, beginning with 
the usurpation of Pu~yamitra (c. 188 B.C.), a reaction set if'. and 
there began a gradual decline of these systems in the face of 
victorious orthodoxy. This change in the religious atmosphere 
was reflected in language, and Sanskrit, associated with the 
traditional Vedic religion gained ground at the expense of 
Prakrit, whose cultivation was mainly due to the activities of 
the unorthodox sects. 

60 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
The practical reason was that Sanskrit offered a united lan­
guage for the whole of India. In'the early Middle Indian period 
the differences between the various local vernaculars were not 
so great as to preclude mutual understanding, but' even at this 
period Asoka found it necessary to engrave his edicts in three 
different dialects. With the progress of time the differences 
between the local dialects grew gre'ater, so that Sanskrit became 
a necessary bond for the cultural unity of India. Furthermore 
the Prakrits were unstable and subject to continual change 
through the centuries. Any literary language established on 
the basis of a vernacular rapidly became obsolete. The tradi­
tional Prakrits in the later period were as artificial as Sanskrit, 
and did not have the advantage of its universal appeal and 
utility. For such reasons alone Sanskrit was the only fonn of 
language which could serve as a national language in Anc-ient 
India, whose cultural unity, far more influential and important 
than its political disunity, rendered such a language essential 
The relation between Sanskrit and Prakrit in the classical period 
is admirably illustrated by the Sanskrit Drama. Here it is the 
convention that certain characters speak Sanskrit and others 
speak Prakrit, and the usage of the drama no doubt accurately 
represents the actual practice at the~time. The use of Sanskrit· 
is fairly narrowly limited to the highest classes of society, 
namely kings, ministers, learned Brahmans and so on. Women, 
with few exceptions, speak Prakrit, and also children, showing 
that it was everybody's first language. Furthermore, Prakrit is 
spoken not only by all the lower classes, but also predominantly 
Ly the wealthy and influential class of merchants and bankers. 
The comic figure of the vidu$aka, an unlearned Prakrit-speaking 
Brahman, shows that not all members of this class were capable 
of mastering the strenuous discipline necessary for the acquisi­
tionof Sanskrit. 
Only the earliest dramas, of which Mrcchaka{ika is the best 
surviving example, reflect living usage in this way. In the 
greater number of extant dramas which belong to a later period 
(A.D. 500-roooL the composition is according to tradition, and 
the Prakrit becomes merely a transmogrified Sanskrit composed 
according to the rules of the grammarians learned by rate. In 
this period the vernacular had advanced much further on the 
road to Modern Indo-Aryan. 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
6I 
§7. 
THE SANSKRIT OF THE BUDDHISTS AND JAINS 
The adoption of Sanskrit by the Buddhists, and later the 
Jains, widened the neld of Sanskrit literature, and the· Sanskrit 
language which was thus adapted to new needs did not remain 
unaltered in the hands of these authors. The Sanskritisation of 
Buddhist literature is particularly complicated since it took 
place gradually and beginning by a compromise between San­
skrit and the Middle-Indian dialects of early Buddhism ended 
in the adoption of pure classical Sanskrit. We may distinguish 
between the following types of Buddhist Sanskrit: 
(I) Mixed Sanskrit. This language was used by the Maha­
sanghika school. In it the original Prakrit appears half San­
skritised, the words being in the main restored to their Sanskrit 
phonetic form while the Prakrit grammar is largely retained. 
For instance Pa. bh£kkhussa, gen. sg. of bhikkhu • monk' (Skt. 
bhik~u-) is not replaced by a regular Sanskrit bhik$os, but is 
mechanically changed to bhik~usya. It may be assumed that 
for a period, in certain circles, such a hybrid la:p.guage was 
actually employed by those who wished to employ the superior 
Sanskrit language but were not able to master its grammar. 
(2) The Sarvastivadins of the north-west adopted proper 
Sanskrit from an early period. The old canonical works were 
translated into Sanskrit, and f~agments. of them are preserved 
in this form. The language of these works has of necessity incor­
poratedwholesale the vocabulary and syntax of the original Mag­
adhi, but allowing for this, and for some false Sanskritisations 
which are to be expected. it is free from the barbarisms of (I). 
(3) We must distinguish from (2) works of the same school 
which were not translations but which were independently 
composed at a period much later than the canonical literature. 
The stories which were inserted to enliven the matter of the 
Vinaya-pitaka, and which are collected in the Divyavadana, 
Illustrate best this type of Sanskrit. Though it fails often 
enough to satisfy the canons of PaI,linean grammar, the style is 
admirably clear and lucid and not an unwelcome change to the 
labo.ured artificiality of some of the classical prose. The vocabu­
lary is characterised by the use of many vernacular and pro­
vincial words, many of which turn up again in Modern Indo­
Aryan (e.g. lardaya-
to load': Hi. lii¢nii), and which are not
t 
found in the older types of Buddhist language (e.g. Pali). 

62 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
(4) The use of pure classical Sanskrit, assoCiated with all the 
characteristics of the Kavya style, is seen in the works of 
Asvagho~a and his successors. Such works are distinguished 
from other works of classical Sanskrit literature only by the use 
of Buddhist technical terms. Likewise the works of the logicians 
and philosophers follows the style pf similar orthodox works in 
Sanskrit, with the addition of the terminology peculiar to the 
Buddhists. 
The Jains resisted longest the use of Sanskrit, and only began 
to take to it in the second half of the first millennium· A.D. 
During this period Prakrit only gradually gives way to Sanskrit, 
but in the end Sanskrit establishes itself here as. elsewhere. 
The Sanskrit of the Jains is influenced by the language of the 
earlier Prakrit literature in the same way as the Sanskrit of the 
Buddhists. In vocabulary it draws more extensively than con­
temporary classical Sanskrit on vernacular sources, and words 
familiar later in Modern Indo-Aryan are often first recorded here. 
§8. 
SANSKRIT IN GREATER INDIA 
The expansion of Indo-Aryan was halted in South India by 
the native Dravidian languages (Tamil, Telugu, Kanarese) 
which in course of time established themselves as literary lan­
guages. Nevertheless the influence of Indo-Aryan in this region 
was at all times powerful, and it is evident in the vocabulary of 
these languages from the earliest records. They were earliest 
influenced by Prakrit, which was the administrative language 
of the Satavahanas and their immediate successors. Inscrip­
tions·extending as far south as Kaiici show that all the Telugu­
Kanarese area was governed by Aryan dynasties whose mother 
tongue was Prakrit. The intruding Indo-Aryans were not 
numerous enough to impose Indo-Aryan as the spoken language 
of the area and after about A.D. 400 the Prakrit inscriptions 
cease, Sa.t:Iskrit replaced Prakrit, as elsewhere, for purposes of 
administration and culture, and as a spoken language it was 
replaced by the native Dravidian. At the same time the native 
Dravidian began to be cultivated, Kanarese from c. A.D. 450 
and Telugu from c. A.D. 650. The Prakrit influence in these 
languages, dating from the earlier period, is rapidly overlaid by 
extensiye borrowings from the Sanskrit vocabulary. In their 
early classical form these languages draw on Sanskrit wholesale. 
and the process was continued in the succeeding periods. At 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
63 
the present time a considerable and essential part of the 
vocabulary of these languages is Sanskrit. 
In the Tamil country of the extreme South Indo-Aryan influ­
ence was weakest. Tamil was the earliest Dravidian language 
to be used for literary purposes, and it was to begin with com­
paratively free from Aryan influence. In the later period the 
influence of Sanskrit increases, but never on the scale that is 
found in its two northern neighbours. 
Ceylon received its Aryan language through colonisation from 
Northern India. In addition Buddhism established PaIi as a 
literary langua.ge. At a later period still the cultivation of San~ 
skrit was introducedJ at some periods on quite an extensive 
scale. 
The spread of Buddhism was responsible for the introduction 
of Indo-Aryan linguistic influence into large regions of Central 
Asia. At one time a form of Prakrit served as the administra­
tive language of the kingdom of Kroraina in Chit:Iese Turkestan. 
Buddhist Sanskrit texts were current over a wide area, and 
works long lost in India have been recovered in recent years in 
Central Asia. Under Buddhist influence the native languages of 
this area began to be cultivated, notably the Iranian Khotanese, 
and the two closely related Indo-European languages which go 
by the name of Tocharian. The vocabulary of these draws 
abundantly on Sanskrit or Prakrit sources. On the other hand 
Tibetan which became Buddhist from the seventh century on­
wards resisted foreign linguistic influence, and by what must 
have been a considerable tour de force, the whole Buddhist 
vocabulary was rendered into native Tibetan. This had been 
done at an earlier period by the Chinese wl ..ere differences of 
script and language rendered any other course impracticable. 
The influence of Sanskrit was equally extensive in countries 
to the East and South-East. In Burma there is early evidence 
of the influence of Sanskrit Buddhism. This was replaced 
(A.D. eleventh cent.) by a religious reformation which estab­
lished Theravada Buddhism as the official religion and with it 
PaJi as the language of religion. Further East there were Hindu 
colonies in South Siam (Dvaravati)' Cambodia (Kambuja) and 
Annam (Campa). Abundant Sanskrit inscriptions dating from 
the third century A.D. onwards remain to show the importance 
of Sanskrit in these areas, and its influence was felt on the 
native languages when they came to be cultivated. 
Even 

64 
OU.TLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
today Siamese is drawing on Sanskrit for its technical vocabu­
lary. A t the same time Hindu culture spread to Indonesia 
and in Java, Sumatra and Bali Sanskrit literature was 
cuItivated. 
The native languages came strongly under the influence of 
Sanskrit and Sanskrit culture-wqrds remain widely current in 
the area today. The classical language of Java abounds in San­
skrit words, just as its literature draws its inspiration from San­
skrit models. The Mahommedan conquest of Java (A.D. six­
teenth cent.) put an end toHindu dominion in thearea, but the in­
fluence of the preceding centuries was too deep to be eradicated. 
§ 9. 
WRITING IN INDIA 
The art of writing was late in making its appearance in Aryan 
India. I t had existed before the Aryan invasion in the Indus 
civilisation, but it perished along with this civilisation. During 
the period when the Vedic civilisation was being built up no 
form of writing was employed in India, and in its absence the 
techniq'!le was evolved of preserving intact the Vedic l~terature 
by means of oral tradition. Even when writing was introduced 
this oral tradition persisted in the various departments of know­
ledge and it continued as a basic feature of Indian education 
and culture down to modern times. 
I t is not known when the alphabet was first introduced into 
India. So far as preserved records go it is only attested from 
the third century B.C. when the two alphabets, Kharol?thi and 
Brahmi, appear fully developed in the Asokan inscriptions. 
The Kharol?thi alphabet, which is written from right to left, is 
confined to the extreme N orth-West of India, to that part of the 
country which in preceding centuries had been part of the 
Persian dominions. It is an adaptation of the Aramaic alphabet 
which was employed in this region in the Achaemenid period, 
and it was probably evolved towards the close of this period. 
It continued in use in the same area, and in some adjoining 
parts of central Asia.down to the fourth century A.D., after 
which records in it cease. 
The Brahmi alphabet, which differs from Kharol?thi in being 
written from left to right, is the source of all later Indian 
alphabets, as well as of those in countries abruad which formed 
part of the area of Indian cultural expansion (Burmese, Siamese, 
Javanese, etc.). It is also derived from some form of the 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
65 
Semitic alphabet, but the exact source from which it is adapted 
and also the period remain uncertain. It is sugg1sted that it 
may have been introduced from the South SemItic area by 
means of the trade routes to the ports of Western India, and the 
period most commonly assumed is about 500 B.C. 
The work of adaptation was considerable since it involved 
not only the addition of vowel signs, but also the changes and 
additions necessary to express adequately the Indian conson­
antal system. The perfection with which the task was accom­
plished was consequent on the labours of the ancient Indian 
phoneticians whose achievements have already been mentioned. 
In spite of this, use of writing was only slowly adopted in the 
Brahmin schools, and in the early period its function lay 
primarily in business and administration and only secondarily 
as an instrument of literature. For this reason all the earliest 
records preserved are in Prakrit, and Sanskrit documents only 
appear later. It is unlikely that much literature existed in 
manuscript form before' the second century B.C, 
The early Brahmi alphabet was comparatively uniform and 
served for the whole of India outside the small area where 
Kharo~thi was in use. After the Christian era local variations 
were intensified and Brahmi developed into a variety of regional 
alphaqets differing from each other as much as they had 
changed from the original form. The structural principles of 
the alphabets always remained the same but the individual 
shapes of the letters were subject to endless variation. In 
North India the alphabet gradually evolved into what is now 
known as DevanagarL With the introduction of printing this 
alphabet was adopted generally for Sanskrit, but before this 
period Sanskrit manuscripts were written' in the various 
regional alphabets of the localities where they were produced, 
e.g. Sarada in Kashmir, Bengali, Oriya, Telugu-Kanarese, Malay­
alam and, in the Tamil country, Grantha. 
The commonest material used for writing in India was palm .. 
leaf. The exclusive use of this prevailed in South India down 
to modern times. The characters were incised on this material 
by means of a stylus and the ink rubbed in afterwards. In the 
North, particularly in Kashmir, the inner bark of the birch was 
used on which the letters were written in ink. This method was 
also used in the North for palm-leaf manu.5c.ripts, and the dif­
ferences between the Northern and Southern alphabets is largely 

66 
OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF SANSKRIT 
occasioned by different methods of writing. As a result of the 
perishable nature of these materials really ancient Indian 
manuscripts are rare. The oldest are those that have been 
discovered~ in a more or less fragmentary condition, in the dry 
soil of Central Asia. The bulk of Sanskrit literature is preserved 
only in manuscripts belonging to the last few centuries. 

CHAPTER III 
PHONOLOGY 
§ I. INDo-EuROPEAK CONSONANT SYSTEM 
The comparative study of the phonetic systems of the existing 
IE languages makes it possible to reconstruct, with a reasonable 
'*, 
degree of certainty, the phonetics of the parent language. On 
this basis a systematic historical account of the Sanskrit 
phonetic system can be provided in which the various stages of 
--development in the prehistoric period can be distinguished in 
respect of their relative chronology. Developments may be 
severally characterised as: (1) Changes in the Indo-European 
period; 
(2) Changes common to Indo-Aryan and Iranian 
only; 
(3) Changes peculiar to Indo-Aryan, which have 
occurred after its separation from Iranian. In sketching the 
phonetic development of Sanskrit we shall-indicate, as far as 
possible to which of these three periods the various changes 
belong. 
The following reconstruction of the IE consonantal system 
has been generally adopted by comparative philologists: 
Surd 
Sonant 
Surd 
Aspirate Sonant Aspirate 
LabiO_velar 
kw 
kwh 
gw 
gwh 
Occlusives 
Velar 
k 
kh 
g 
gh 
(Stops, 
Palatal 
k 
kh 
g 
gh
j
Plosives)  
Dental 
t 
th 
d 
dh 
Labial 
ph 
bh
P  
b 
Nasals: m, n, 1); Liquids: 1, r; Semivowels: y, v ~ 
Sibilants: 5, z; Doubtful p: , a. 
The reconstructions are of two kinds. In-the first and com­
.monest case the phoneme postulated for Indo-European occurs 
in a number of the existing languages in which it has continued 
unchanged; in the second and rarer case the phoneme assumed 
for Indo-European is nowhere preserved as such, but it is 
deduced by comparison of the fonns derived from it. Naturally 
67 

68 
PHONOLOGY 
there is the greatest certainty in the case of the first class, but 
even the pure reconstructions of the second class are, with few 
exceptions, established beyond reasonable doubt. 
In the following cases an Indo-European consonant is pre­
served unchanged in Sanskrit and in other languages: 
p: pdnca • 5 ': Gk. 7T&rf.; pdtati 'flies': Gk. 7T£'TE'TaL ; 
dpa 'away, from':' Gk. a7To: sdrpati' crawls I: Gk. EP7TEL 
Lat. serpit. 
t: tanu.. 'thin' I Gk. 'Tavv-, Lat. tenuis; trdyas '3', Gk. 
'TpEis, Lat. tres; variate {turns'; Lat. verto. 
d: ddsa' 10 " Gk. OtKa, Lat. decem; dirghd- {long '; Gk. 
oo.\,xoS', O. S1. dlugu; veda, ' I know', Gk. 0100., Lat. video. 
k: 
kravf,~- 'raw flesh', Gk. KptaS; 
kdk~a- (annpit', d. 
Lat. coxa. 
g : yttgdm ' yoke', Gk. 'vy6v, Lat. iugum; sthag-' to cover' I 
Gk. O"Tiyw. 
n: ntima 'name I, Lat. nOmen; nava- 'new', Gk. vioS', 
Lat. novus; 
ndbhas {cloud', Gk. virpoS'; 
do'nam 'gift', 
Lat. donttm, O. S1. danU. 
m: miitdr-' mother', Lat. mater; ma' me', Lat. me ; ma~­
, mouse', Lat. mi~s, 0.51. 1nysi; ddma.;.' house ',Gk. OOJL0S', 
Lat. domus. 
I: lubh-, lubhyati 'desire, covet', Lat. lubet, Goth. liufs, 
O. S1. Ijubu ' dear', laghu- ' light, swift', Gk. e.\axvS', Lat. levis. 
r: rudhira- 'red, blood', Gk. EpV()pOS, Lat. ruber;, riij-, 
riijan- ' king " Lat. rex, Gallic Crt>:; bhdrati' bears " Gk. rpEPW, 
Lat. fero, Goth. baira. 
y: yuvan- ' young man " Lat. iuvenis; yak,! 'liver', Lat. 
iecur; ya~-
f broth, soup " Lat. £us, O. S1. jucha. 
w (v) : vo'c-' speech " Lat. vox; vdhati ( carries .,. Lat. vehit; 
nava- ' new' 1 Lat. novus; avi-' sheep', Lat. avis. 
s: sdna-' old', Lat. senex, Ir. sen; santi' they are', Lat. 
sunt; sunu-
I son', Lith. sunus, Goth" sunus; d1Jtsa- 'shoulder', 
Goth. ams; dsthi' bone ·,Gk. OUTt{ov, Lat. os, assis. 
In cases like the above the reconstruction of the IE forms 
presents a minimum of problems; reconstruction in the full 
sense is not necessary since the phonemes in question are 
widely preserved. 
are not preserved in all languages (e.g. 
Engl. thin: Lat. tenuis; \Velsh hen, Ir. 
but a study of all 
the available evidence leaves little doubt as to which languages 

PHONOLOGY 
6cJ 
preserve the original sound. In other, cases change has been 
more widespread. There are instances where the original IE 
sound is preserved only in one language, others in which the 
sound, which theory demands for the parent language, is pre­
served nowhere at all. Even in these cases it is possible to fix 
the original sound with reasonable certainty. 
§2. THE SONANT ASPIRATES 
The sonant aspirates which it is normally believed Indo­
European pos~essed are preserved as a class by Sanskrit alone. 
Elsewhere they are changed in various ways; in Iranian, 
Slavonic, etc., the aspiration is lost; in Greek they are changed 
into the corresponding surd aspirates, in Latin (and the other 
I talic dialects) into fricatives. Examples of this series are as 
follows: 
bh: Skt. bhra- • brow', Gk. ocppvs, O. 51. bruvl; bhr4ta 
(brother '" Gk. cPpa:T'f]P 
member of <\. phratry', Lat. frater,
t 
O. S1. bratru, O. Jr. brathir; bhdrati' bears', Av. baraiti, Gk. 
cPEpw, Lat. fero, Arm. berem, O. S1. berp, Goth. baira, O. Ir. 
berim; ndbhas 'cloud, sky', Gk. 
VEcPO~, O. S1. nebo, Hitt. 
-"'ttnepis. 
dh :. dha-, dddhati ' to place', Av. daSaiti, Gk. 'T't8TJfLL, Lith. 
diti; dhumd- 'smoke', O. S1. dymu, Lat. fitmus; mddhu 
'honey, mead', Av. maSu, Gk. fL€8v, O. S1. medu, A.S. medu, 
O. Ir. mid; vidhdvii' widow', d. Gk. ~L8€os f young (unmar­
t 
ried) man " O. S1. vidova ' widow', Lat. vidua, O. Ir. fedb. 
gh: stigh- 'to stride', Gk. U'T'€txw, Goth. stciga; meghd­
f cloud " d. Gk. 0f.L{XATJ, O. S1. migZa, Alb. mjegule. In the case 
of the guttural series the sonant aspirates have undergone 
changes in Sanskrit in common with the other members of the 
series. These will be detailed below. 
Although the sonant aspirates are preserved in Indo-Aryan 
alone among the IE languages, there is ,little doubt that they 
should be attributed to the parent language, since no other 
type of phoneme can account so simply for the various develop­
ments that appear. The theory, prevalent in some quarters, 
that in these cases we are dealing with a series of original IE 
fricatives, has nothing to recommend it. 
Although Sanskrit preserves the sonant aspirates as ;.::.. class, 
it does not preserve them all unchanged. The special develop­









PHONOLOGY 
t 
f 
f
thread', Gk. fJl.&s 
bow'; jdtu gum, lac', A.S. cwidu, cf. 
Lat. bitumen; °jiini-
wife', Goth. qlns; rajant 
night " 
I 
f 
':t 
I 
'Q 
,. dark'
Gk• fipep.;IIOS, epE/",EWOS 
. 
gh: Skt. hdnti' slays " Av. Jainti, as opposed to Skt. jagh4.na 
I 
r
slew', O. II. geguin, Hitt. kuenzi slays'; drhati ( is worth', 
Av. ar~Jaiti, as opposed to Skt. arghd- ' price'. Lith. alga' re­
ward', Gk. d.A4x:f.vw; hdra5-
heat'. Gk. Ol.pos 
summer'
I 
I 
(: gharmd-. etc. above); ddhati bums', Av. dazaiti: nidiighd­
I 
f heat of summer'. Lith. degu ' I bum '. 
The second palatalisation took place fairly early in the de­
velopment of Indo-Iranian, before the change of I to a which 
distinguishes this branch from the rest of Indo-European. 
Similar changes appear in some other languages of the salam 
group, e.g. Slavonic (cetyre ' 4 " iivu • alive') and ,Armenian 
(Jerm f warm ') but these appear to have occurred independently 
and later. 
§ 8. 
THE Two PALATAL SERIES IN INDO-ARYAN 
In Indo-Aryan the distinction between the two palatal 
which is fully preserved in Iranian (5, z, z: c, J, J) is retained 
only in the case of the surds (s: c). On the other hand the 
sonants, both unaspirated and aspirated, are confused with 
each other as j (=zandJ) and h ( = ih and Jh) respectively. But 
the distinction between the two remains effective in many ways 
in the grammatical system, because according to their origin 
both j and h are treated in two different ways in various con­
texts. In declension and inflection the rules of sandhi operate 
differently according to the different origins of j and h. This 
may be illustrated from the formation of the participle in -ta 
from the two types of root respectively. 
j: (a) yaj- 'sacrifice' (Av. yaz-): 
i~td-, srj- 'to let go' 
(Av. har3z-): s!$/d-, m!j-
i to wipe' (Av. maraz-) : mr#d-. 
(b) nij~ '. to wash' (Av. naeJ-): niktd-; bhaj-' to distribute ~ 
(Av. baJ-): bhaRtd-; yuj- ' to join' (Av. yaoJ-) : yuktd-. 
" I 
h: (a) vah- ' to carry J (Av. vaz-): U4ha-. lih- ( to lick' (Av. 
i 
raez-): li4hd-; sah- {to overcome J (Av. haz-): sarf,hd-, sorf,hd-. 
(b) dah- ' to burn' (Ir. daJ-, Av. dazaiti) : dagdhd-, druh" to
f 
injure, betray' (Av. druJ-) : drugdhd-. In this, as in many other 
respects the distinction between the two series remains active 
in Sanskrit grammar. 
In the case of the second palatalisation, as opposed to the 

79 
,..  
PHONOLOGY 
first which operated in all conditions, there exists an alternation 
in the roots affected between palatalised and non-palatalised 
forms, depending on whether the vowel following was origin­
ally I or J. This is seen in perfects like jagJuina ( slew 1 and 
jigdya · conquered', as contrasted with the present tense forms 
hanti and jayati. Similar alternation is not permissible in the 
case of roots whose j and h belong to the first palatal series, 
e.g. jajiina 'begat j (jan-: Av. zan-) and juhiiva (called' 
(Au: Av. zav-). 
To begin with the distribution of palatalised and non­
palatalised fOQlls must have depended entirely on the nature 
of the succeeding vowel, and consequently an alternation be­
tween the two must have been active in the paradigms of noun 
and verb. In the parallel palatalisation of Slavonic such alter· 
nation exists, e.g. between vluki/, • wolf' nom. s. and vluce 
voc. s., and between pekp ( I cook' and peeetu •he cooks'. 
Since the natural tendency of linguistic evolution is to smooth 
out such irregularities (as is done later in Russian, etc.) it is 
likely that the Slavonic palatalisation did not long precede the 
beginning of the literary tradition. On the other hand in the 
case of Indo-Iranian the change had taken place early enough 
for the working of analogy to become widely effective. Varia­
tion in the paradigms of noun and verb after the Sla vonie style 
has been eliminated, except as between vocalic and consonantal 
suffixes (loc. s. vad, loco pI. vak$u). On the other hand the alter­
nation remains active between different nominal derivatives 
(bhoga-: bhoja-, etc.). At the beginning of a root alternation 
between palatal and guttural remains active only in the case of 
a few roots as thosequoted above. Mostly it is eliminated, and 
in this respect Sanskrit shows a greater tendency- to innovation 
than Old Iranian; d. Skt. akar 3rd sg. root aor., Av. cor31 
(early Aryan acart<ekert), and agamat, a-aor. Av. Jimal. In 
the latter case the proper name Jamadagni- (' who goes to the 
fire J) preserves the earlier, pre-Vedic form. In the reduplica­
tion of the perfect, etc., the alternation always remains, based 
on the fact that the vowel of the reduplicating syllable was 
originally e (jagiima<gwegWome, etc.). 
There are a few instances in Sanskrit where j of the older 
palatal series alternates with g in the formation of nominal 
derivatives, e.g. sarga- •emission" (srj-, Av. har3z-) yaga­
sacrifice' (yaj-, Av. yaz:-). 
The guttural here cannot be 
I 

80 
PHONOLOGY 
original, and it is due to the analogy of the palatals of the later 
series operating after the twohad fallen together inpronunciation. 
§ 9. 
DEVELOPMENTS OF S IN INDO-IRANIAN 
AND SLAVONIC 
In Sanskrit it is the rule that the dental sibilant must be re­
placed by the cerebral after k, r", i and u. By a similar rule in 
Iranian s (> Ir. h) is replaced by s. Further in the Slavonic 
languages s is usually replaced by ch in these conditions, and 
this ch represents an earlier s. In Lithuanian a similar change is 
found, but only after r. 
Examples are: 
After k: (Skt. k$, Ir. xs, Slav. ch<kx<ks) Skt. vak$ytimi; 
Av. vaxsya; Skt. k$udrd- • small', d. O. S1. chudu 'id'; 
Skt. draik$am, s-aor. of ric- ' to leave' (IE leikW-) , Gk. EAf:upa ; 
d. O. S1. fechu, s-aor. of teke ' I run'. 
. 
After k: Skt. s: (Skt. k$, Ir. s, Slav. s), Skt. dk$a- ' axle', 
Av. a.sa-, O. S1. osi, Lith. asis, Gk. f1.gwv, Lat. axis; Skt. 
ddk§i1;ta- 'right (hand) " Av. da!ina-, O. S1. desinu, Lith. 
de!in~, Gk. 8£gLOS', Lat. dexter, etc.; Skt. tak$- ' to construct in 
wood (as a carpenter), Av. tas-, O. S1. tesati, Lith. tasyti, Gk. 
7'€XV'l] tart' (*teksnii) , 7'€K7'WV 'carpenter' (*tekst6n) , Hitt. 
taks- 'to join', Lat. texo 
weave'; Skt. mak$1i 
quickly',
t 
t 
Av. mosu, Lat. mox. 
After r (and ,) : Skt. vdr$man- 'summit', vdr$iyas- ' higher', 
O. 51. vrichu ' summit', Lith. virsus ' upper part'; t?t!§- ' to 
overlook, forgive', mdr$a- 'forbearance', Lith. mirsti 'to 
forget " maisas ' forgetfulness " Toch. A. mars- ' to forget' ; 
dhr$1Jo# ' dares', O. Pers. adarsnaus' he dared', d. Gk. 8apaoS' 
r boldness', Goth. gadars ' dare', Eng1. durst,' etc. 
After i: Skt. pi$- ' to pound', O. Slav. pichati ' to knock, 
strike', Lat. pinso; tri§u, loc. pI. of tri- ' three', O. S1. trichu; 
dsve§u, loco pI. of d5va- ' horse " Av. aspae.su, d. O. S1. vluclchu 
(vluku ' wolf '); vi$a-' poison', Av. viSa-, Lat. virus, Gk. loS'. 
After u: jU$- ( to enjoy', jO$a- ' enjoyment " Av. zaos-, d. 
LaL gustus, etc.; mii~- ( mouse', O. S1. mysi, Lat. mus, etc. ; 
su~ka- 'dry " 56$a- 'drying up " Av. huska- 'dry', 0. S1. 
suchu, Lith. saiisas, Gk. aVoS' • id '. 
As can be seen, the parallelism between Indo-Iranian and 
Slavonic is not absolutely complete, because they differ in the 
treatment of that s which follows IE k (>Skt. s, Slav. s). But 
in all other respects they agree, and the correspondence is too 

81 
, . 
PHONOLOGY 
'"  
close for such changes to have taken place independently. In 
Lithuanian the same kind of development is observed, but 
only in connection with r, which points to a remoter contact 
than \lIas the case between Indo-Iranian and Slavonic. 
Cerebralisation of s does not take place in Sanskrit when r or 
! immediately follows: e.g. visra- 'bad-smelling (meat) " cf. 
vi~a-, etc., Av. vaesa- ' corruption'; tisrds, tisfbhis, tisfttam, 
from iri· I three' ; gen. s. usras from u~ar-
I dawn " sisrate from 
sar- ' to go '. In A vest an there is no such restriction, e.g. ti/ro, 
nom. pI. fern. d. Uri- ' three'. 
§ 10. 
THE SO-CALLED MOBILE s 
Indo-European s when it formed the first member of an 
initial consonant group, was an· unstable sound, and liable to 
disappear under conditions which it has not been possible 
accurately to define. Forms with and without s are found side 
by side in the various languages, as illustrated by the following 
examples: 
Skt. tanyati 'thunders', Lat. tonare: 
Skt. stanayitnu­
, thunder', d. Gk. Q'TEVW, O. 51. stenj(J, etc.; Skt. tayu-
I thief " 
O. S1. talit (id', Gk. 77]Taw, Hitt. taya- •steal': Skt. stena­
, thief', stayu-, stiiydnt-, etc.; Skt. tt-, tiird ' star': Skt. stt-, 
Av. star-, Gk. o'Q'T'Y]P, etc. ' id '; Skt. tij-
to sharpen " tigmd­
I 
, sharp': Gk. Q'Tl{w, GTtYI4--rJ, etc.; Skt. tud- 'to push', Lat. 
tundo: Goth. stautan id '; Skt. phena- . foam " O. S1. plna :
I 
O. Pruss. spoayno, with variant suffix Lat. spuma: Eng!. 
foam; Skt. plihdn- ' spleen': Av. sp'3YtJzan-, Gk. O'1TA1}v, etc. ; 
Skt. pasyati (sees': spas- ( spy' 1 Lat. specio; Skt. khanj­
· to be lame': Gk. GKa.,W; Skt. phala- ' plough-share ': Pers. 
supar; Pers. fih . oar': Skt. sphya-
'woode~ ladle'; Av. 
(vi-) xad- 'to break up (earth) ': Skt. skhad- · to smash to 
pieces t, d. Gk. O'KESawtJl4-t; 
Skt. nava- 'sneeze': Germ. 
niesen: EngI. sneeze (neu-s-: sneu-s-); Skt. lavattd- 'salty, 
salt': cf. Lat. sal, nihakii ' fog " nihara- ' mist, dew': snih­
I to be moist ',etc. There is no perfectly satisfactory theory to 
account for this variation which affects all Indo-European 
languages. Most probably it is the result of some kind of 
external sandhi affecting initial s- in the Indo-European period. 
It seems fairly clear that the phenomenon is due to loss of 
initial s, and if this is so the theory that would regard the s as 
the remains of some kind of prefix is out of the question. 

82 
PHONOLOGY 
§ II. THE RECONSTRUCTIONS Pi ph, dh 
In a certain number of words etymologically connected, 
chiefly between Indo-Aryan and Greek, an S (5) in the fonner 
appears to correspond to T or ein the latter. The commonest 
examples of this interchange, which has caused considerable 
difficulty, are the following: Skt. tdk§an -' carpenter': Gk. 
TI.KTWV; Skt. fk§a- • bear I, Lat. ursus: Gk. apKTos, Ir. art; +
Skt. k§an- 'to wound': Gk. KTdvw (kill'; Skt. k§i- (to 
dwell', Av. say-: Gk. KTl,w, K'T'llttIvos; k§i- 'to possess' : 
Gk. K'T&.op.af.; rak§- 'to injure': Gk. l.pl.XBw; k§dm-' earth' : 
Gk. XBwv; k§ar- ' flow': Gk. 4>0,dpw 'perish'; k$i-' to de­
stroy': Gk. 4>()£vw. It has been customary to assume a set of 
IE fricatives to account for these correspondences, namely p, 
ph, tlb, but it is certain that these creations are without serious 
foundation, since in the case oTsome of them Hittite evidence
hasshown that a quite different kind of explanation is necessary, 
and in view of this the rest are naturally suspect. Correspond­
ing to the Greek and Sanskrit words for · earth' 'Hittite has 
tekan- and Toch. A tka1"(t from which it may be deduced that the 
original form of this word was *dheghom-, or, with elision of the 
radical vowel, *dhghom-. In Greek there has been metathesis of 
the initial consonant group; elsewhere we find elision of the 
first member of the group: Lat. humus, OIr. zam-, etc. Like­
wise for ' bear' Hittite has (in all probability) lJartagas, from 
which it can be seen that there has been the same transposition 
in Gk. apKTos. The Sanskrit forms of these words have de­
veloped from original unmetathesised form changed according to 
the rules of Sanskrit historical phonology. An original Hrtkos 
« bear' J with loss of H; rtkos, develops through the stages rtsa-> 
rt$a- to fk$a-. The development of the word for ( earth J. though 
more complicated as containing a voiced aspirated group, follows 
the same line in principal: dhghom- >diham->4;ham- I$am-> 
k~am-. In the case of Skt. k$i. Gk. c/>Olvw the original root 
dhgWhi- produced Indo-Iranian dfhi- which was modified to 
dihi- and then treated as the initial group of the word for 
r earth '. In the case of some words Sanskrit has elided the 
first member in such groups, so that an original *dhghyes 
, yesterday' (d. Gk. XOls, transposed) appears as hyas «ghyes). 
The correspondence of Skt. syend- ( hawk' and Gk. lK7'tVOS is of 
the same nature. 
. 

l 
PHONOLOGY 
83 
Not all the examples are to be accounted for in this way. In 
some cases there is suffix variation. Skt. dk# eye' contains
I 
original -s- which is not to be compared with Gk. Tin OKTaMos 
on the assumption of original p. 
Suffix variation should 
probably also be seen in Gk. TlKTwv I carpenter' (*teks-tan) as 
opposed to Skt. tdk~an-. 
§ I2. 
TREATMENT OF r AND I 
In Iranian IE r and I appear indiscriminately as r.l In the 
language of the J.?gveda this is predominantly the case. In 
Classical Sanskrit both I and r are found, but their distribution 
does not correspond exactly with that of Indo-European. In 
certain Eastern dialects of Indo-Aryan (notably in the inscrip­
tions of Asoka and in the Magadhi of the Drama) only 1 is 
found. The treatment of IE 1 in Sanskrit is illustrated by the
J  
following examples: 
(a) 1 becomes r: ri'(tdkti 'leaves': Lat. linquit; srchJ'i­
I 
I
buttock': Lat. clunis, Lith. slaunis; sarpis butter', Toch. 
A. §iilyp, cf. Engl. salve; aratni- ( elbow': Gk. wA~, Lat. 
ulna; 
srdvas 'fame I: Gk. KAla!;, O. S1. slovo 'word'; 
gdrbha-
embryo I: Gk. oe:Ar/>6s 
id I, aOEAr/>6, 'brother I (d.
I 
l 
sodara-); cakrd-' wheel': Gk. K6KAoS; parasu- ( axe': Gk. 
1T{AEKV,; piparti' fills I 
: 
• Gk. 1TlfL7TA7JfU; pur- ' city ': Lith. 
Pili-s, Gk. 7T()Ats"; sri-' to lean I: Gk. KAlVW; siirya-
sun " 
t 
Lat. sOl. 
(b) 1remains: lubhyati ( covets ': Lat. lubet; palitd-' grey­
haired': d. Gk. 7TOAI.6" 
1TE"A~TV6S', etc.; °kulva· ' bald': Lat. 
calv'Us; pal&va- 'chaff': O. S1. pliva, Lat. palea; palvala­
( pond I: d. Lat. palus 'swamp '; plihdn- 'spleen': Gk. 
a1TA~v. Lat. lien; 
dala- 'portion': Lith. dali-s; k16man­
, lung J: Gk. 1TAEVfLWv. 
In comparing the Vedic 'With the Classical language we notice: 
(i) that in a number of words the latter has l where the former 
has r, and this normally in cases where l appears in other IE 
languages, e.g. laghu- ' light • v. raghu-, Gk. €A4xrJS. Lat. levis; 
I
plu- ' to fioat', v. pru-. Gk. r.Alw; lip-
to smear', v. rip-, 
Gk. aAf!tr/>w; lih- ( to lick " v. rih-, Gk. AEtxw; (ii) that a con­
siderable proportion of the classical words which preserve IE l 
1 There are a few exceptions in Modem Persian and occasionally elsewhere: 
Pets. liltan • to lick'. Skt. rih-, lik, Gk. Af:{XCIJ; laJin' soft'. Skt. slaklfld-: 
lab ' lip ': Lat. labium; Oss. saJd I cold': Lith. Idltas. 

PHONOLOGY 
are not found in the text of tbe lJ.gveda, either by accident, or 
because their meaning was of such a nature that they were not 
likely to appear in a text of sq.cred hymns (e.g. plu~i-
I flea' : 
Arm. lu, Alb. pl'est, d. Lith. blusa); (iii) that some derivatives 
which have become isolated from their roots preserve IE 1 
even when it is normally replaced by r in the corresponding 
roots: s16ka- 'verse' (sru-). vipula- ' great, extensive' (Pf-, 
plparti • fill '). 
The explanation of this apparently complicated treatment is 
fairly simple. The dialect at the basis of the ~gvedic language 
lay to the north-west, while the classical language was formed in 
Madhyadesa. The original division must have been such that 
the Western dialect turned 1into r in the same way as Iranian 
(being contiguous to Iranian, and at the same time probably 
representing a later wave of invasion), while the more easterly 
dialect retained the original distinction. It was in this latter 
area that Classical Sanskrit was elaborated, but it was not 
evolved as a separate literary language, distinct from that of the 
Veda; on the contrary it developed as a modification of the old 
sacred language of the Vedic hymns. The latter was always the 
foundation of the literary language, but since after the earliest 
period (and this excludes most of the later tenth book of the 
lJ.gveda), the centre of its cultivation shifted eastward to 
Madhyadesa, in its further development it was subject to the 
continuous influence of the dialectal forms of this region. So 
in the case of the distribution of rand 1many of the basic words 
of the vocabulary retain always the form established by the 
Vedic literature, but in other cases l-forms based on the dialect 
of Madhyadesa replace them. In cases where the word in ques­
tion is not found in the Vedic text, and where therefore there 
existed no established literary tradition, the Eastern form with 
originall almost universally appears. 
The treatment of IE r is different in that in the vast majority 
of cases it continues to be represented by r in all periods of the 
language, e.g. rudhird- 'red, blood', Gk. Jpu8pos; jdrant­
, old', Gk. ylpwv { old mall'; rai-' property', Lat. res, pari 
• round', Gk TrEpl; 
variate 'turns', Lat. vertitur, pdrdate. 
• breaks wind', Gk. 711.pOETG.L; pitr$1Ji- 'heel', Gk. TrT€pVa, 
Goth. jairzna; sru- ' to flow', Gk. p€W; ndras n. pI. ' men', 
Gk. av€pf.s, avopes; sdrpati 'crawls', Gk. €P7rW, Lat. serpa; 
riij-, riijan- (king', Lat. rex; rdtha- • chariot'. Lith. riilas 
I 

PHONOLOGY 
85 
I 
I
wheel', Lat. rota rid'; vira-
man, hero '!-L1th. vyras, 
Lat. vir, etc. 
On the other hand instances of 1in place of IE r are campara,:" 
tively rare: l6hita-
red' (also rohita-. Av. raoioita-, cf.
I 
TudhiTd-); dlam' suitable, enough " v. dram, d. Gk. apap{uKw ; 
paIiiyate ' flees' (para with i-
to go '). The' number of such 
f 
examples is too small to justify the assumption of an I-dialect 
to account for them. Such an l-dialect does in fact occur later 
in the Magadhan Prakrit. but it was limited to a small area, 
and this Prakrit cannot account for forms with lout of r which 
occur in the later Vedic literature. It is also to be noted that in 
some cases where a change l>r has been assumed (e.g. lup­
compared with Lat. rumpo) it is more likely that 1is original. 
§I3. INDO-EuROPEAN H 
Of late a new phonetic element has entered into accounts of 
Indo-European as a result of the discovery of Hittite. In this 
language there appears a sound !J which was unaccounted for in 
the normally prevailing conception of IE phonetics. It is found 
in basic IE words and must therefore be attributed to Indo­
European. Since it is absent in the corresponding words in all 
the other languages, .they must be presumed to share a common 
change by which it has been lost, and to represent, in this 
respect, a more advanced state of Indo-European than that 
preserved in Hittite. Common examples of !J are: Hitt. eIb·aT 
r blood': Skt. dsrk, Lat. aser, Gk. Eap, Toch. A. ysiir ; .iasta~+ ~... ~
I
bone': Skt. asthi, Gk. OO'TEOV, Lat. os; !Jani-
front': Skt., 
anti' (in front of), near " Gk. G.VTl, Lat. ante; !Jarki-
white' : ~~J:
I 
Toch. iirki, Gk. apyas. Skt. drjuna-, etc. ;pa!J!Jur ' fire': Gk. --p Lr
:,...~-
'lTVp ; pabs- ( to protect' : d. Skt. pa- ' id " etc. ; islJai-, is!Jiya­
j bind J: Skt. sydti ' binds'; newa!J!J-' renew': Lat. novare ; 
pal!Jis' broad'; d. Lat. planus, etc. For Indo-European the 
symbol H, used by H. Pedersen is the most convenient (IE 
*pelH- etc.). 
In some instances H disappears without trace (dsrk blood ') 
f 
but in others its effects survive. It is clear that the long vowel 
in Lat. novare results from the combination of a short vowel + H, 
a combination which remains in Hittite, and the same can be 
assumed in the case of Lat. planus (plaH-, varying in apophony 
from Hitt. Palb-). Skt. syati' binds " from the Hittite evidence, 
stands for *sHydti, of which SH- is the root in its weak form, and 

86 
PHONOLOGY 
yd the suffix of the fourth class. The simple root with gut;la 
appears in th<-: aorist (asiit) showing the same development of 
aH to ii. Hitt. pabs-
I to protect' is enlarged by an s- suffix, and 
when this is removed we see the same correspondence alJ: Ii 
between this and Sanskrit pii-. Since the nominal and verbal 
suffixes ii are identical. the same development aH>a (as in 
novare) is to be assumed in the case of the feminine suffix a 
(Lat. nova, Gk. vIii, Skt. nava), and this implies a similar de­
velopment in the case of the long vowels i and uin nominal and 
verbal derivation, since the compound suffixes ycl and vii must 
in the same way be derived from i +aH and u +aH, and the 
corresponding weak grades are for i-H and u-H. 
Another effect'of H. observable in languages other than San­
skrit. is the coloration of a succeeding vowel by H, pr04ucing 
notably a change from e to a. For instance the root which 
appears in Sanskrit as kri-
to buy I . is to be set up for Indo­
I 
European as kWriH-, and in Greek an original aorist form ekwriH­
eto appears as "'TTpla-ro. the original presence of H being indicated 
by the a instead of e of the termination. Similarly from the root 
kruH- (Skt. kru- in krurd-, etc.) an original es/os stem *kreuHos 
appears in Greek as an -as- stem, KplaS'. The confusion of the 
"~_vmvJiqualities has eliminated such variation in Sanskrit, but 
there remain a number of other circumstances in which the 
presence of H can be detected, notably : 
(1) The older theory assumed a vocalic rand 1 (writ~en (f", p 
and in other ways) before a following vowel in certain cases to 
account for correspondences like Gk. {Japus • heavy', Skt. 
guru-, Goth. kaurus • id '. But there was no clear reason why 
the rule that these phonemes appear as vowels in intercon­
sonantal position, but as consonants before and after vowels, 
should not be valid in this case. A restoration gW(HU- showing 
that the ( originally occupied an interconsonantal position, 
accounts for all these' developments. In most IE languages 
where r develops into a vowel (varying from language to lan­
guage) +r, this combination remains before a vowel when H 
disappears. and similarly in the case of 1. In Sanskrit the pro­
cess is somewhat different, since here vocalic r normally re­
mains, but when the loss of H would leave it before a vowel, its 
place is taken by the combinations ir and ur. Iranian, which is 
usually so close to Indo-Arjan, differs markedly on this point, 
showing ar where Sanskrit has ir orur. Examples of such words 
I 

87 
PHONOLOGY 
are Skt. tirds ; across': Av. taro; siras- ' head't Av. sarah-, 
d. Gk. Kapa, KaPT/vov; purds ' in front ., Av. paro, Gk. mlpos; 
puras n. pI. cities 'J d. Lith. pilis ( fort' (guQa in Gk. 1TO)US) ;
4 
puru- ' much " Av. pouru- (Ir. paru-); hira1Jya- ' gold " Av. 
zaranya-; giri- ' mountain " Av. gairi-, d. Lith. giria ' forest' 
(guJ.la in O. S1. gora ' mountain '); girdti, gildti ' swallows', 
tirati ' crosses, overcomes', kirdti ' scatters', etc. The varia­
tion between i and u in these cases depends on the preceding 
consonant; preceded by a labial, or in some cases by an old 
labio-velar, u appears, elsewhere i is normaL 
. (2) The combination rH also gave ris'e to a special develop­
ment when followed by a consonant. In this case ir, iir appears 
in Sanskrit, but in Iranian predominantly ar. So we have 
sir~d'J1,- ' head' beside siras (krHsen-: krHes-), tir1Jd- and kirt;.ti­
beside tirati, kirdti, etc., and with it, pUT1)d- 'full' (after 
]abial).Other words with ir, iir of this origin are: irma-' arm, 
foreleg', Av. ar2ma-, O. Pruss. irmo, Lat. armus, Eng!. arm; 
urdhvd- . , upright" high', Av. 2r;,owa-, Lat. a1'duus; 
ilrtLti 
· wool " Av. var;;na, Lith. vUna; urmi-' wave', Av. vanmi-. 
A.S. wielm; 'lirvdra' cultivated land', Av. urvara' cultivated 
plant '<*,Hvara, d. Lat. aTtire • plough', Gk. apovpa 'ploughed 
field '. etc.; dirgha- ' long', Av. dar'Ya-, O. S1. dlUgl'4; p.aTva­
• fonner', Av. paurva-, O. S1. prfIVu; bhttrja- 'birch' (Lith. 
berzas, etc., with different ,grade). To account for these de­
velopments original long sonant liquids were set up Ci. I), and 
these could have conceivably existed at an intermediate stage 
(,H>f>ir, lir), the development being parallel to that of in, UH 
to i, ii. 
In the same fashion the long sonant nasals which were postul­
ated may be replaced by ttH and 11tH. From the root san(H) , to 
win ' the Skt. participle satd- develops regularly t,hrough *saHto­
from S't'Hto-, with regular weak form of root. In the case of'1"H 
the nasalisation is preserved (or reintroduced), but the original 
presence of H is clearly enough indicated by the long vowel: 
dantd- 'tamed " santd-
appeased " from dam(H)-, sam{H}-. 
I 
(3) In the Vedic language -ya- after a light syllable is pro­
nounced as one syllable if it is simply a combination of y +a : 
avya- ' belonging to a sheep', kavyd- ' wise', vdnya- · of the 
forest', havyd- 'oblation '. When on the other hand it goes 
back to -iHa (a suffix parallel to -ira, -i~a, etc.) ya is pronounced 
-iya: ddmiya-' belonging to the house', ,dthiya- ; relating to a 
o 

.88 
PH ON OJ.or; y 
chariot " jdniya-
relating to the people " udaniya-
watery , 
t 
I 
The two types are of course confused in the later language, and 
the difference revealed by the Vedic metre, is simply explained 
when it is realised that there are two different suffixes, 
(I) i +a, (2) i + H+a. The declension of the stems in i and u 
«iH, 1-1 H) where the suffix always retains its syllabic value 
before a vocalic ending (gen. s. vrkiyas, tanuvas<oiHas, °UHas) 
confirms this quite clearly, since the corresponding genitives of 
dvi- · sheep J and mddhu ' honey' (dvyas, mddhvas) show always 
the consonantal value of y and v. 
(4) Most significant of all, traces of the original nature of 
H are preserved in Sanskrit in cases where it was immediately 
preceded by an occlusive. Here the combination occlusive + H 
may produce an aspirated occlusive. As alreadY,stated, it was 
in this way that the whole category of surd aspirates arose in 
late Indo-European. Examples of this have already been given. 
Examples of sonant aspirates arising in this way are seen when 
an aspirate in Sanskrit appears to correspond to a non-aspirate 
in other languages, or when a final non-aspirated occlusive of a 
root appears with aspiration in a derivative. In these cases 
original suffixal H is responsible for the aspiration; e.g.mdhli­
· great': Gk. Jdyd.~. Here the root is followed by the suffix 
aH(>a), which appears in its weak form (-H-) in the gen. sg., 
and this H being in immediate contact with the preceding g 
causes aspiration (meg-H-es>meghes>mahds), and from such 
forms the aspiration is extended to the whole declension. The 
same thing has taken place in duhitdr- • daughter' (dhug-H­
itdr-): Gk. flvyaTYJp, aham • I; (egH-6m): 
Gk. EyW (egoH), 
sadhdstha- 'seat. abode' (sed-H-es-): sad- 'to sit', stndhu­
· river': syand-
t toflQ,~~ '._ 
Before the discovery of Hittite there existed in Indo-Euro­
pean studies a ' Laryngeal Theory', which, since it received 
partial confirmation from the new Hittite evidence, has come 
to be generally adopted in recent years. Briefly stated in its 
most popular form the theory maintains that there existed 
three laryngeals, which in this notation would be represented by 
HI> Hl!'b 
H 3• The original long vowels of Indo-European (as 
opposed to those long by vrddhi), result from a combination of 
a single gul}.a vowel e with the severallaryngeals, so that from 
eH11 eH,and eHa, e (e.g. dhe- ' to put '), Ii (e.g. std ' to stand ') 
and 0 (e.g. do to give ') are respectively derived (Le. the roots 
t 

PHONOLOGY 
l;9 
are originally dheH 1 • steH 2, deHa). The theory further maintains 
that when preceded by these three laryngeals this same gUI)a 
vowel takes the form e, a and 0 respectively (es- ' to be ': Hles-; 
anti in front ': H~nti; ost(h)i-' bone ': llaesti).
f 
I 
Hittite provides some positive evidence in support of this 
theory, but it is incomplete, and in certain respects contra­
dictory. We have already quoted instances showing the de­
velopment of the gUI)a vowel + H to a and of the change of e to 
a when preceded by H. On the other hand there are difficulties : 
although !J appears where the theory demands it in !Jant-: 
Gk. aVTt it is absent in appa: Gk. a7TO where the theory equally 
demands it. In Hittite there is only one !J and it is a long way 
from this three or even four demanded by the theory. I t is not 
therefore surprising that the theoreticians differ considerably in 
the details of their exposition. For the purposes of Sanskrit 
grammar the question of the plurality of Ii is fortunately of 
little significance, because the variation of vowel quality 
(a, e, 0). with which it is bound up, has ceased to exist in Sanskrit. 
f 
For all practical purposes it is possible to operate with a single, 
t 
undifferentiated H, and that will usually prove sufficient. 
Another aspect of the Laryngeal theory should be briefly
I 
mentioned. From the beginning it has been involved in the 
theory of IndQ-European · Shwa '(3). Inine Laryngeal theory 
it is replaced by a vocalic version of the laryngeals (I) with three 
yarieties). As a result of this the laryngeals themselves com­
monly receive the notation 31• ~l' ~3' It will be pointed out below 
that the hypothesis of an Indo-European, is without justifica­
tion either in the framework of the laryngeal theory or of any 
other. Indo-European H is not capable of vocalic function and 
when left in interconsonantal position through loss of the 
associated gUI.la vowel it is in Sanskrit elided: e.g. Skt. dadmas, 
dadhmas from dil, dhii. 
§ 14. 
COMBINATIONS OF OCCLUSIVES 
The following changes in combination are inherited from 
Indo-European: 
(1) A sonant is changed into a surd when immediately fol­
lowed by a surd: yuktd- ' joined' : yuj- . to join', yugdm · yoke'. 
d. Gk. 'EVKT&S-: ,EVyvvIL'; patsu, loc. pI. of pdd- ' foot', cf. 
Gk. 'Tfoaal, 7Toal. Conversely a surd becomes sonant when fol­

PHONOLOGY 
lowed by'a sonant: Skt. upabdd- ' trampling on ' : pdd-' foot', 
d. Av. frabda- ' fore part of the foot " Gk. £1Tt{J8aL ' day after 
a festival'; dadbhis instr. pI. of dant-, dat- 'tooth '; abjit­
, conquering the water': Jp-' water t. 
(2) In the case of the combination sonant aspirate followed by 
-t- the whole group i~ voiced and the aspiration attached tq, the 
second consonant; thus-from dah- ' to burn J (from dagh- by the 
second palatalisation), budh- 'to understand' and labh- 'to 
receive " the participles in -ta are dagdha-, buddha- and labdha-. 
In the older Avestan language a similar development is ob­
served, though the aspiration as always in Iranian has been lost: 
aogadii 'said' from *augdha, i.e. Aryan augh- (Av. aog-) +ta, 
d. Gk. dJxo/LaL; ubdaena- 'woven' from Aryan vabh-. The 
later Avestan substitutes combinations of type (r) above even 
in the case of the original sonant aspirates: aoxta 'said', 
drttxta- 'betrayed' (draog-: Skt. druh-) dapta- 'deceived' 
(dab-: Skt. dabh-). In the same way in Sanskrit dhatte' places' 
has been ,substituted for *daddhe ( Av. dazde) which would be 
the regular combination of dadh- +teo 
Elsewhere in Indo­
European innovating forms of this type have completely re­
placed the old type of combination: e.g. Gk. lK'TO~: EXW; 
7TVcnt.S', d. Av. apaitibusti not noticing', as opposed to San­
I 
skri t buddhi-. 
(3) Dental combinations in Sanskrit normally conform to 
the above rules: vitti' he knows' from vid·. ruddha- • ob­
structed ' from rudh- +ta, etc. On the other hand Iranian sub­
stitutes the sibilant s or z in these positions: vOista 'thou 
knowest I: Skt. vettha; 
hastra-
session': 
Skt. sattrd-;
t 
ni-uruzda-
locked up': Skt. ruddhd-. The Greek treatment
I 
agrees with Iranian: aruBa ' thou knowest " 1TVO"TtS' • informa­
tion " d. Av. apaitibusti: Skt. buddhi-. In the Western IE 
language -ss- results from the combination: Lat. ob-sessus 
(sedeoL O. Ie. sess 'seat'. A tendency to modify the dental 
combinations is therefore wide-spread. It is assumed that in 
Indo-European a sibilant was inserted in these cases (t't, t'th, 
df.d, dzdh). Since all interconsonantal sibilants are elided in 
Sanskrit an IE voitstha would produce Skt. vittha, and at the 
same time it accounts for the Iranian and Greek forms. In 
the case of the voiced combination we find two kinds 
of treatment in Sanskrit, on the one hand the usual type 
'fuddhd-, vrddha-, etc., and on the other hand some ancient 

91 
PHONOLOGY 
forms testifying to the existence of z instead of d as in Iranian: 
dehi impv. ~ give' beside daddhl, cf. Av. dazdi, anddhehl (put '~ 
both with e out of earlier az according to the rule below. Either 
this is a case of dialectal divergence, or the type dekt «dazdhi) 
represents the regular phonetical treatment which has been re­
placed in the majority of cases by new analogical formations. 
§ 15. 
COMBIN.~TIONS INVOLVING THE PALATAL 
SERIES 
The second palatal series is simple in the matter of consonant 
combination, since all that is involved is the retention of the 
original guttural before a consonant, which then combines 
according to the rules given above: vac-' to speak ': ukta-, 
yuj- ' to join': yuktd-, yok~ydmi. dah- ' to burn': dagdhd-. 
Combinations of the old palatal series are much more com­
plicated. In the early Indo-Iranian period S, i and ih were 
changed to sand i before dental occlusives (with aspiration and 
voicing of the occlusive in the case of ih according to the rule 
given above for dagdhd-, etc.): the resulting sibilants were 
identical with those that arose from Indo-European s, z after 
i, u, etc., and their subsequent history is the same. In Sanskrit 
s became cerebral ~ and cerebralised the following dental and z, 
after undergoing the same process, was elided leaving cerebral 4 : 
e.g. vd~ti • he wishes 1 (vas-) Av. vasti, Hitt. wekzi, d. Gk. £KWV 
ptc. ' willing J; a~tau' 8 ' (d. asitl- ' 80 '), Av. asta, LaL octo, 
etc.; Skt. mrif,ikd- ' pardon " Av. m'JrJzdika- (mrg-d, d. Skt. 
mrj- ' to wipe away' and Pers. iimurzidan ' to pardon '); Skt. 
'1¥hd 'carried' for 
*u~4ha-<uidha- (vah- 'to carry t from 
vaih-<IE vegh-); Av. gar3zda ' complained', 3 sg. aoT. nlid. 
from garaz- = Skt. garh-; Skt. teif,hi ' licks' (lih-), etc. 
The same change was liable to take place in contact with 
other consonants: d. Av. f!umant- ' possessing flocks' (pasu-, 
Skt. pasu-); Av. frasna-
'question', Skt. prasna-; 
Av. 
viZibya, Skt. vi¢bhyas (vis-). In these combinations there is not 
complete agreement between Indo-Aryan and Iranian, but in 
the case of the latter example at any rate an Aryan *vilbhyas is 
attested. 
The Sanskrit development through 
vi~bhyas to 
vi4bhyas is exactly the same as that seen when ~ (i) was out of 
IE 5, e.g. in viprU,4bhyas for *vipru;.bhyas (vipru~- ' drop '). 
When immediately followed by s these palatals appear as k 
in Sanskrit in intervocalic position; and the treatment is there­

PHONOLOGY 
tore the same as that of the second palatal series: vdk$i' you 
wish t (vas-) like vak~yiimi ' I will speak' (vac-). This is not a 
case of preservation of IE k (d. Hitt. wek- ' wish ') but of its 
restoration. This is known for the following reasons: 
(I) Iranian continues to distinguish the two types of com­
bination derived from IE guttural + s and from IE palatal s: 
(a) vak$yami, Av. vaxsya (wek llJ-); k§atrd- 'sovereignty' : 
Av. xsa()ra-; k~dp- ( night' :. Av. xsap-, d. Gk. l/JEq,aS; 
bhak~­
'partake of, eat J: Av. baxs- 'distribute J; 
tvak~-' to be 
active ': A v. (jwaxs-. 
(b) kdk:;a-' armpit': Av. kasa; fk~a- ' bear': Av. arlJsa- ; 
ddk#tta- 'right': Av. dasina-, d. Gk. O€gu)s, etc.; maksa. 
. quickly': Av. mostt, cf. Lat. mox; rdk$as-' injury ': Av. 
rasah-; tak~-' to construct in wood': Av. tas-, d. Hitt. taks­
, join' J etc.; 
k~udh- 'hunger': A v. suoa; 
I(,~-i- · to dwell r, 
ll~etra-' field': Av. si-, soifJra-' settlement'. 
{2} The evidence from Iranian that there were two combina­
tions in early Indo-Iranian both represented in Sanskrit by k~ 
is further confirmed by evidence provided by Sanskrit itself, 
In cases where the group is followed by t it gives k or ~ according 
to its origin: (a) dbhakta 3 sg. mid. s-aor. of bhaj-, d. I sg. 
dbhak~-i; d. also bhaktd- ' food': bhak~-' to eat'; (b) 3 sg. 
td~ti, ca~te from tak~-, cak$-; nira#a-' castrated' from l~irak§-r 
etc. When the group is final the sibilant is elided according to 
the general rule. When the k goes back to the guttural series it 
invariably remains: vdk nom. s. from *vak§, d. Av. vax!. 
When on the other hand the old palatal series is involved, 
although there are some instances of k (Odrk, °SPrk, nom. sg. to 
°drs-, °sprs-) the normal and regular treatment is -{: vi#' settle­
ment ': vis-; vipiit' the river Beas ': vipiis-; spal' spy' : 
spas-; rot' king': riij-, d. Lat. rex; Ova!' carrying': vah­
• to carry ., etc. Here the anomaly of the k-forms is explained 
by· the dissimilatory influence of r in the vicinity. 
It IS clear from this evidence that, where Sanskrit has a single 
combination k~, there were originally two different combina­
tions. What immediately preceded k~ in the prehistoric period 
01 Indo-Aryan where the palatal series is involved is made clear 
by the forms of the nom. sg. quoted above. Just as nom. sg. vdk 
is derived from earlier *viik§ by regular loss of the final sibilant, 
in the same way v# is derived from *vit~. At a period which 
probably did not very long precede the beginning of the re­

93 
PHONOLOGY 
corded tradition this!~ was changed into k~ and thus confounded 
with original k~. The change is seen in the loco pI. vik~u (later 
supplanted by an analof:.,rical v#su) as opposed to the nom. 
vi!(~). Since the simplification of final consonant groups pre­
ceded this change, the cerebral, that is to say half the original 
combination, is preserved in the nom. sg. 
I t is necessary also to go beyond this t$ since even from the 
point of view of Sanskrit this will not explain ca#e, etc. (*ca!!e 
would have resulted). In this connection the sandhi of two 
sibilants should be compared. There are instances of s + s be­
coming ts: vatsyiimi, aviitsit from vas- ' to dwell " and of :; + s 
becoming k~: dvek~i' you hate' from dvi§-. Here again forms 
of the nom. sg.-dvi! viprul-show that there was an inter­
mediate stage !~ (which is obviously what would be expected in 
the case of this combination), 
In both cases !~ (>k~) may be derived from ~~ (Aryan sf). 
The treatment of the palatals before s is on the lines of their 
treatment before dental occlusives. Just as palatal s+ dental t 
produce the cerebral group ~t, so palatal s+ dental s produced §~ 
which then, in precisely the same way as the original sibilant 
combinations, became I~ and finally k~. 
In Iranian the development was somewhat different. Here 
S+sout of Aryan s+ s result in single s. This is in accordance 
'with another rule for the sandhi of sibilants by which one can 
stand for two when they come' together: d. Skt. asi for as + si. 
When palatal c is preceded by s the latter is changed to the 
palatal sibilant s: e.g. sascat'i 3 pI. reduplicated present of sac­
• to associate with'. When s is followed by s the two lose their 
identity and are merged as cch: ducch-una' misfortune' from 
dus + suna- ' prosperity '. Since the same sandhi results when s 
is preceded by a dental (pacchas from pad- ' foot' suffix -sas) 
we may see here the same tendency to occlusion as in the other 
sibilant combinations noted above. In tuccha-
empty' (for
i 
j
*tusya-. cf. Khot. tussa-<*tusya-) and kaechapa-
tortoise ' 
(cf. the proper name Kasyapa-) we have the same development 
of a group -55- which has resulted from an early • prakritic' 
assimila tion. 
From the standpoint of Indo-European Skt. ch (ecn) results 
from an original combination sk (skh); and in these cases 
Iranian has s :. chid- ' to cut " Av. saed-, Gk. UXt,w, Lat. seindo ; 
chay4 shade'; Pers. sayah, Gk. O'Kla; gdcchati 
goes', Av.
t 
l 

94 
PHONOLOGY 
jasaiti, Gk. fJaC1Kw; Prcchdti · asks', Av. p'Nasaiti, Lat. poscit. 
We must assume that in these cases Aryan sand swere assimi· 
1ated to 55 which was then treated as above. It should be noted 
that Skt. cit is different from the other consonants among 
which it is classified in that it is always a long or double con­
sonant. It is a matter of indifference whether ch or cch is 
written, though it is customary to use the former at the be­
ginning of a word and the latter in the middle. 
§ 16. 
COMBINATIONS INVOLVING SIBILANTS 
Indo-European s became z when followed by a sonant 
occlusive. This z became zin primitive Indo-Iranian under the 
same conditions that s became s (Skt. ~). In Iranian % and z 
are preserved: Av. hazdyiiJ ( would sit down' (sad-, Ir. had·)~ 
miida- ' reward " Goth. mizdo. In Sanskrit they are eliminated 
in the following ways: 
(a) Before unlike consonants z and ~ (Aryan i) are replaced 
by d and 4- respectively :ddga. ' branch': PahL a%g; madgu­
, a water bird', majj- 'to dive' «*madj-<*mazj-): Lith. 
mazgoti' dive' ; instr. pI. u~ddbhis. miidbhis from u~ds- ( dawn'. 
miis- • month '; viprU4bhis. instr. pI. of vipru~- · drop'. 
(b) Followed by dental d, dh, z is elided and a preceding 
vowel a is changed to e: edhi 2 sg. impv. ' be': Av. zdi (as-) ; 
sedur for ·sazdur 3 pI. perf. of sad- ' to sit ': d. Av. hazdyii.l ; 
nld#tha- 'nearest': A v. nazdista-; medhii 'wisdom': cf. 
A v. mazda ' wise '; miyedha-' food offered to the gods,': A v. 
myazda-; iidhvam • sit' 2 pI. impv. from iis-; sasadhi from 
sas- etc. This applies also to cases where z developed from 
original d: ct. deht, dhehi above. A different treatment is seen 
in addhti adv. ' certainly': Av. O. Pers. azdii. 
(c) Before d, dh, ~ (which may be derived from IE s or from 
the old palatals, § IS) is elided with cerebralisation of the fol­
lowing conson,ant, and compensatory lengthening of a short 
vowel: 
ni4d~ • nest', Lat. nidus, Engl. nest (*nizdo- from 
ni + sed-); mf4,hd- 'reward', A v. milda-, O. S1. mlzda, Gk. 
p.tC18o~, Goth. mizd{); du/dbha- • difficult to deceive' (dus + 
dabh-. Vedic f for 4); pi¢- ' to press '(cf. pi~- ' to pound '). 
hi4--
to injure' (cf. hi""s- " id ') kTi4-- ' to play' (d. ON hrista 
• shake ') for pi¢-, hi~-, kriw.-; astof/,hvam 2 pI. mid. s-aor. of 
stu- -'to praise '; mr4-ikd- • mercy' (first syllable metrically 
I 

PHONOLOGY 
95 
long in the Veda): Av. m3Y3zdika-; fi4,hti- · carried ': vah­
«u~ha-, i.e. uzh+ta). te¢hi 'licks' «le~4hi, i.e. lezh+ti). 
A preceding short a may be either lengthened (tii¢hi<taz4hi for 
tak~ +dhi, d§iitJ,ha-: sah-), turned into 0 (v6¢hum ( to carry' : 
vah- ; $otJhii < sixfold> : ~d§) or turned into e : t!1Je4hi ' shatters' 
from the present base tr1Jdh- of trh-. 
Occasionally ~ is represented by 4 even in this position: 
didir!4hi, mimir!4hi, riri4rJ.h£ from dis- 'to point', mih- • to 
urinate', rih- ' to lick' ; $a44ho. beside ~or!hii. The same varia­
tion is seen in Pa. nir!4a-, kitJrJ.ii which reflect a different dialectal 
1 
treatment in Old Indo-Aryan. 
I  
Between consonants z disappeared without trace: jagdhd­
· eaten' *jagzdha- (ja-ghs-ta-), as also did s (d. dbhakta above).  
The combination sonant aspirate +s was in the Indo-Iranian  
t 
period treated in the same way as the combinations of sonant 
aspirate +t noted above. That is to say, in intervocalic posi­
I  
tion gh + s gave gzh, and so on. Avestan preserves such voiced 
combinations though the aspiration as elsewhere is dropped: 
aoyiii · you said' « augzha, i.e. aug), + sa), diwzaioyai 'to 
injure' «dibiha-, i.e. di(d)bh+sa). 
Sanskrit has the surd 
combinations k$, ts, ps in these cases, but these have replaced 
original 
dih, bih. The absence of aspiration in Vedic 
aduk§at ' milked', dipsati • desires to injure', coming under the 
general rule (§ 2) of the dissimilation of aspirates, presupposes 
forms like dhugzha-, dh1:(d)biha- where the rule could operate. 
On the other hand in final position, where these groups were 
surd and de-aspirated from thebeginning (Aryan 0 dhuk!nom. sg.), 
there is never any loss of aspiration in Sanskrit. 
Furthermore there are a few cases in Sanskrit where jh, jjlt
I 
appear instead of k~ where such a voiced combination is in­
volved : jdjjhat- · laughing' (reduplicated formation from has-L 
nirjhara-
· waterfall', containing the root which normally 
appears as k~ar- (= Av. yzar-). These are Prakritisrns, and 
further examples are quotable from Middle Indo-Aryan: 
Pa. Pkt. jhiima- ' emaciated': Skt. k~iimd- ; jhiiy- • to burn I 
: 
Skt. k$iiy-; jhina- (exhausted': Skt. k!/itui-. Pali has also 
jagghati ' laughs' with ggh instead of the more usual treatment 
-jjh-. In all these cases voiced combinations of the type pre­
served in A v. yzar- J etc., are to be assumed, and the difference 
between these forms and the normal k~ of Sanskrit is indicative 
of dialect variation in Old Indo-Aryan. 
" 

PHONOLOGY 
Something has already been said about combinations of 
sibilant + sibilant. There are three types involved which differ 
in respect of the date of their operation: 
(1) By an old IE rule s + s could be represented by a single s : 
dsi 'you are " Av. ahi, Gk. Et (IE esi out of es + si); d1Jthasu 
loc. plUL, Av. ifzahu (df!thas ' distress' + su). 
(2) By a rule specific to Indo-Aryan, but one whose opera­
tion lay mainly in the prehistoric period, s + s became ts and 
~ + s became k~ (through *!~): vatsydti, dviitsft from vas- · to 
dwell ' ; jighatsu- ' hungry' from ghas- ' to eat '; dvek~i' you 
hate' from dvi~ , to hate '. When these combinations are final 
only the first element remains. and in the case of the cerebral 
combinations, since the loss of the final sibilant took place 
during the stage *!~, this appears as I: nom. sg. ukhiisrat 
· dropping from the pot' (sra1fJs-) J parttadhvat 'shedding 
leaves' (dhva(1Jt)s-); °dvil' hating I, viPrul • drop'. 
(3) Neuter nouns in -as, 
-us make their loc. pI. in -absu. 
-i!z§u, -u#~u (optionally -assu, -i§~u, -U$§u). This is the latest 
type, and it is patently imitated from the external sandhi of the 
nom. sg., as has happened also in the bh- cases (mdnobhis, 
havirbhis, et~.). 
§I7. THE CEREBRALS 
In the cerebral series (~, !h, 4, 4h, t', $) Indo-Aryan presents 
an innovation as opposed to the rest of Indo-European. This 
somewhat infelicitous name, a mistranslation of Skt. mUT­
dhanya-, dates from the very earliest days of Indo-Aryan 
philology I and has stuck through long habit. Phonetically 
, retroflex • or retroverted' more adequately describes these 
t 
sounds which are distinguished from the dentals in that the tip 
of the tongue is turned back .to the roof of the mouth. They are 
characteristically Indian sounds, and were certainly acquired 
by the Indo-Aryans after their entry into India. At the same 
time their use spread to the more easterly of the Iranian lan­
guages, those bordering on the Indo-Aryan area (Pa§to, 
Khotanese, etc.). Cerebrals are also found abundantly in 
Dravidian, and they are certainly ancient in that family_ 
They are also found prevalently in the Mun"a languages, but 
since they appear to be absent in Savara, a member of the 
family less affected by external influences than any other, they 
may not be original in that family. Since it is only in India and 

97 
J. 
% 
PHONOLOGY 
the immediate vicinity that an Indo-European language has 
developed such sounds, and since it may be safely assumed that 
an early form of Dravidian possessing such sounds was spoken 
over large portions of India prior to the advent of the Aryans, 
the influence of Dravidian may be held to be responsible to 
some extent for their emergence. At the same time, in native 
Indo-Aryan words they are explicable entirely out of the com­
binatory changes that affected certain consonant groups. 
Most of these have been mentioned and can be classified 
quite simply: (I) Originally dental t, th became cerebral when 
preceded by ~ (Aryan s) which in this position may either rep­
resentIE s (§ 9), or be a modification of Aryan pal a tals s, z 
I
(>Skt. j: IE k, g): 
v.r~fi-
rain' ('01$-: d. Gk. EPO'], £Epa'] 
, dew " Ir. frass 
rain shower '), va{;# ' wishes' (vas-, d. Hitt.
I 
wekzi), a$tra I goad' (aj-
I to drive' : Lat. ago, etc.); (2) Origin­
ally dental d, dh, became cerebral when preceded by ~ (Aryan i 
of the same twofold origin as s); since in this case the sibilant 
was elided the resulting cerebrals 4, ¢h (!, [h in the ~gveda) came 
to stand alone in intervocalic position: exx. nit!d-, {u!hd-, etc., 
see above; (3) The occlusion of the first part of the group ~~ 
(which may be for ~ +s or S+s) produced t~; finally the ~ came 
to stand alone, the simplification of the consonant group in this 
position (dv#. vit, above), while intervocalically the group de­
veloped further to ~; (4) Originally dental n became cerebral 
~ under wider conditions, namely when preceded in the same 
word by ~, , or " except when a palatal or dental intervened: 
kii:rava- ( cause '. etc. 
In addition to these rules by which cerebrals developed there 
are others which have been more controversial, but which can 
now be regarded as established. A notable case is the change of 
IE I followed by dental to cerebral, commonly referred to as 
Fortunatov's law. 
Though long opposed, this rule is to be 
accepted. Examples of this phonetic change are as follows: 
pa/a- «cloth' <*palta-: Arm. «If.) pariak «veil', Npers. 
pardah, OSlav. plat~no. ' linen cloth " etc.; patala- ' fold, layer, 
stratum', pufa-
fold, thing folded' < *paltala-, *pulta-: d.
I 
the IE root pel. ' to fold' in Gk. OL1TAOS" ' twofold', Lat. dupl14s, 
duplex, Eng. fold, etc.; sphatika-' crystal', sphuta- • clear' : 
d. the IE root sP(h)el- (to be bright' appeariJ).g in Sanskrit 
also in sPhul-/sphur- ' to glitter', sphulinga- • spark'; hiitaka­
, gold ': OS1. zlato, Russ. Zo.lo.to.; 
jathdra-
belly' : Goth.
4 

98 
PHONOLOGY 
kilJ>ei 'womb'; ku!hara- • axe'; d. kulisa-
id' and Lat.
l 
cutter' knife " etc.; jarj,a- ' cold, stiff, numb, dull' <*jalda-: 
d. Lat. gelidus, etc.; a¢hyd-' rich': d. rdh- • to prosper', a 
root which originally had l (Gk. aMJop..a.t. etc.); pa1Ja- ' stake, 
stipulation, hire, wages': Lith. pelnas ' gain, profit, earnings'; 
kU1Ji- 'lame in the arm' <*kulni-: d. Gk. KvAAoS" «kulnos); 
pa~ii1ja- 'stone, rock': Germ Fels, etc.; bha$- 'to bark', 
bhii~- ' to speak': Lith. balsas' voice', Germ. bellan, etc. l 
In addition to these types of combinatory change, there has 
also been a considerable amount of spontaneous cerebralisation 
in Sanskrit, and it is possible to list a fair number of words in 
which a cerebral represents an original dental without any 
combinatory change being involved. Some instances of this 
kind have long been recognised, particularly where later San­
skrit has cerebral as opposed to dental in the Veda: e.g. a!­
, to wander " ¢i-' to fly 'J na¢d-' reed ',as opposed to Vedic at-, 
di-, nadd-. Other cases such as ma1Ji-
I jewel' (Lat. monile) and 
sth·d1}ii ' column' were also early recognised, and the cerebral 
was put down to Prakritic influence. Recently, however, it has 
become clear that this process has occurred in Sanskrit to a 
much greater extent than previously admitted, and that it is in 
most cases a genuine Sanskrit and not a Prakrit phenomenon. 
The following further examples illustrate the spontaneous 
change to cerebral: avatd-' hole in the ground' as opposed to 
Vedic avatd- 'well'; kwr,t!ha- 'blunt': 
NPers. kund, Bal. 
kunt; pi1J¢a- 'lump. mass': Ann. «Ir.) pind ( compact>; 
pa1J¢ita- ' wise', pa1J¢ii ' wisdom' : NPers. pand ' good adVice' ; 
kii,#a- I hammer' from *kuta-, d. the root in EngL hew, Lith. kdu.ju 
t strike', OS1. kovati ' forge, hammer', etc.; ko{i-' tip, point>: 
Lat. cautes, cautis ' sharp, jagged rock'; katf,evara- (>kalet1ara-) 
• corpse': Lat. cadaver. 
A small number of Sanskrit cerebrals are of Prakrit origin, 
e.g. bha!a- I soldier ' ( < bh,rta-) , na!a- < actor '. d. nrt- • to dance " 
bha#araka- ' lord', d. bhartr-. and atani- ' tip of bow' beside 
earlier tirtni. There are some which occur in Dravidian loan­
words: 
e¢a- 'goat', kuti- 'hut, house', ka!hina-
hard',
l 
gU¢a- / ball ., for which see Chapter Vln. In late Sanskrit 
some words with initial cerebral appear, which cannot be 
explained out of either Indo-Aryan or Dravidian: such are 
I The change did not take place in words in which I was changed to ,.: e.g. 
uft*a •wool' (Lilt vitna. ch.), jartu- 'womb' as opposed to jdpuJra- etc. 

99 
PHONOLOGY 
tikii (commentary', tjamara- 'uproar' and tf,hakkii • a large 
drum '. 
§ 18. 
MISCELLANEOUS CHANGES 
I  
~ 
The phonetic changes undergone by a language are for the 
most part subject to general laws, but when all has been done 
to elucidate these some exceptions will remain. For instance 
one can hardly doubt that Skt. ktsa- ( hair • is the equivalent of 
Av. gaesa- ' id " since an associated u- stem is available in both 
cases (Av. gaesav-: d. Skt. kdav-a-). Contamination with 
kesara- ' mane' (d. Lat. caesaries) may explain the change in 
Sanskrit. Such sporadic changes are found more abundantly in 
the case of certain consonant combinations. The combination 
pl normally remains when I does not become r (Plu- ( swim. 
fioat') but it is changed to kl in klOman- • lung' as opposed to 
Gk. 1TA.EV/-lWlI, Lat. pulma 'id' (the original meaning was 
, swimmer, that which floats '), and in viklava- • distressed' as 
opposed to viplava-, vipluta-. In the case of trP- ' to steal' 
IE klep (Gk. KAE1TTW, Goth. hlifan, etc.) has been altered to tlep : 
a confusion of the groups kt and tt is common the world over, 
A similar change of the occlusive, also sporadic, is found in the 
case of the group -tn-. It remains normally (rdtna-, pdtnt) but 
in the feminines of certain adjectives in -ita it appears changed 
to -kn-: dsikni, pdlikni (dsita- ( black', palitd- • grey-haired ') 
Later examples of this tendency are seen in Pkt. savakki (be­
side savatti) • co-wife I, Panj. saukkan, and in Panj. arak 
( elbow' (aratni-). 
The sibilants are liable to certain changes when in proximity 
to one another. Initial s was changed to s in Sanskrit when s 
followed in the next syllable: svasura- ( father-in-law I. Av. 
xVasura-, Gk. lKVPOS, Lat. soter; smasru- • beard'; ct. Lith. 
smakra. Ir. smech ' chin', The same assimilation in the reverse 
order is seen in sasa- ' hare' for *sasa-: d. Khotanese saha-, 
Germ. Hase, Engl. hare. On the other hand s is preserved in the 
roots sas- and sas- because the change was impossible in forms 
like so.sti, sastd- (but d. sasana- for sasana- in the N.W. Prakrit). 
There is also a change of s to swhen ~ follows: su~ka- (dry • : 
Av. hu~ka-, slak~1}d- ' soft " Pers. laSin. ct. Gk. Aayvos. AayapoS'. 
Lat. laxus, Engl. slack; sli~-' to adhere " sle~mdn- ' phlegm I, 
d. Eng!. slime, etc. 
Since in cases where a final ~ has disappeared an initial sis re­

100 
PHONOLOGY 
placed by ~, c.g. ~at 'six' (*~at~< *sa!§) and vira-~ti! . over­
coming men I, it is likely that sU$ka-, 
are the result of 
secondary dissimilation of an intermediate *:;'lt$ka-. This rule 
does not apply where the system of related forms is strong 
enough to prevent it, e.g. vdsu-, vdsiyas-, vasi§tha-, though even 
here isolated forms with s are handed down. 
In Vedic k§umdnt 
Av. jsumullt-
(:pasu-) we have an 
isolated example of a ch~nge which has parallels in Iranian 
(d. Khot. k:;iirma- ' shame' =f:;tarnna-). 
More or less isolated cases of the reduction of three consonant 
groups in Sanskrit appear in stdna- 'breast'; Av. f!tana-, 
Pers. pistfin Toch. B pifscane; hradd- . lake • : d. Av. yzrad­
tv flow 
; and tvd$!ar- 'n. of the divine architect' 
Av. 
(Jwor~star·-. 
From the Indo-European period there was a certain instab­
ility about r, v, y as the second members of initial consonant 
groups. 
This accounts for equations like Skt. bhanj- 'to 
break', Ir. bongaim, Skt. bhuj- · to enjoy', Lat. fungor on the 
one hand and Lat. frango, fruor on the other. Similarly in the 
case of v Skt. ~a§, Lat. sex, etc., are opposed Av. xst'as, etc., and 
Ski. k$ip- • throw' to Av. x5vaew-. 
§ 19. 
FINAL CONSONANT5 
In final position consonants and consonant groups receive in 
many respects special treatment. This was true also in the pre­
historic period; for instance the aspiration in nom. sg. °dhuk 
as opposed to its absence in aduk$ata is due to the fact that at an 
early period the combination gh 
s became -ks in final position> 
whereas intervocalically it became gih. But the tendency to 
special development in final position has become much stronger 
by the historical period, and its features anticipate in some re­
spects the later Prakritic developments of Indo-Aryan. 
Of the occlusives only the unvoiced series p, t, #. k are 
allowed to stand in absolutely final position, and in their place 
the corresponding voiced series b~ d, t/, g are substituted before 
voiced consonants and vowels. The sonantisation before initial 
vowel is a special characteristic of Sanskrit, and it anticipates 
the voicing of all intervocalic surds in later times. 
Consonant groups were drastically reduced during the period. 
immediately preceding the historical record, and in this respect 
Vedic contrasts remarkably with early Iranian. Here too the 

101 
PHONOLOGY 
same general tendency was at work which later resulted in the 
assimilation of all consonant groups. With few exceptions 
(e.g. nom. sg. urk from itrj- ' vitality') not more than one con­
sonant may stand at the end of a word, however many were 
there to begin with. This had serious results in some aspects 
of the morphology, and led to som~ grammatical innovations. 
Thus the terminations are lost in the case of the second and 
third persons singular of the root and s-aorists, and the s of the 
s-aorist suffers the same fate in these persons when preceded by 
a consonant, so that the formations lose their grammatical 
clarity. On accbunt of this the root aorist comes to be abandoned 
in Classical Sanskrit except in the case of roots in long ti, and 
new extended formations are provided in the case of the s-aorist 
(dnai$it (or dnais). 
The weakest of the final consonants was s. In final position 
this is weakened to the breathing tz. (visarga). In sandhi the 
same change occurs before k, p and the sibilants. Preceded by 
a it is elided before voiced consonants and vowels. The same 
thing happens when it is preceded by a, but here the -as is in 
most contexts replaced- by o. In the non-Sanskritic .dialects of 
Old Indo-Aryan there was an alternative development of -as to 
-e. An example of this is found even in the ~gveda (sure duhita 
, daughter of the sun '); later it is a characteristic of the 
Eastern (Magadhi) Prakrits, and examples are also found in 
some of the Kharo~thi inscriptions of the North-West. These 
developments of final-as began in the Indo-Iranian period, and 
in Avestan likewise -0 is the common representative of final-as, 
beside which the;e is a dialectal variant -j corresponding to the 
-e of Magadhi, etc. Final s is preserved only before t, th, while 
before c, ch it exists in the modified form s. 
When preceded by i, U, s became originally s (§ 9) which 
would normally become Sanskrit $. In place of this $, before 
. voiced consonants and vowels r is substituted. The intermed­
iate stage was presumably z and in this case there is complete 
difference of treatment of a phoneme at the end of a word from 
it:) treatment internally. This external sandhi was extended to 
the sandhi of compounds (durdama-, etc.) but old forms like 
du!dbha-
(du4°-<du~O-) and kdrulati show that this is not 
original but analogical. Likewise the sandhi of neuter s- stems 
in declension (havtrbhis, havttz.$u; . mdnobhis, manalzsu) is in 
imitation of the external sandhi. 

102 
PHONOLOGY 
Final r was weakened in much the same way as s. Finally it
is represented by visarga (pttnab), but it is retained when pre­
ceded by a and followed by a vowel (punar iigacchati). Else­
where it behaves in sandhi exactly like s. It even becomes s
before t (punas tam) a development which is certainly analogical
rather than phonetic. In the case of uninflected forms with
final r preceded by i or 'U it is impossible to tell from any sandhi
context whether the word originally ended in s or r; thus
though we may conclude that the original form of the adverb
meaning' outside' was bahir because of Pa. Pkt. biihira- • ex­
ternal' (: Skt. blihya-) derived from it, its form cannot be
phonetically determined from Sanskrit itself, and the stem is
usually given as bahis. This weakening'of final r had no doubt
a good deal to do with the abandonment of a large number o
the old neuters in r. They were already in decline, but the
phonetic weakness of final r no doubt hastened the process (the
stem Qdhas ' udder' beside iidhar is due to the tendency to con­
fuse sand r in final position). 
VOWELS 
§ 20. 
CORRESPONDENCES 
The correspondences between the vowels of Sanskrit and
those of other IE languages may be gathered from the following
table, in which the examples are quoted after the presumed IE
original vowel: 
a: Skt. ajra- · plain'. Gk. aypas • field', Lat. ager, Engl
acre; dpa 'away, from'. Gk. awo, Lat. ab: anti' opposite
near', Gk. ant, Lat. ante · before'; dniti' breathes', d. Gk
aVEfLo!) • wind', Lat. animus; ayas 'metal', Lat. aes; 1Zas
, nose' (instr. nasa, etc.), OHG nasa, O. S1. nos"; ha1!J-sd­
• goose', Gk. Xtiv, X17v, Lat. anser, Germ. gans; yaj- ' to sacri­
fice, worship', yaj1ia- 'sacrifice', Gk. «ytos, «')'Va!) 'holy' 
sad- ' fall " Lat. cadit. 
e: Skt. bkdrati • bears', Gk. cpEP€f., Lat. jert. O. Ir. berid;
asti ' is " Gk. ECY'n, Lat. est; diva-' horse ., Lat. equus; sdna­
• old', Lat. senex, O. Ir. sen; sddas {seat', Gk. eoos; pasti.
I domestic animal '. Lat. pecu, O. Pruss. peck1t, Lith. pekus,
Goth. jaihu; mddhu • honey, mead', Gk. fLE8v. AS. medu;
madhya- ' middle', Lat. medius, Gk. jUaos. 
0: Skt. avi- 'sheep " Gk. OLS, Lat. ovis; pdti- • husband,

PHONOLOGY 
103 
lord '. Gk. 170UL~. Lat. potis able'; dpas-
work', Lat. opus:
I 
I 
dnas- ( wagon " Lat. onus I burden' ; asthi' bone', Gk. OO''TEOV,  
Lat. os; ddma.. 
house » Gk. oOfL0S', Lat. domus, O. S1. domu ; 
I 
daddrsa ' saw', Gk. OlOOPKf:; vfkas nom. sg. ' wolf', Gk. AUKOS. 
a: miitdr-' mother', Lat. mater; bhriftar-' brother'. Lat.  
frater; sviidlt- 'sweet', Gk. uouS', 
~ouS', Lat. sutivis; tisthat  
· stood', Gk. laTa, [aTT}; 
bah~t- 'ann', Gk. 17fjXVS'; sJUi- ' to  
bathe " Lat. nare; diva' mare " Lat. eqii':;.  
e: Skt. riij-, rdjan-
king', Lat. rex; miis- ' month " Gk.
I 
JL~V, Lat. mensis; sami-' half- " Gk. ~fLt-, Lat. sem£-; md' not 1  
(prohibitive), Gk. JL~, Arm. mi; Pita' father " Gk. 7TaT~p,  
0: ils- 'mouth', Lat.. as; vak nom. sg.' speech " Av. vax!,  
Lat. vox; asu- (swift ., Gk. J)/(tk, Lat. acior • swifter'; pa­
'to drink', Gk. 1TWVW, Lat. potus; ntipiit • grandson' I Lat.  
tUpos; pilt nom. sg. 'foot', Gk. (Dor.) 1TW); vfkiis nom. pI.  
, wolves " Goth. wulfos.  
i: Skt. imds (we go', Gk. '{fLO!; vidmd' we know', Gk. iOfLtV; 
d. Lat. video; ti§thami I I stand', Gk. iaTTJfH; divi' in heaven',  
Gk. J,Fl; rincdnti' they leave " Lat. It'nquunt.  
f
i: Skt. jivci- • alive I, Lat. vivus; 'lIirci-
man, hero', Lith.  
1ry,as: ptvan- ' fat' I Gk. 1Tiwv.  
f
u: Skt. srutd-
heard', Gk. KAV'ToS'; rudhird- 'red', Gk.  
;'pv(Jpos, Lat. Tuber; 
snu~J, , daughter-in-law', O. S1. sn'ttcha,  
Gk. VVOS' , Lat. llurus; uddn- 'water', Gk. vowp, °aToS', Lat.  
unda i wave '.  
it: Skt. dhfimd- ' smoke' 1 O. S1. dymu, Lat. fibnus; bhrii­
, brow', Gk. d</>~f)S', AS. bru; pt""{-' to be rotten " pftti- 'putre- : I"~\
faction', Gk. 1TV(JW, Lat. pus, puteo, Goth. flils. -v- Yl{;lc 
nt1$cC'¥6' 
M
ai: Skt. tdhas ' fuel " Av. aesma-, Gk. a'l8w ' burn I, devdr­
• brother-in-law', Gk. oo.~p «oatF~p), Arm. taigr, Lat. levir. 
ei: Skt.lii i he goes " Lith. elt·i, Gk. Elat; heman ( in winter .,  
hema1'lta- ' winter', Gk. X€L/L
Alb. dimen; devd-' god', Lith.  
divas, Lat. divus, Osc. deivai · divae '; dehi 'embankment, 
(Jjl~l
wall " Gk. T€tX0S', 
Osc. feih1Hs · muds '. 
o·j: Skt. vida 'I know', Av. vaeoa, Gk. oloa, Goth. wait; 
. tt ' those I, Gk. TOt; bhares' you should bear', Gk. </>EPO'S" 
all : Skt. 6jas-' strength " Av. aogar3' id ',d. Lat. augu.stus; (~IL·)1-('\
so~a- ' drying up " Lith. saiisas ( dry', Gk. aOoS" id " AS. sear. 
8.~Jf 
ttl:, Skt. .b,ddnami, 'I ob:er~e', G~. 1TE~(JOfLac. ~ find . ?ut~ j/l. 1t7f
learn ; o~att burns, Gk. £vw burn, smge , Lat. uro ; Jo~at" 
j''{iL
• 
. 
'Gk 
' 
't t ' ~ th k' 
· h 
'~J {
enJoys 
• YEvofLat 
as e , ~o . tusan 
C DOse . 
.
1 
c{C"lIl'l.4 

104  
PHONOLOGY 
r
ou: Skt. lokd- ' space, room, world " Lith. laukas plain', ~
Lat. Lucus 'grove '; bodhdyati • he awake~' (trans.), Lith. 
pa-si-baudyti 'to awake oneself " O. SI. buditi 
to wake,
I 
rouse'; sunos gen. sg. of sunu- 'son', Goth. sunaus, Lith.  
sunaus.  
iii: Skt. dat. sg. fern. seniiyai, devyai. Gk. XWPrf, Lat. equae, 
etc. 
ei: Skt. draik~am, s-aor. of ric-
to leave " d. Gk. tAf:I..pa.
I 
m: Skt. instr. pI. vfkais~ etc., Av. daevais, Gk. AVKo,S'; dat. 
sg. tdsmai ' to him " Av. aetahmai, d. Gk. Z1T7f<p, etc. 
iiu: Skt. naus ( ship', Gk. vav), cf. Lat. navis. 
eH: Skt. dyaus ( sky', Gk. Zfi:VS; 
dyauk~am' I joined " d. 
Gk.  t'Ev~a. 
01,: gaus ( cow'. Gk. f3oii~; a~/atf I 8 '. Goth. ahtau. 
Sonant Liquids and Nasals: 
/ 
r: 
Skt. prcchdti (asks', Lat. poscit «*porscit), OHG 
!orscon;  Pitf~u loco pI. of pitdr- ( father " Gk. 1Ta7pa.at; vrtta­
, turned " Lat. versus, vorsus; 111:rtd-
dead " cf. Lat. mortuus,
r 
mors, Lith. miiti r to die I, O. S1. sumriti ( death I. 
i: Skt. mrdu- ' soft '. Lat. mollis, d. Gk. apaAovvw ( soften, 
weaken' ;Prthu- (broad', Gk. 1TAaTl)S' ' flat'; vfka-' wolf', 
Av. 1J~hrka-, Lith. vilkas, Goth. wulfs. 
tJ: Skt. matd- • thought, considered I, mati- ( thought, Idea'I 
(man-). Gk. airrojLfJ.'ToS' ' of one's own accord " Lat. commentus, 
mens. mentio, etc.; hatd-
< slain' (han-), Gk. r/>a'ToS' (: ¢ovoS'. 
etc.); as£- 'sword', Lat. ensis; niima • name ',Gk. ovopa, 
t
Lat. nomen, Hitt. Zaman; a-
not' in djiiiita-
t unknown'. 
Gk. a:yVW'ToS'. Lat. ignotus, O. Ir. ingnad. 
1Ji: Skt. satdm (hundred', Gk. EKaTov, Lat. centum, Goth. 
hund, Welsh cant, Lith. Emtas; gdti- ( going " Gk. {Jaaes, Lat. 
in-venti0, Goth. gaqumps; abhrd-
cloud', Av. awra-, Lat.
I 
imber; saptd seven I, Gk. t1T'Ta. Lat. septem.
r 
§ 21. 
NOTES ON THE VOWELS 
The most characteristic distinguishing feature of Indo­
Iranian as opposed to the remaining IE languages is the posses­
sion of only a single vowel a corresponding to the three vowels 
a. e, 0 elsewhere, and likewise in' the case 'of the long vowels, a 
corresponding to a, i, o. It is clear that this uniformity is due to 
a special Indo-Iranian development, since the other languages 

PHONOLOGY 
105 
are ill substantial agreement with each other in the distribution 
of the vowels a, e, o. Furthermore the palatalisation of the 
velar series which occurs in Indo-Iranian before a only when it 
corresponds to e in the other languages (ca 
Lat. que, etc.) 
testifies to its existence in these positions in the prehistoric 
period of Indo-Iranian. The confusion of a and 0 is found also 
outside Indo-Iranian, inGermanic, Slavonic and Hittite. It is 
not possible to say for certain whether we have here independent 
parallel development in the various language groups, or whether 
this fusion of 0 and a is an ancient dialectal feature of {ndo-­
European. Certainly in the case of Indo-Iranian and Slavonic~ 
which show other signs of special affinity, the possibility of an 
ancient common change is deserving of consideration. The 
change e to a on the other hand is found only in Indo-Iranian, Af'-­
and It is one of the most characteristic features distinguishing 
this family from the rest of Indo-European. 
The Indo-Iranian development of the sonant nasals (to a) is 
the same as that of Greek. and it is one of the several features 
that links these two branches. Sonant nasals as such are found 
nowhere, but have been reconstructed for Indo-European from 
theoretical considerations. The sonant liquids have in the same 
way been replaced in most languages by combinations of vowel 
+r or l. Only Indo-Iranian preserved the vocalic!, which repre­
sents also original vocalic t. In Sanskrit there exists only one case 
of vocalic I, namely the root klP- f to arrange'. Because of Vedic 
k;P-, Av. k:JhTP- ' form, body', which are usually compared 
with Lat. corpus it is generally ~onsidered that this I is", of -;;.. 1
secondary origin, but this is not altogether certain. Neverthe: 
less as a general rule Sanskrit is much more consistent in turn­
ing l into T in its vocalic form than in its consonantal form. On 
the basis of sonant 1 (which is attested in Indo-Iranian) and J 
the sonant nasals can be safely reconstructed. They occur in 
the same conditions, that is to say by the suppression of the 
associated gUI)a vowel which leaves them to function as vowels, 
and their treatment in various languages is similar. Thus we 
have for 1 in Gk. ap(pa) , in Balto-Slavonic iT and in Germanic 
"r similarly for t' Gk. a, B. S1. t'n, Germ. un. It is clear,that the 
assumption of original sonant nasals is as much necessary to 
account for the variation in the associated vowel in the various 
languages as it is by the principles of apophony which are 
briefly noted below. 

106 
PHONOLOGY 
Among the vowels of Primitive Indo-European it has been 
customary to postulate the so-called' shwa' (a). This is based 
on such comparisons as Skt. pitdr- ( father': Gk. 1TanlP, etc. 
Skt. sthitd- ' stood': Gk. O"Ta-roS', etc. In such cases the 'J was 
considered to represent the reduced grade of the original long 
vowels, corresponding to the zero grade of the short vowels 
e, a, o. It was supposed to have become i in Indo-Iranian, and 
a in all the other IE languages. I have shown elsewhere 1 that 
this reconstruction is without justification, and that it was due 
to a faulty analysis of the Sanskrit words concerned. In these 
words the i is IE i and it is part of the suffix, not part of the 
root. Skt. sthitd- should be analysed sth-ita and its formation 
therefore differs from that of the related words, so that the 
phonetic reconstructions based on these comparisons become 
void. The same analysis is to be adopted in all the relevant 
forms: sth-iti- 'standing' (d. snih-iti-) sth-ird-
firm' (cf.
r 
stht!yan, sthiman, Pa. theta-) , aor. 3 sg. dsth-ita 'stood' (cf. 
aViid-i-ran, etc.), perf. I pI. dad-ima (contrast pres. dadmds) , 
stan-i-hi ' roar' (d. stanayitnu-, etc.), s-ita- ' bound' (d. sindti, 
si~iiya, etc.), s-itd- 'sharp' (cf. Ved. sisayd-, Av. saeni, etc.), 
krav-i~-
I raw flesh' (cf. roc-i~-, etc., and Lith. kraiijas, etc.). It 
is also clear, and established by many examples in Sanskrit that 
in the zero grade the original long vowels are completely elided : 
e.g. in the present tense of dii and dha, dadvds,dadmd~, datU, 
daise. dadhvds, dadhmds, dhatse, dhatsva, etc. (likewise in Iran­
ian. Av. dad~ahi, dasta, daste, dazde, dad:;maide, etc.); the 
same, elision is found in the participles dated (given ' and °tta 
(devdtta- ' given by the gods " etc.) and in Av. ptar-
father'
r 
beside p-itdr. 
If this a had been confined to the comparatively few words in 
which Sanskrit i appeared to correspond to a in the other lan­
guages, it would never have acquired very great importance in 
Indo-E uTopean theory. It was due to its becoming a basic 
element in the early theories of apophony that it acquired such 
importance in the traditional theory of Indo-European. In the 
comparative dictionaries this a, so insecurely founded, appears in 
the utmost profusion in IE reconstructions, particularly in the 
case of the so-called disyllabic roots. Skt. i is also suffixal when 
it appears after such roots and the H which constituted the 
final element of the root is elided (taritum<*tarH-itum). The 
1 TPS. 1949. pp. 1,2-61. 

PHONOLOGY 
107 
theory of apophony was further complicated by the invention 
of original long diphthongs, possessing a weak grade ai which was 
held to have developed into i (sometimes into -ay-), but there IS 
nothing in the facts to justify the assumption of such long 
diphthongs or of the weak grades which are supposed to be de­
rived from them. In addition a second: shwa J. supposed to be 
a reduced grade of the short vowels was introduced by certain 
authorities. As a result the theory ofapophony, which, as will 
be seen below, is really of the utmost simplicity, became extra­
ordinarily complicated. With the discovery of Hittite !J, and 
the subsequent rise to popularity of the laryngeal theory. the 
main features of the old theory were transferred to the new. 
IE H was identified with the old shwa (;)), and it was believed 
that all its varieties could function in a vocalic as well as a 
consonantal function like the liquids and nasals. It has even 
been common to use the sign;) to indicate IE H in its conson­
antal function (;)1' ;)2' ;)3), and the whole presentation of the 
laryngeal theory has continued to be vitiated by the original 
error of the invention of < shwa '. Needless to say the objections 
that apply to • sh~ in the old form of the theory apply to it 
with equal force i~ the new. There is no satisfactory evidence 
to show that H in a"1lcy of its varieties could function as a vowel 
and it is certainly never represented in Sanskrit by i. 
The effects of IE H on the vowels have already been noticed. 
By the restoration of H a very considerable simplification of the 
vowel system is achieved. 
(i) The long vowels a. e, 0 (>Skt. a) may be long through 
vrddhi, in which case they have developed out of the short 
vowels a, e. o. But there is another series of long vowels which 
are long by nature. e.g. the ti, e, ain sta.- ' to stand'. dhe- 'to Jd/ 
place' and do- • to give' (Skt. sthti-, dhti-. dti-). In such cases the 
laryngeal theory analyses the long vowel into short vowel + 
several varieties of H (dheHt • steH21 deHs) the quality of the vowel 
being determined by the following laryngeal. Thus in all cases 
long vowels are of secondary origin. 
(ii) The varieties of gUI:ta vowel are partly due to qualitative 
alternation in Indo-European. This was particularly so in the 
case of the alternation eJo (tP€pw: 
tP6po~). But some cases of 0 
are left over which have been considered to be original (o(]Tlov 
I bone ') and a can only rarely be put down to vocalic alterna­
tion (Lat. quater, etc.). Cases o!' original' a, and 0 according to 

108 
PHONOLOGY 
the laryngeal theory go back to H~ and H3 followed by the gUJ.la 
vowel which was in itself undifferentiated {H:tent- ' front ., Hitt. 
1l-'1W\ -
bant-, Gk. ant, 
H~st- • bone', Hitt. llastai, Gk. oO'Tf£OV, 
etc.}. Thus we are reduced to a single original gUlfa vowel. 
conventionally written e, which is the state of affairs to which 
Indo-Iranian again returned at a later period as a result of 
special developments of its own. 
A few words of caution should be added ill i1lustration of the 
fact that the laryngeal theory has not yet acquired a completely 
satisfactory form. I t is never possible to be certain for instance 
that the vowel 0 is original, since alternating e- forms may be 
missing by accident. Furthermore there exist some o/a alterna­
tions which the theory does not altogether account for. As re­
gards original a the absence of any l' in forms like Hitt. appa 
· away · can only be explained away by making the theory un­
comfortably complicated. It must be admitted in such a case 
that the actual evidence available does not allow us to go any 
further than IE apo. 
(iii) IE i, ii have in a]] cases developed out of iH, ltH. The 
special developments of r. /, tl, '!t followed by H have already 
been outlined. In this way the old reconstructions of long 
sonant liquids and nasals can be dispensed with. 
These simplifications effected, the IE "owel system is reduced 
to very few primitive elements. There is only one purely vocalic 
~o begin with, which may be wri~. The develop:
ment of three varieties (e, a, 0) and of the corresponding long
vowels can be explained on the basis of the effect of laryngeals
and of vocalic alternation. In addition there are six elements
which may under certain conditions (between consonants, initi­
ally before, and finally after consonants) function as vowels-­
i, U, (. J, 1..', 1p~but elsewhere (between vowels, etc.) function as
consonants-y, v, r, l ,n, m. As regards diphthongs it should be
noted that the second element is consonantal, and that from
the point of view of Indo-European it would be more consistent
to write eyti goes', gews- · taste', etc.
j 
§22. 
QUANTITATIVE ALTERNATION: ApOPHON Y 
The purely vocalic element (Skt. a, IE a, e, 0) was subject to a
quantitative gradation of the following'type. It could be elided
in any syllable, radical or suffixal, or alternatively it could be

PHONOLOGY 
109 
lengthened. In other words any syllable may appear in the 
normal grade (a), the strengthened grade (a). or the zero grade. 
This gradation is of fundamental importance in Sanskrit 
grammar, and its importance was fully recognised by the Indian 
grammarians. They gave the name vrddhi to the strengthened 
grade and gutta to the normal grade. The weak or zero grade 
they did not nanle because they c~mstructed their grammatical 
system in such a way that they started from the zero grade as 
the basic grade and from this they derived the gUI)a and ·vrddhi 
grades by two successive processes of strengthening. The com­
parative philologists differ from the Indian grammarians in that 
they regard the gUI)a as the normal grade and from it derive the 
vrddhi and zero grades by the opposite processes of strengthen­
ing and weakening. 
The operation of this gradation may be illustrated by a few 
examples: 
(I) N arrnal grade: sddas' seat' I sdcate 
associates with "
I 
padds, gen. sg. of pdd- ' -foot', ghas-
I to eat ., dabhn6ti I injures;. 
hdsati laughs '. , 
t 
(2) Extended grade: siiddyati ( causes to sit ., riit#dcas nom. 
pI. t associating with liberality', pddam acc. sg. • foot', ghiisd­
I fodder I, ddabhya-' that cannot be injured ',hlisa- (laughter'. 
(3) Zero grade :t sedur < they sat •<*sazdur, d. Av. hazdyaJ 
I would sit ., sascati 3 plur. ( they' associate '. upabdd- I trampling 
under foot', d-dbh-uta-· I wonderful • (literally' that cannot be 
harmed, impregnable', of divine beings), jdk#ti • eats' (i.e. 
ja-ghs-i-ti), jdk~ati •laughs' (ja-hs-ati, d. Vedic jdjjhati and 
Pa. jaggiJg.ti for different treatments of h +s). 
The same three grades apply to all suffixal elements. Thus in 
the case of the n-suffix we normal grade (guI)a) in voc. riijan, 
loco rajani, zero grade in gen. sg. rajitas, extended grade in 
a~c. sg. riijanam from the stern riijan-
t king'. The same grada­
tion applies to all suffixal elements. 
Fundamentally this alternation a/a/zero is all there is to the 
system of apophony. Some complications are caused by the 
combinations of a with semivowels. etc., and by some phonetic 
changes. These may be briefly summarised as follows: 
(1) When a is lost the semivowels (y, v) assume their vocalic 
form in the appropriate phonetic context: ydjati • sacrifices' ; 
ijyJ. 
sacrifice '; vdpati 
sows '; uptd-
sown '. When the
l 
I 
I 
semi vocalic element comes se~ond, i.e. in the diphthongs, the 

110 
PHONOLOGY 
original Indo-Iranian alternation iii, ai, i, (IU, au, u is modified 
in Sanskrit to ai, e, i; au, 0, t. of which e an'd 0 ceased to be 
diphthongs in pronunciation. The gm)a and vrddhi grades 
acquire the alternate forms ai, au, e, ojiiy, tlV, ay, av according 
as a consonant or vowel follows. 
Exx. Normal grade; jetum . to conquer', jdyati ' conquers'. 
sT6tum ' to hear', srd'l!a~ta- · hearing'. 
Strengthened grade: djai~am' I conquered' (s.aor.), jigtlya 
• he conquered I 
(perf.), 
dsrau~am 'I heard', Sllsrtlva · he 
heard '. 
Zero grade: jitd- ' conquered', srutd-
heard I.
f 
(2) The liquids r, I \vere vocalised under the same conditions. 
Though I has been mostly merged with r Indo-Iranian preserves 
the original sonant. pronunciation, so the apophony remains 
simple. GUDa: 
kdrtum 'to do'; Vrddhi: cak&ra 'did'; 
.Zero: krtd done'/cakre 3 sg. perf. atm. ' did I.
f 
(3) The nasals were likewise capable of functioning as 
vowels, but here the sItuation is complicated by the change, in 
Indo-Iranian as in Greek, of the sonant nasals to a. The series 
is therefore (1) an, am, (2) an, am, (3) afn, a/ut, e.g. (I) gdmana­
, going 't hdnti slays', (2) jagdma 'went', jaghdna 'slew I,
f 
(3) (a) hatd- ' slain', gatd- ' gone '. (b) gh11.dnti 'they slay' .. 
jagm·ur ' they went '. 
(4) Long a is sometimes original, that is to say it appears in 
.the gUDa position, e.g. in the roots dhii {to place' I dii ( to give'• 
and stha ' to stand '. I t is elided in the zero grade like the 
ordinary gllI)a vowel, e.g. dadhmds, dadmas. We have seen that 
this ii is for all (orin the IE system e, ii, (j are for eHl• ells, eHt ). 
Thus we are dealing with the ordinary gUDa vowel in this 
apophony, and H which cannot function as a vowel but is elided 
in such positions. 
(5) The combinations iH, ftH resulted in i, if, while in com­
bination with corresponding diphthongs (-ein-, :-euH-) the H 
disappeared without trace.' So there arises an apophony eii~ 
o/u, etc., beside the normal diphthongal apophony: (1) netum 
• to lead '/ndyati 'leads'; homan' invocation'jhdvana-
id '.
t 
(2) 
anai~am 'I led I jnayaka-
'leader'; jllhdva 'called I. 
(3) nitd-
I lead " hutd- ' called '. 
(6) Sonant, followed by H resulted in iT, ur, while in the 
corresponding gUDa grades it disappeared. In these cases we 
have the weak grade i" itT in apophony with a,. ar: (1) tdTtum 

III 
PHONOLOGY 
'to cross', piparti 'fills ~; (2) tdrayati 'causes to cross'; 
(3) tir1;a- · crossed', pitrtJti- . filled'. 
(7) When ~ and 1']1 were fol1owed by H the result in Sanskrit 
is in the first case ii, in the second case -an- (examples occur 
only before t). Hence the apophony sanoti: saM-; da:"myati, 
damdyati, danta-. 
(8) There are some deceptive cases where no real apophony is 
involved. An example is pd.-tum' to drink': p-ita- ( drunk " 
Here the i of the second form is suffixal and therefore cannot be 
in apophonic relationship to the radical ii of the first form. 
(9) Roots consisting of more than two consonants admit of 
two types of gUI)a grade: (I) vartate ( turns', etc., (2) trasati ( is 
afraid', etc. Usually roots belong to one or the other type and 
keep to this in the gUl).a grade (and in vrddhiwhich follows the 
gU1)a in this respect) but double forms occur in some cases, 
e.g. from drs- ' to see' we have the series: Weak grade dr#d-, 
gU1)a I darSayati, gU1)a 2 
drak~yaml:, vrddhi I diirsanika-, 
yrddhi 2 ddriik$am. 
(IO) Final vrddhied forms terminating in semivowel, liquid 
or nasal may lose this final element: sdkhii 'friend' (acc. 
sdkhaya11l, stem sdkhi..), asmii 'stone' (acc. asmiinam, stem 
asman-), datei ' giver'~ (acc. diitdram, voc. dlltar, data dii!re, etc.). 
The tendency is found elsewhere in Indo-European (Lat. 
senna, etc.) but nowhere as consistently as in Sanskrit (e.g. Gk. 
7TU'1'7/P, Lat. pater beside Skt. Pitei). 
This vocalic gradation was connected with the Indo-European 
accent. 
In Sanskrit the connection between alternation of 
grade and alternation of accent is clear from many examples: 
Inti' I go ' : imas ' we go ' ; sratum' to hear ' : sruta- ( heard ' ; 
dsti ' is ': santi' are' (Lat. est, sunt); hdnii' slays': ghndnti 
'they slay' (Hitt. kuenzi: kUllanzi); 
dtti 'eats ~ (dd-ti): 
danl- ' tooth' (' eater '). From such examples it is clear that 
the zero grade is due to the unaccented position of the syllable, 
and that the gUI)a grade is properly the grade of the accented 
syllable. There are of course many exa"Plples in Sanskrit, as in 
other languages where accent and apophony do not agree, e.g. 
Skt. vfka- 'wolf'; fk$a- 'bear', thta- · grass ' ~ vipra- ' sage, 
brahmin ~. These however create no difficulty since it is known 
that in many cases the position of the accent has changed in 
course of time. This is obviously the case in the examples 
quoted since they are all in origin adjectival formations (e.g. 

lIZ 
PHONOLOGY 
tft;ta- «*trt;td-) is ' what pierces ., d. tr1Jdtti) and it was the rule 
that such formations were suffixallyaccentLd. It is also very 
common in Sanskrit for nominalised adjectives to throw back 
the accent on to the first syllable. 
The application of the above accent rule in its full rigidity 
would allow only one gUJ;la syllable in any word. The words 
quoted are of that type, but the majority of Indo-European 
words, in any language, are not so. This is mainly due to two 
reasons. Firstly, when inconvenient or grammatically less clear 
forms would result, the elimination of the unaccented gul)a 
vowel was resisted, or if eliminated it was quickly restored. So 
we have as the gen. sg. of pad- ' foot' not *bdds which would 
have resulted from the rule, but padds with gUt:la vowel in un­
accented position. The existence of dcint- 'tooth' (' eater', 
d. sdnt-
I being': as-) beside addnt- ' eating' gives us one dear 
case where a gu:r:la vowel in unaccented position has been re­
stored by analogy. Secondly the nature of the Indo-European 
accent underwent a change during the later Indo-European 
period. It had the power to reduce neighbouring unaccented 
syllables for a certain period of time, and then, in later Indo­
European it ceased to have this effect. Consequently forms like 
those quoted above which show the full effects of apophony 
must be considered as belonging to the most ancient stratum of 
Indo-European. But after the accent ceased to have the effect 
of reducing adjacent syllables, Indo-European was creating 
new formations in abundance, a faculty retained by the indi­
vidual languages particularly in their early stages. The very 
numerous formations of the type yajatd- ' adorable " darsatd­
• worth seeing', devasya 'of the god', etc., etc., had their 
origin in this later period when the accent had ceased to have 
the power to influence the vocalism of the surrounding syllables. 
§23. 
QUALITATIVE ALTERNATION: METAPHONY 
There existed in Indo-European also a qualitative alterna­
tion of the gut;la vowel, and this is well preserved in most 
branches of the family: e.g. Gk. ).,I.yw i I say • : ).,oyoS" (word' ; 
Lat. tego (I cover': toga· gown J; Russ. vezu ' I carry': v6z 
, cart, load'; Engl. sing: sang. The alternation affects both 
the gUl).a vowel, as in the examples above and its vrddhied ex­
tension (Gk. SOrrJp: 
ScfJTWP 
giver '). In Indo-Iranian this
t 
alternation has entirely disappeared owing to the confusion of 

113 
PHONOLOGY 
the vowel qualities a, e, 0 in Q. Consequently this Indo-European 
alternation has no significance for Sanskrit grammar, and it de­
serycs brief mention only because the student of the compara­
tive grammar of Sanskrit will meet it in the material cited from 
the related languages. 
r 
This alternation, like the quantitative alternation is clearly 
connected with the Indo-European accent. This is evident from 
the juxtaposition of such forms as Gk. SaLp.WJ.l, oalfWJ.lO~ on the 
one hand and 77'O(J.L~J.I, TTOI.J.LEJ.IOS on the other. The rule is clear 
that e is the normal grade of a syllable which bears the accent 
and has always borne the accent (Gk. Eun, E77'OS, J.lEOS, etc.). 
Accentual changes and the workings of analogy have to some 
extent contrived to obscure the picture but this central fact 
remains beyond doubt. An example of the working of analogy 
may be mentioned; the termination of the genitive singular 
appears in some languages in a form that represents IE -es, in 
others in a form that represents IE -os. Since this termination 
was sometimes accented and sometimes unaccented, we may 
rC'asonably assume that the two forms were originally differ­
entiated according to accent. Later in the individual languages 
one form was generalised, sometimes the -es form and some­
times the -os form being chosen. 
The fact that the IE accent should have two quite different 
effects is bound up with what has been said above about the 
accent. The elision of the gUI)a vowel was frequently resisted 
for morphological reasons, or if eliminated it was restored. 
Such retained or restored gUI;m vowels were then, possibly at a 
later period, affected in a different way by the accent, so that 
o appears in place of t. Or again the main accent of a word may 
have changed with the result that the vocalism of the syllable 
which lost the accent was altered. For instance the numerous 
words of the type represented by Gk. oatJ.LwJ.I belong to a class 
(agent-nouns) which was originally suffixally accented. The 
type of formative -TWP, -J.LWJ.I, etc., beside older -T~p. -J.L~J.I seems 
to have come into existence as the result of such an accent 
shift. 
§ 24. 
SA!'SKRIT AND INDO-EUROPEAN ACCENT 
The last two sections illustrate the importance of the part 
played by accent in Indo-European. In dealing with the 
morphology the accent is an indispensable element, without 
l '  

114 
PHO:-':OLOGY 
which no proper grammatical analysis can be made. For this 
reason the accent v,i11 be continually under discussion during 
the succeeding chapters. 
Here a few general remarks will 
suffice. 
The full technical details of the Vedic and early classical 
. accent of Sanskrit, and of the various methods used to denote 
them, are somewhat complicated but the main principles are as 
follows. Each word had normally one accent whose position 
varies from word to word. Any syllable from the first to the 
last may bear the accent (e.g. dpaciti ' retribution', dhiirdyati 
4 holds I, namasydti ' respects' and apariih~ld- ( afternoon ' are 
accented on the first f second, third and last syllable respec­
tively). No simple set of rules can be given to determine on 
which syllable of a word the accent will fall. 
Certain words were enclitic by nature and never bore the 
accent. These are such particles and pronominal forms as ca 
( and " mii ' me " me ( of me " etc. Elsewhere the accent might 
be dropped in certain circumstances. (1) In the vocative a 
noun lost its accent except at the beginning of a sentence, 
when it was accented on the first syllable regardless of its 
natural accent. (2) The finite verb in the main clause of a 
sentence is unaccented unless it appears at the beginning of a 
sentence, in which case it retains its natural accent. 
In 
dependent clauses it retained its accent whatever its position. 
In this case a verbal preposition is most commonly compounded 
with the verb and loses its accent, e.g. pra gacchati ' he goes 
forward " yadi pragdcchati ' if he goes forward '. 
The accent so indicated is termed by PaI,lini udiitta- ' raised' 
and the rise was one of pitch or musical tone. The main accent 
affected also the pronunciation of the following syllable, since 
the return of the voice to the normal level was effected during 
the enunciation of this syllable. The accent of the syllable 
immediately following the udfltta is termed svarita- and it is 
described by PaI).ini as a combination (samahiira-) of udatta 
and anudatta. That is to say it begins at the high pitch of 
udatta and descends in the process of utterance. There exists 
also an independent svarita which arises secondarily out oi the 
contraction of lya to yd, etc., in which case the main accent of 
the word is the svarita. This is a post-Vedic development since 
the metre of the earlier texts shows that the contraction had 
not yet taken place. 

PHONOLOGY 
lIS 
The main accent affected the pronunciation of the preceding 
syllable. This was pronounced lower than normal and it is 
termed by Pal}ini sannatara-. 
The remaining unaccented 
syllables were termed anudatta-. Thus out of one main accent 
of a word there arose four different varieties of pitch: udiitta-, 
anudiitta-, svarita-, sannatara-. Since however all this variation 
is dependent entirely on the main accent, only that needs to be 
noted, as above. A separate notation is needed for the inde­
pendent svarita (vrkyas, tanvds, etc.) but even that may be 
dispensed with for the Veda if the words are transcribed accord­
ing to the pronunciation (vrkiyas, tanuvas). 
The complications of the accent detailed above were respon­
sible for an unnecessarily complicated system of notation 
adopted by the Vedic schools. According to the usual system, 
that adopted in the lj.gveda for instance, the principle is to mark 
the syllable preceding the udatta, the sannatara, with a sub­
script line, and the dependent svarita following the udatta by a 
vertical stroke above. The udatta itself is left unmarked. 
This achieves the same purpose in a less convenient manner 
than the method adopted in modern transcription, and by some 
Vedic schools. The modern recitation of the lJ-gveda follows the 
notational system to the extent of pronouncing the sannatara 
lowest and the svarita highest musically of syllables and ignor­
ing the udatta altogether. This is a secondary development 
although it may be old, and at variance with the teachings of 
,. 
Pal)ini which are in complete agreement with the findings of 
comparative philology. 
The system of accentuation described above has for centuries 
been totally extinct in spoken Sanskrit as it has in all forms of 
Indo-Aryan derived from it. When exactly the accent died out 
in ordinary spoken use it is impossible to say with certainty. It 
was certainly a living thing in the time of Patanjali and even 
later than Patanjali, Santanava treated of the subject in his 
Phitsiitra. According to the <luthor of tlie Kiisikii commentary 
(c. A.D. 700) the use of accentuation was optional in the spoken 
language t which probably means that in practice it was no 
longer used at this time. On the whole it is unlikely that the 
use of accentuation survived long after the Christian era. In 
Middle Indo-Aryan we may take it that the change occurred 
much earlier, at the very beginning of anything that could be 
called Middle Indo-Aryan. 

;116 
PHONOLOGY 
The old Indo-European accent was lost, at some time or 
other in most Indo-European languages jnst dS in Indo-Aryan. 
Accentual systems derived directly from Indo-European are 
found only in Greek and Balto-Slavonic. They may also be de­
duced from the phonetic developments classified as Verner's 
law for an early stage of Germanic. The existence of accurate 
information about the accentuation of two of the oldest mem­
bers of the family, Sanskrit and (;reek, is of the utmost value 
for the understanding of Indo-European. 
A comparison of the accentuation in those languages in 
which it is preserved reveals basic agreement, though to a 
greater or lesser extent al1languages have innovated in detaiL 
The position of the accent in Indo-European for instance ls fre­
quently established by the correspondence of Sanskrit and 
Greek: e.g. bhdrati . bears J: Gk. 4>IPH; srutd- - heard I 
: 
Gk. KAv'To~; gurl~- . heavy': Gk. fJapus; (Ideas • word • :. Gk. 
;110$, etc., etc. In other cases they differ showing innovation 
on one side or the other :mliiar- ' mother': Gk /i~'T7JP; hiihu­
. arm': Gk. 1TfjXVS, etc. The tendency to innovate is also evi­
dent fronl the frequent disagreements between accent and 
apophony, whether in individual languages (Gk. '{o/i€V ' we 
know' as opposed to the more original accentuation of Skt. 
vidmd) or in <111 (Skt. 'vfka-, Gk . .\VKOS, etc.). In the latter case 
the innovation is of the Indc-European period. By means of 
comparison of the individual languages, by the study of apo­
phony so intimately bound up with accent, and by the proper 
understanding of the part played by accent in the morphology, 
it is possible to form a clear and accurate idea of the Indo­
European accent. The details are part of the morphology and 
will be found ill the chapters concerned. 
The nature of the old accent in Sanskrit and Greek is known 
from the technical descriptions handed down and partly in the 
case of Sanskrit from the traditional recitation of the Veda. It 
was in both languages predominantly musical, and not a matter 
of stress. This is confirmed by the fact that in both laItguages 
metre is completely independent of accent, depending solely on 
the length of syllables. From this agreement it is deduced that 
the same kind of accent prevailed in late Indo-European. But, 
as we have already seen, there must have been a change be­
tween early and latc Indo-European in this respect. Earlier the 
accent had the power to reduce the neighbouring syllables. 

117 
PHONOLOGY 
indicating a strong stress element. In the later period this 
power was certainly lost and this agrees with what is known 
about the accent of Sanskrit and Greek. 
Beside the normal acute accent Indo-European possessed 
under certain circumstances a circumflex accent. This is clear 
from the agreement between Greek and Lithuanian, e. g. cir­
cumflex accent in gen. sg. fern. Gk. Bf:iis, Lith. geriJs, gen. pI. 
masc. Gk. O€WlI, Lith. gerft,. instr. pI. masc. Gk. BEalS, Lith, 
vilkais, as opposed to acute accent in nom. sg. fern. Gk. B€a. 
Lith. ger6-ji (gera). In such cases Sanskrit has the ordinary 
ud5.tta acceneas elsewhere, and it does not, as Indo-European 
did, distinguish between the two types of accent. The inde­
pendent svarita which came to exist in Sanskrit as a separate 
type of main accent is, as we have seen, a post-Vedic creation 
and unconnected with differences of accent type in Indo­
European. 
Nevertheless traces of the old circumflex have revealed them­
selves in the Veda from a study of the .metre. In certain cases 
the metre makes it clear that a long a is to be pronounced di­
syllabically, e.g. gam, dyam as gaam, dy,1am, and the ter­
mination of the genitive plural -am as -aam. In such cases the 
corresponding Greek forms frequently have the circumflex 
accent, and this gives reason to believe that metrical pecul­
iarity of the Veda is the effect of the circumflex accent of Indo­
European. 

CHAPTER IV 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
§I. 
GENE.l{AL REMAHKs 
The Sanskrit nominal stem may coincide with the root, as 
happens in a minority of cases, but usually it is derived from it 
by the addition of a suffix. These suffixes are very numerous 
and are inherited from Indo-European. They are not, as occurs 
in some languages (e.g. Eng!. man-Iy, 'Inan-hood) derived from 
what were originally independent words, but are in every case 
analY5abie into their component parts, that is to say the indi­
vidual consonants or semivowels of which they are composed. 
These primary elements include nearly all the. avaiiable 
phonemes, but the ones most commonly used are r, 11, S, t, 
yji, vju, m, Hand f.:. They may appear either with gm.la, i.e. 
preceded by the thematic vowel (-ar, -an, -as, IE eT-, en-, es-, 
etc.) or in their weak form (-r, -11, -s). The thematic "owel itself 
may appear as a suffix but naturally, since elsewhere it is 
always a question of the gUl)a grade of a consonantal suffix, only 
in final position (bha'l'-an-a-, udr-d, etc.). 
The IE, primary 
suffixes could be added either to roots or to words already end­
ing in another suffix: e.g. the suffix -as is added to the root in 
vacas- ' speech', to a base having the suffix 11 in rell~zas-
inherit­
I 
ance, property' I the suffix t in sr6tas- ' stream 'and the suffix v 
in pitJas-
fat'. Since the root itself could originally function 
I 
freely as a noun, that is to 
was a word in the full sem;e, there 
is no difference in principle between primary and secondary 
derivation of this kind. A suffix could be added to any word. 
whether it already had a suffix or not, and the nature of the 
process was precisely the same. The result was that owing to the 
very large number of possible combinations of the primary 
elements, the number of these compound suffixes in all IE lan­
guages is very large, and the complexity of nominal stem 
formation in Sanskrit and the allied languages is entirely a 
matter of the multifarious combination of a comparatively 
small number of primitive elements. 
1I8 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
I~9 
In the descriptive and synchronistic grammar of Sanskrit the 
various suffixal combinations are treated as units, which is 
what they have in fact become in the course of the develop­
ment of the language. For the historical and comparative 
treatment of the subject a more radical approach is needed. 
Here it is necessary, as is done in the following pages, to start 
from the single, primitive elements, and in the exposition to 
build up the whole suffixal system from them in the way that it 
had developed in the prehistory of the language. 
Between the original simple suffixes, as so analysed, no dis­
cernible distinction of meaning or function can be found. In 
some ways they have no meaning. Thus an ancient IE word 
tfjJY1~ wet' yea.r ' appear.s in Hittite as such (also .in Sanskrit reduced I 
to -ut in parut ' last year '); in Greek it appears with the suffix 
-os as (F)fTOS, without anything being added to the meanj~ 
Likewise in Sanskrit neuter action nouns with suffixes (-as3 etc.) 
do not differ fundamentally in meaning from roots used in the 
same sense: dv£~-' hatred': dve~as' id.', etc. Of course when 
several words derived from the same root with different suffixes 
appear side by side, differences of meaning between these 
words usually develop, but this is a matter of idiom and nothing 
to do with the ultimate nature of the suffixes as such. What 
applies. to the simple suffixes applies equally to the compound 
suffixes. In the examples quoted abdve the suffixes -tas, -nas 
and -vas are used in precisely the same way as the simple suffix 
-as. Hittite has a series of suffixes -sar, -tar, -mar, -var (with 
variant n-stems) making neuter action nouns of exactly the 
same nature, and this accurately reflects Indo-El!ropean usage. 
In the course of time specialisation of usage in the case of various 
suffixes has developed in all languages, but thjs is secondary 
and it is possible in some cases to show how it has come about.1 
The most important distinction in nominal derivation in 
early Indo-European was not between the different suffixes 
simple or compound, but in a difference of accentuation ac.cord­
ing to which a word formed with the same suffix functioned 
either as an action noun or agent noun/adjective. Accented on 
the root it was an action noun and neuter, accented on the suffix 
it ~ent noun or adjective and originally of the so~ 
< common...gender '. The system is preserved to some extent in 
Sanskrit and. is exemplified by such doublets as brdhma D. 
I E.g. in the case of the comparative suffix-tara. see p. 149. 
E 

120 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
I prayer': brahmii. m. · priest ., ydsas n. (glory': yasas- m. 
• glorious'. The Sanskrit examples are not very numerous, and 
are only found in the case of a small number of suffixes; they 
are in fact the last remnants of a system dying out. In earlier 
Indo-European on the other hand the system was of very great 
extension and importance, and it is fundamental to the under­
standing not only of the formation of nouns but also of their 
declension. 
The, thematic vowel stands apart from the other suffixes in 
many ways. Its~ction seems to have been ~dU&!L_
agent noun~ives from the various primitive neuter 
~Otor""'~s, e.g. udr-a • otter': Gk. lJSwp • water'. It was in fact an 
alternative method to the above in the formation of such nouns. 
~ is its normal use in Hittite, which indeed ignores the 
method indiCa:tedabove. The numerous neuter thematic stems 
which are only enlargements of simple consonantal stems (Skt. 
anja1t-a- n.: Lat. unguen, etc.) appear to be a later develop­
~ and aTe ignored by Hittite. 
In the descriptive grammar of Sanskrit nominal derivatives 
are divided into two major classes, primary and secondary, in 
the terminology of the Indian grammarians krt and taddhita. 
The' former comprises all those formations which are deriveq 
directly from a root by means of a suffix (e.g. vacas (speech' 
from vac-) and the second those which are derived from the 
basis of nouns already made (e.g. asvavant- ' possessing horses J 
from asva- ' horse '). Convenient as this twofold classification 
is from the point of view of Sanskrit itself, it has no fundamental 
or ancient significance from the point of view of Indo-European. 
For one thing the same suffix is found functioning in both ways. 
and when a suffix is found to function predominantly or even' 
exclusively in secondary derivation, it is historically a case of 
secondary specialisation. The suffix -vant is normally a second­
ary suffix in Sanskrit, but it is primary in such examples as 
drvanl- ' steed " yahvdnt- • young " also in Av. b-azvant- ' abun­
'dant " 'Jr"aZvant- ( straigHt', and in Hitt. dassuwant- • strong'. 
It was as a primary suffix that this; like other suffixes which 
have become predominantly secondary in Sanskrit, first came 
into being. A historical accoun.t of nominal stem formation 
must 'therefore be arranged entirely according to the external 
form of the suffixes concerned. 
Secondly many formations which from the point of view of 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
121 
Sanskrit are primary, are in origin secondary formation. Thus 
udrd- ' otter • which counts as a primary derivative (ud-rd-) is 
clearly in origin a gecondary derivative meaning' connected 
with water, water-animal' (udr-d-, d. Gk. ilSwp n. 'water', 
t"'J'.1
etc.). In origin all types of such thematic adjectival derivation 
are secondary, but owing to the obsolescence of the old neuter 
action nouns on which they were based they acquired the 
nature of primary derivatives. In so far as such suffixes re­
mained living suffixes, they were employed as units in the later 
period in a primary way." Not all formations in -ra have the 
same history as udr-d-, etc., but the type of derivation came 
into existence in this way. 
Again in the old IE dichotomy of the types brdhma: brahmd 
we have in the second of these pairs a type of secondary deriva­
tion. Logically and presumably historically the neuter action 
noun precedes the agent noun. The form brahma · one connected 
with brdhma' presupposes by its meaning the existence of the 
more primitive neuter. In the Sanskrit system such agent noun 
formations count as primary formations, and this is what the 
majority have become owing to the disappearance of the corres­
ponding neuter types. This is illustrated very well by the agent 
nouns in -tar (datdr- ' giver ',etc.). Hittite has nouns in -tar 
but oI1ly neuter action nouns. It is clear that the relation be­
tween the two types is the same as that between brahma and 
brahma and that datdr- was originally 'one connected with 
giving' corresponding to an obsolete *datar n. ' giving'. When 
the neuter type went out of use it became a primary formation 
connected directly to the verbal root. 
In the development of the system of nominal stem formation 
in the prehistoric period, certain general tendencies will be 
observed, notably : 
­
(I) The d~ of the n~ters. Whole categories of peuter 
nouns with ancient IE suffixes such as -er and -el have become 
almost extinct in most IE languages except Hittite; but the 
letters r and I playa great part in IE nominal derivation, so that 
although the original types have disappeared, they have left 
great masses of further derivatives which cannot be explained 
without them. In other cases the old neuter nouns have not dis­
appeared, but have been transferred bodily to the nlasculine and 
feminine classes. This is particularly the case with stems in i and 
tt, and the action nouns in -ii, but it occurs frequently elsewhere. 

122 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
(2) ~h of gramm~al gend.e!:. In the earliest period 
the threefold classification did not exist. There was no feminine 
and nouns were divided into two types, , neuters' and' com­
mon gender', the latter so called because the masculine ·an:l 
feminine developed out of it. This is the state of affairs actually 
found in Hittite, and it is further confirmed by many survivals 
in other languages (Lat. feTens masc. and fern., Skt. suvt'fsas 
nom. sg. m. and fern., etc., etc.). The feminine gender arose in 
the later period of Indo-European, and strictly speaking only 
then is it possible to speak of gender in the proper sense of the 
term 
(3) The great variety of possible suffixes that could arise from 
the various combinations of the primitive suffixal elements led 
necessarily to a Erocess of sel~, so that many combinations 
which are known to have existed have not survived to the Vedic 
period. Thus out of a series of suffixes forming neuter nouns, and 
based on the primitive suffixes -CT and -en, namely IE -erjT, 
-mer/m,,-wcT/ur,-yerjirl-ter/tr,ser/sr and -enjn, men/mn/. wen/un, 
-yen/in, .:tenJtn, -senJsn, only -menJmn remains as a·living suffix 
in Vedic in the formation of neuter nouns. The others are better 
represented in agent-noun and adjectival derivatives which is 
in accordance with what has been said above about the decline 
of the neuter formations. 
(4) Another feature of great importance is the growing use and 
~sion of the thematic vowel (Skt. a, IE e/o) as a final suffix. 
It has been said above that the original use of this vowel as a 
suffix was probably to form adjectival derivatives, in which 
case it was accented. Later its use spread as an extension of 
consonantal stems. This tendency is well known in the further 
development of Indo-Aryan (Class. Skt. pada-
foot' replacing
r 
piid-Jpad-, etc.), but it had been actively at work for long in the 
prehistoric period. Thus Skt. dnjana- n. ' ointment' replaces 
an older consonantal stem· which is preserved in Lat. unguen. 
As a result of this development thematic stems 'became by far 
the most numerous type both in Sanskrit,l and in other lan­
guages which reflect the late IE stage. In Hittite, on the other 
handl which reflects an earlier stage of Indo-European there is 
not such a great preponderance of a-stems. 
1 In the J!.cveda 45 per cent of all nomini! stems end in -a. 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
123 
§2. 
ROOT NOUNS 
Root nouns are an ancient type very much in decline in the 
earliest recorded Indo-European languages. In Sanskrit they 
are preserved better, on the whole, than elsewhere. Such are 
pdd-IPad- ' foot I: Lat. pes, pedis, vac- ' speech '; Lat. vax, 
raj- · king': Lat. rex. They are usually either masculine or 
feminine, but in the case of verbal roots functioning as action 
nouns they are normally feminine (dyut- f. ' brilliance " etc,). 
The old neuter type of root noun (d. Lat. mel, fel, etc.) is prac­
ticallyextinct. Of the few examples mention may be made of 
-(juo 
~dm' welfare 1 whic? is. indeclin~ble, ~dn- ' wood, ,tr,ee • which 
d, 
IS probably neuter (hke Its extensIOn vana- n.) and as mouth':
-P 
Lat. as. 
This type of stem was originally subject to the laws of 
apophony: V~I)a in the No~~~Ac~:_~  
~nd Nom. PI. and the weakened form of the root in the ot~  
~This system is partially preserved in the case of some  
common nouns (n. sg. pdt, gen. sg. padds) but the general tend­ 
ency is for it to be levelled out. In this levelling out any of the  
three grades may come to function throughout the declension,  
the weak form of the stem being normal in the case of verbal  
roots used as nouns: (r) vitc- ' speech', gen. sg. vc(cas, (2) spas­
, spy', nom. sg. spat. (3) fc- ' hymn' I nom. sg. tk, gen. sg. rcas.  
Roots functioning as nouns may be used either as action or 
agentnouns~tne latter case they are feminine): druh­
tIT 'injuring, injurer " (2) 'injury'; 
dv(~ (1) '-hatred', (2) 
, enemy'; 
bh1~j- (r) , enjoyment " (2) , enjoyer', When used 
as the second member of compounds they have the latter 
function only. 
This type which has a moderate extension in the Vedic lan­
guage, becomes more restricted later in accordance with the 
pre-existing tendency. That is to say with one exception~ 
when ~stems are used as the last mem~~ompounds. 
In this case both in the Vedic and Classical language roots may 
~ freely used as nominal stems. They are also used rn:o;e 
widely in the Vedic language as infinitives_ of the type drsi { to 
see' than otherwise independently. Elsewhere as we shall see 
th~dic infinitive tends to preserve old nominal stems which 
~otherwise become extinct. 
Roots ending in short -u, -£, -r cannot function as nominal 
~"e.~,,
?, 
(oJ{ 
.;.

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS
124 
~.2' In Q£curnstances w~~th~!QQi$ do so :the¥.1.ake__tha­
suffix ·t: °jit_ 'conquenng'• mit- 'pillar'• st-ut- 'praise', 
°bhrt bearing " etc.
f 
§ 3. 
THEMATIC STEMS BASED ON THE ROOT 
Stems with the thematic suffix -'a can be formed on the basis 
of stems ending in all the other suffixes, and these are best 
treated in connection with the various types of stem to which 
the thematic suffix is added. The most simple type of thematic 
stem is that formed directly from the root, These sterns may be 
divided into two classes according to the usual scheme: action 
nouns and the like with accent on the root, and agent nouns, 
etc., with accent on the suffix, final accented -a having here as 
elsewhere an adjectival function. Certain pairs are quotable 
where both types occur in connection with the same root: 
e6da-
goad': codd-
instigator '; e~a-' speed ': e$a-' speed-
l 
l 
-rl-", 
ing'; vara-
choice': l.'ara-' suitor '; sdka-' glow ': soka­
f 
I glowing'. The same type of alternation is familiar also in 
Greek, 1"0IWS ' a cut ': TOJ.LO~' cutting " etc. 
In Greek and in other languages which distinguish the vowels 
o and e the vowel of both root and suffix is o. Original 0 is 
attested by Sanskrit in some cases wh~ a guttural has~t 
b_ kita-' intention', gdya- 'property', ghand­
, striker. solid', Such an arrangement can hardly be original 
since normally e would be expected in the accented and 0 in the 
unaccented syllable. It is likely therefore that we have here a 
phonetic compromise between the nominal and adjectival types. 
In Sanskrit there are distinct traces of a variation ole between 
the two types in the suffixal vowel in the case of roots ending 
originally in gutturals. The final guttural in these cases is 
usually preserved in the case of action nouns with radical 
accent and palatalised in the other type: e.g. bhoga- ( enjoy. 
ment': bhojd-' bountiful' ; roga-' disease • : rujd-' breaking, 
destroying'; soka- 'glow, heat; grief': sued- 'bright'; 
yoga-
(union': a-yujd-
'without an associate'; 
drgha­
, value': arha- ' worth, valuable' (accent not quoted). The 
distinction is found in some cases where the accent is on the 
f
suffix in both types: arkd- (ray ': arcd-
brilliant'; rokd­
, lustre': roed- ( radiant'. Here the accent of the action nouns 
has been secondarily transferred to the suffix. The variation 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
125 
between the palatalised and non-palatalised form 'indicates an 
original variation in the quality of the suffixal vowel according 
to the position of the accent. 
In action pouns the radical syllable ~only _has gU1)a· in 
a.gt:.eeIDJm! with the Elated languages: ddma-
house', Gk.
l 
86JLO~, Lat'. domus, Russ. dom (IE dem- ( to build '). Nouns of 
this type are dya- ' going, course I, hdva- ' invocation', tdra-
~.. G 
, crossing', veda- 'knowledge', j6~a- 'enjoyment' and so 
forth. There is however another type, for which it is difficult 
to find parallels outside Indo-Iranian, with vrddhi of root and, 
paradoxically, usually having the accent on the suffix. These 
appear to have been formed on the basis of the vrddhied nom. 
sg. of root nouns, just as later, Vedic piit nom. sg. ' foot' is ex­
tended to pdda-. Typical instances are: bhiird-
burden I (cf.
t 
the vrddhi in Gk. t/>wp , thief '), diivd- ( fire', tiird-
< crossing " 
I' 
siidd-
sitting', sa'od- (libation', vasa- 'residence'; with 
t
l
tAJ/ 
radical accent, v4ra- ( choice " mdna-
< opinion '. 
J..<p 
Irregular accent is found in the whole class of such nouns 
which are formed from verbal roots combined with a prefix: 
satftgamd- ( coming together, union I. abhidrohd- 'injury', etc. ; 
and in a minority of cases elsewhere: bhogd- (bend', jayd­
· victory', javd- 'speed'. These irregularities show that a 
te~dency to confuse the two'types was beginning; jayd- and 
javd- for instance also mean 'vic1;orious I and 
speeding I
l 
which is their original significance, but at a time when the im­
portance of the old distinction was diminishing, they came to 
be used indiscriminately in both functions. Here, as elsewhere 
throughout the formation of nouns, the Vedic~ accent is not 
original, but in spite of such exceptions t:p.e old system remains 
predominant enough for its principles to be clearly seen. 
The oldest type of apophony among agent noun/adjectives of 
this class is that which has the weak grade of the root due to 
~~ented suffix: vrdhd-' increaser' (: vdrdha- ' increase '), 
budhd- ' intelligent' (: bddha-
< understanding '), sued-
1 bright J 
4
(sdka-
glow'), turd- {victorious' (tdra-, tara"- 'crossing '), 
priyd-
< dear', krsd- ( thin' I rued- • brilliant '. etc. More fre­
quently the restored gu1)a vowel appears: ared-
shining " 
t 
dravd- 'running', yodhd- (fighter I, nada-
roarer', vadhd-
43
,I 
• slayer " etc. Like the action nouns they may also appear with 
vrddhi, and this is connected with the vrddhi of the nom. sg, 
of the corresponding root stems: viiha-' beast of burden ' (cf 

Iz6 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
the root stem °viih-, nom. sg. °vi#, acc. sg. °vctham) sliha-
j victor­
ious' (d. °sah-), nayd-
leader t, griibhd-
seizer I, etc.
r 
t 
The agent nouns of this type are on the decline, and as hap­
pens elsewhere in the same circumstances, many such stems are 
no longer used as independent nouns, but only as the last mem­
bers of compounds: e.g. °add_ 
eater' (annada-
eater of
r 
r 
food '), °gamd-
• going' (duratl'tamd-
'going far '). °gara­
J swallower' (ajagard- • goat swallower', i.e. python), °ghnd­
J slaying' (goghnd- • slayer of cows '). This is because the for­
mation which came to be normally used in making agent nouns 
was that in -tar, and this tended to oust other formations in 
ordinary free use. In contrast the tdr- formations were not 
capable of being used in composition, so there is a dichotomy of 
the type dnnasya-- atta: annada-' eater of food'. In a small 
number of nouns of this type the accent has been secondarily 
tr~ansferred to the root. Such are vfka-
wolf " v{~a- ' server'.
j 
Such transference is common in nominalised adjectives through­
out the system. 
The adjectives sana- ' old I and nava- • new» can be fitted into 
neither of the above classes. . From the corre·sponding forms in 
other languages (Gk. 
Pl.o~ new', Lith. sen-as < old " etc.) it
I 
can be seen that they are distinguished from other thematic 
stems by having the radical e-grade and from the adjectival 
type by having radical accentuation. This is because they are 
based on old root stems new-, sen-, which were adjectives by 
meaning from the beginning, and consequently the thematic 
vowel here is merely an extension of the stem, as in the action 
nouns, and not meaningful as in the usual oxytone thematic 
adjectival type. In Latin the root stem sen- is still used outside 
the nom. sg. (senex. senem, senis). 
Both types of the above nouns are masculines. Feminine 
agent nouns such as are found in Greek (ij oOoS' way I, ij TpocPor
t 
(nurse ') are non-existent in Sanskrit, which in this respect is 
less archaic than Greek. The masculine gender of these action­
nouns is in contrast to the neuter gender of the various thematic 
action nouns derived by extension from the various neuter 
suffixes to be mentioned later. This is because the root nouns, 
at least those ending in occ1usives developed early the distinc .. 
tion between nom. and acc. and used -s in the nom. sg. That is 
to say they were-'common gender " and the thematic deriva­
tives based on them automatically acquired the same gender. 

THE  FORMATION OF NOUNS 
127 
Later they were specialised as masculines owing to their ex­
ternal form. In contradistinction there are a couple of neuter 
nouns vana-
I forest' and tana- ' offspring I which are extensions 
of root stems (van-, tan-) which had retained their neuter gender. 
Old neuter formations are found in yugam {yoke' (: Gk. 
'vy6v. Lat. iugum) and paddm 
step' (: Gk. 17'OOV, Hitt.
f 
pedan). These are old formations, among the very few simple 
thematic neuters that can be traced to Indo-European. They 
will be discussed in connection with the suffix m (p. 172 ff.). 
§4. 
NEUTER FORMATIONS WITH ALTERNATING 
rln SUFFIX 
The suffixes r (which in Sanskrit may also represent IE 1) and 
n must be studied together since they early became associated 
in a common paradigm in which the nom. acc. was formed by 
the r-stem, while the oblique cases were formed on the basis of 
an n-stem. 1 his ancient type of neuter noun is tending to 
obsolescence in the earliest Sanskrit, as it 15 in Greek and most of 
the otherlanguages. In Hittite on theotherhand, which presents 
here, as so often, a more archaic stage of Indo-European, the 
system is unimpaired. The system as found in Hittite contains 
simple rln stems with this alternation, e.g. elbar ' blood " gen. 
sg. esnas, also a series of compound suffixes formed by the addi­
tion of these suffixes to stems in fl, m, s, t, namely -war, -mar, 
-sar, tar. Examples are partawar wing', gen. sg. partaunas,
I 
tarnummar letting go, to let go", gen. sg. tarnummas (mm < 
f 
mn), bannessar law, law suit " gen. sg. bannesnas, papratar 
r 
· uncleanness " gen. sg. papratmas (nn<tn). This early system 
of neuter nouns exists only in fragments in other IE languages, 
but an abundance of suffixes containing rand n have these 
primitive neuter types as their ultimate source. 
There are a few simple neuter stems in r with alternating 
n-stem in Sanskrit. Such are dhar ' day', gen. sg. dhnas (Av. 
azan- ' id '), .adhar udder' gen. sg. iidhttas (Gk. oi5fJap, ov(Ja'To~.
f 
Eng!. udder, etc. ; there also appears to be in the Veda a second 
I
te-¥~  ddhar ',!cold I = Av. aodar-
id:). In these the suffix has the 
guQa grade, but it may also appear in the weak grade, in which 
case it is strengthened by a further suffix. This is usually 
t; ydkrt ( liver " gen. sg. yaknds (Av. yakar-, Lat. iecuf, Gk. 
~1TapJ all without any t), sakrt ( dung " gen. sg. saknds, with a 
tI!r
icp'l~
~(l

128 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
i",:)..~-1.. 1<.J variant ·th in kdPrth-
penis'. This additional t may be com­
r 
~v0 
pared with additional t which in Greek strengthens the alternat­
ing n-suffix in these (nouns: 
ov8a7'o~ compared with Skt. 
adnnas, etc. We may also compare the fact that final radical-r 
is avoided and -t added in lokak/t, etc. A suffix j «g) is found 
in dsrk blood 1 (nom. sg'J stem dsrj-), gen. sg. asnds (: Hitt.
r 
e!!Jar, esnas, Toch. ysar,'Gk.lap, Lat. assir). Thisg also appears (".1
in Lat. san-g-uis 'blood 1 which like sanies' gore' is derived 
from the n-stem of this word with loss of initial vowel through 
apophony. 
Since this type is becoming obsolete we have occasionally de­
fective nouns like vddhar weapon' (Av. vadar-) not used out-
J1
t 
side nom. acc.sg. The old alternating n-stem appears in the 
extension vadhdna fern. ' id '. Some stems even more obsolescent 
occur only as the first members of compounds: u~ar- (u~arbudh-
t waking at dawn '), anar- (anarvis- • seated on a chariot '). 
vasar-, (vasarhdn- ' smiting in the morning '), vanar- (vanargu-
I  
t
going in the woods', d. the derive viinara-
monkey' ; 
n-stem in vdnan-vat), sabar- (sabardhuk: for savar-, cf: sdvana 
, milked at the soma-pressing '). The stems manar greatness • 
I 
and bhuvar ' abundance • appear only in liturgical formulas and 
in the compounds maharloka- and bhuvarloka-, but the instru­
mentals of the corresponding n-stems, mahna '(d. Av. mazan­
n.) and bhund are common in the IJgveda. The n-stem gdmbhan 
, depth' appears only as endingless loc. sg'J but a corresponding 
r-stem *gdmbhar is implied by the extension gambhara- n. tid:. 
Corresponding to Vedic loco sg. riijdni ' under the direction of' 
Avestan has nom. acc. sg. riizara 4 nIle, regulation'. The instr. 
dana implies an old nom. sg. *dar < gift '. and from these alter­
nating stems the two extensions Gk. owpov, O. S1. daru and Lat. 
donum, Skt. danam are derived. These instrumental forms, 
vctl~ oJIp<  and also dsna t with a stone 1 (Av. a..;an-) andpretld f with affec­ 
tion ' being isolated, have come to function as the instrumentals  
of the corresponding man- stems.  
The adverb avar' down, downwards' has the same formation 
as the above neuter nouns. but differs in its accent which 
corresponds to that in the endingless loco sg. The same adverbial 
accent is found in priitdr. etc. below. Such adverbs also re­
semble the locatives without ending in that they may optionally 
add the termination -i: Just as we have ak$d1)i in the eye • 
I 
beside ak$dn, so we have Skt. updri above' beside Gk. WEP
I 
I

jI "I.!! v 
dB"'!"''!>' 
'~qvtt..... 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
129 
and Av. aoairi t below' beside the *adhar adv. which is implied 
'J 'fd 
by the adjectivarderivative ddhara- • lower'. 
Neuter stems in -ar not otherwise preserved form the basis of 
a small class of denominative verbs in the Vedic language: 
ratharydti 'rides in a chariot', sratharydti 'becomes loose', 
implying *rdthar nt. 'riding in a chariot' and *srathar nt. 
, looseness '; d. vadharydti 'smites with a weapon' beside 
vddhar. There are parallel denominative yerbs from the corres­
ponding 1t-stems: vipa nyd- 'to be wise, inspired' (d. also , , 
vipanya, tiipanyu-. and with -r-
vipra-
'inspired, wise '), 6vcr'fe
bhura1;tyd- ' be turbulent, agitated.' (r-stem in Lat. furor), etc. 
There are various secondary formations testifying to tbe exist­
ence of old neuter r-stems. The curious formations dhaft'ri(a- n. 
· horse's trot' and iidhora1;ta- m. ( elephant driver J I which turn 
up in later Sanskrit can be explained as denominative formations 
on the basis of an old neuter noun *dhiivar · running '. The 
Vedic vrddhied derivative jJmarya- . earthly' is based on a( 
*jdmar • earth I corresponding to Av. zlimar- ' id: (j- as in jmii. 
jmds, etc.). A neuter *svetar · whiteness, white spot' is implied'r' r.;:?P
by the derivatives svaitari' having an (auspicious) white mark I 
\ 
(a cow) and svetra- nt. 'white leprosy', and the alternating h /
n-stem appears in the extension svetanii fern. ' dawn '. 
i}1 
Sin~e Skt. r represents both r and I of Indo-European, IE 
stems in -1, which functioned precisely as r-stems, cannot be P 
distinguished from r-stems in Sanskrit. except by comparison 
with other languages. Such a stem is found in svar (suvar) 
e/
I 
>(
I sun " gen. sg. saras (d. Lat. sol. Goth. sauil, etc.). The hetero­
clitic declension which is absent in Sanskrit appears in other 
languages (Av. x"mg < *svans, gen. sg., etc.). Some of the r­
stems mentioned above appear by comparison with other lan­
guages tohave been originally l-stems: mdhar-: Gk. p,eyaAo- ; 
Av. zmzar-: d. Gk. X8ap,a'Abs, Lat. humilis. etc.; Av. riizarli : 
Lat. regula. The denolI\inative verb saparydti I serves, honours, 
worships' is like Latin sepelio bury I 
(' honour with funeral 
t 
rites ') derived . from an old IE neuter *scpel ( honouring, wor­
shipping' derived from the root sep-, Skt. sap- • honour, serve.' 
The t-:extension to the suffix n, which appears in G;eek 
(ou8aTor), etc., is absent in Sanskrit (tidhnas, etc.), but in $ome 
derivative forms an additional t-suffix is found which may 
be connected with the extension t of the Greek neuters: 
vasantd- ' spring', d. vasar 9, vesantd- •pond • (J'vis,,-), bhuvanti 

130 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
, causing abundance " d. bhuvar. bhund. Another example is 
simanta-
i parting of the hair' as opposed to siman- ' id " and 
the lexica give a word asmanta-
fireplace · which is related in 
I 
the same way to asman- • stone'. 
Compare also the pair 
sakuni- and sakunti-' bard '. The t-extension appears regularly 
in the participles in -ant which will be discussed later. 
§$. 
COMPOUND NEUTER SUFFIXES IN rln 
By adding the simple suffixes rand n to stems in u, m, sand 
t the suffixes -war/n, marin, etc., which were so productive in 
Hittite in the formation of neuter nouns, were produced. In 
addition they could. be added to i-stems, and this ancient 
neuter type is preserved in the Latin passive infinitives, iitier, 
scribier, etc. Outside Hittite the compound neuter r-stems have 
become comparatively rare, the corresponding n-stems are 
better represented, and have tended to replace the r-formations 
in the nom. acc. sg. 
A neuter suffix -wer, -war is found outside Hittite in such 
examples as Gk. ElOap (food' (*€8Fap) , SI.I\€ap (bait " Lat. 
cadaver' corpse " Tach. B malkwer ' milk' and the like. They 
are not uncommon in A vest an: snavar-
< sinew'. Oanvar­
I 
<
bow J. karsvar-
(region of the earth', dasvar-
health " 
sax'f!ar- 'design, plan', vazdvar-
(firmness'. 
The Iranian 
evidence shows that they had survived in reasonable abundance 
to the Indo-Iranian period, but in Indo-Aryan they had 
already become extinct by the earliest period. This was be­
cause the rt-stem was generalised in all cases: nom. acc. sg. 
sndva ( sinew', etc. Only the adverb sasvar ' secretly, stealth­
ily I preserves the suffix in this form, with the usual adverbial 
( = locatival) shift of accent. It implies a neuter noun *sdsvar 
which we may compare with Hitt. sesuvar 'sleep' (seszi 
, sleeps', Skt. sdsti), the original meaning being , while people 
sleep J. In its weak form the suffix is preserved in the adverb 
muhur' suddenly, in a moment' (whence muhurtd- ' moment I 
; 
also muhu with simple u-suffix, for *mrhuft, d. Av. m:rr:;zu-
tj~
'short (of life)', Gk. {3paxrk). 
Neuter nouns in -van are 
I dhdnvan 'bow I, 
2 dhdnvan · desert', snavan- 'sinew' I 
ott,
parvan-
'joint I 
(d. Av. paour,)ainya-
'linked '), sf/wan,· 
•corner of the mouth', and some sporadic occurrences in the 
lJ.gveda, patvan- ' flight I, sanitvan- ' acquisition' and vivasvan­
, illumination'. In addition a small number of dative infinitives 
----------------~ 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
131 
are formed \\>ith this suffix: davane' to give' (Gk. 80FEVaL, 
4----­
Sovvat) turvdtte • to overcome', dharvatte ' to injure'; simi­
larly in ,Av. vidvanoi f to know', 
A suffix compounded of i and r appears only in the adverb 
bdhir ' outside'. A few defective in-stems appear in the lJ.gveda 
in the instrum. sg., namely prathind, mahind, vari1}ii. These 
forms, in origin old neuter in-stems, have been attracted to the 
paradigm of the masc. man-stems prathiman- ' width I, mahi­
man-
I greatness J and varimdn- 'width t 1 and so preserved. 
The neuter suffix -in further compounded with v appears in 
sfkvin- nt. ' comer of the mouth " 
The compound suffixes m-er, m-en alternated in the same 
way, but outside Hittite, mer (mr) is rare and obsolescent. A 
fair number of examples can be collected from Greek (Avp,ap, 
A';/-La.,..o~ impurity', etc.) but they exist only as survivals. No
t 
examples are found in Sanskrit but their one time existence in 
Indo-Iranian is shown by adjectival derivatives like admar-d 
i gluttonous 1 based on an old *admar 'eating, food '. Such 
forms have been entirely replaced by the extension of the man­
stem to the nom. acc. sg. 
The neuter suffix man is the only one of the rln suffixes that 
remained fully productive in languages other than Hittite. 
Examp~es are: (nom. acc. sg.) ajma 'career, march' (: Lat. 
agmen), karma · deed', carma ' skin', pdk$ma ' eyelash " pdtma 
, flight', brdhma prayer • 
t bhdrma ' maintaining, supporting;
r 
load 1 (: O. S1. brem~ , burden /, Gk. ¢€p/-La). vasma ' garment' 
(: Gk. d/-La. 'id', Lesb. FE/J-/-La), loma, roma 'hair' «J]u-: 
d. lava- 'fleece, wool. hair '), man-ma 
thought' (: O. Ir.
r 
menme 
mind, understanding'), varma ' protective armour',
r 
vartma 'course, way' (0. SL vrem~ 'time ')', sadma • seat I, 
syt1ma ( thong, rein " sviidma ( sweetness " 
A small number of dative infinitives are formed 011 the basis 
of this suffix: trtlma1}e' to protect', diimane ' to give', dhdr­
matte {to support " bhdrmatte 'to maintain', vidmalle 
to
r 
know'. In Greek infinitives are also made with this suffix, 
much more abundantly, and including an archaic type without 
termination; 
'/-LEV 'to go', SO/LEV 'to give'; e8/-LEVCU 'to 
eat', 'l/-Lf:va., • t~ go " 80/-LEva, ' to give'/ etc. 
The nouns of this class are primarily verbal abstracts (action 
nouns), but they show a strong tendency to acquire concrete 
rneanings, as happens with other neuter abstracts: e.g. hanma 

X'Mpa 
THE. FORMATION OF NOUNS
132 
t weapon ' .as well as i blow', tardma • hole', mdrma t a mortal 
place, vital organ', carma • skin', vdsma ' garment', etc. 
Like other neuter suffixes in -n this suffix is extended by t 
in Greek (gen. sg. CTwp.aTos, etc.). A case of such extension is 
found in Skt. varimdt- 'breadth 1 (inst. sg. varimatii RV. 
1. 108. 2). 
The neuter suffix -t-er alternating with -t-en, which is so well 
represented in Hittite; has become exceedingly rare in other IE. 
languages. Only isolated examples such as Lat. iter, Tach. ytar 
, way' are quotable. In Sanskrit a solitary example of this 
kind appears to be preserved in RV. 6. 49. 6. : jdgatab sthatar 
jdgad if kTfJudhvam, 'may ye bring stability to the movLllg 
world '. Misunderstood by the redactors the form has been 
handed down without accent as if vocative of sthiitar- ' stander', 
and the passage has been rendered unintelligible. A restoration 
sthatar n. stability' gives meaning to the line. Apart from this 
I 
the neuter suffix -tar- appears in a small number of locative 
infinitives, e.g. dhartdri ' to hold " vidhartdri ' to bestow '. In 
Avestan so~e dative infinitives are made with the same suffix: 
vid6iBre • to look at ' baraBre 'to support'o These forms are 
interesting as showing that the neuter r-stem~ were capable to 
some extent of be in inflected th~' '0 
stead
0 
~_~Under what precise conditions 
this happened originally it is not now possible to say. 
Some adverbs appear with this suffix, having the usual 
change of accent: antdr {inside ' (: Lat. i'nter) , pratar .' early' 
(: Osc. pruter), sanutdr 'aside, apart' (d. EngL a-sunder). 
These imply old neuter nouns *dntar • the interior " etc. Thb 
type of adverb became very productive in Latin, aliter 'other­
wise' (d. anydtr-a), breviter, leviter, etc. \Vith additional suffix 
-a we get adverbs in -tra, e.g. sayutra ' in bed, abed'. and this 
suffix may, and normally does later, appear with a short vowel, 
a1tyatra ' elsewhere', atra {here ',etc. Among the adverbs the 
Veda has some interesting collective formations: 
devatrd 
• among the gods' I puru$atrd 'among men I. They may be 
explained by comparing Hittite forms like antu!Jsatar 'the 
population, mankind' (antu!Jsas man '). Similar neuter col­
r 
lectives *devatar, etc., lie behind these adverbial forms. 
A neuter suffix -tan is found only in naktdn- ' night' (instr. 
pI. naktdbhis).Altemating -r appears in Gk. vVKTWP • by night' 
and Lat. nocturnus. This neuter suffix is found sporadically 
t 
.... '1ctol'"'.t 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
133 
elsewhere (Lat. gluten' glue '. etc.) and in Old Persian it is used 
to make dative infinitives (lartanaiy , to do I, etc.). '" ~r11l~"~"-
The compound suffix sarlsn, which is very common in Hittite, 
is more or less obsolete elsewhere. It is an extension of the 
neuter s-stems, and in Hittite the -ar/n has been addetl so con­
sistently that the simple s-stems have practically disappeared. 
In other languages the simple s-stems are well preserved so that 
it is unlikely that the sar/sn formation ever had the same exten­
sion elsewhere as appears in Hittite. Nevertheless there are 
considerable traces of it. Adjectival derivatives of the type 
matsar-d ~ exhilarated; are based on such fonnations, and the 
coexistence of mandasiind- ( id.' shows that there was the old 
rln alternation. Similarly pit~arya- 'well-nourished' implies 
*pit~ar nt. ' fatness, prosperity', equivalent to Gk. 1Tvap , beest 
milk', and the alternative n-stem is used in the masc. derivative 
Pu§dn- ( nourisher (name of a god) '.1 
A few neuter sterns in -sn- are preserved in the oblique cases 
of nouns which appear in the nom. sg. as simple s-stems, e.g., 
gen. sg. sir~1Jds. dO~1Jds. nom. acc. sg. siras ' head'. dvs ' arrr! " 
A small class of locative infinitives is made on the basis of 
neuter stems in -s4n':. 
ne~d1Ji 'to lead', par§d1Ji 'to pass', 
grfti§d1J,i ' to sing', i§dt;i ' to emit' (for i$-§ani with the old 
:;(£' 
sandhi, p. 95). In Greek also this suffix forms infinitives. The 
common type cP1p£tV is best explained in this way (*cP£P€u€V, 
*bheresen, the simple base without ending being used as in 
to/L£v, etc.). 
§6. 
ACTION NOUNS TRANSFERRED TO THE 
MASCULIXE 
It has been remarked above that the major distinction in 
Indo-European was between neuter action nouns accented on 
the root and masculine, originally common gender, agent nouns 
accented on the suffix. But in Sanskrit as in other languages 
not all nouns fit into this simple classification; among the 
n-stems for instance with which we are dealing there are quite a 
number of masculine formations which cannot be classed as 
agent nouns, and which from the point of view of their meaning 
go rather with the neuter action nouns of the above type. Such 
1 Originally *py-usar (~PJ) as is seen by comparing 7Tvap and Skt. pfyl4~a-. 
Similarly pu§- ' to thrive, prosper' is for "pyu~-. originally a denominative 
formation like u1'u~ydti, etc. (*pyu~ydti). 

134 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
I
are: (-an-) murdhdn-
head' (AS. moida). 'plihan- •spleen' 
(Av. sp:W;1zan- m., Gk. O"7TA7}V m.)? majjdn- 'marrow J (cf. 
O. Pruss. musgeno); (-'{}an-) ddhvan-' way' (Av. advan-). gravan­
• pressing stone # (0. Ir. bro, Welsh breuan); (-man-) u~mdn­
< breath, vapour', ojman- 'strength # (Lith. augma.), oman­
, favour J assistance', takmdn- 'a particular disease J, iitman­
'soul, self J, papmd1t- 'sin' (also adj. 'wicked '), paman­
· scabies J; .premdn-
love', bhuman- . abundance', rasman­
t 
• rein '. re~mdn- 'whirlwind', simdn- 'parting of the hair' J 
sviidmdn- ' sweetness'; (-iman-) jarimdn- ' old age '. mahimdn­
b O! ;;·HUA~ , greatness', hariman- I yellow colour " etc. The question natur­
ally arises as to why such words should have a form which is 
properly a characteristic of agent nouns. There is no apparent 
reason why words meaning 
liver' and 
udder' should be
I 
t 
neuter and words meaning' marrow' and ( spleen' masculine; 
nor is there any immediately apparent cause why verba] 
abstracts like oman- 'assistance' should differ in formation 
from the normal neuters in -man. 
In the case of a few of such words we may be dealing with 
disguised agent nouns. A good example of this kind is seen in 
Skt. k16man- Gk. 1TA€VP.WV ' lung " so named because it floats on 
water (' swimmer, floater' J-pleu-). Likewise we may interpret 
rasman- as I that which binds, binder' and re~mdn- as • destroyer'. 
When these have been explained away there still remain a 
number of pure action nouns or abstracts constructed after the 
manner of agent nouns. In these cases we have to do with a 
transfer of action nouns from the neuter to the masculine class. 
The following facts speak for this: (I) A number of words 
appear in both classes in Sanskrit, vdr~man- n., var~mdn- m. 
i height, top, surface " sviidman- n., svadmdn- m. { sweetness ., 
difman- nt. giving' (inf.), daman- m. < gift, liberality', Here
I 
the neuter may be taken to be the older formation as conform­
ing to old rule. In the case of dhdnvan- nt. and dhdnvan- masc. 
· desert J the latter is unknown to the earlier language. (2) The 
same alternation is found as between different languages: 
Skt. ojmdn-, Lith. augmuo: Lat. augmen nt. (with extension 
augmentum); Skt. syiiman- nt. 'thread, sJ!ture ': Gk. v!-'7}v, 
1 This word appears in the different languages with a varying arrangement 
of suffixes in each case: Skt. plfhdn~: (s)Pl-i-H-gh-ln-; Av. Spi1r1Zan-: 
sPJ~gh-'n-; O. si. slezena; s{P)ei~gh-en-fi,: Gk. 0"IT).,,1I: spl-in. cf. 1'7'17.\4YXll(w; 
spJ-n-gh-no-; Lat. lien: {sp)l-i-in or (sP)l-i-H-en), O.Ir. selg: s(p)el-fh-ii. 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
I35 
(3) The two adjectival forms pamar-d- and paman-d- ( affected  
with scabies' show that there was an old neuter rln stem which  
has given way to the masc. pamdn-, and asmari' gall stone' ~'C<?"
attests an old neut. *dsmar as opposed to the masculine n-stem ;/'  
which is always found elsewhere (Skt. dsman-, Lith. akmuo;  
Gk. aKfWJV ' anvil '). The same relationship exists between the  
Gk. adjective TJ/u:pos ( gentle, tame' and Skt. samand- ' quiet'.  
The general tendency of the neuter to decline, and with it  
the decline of the old antithesis marked by accent and gender  
between action noun and agent noun made it easy for a type of  
masculine (and feminine) action noun to develop. To a certain  
extent also personification is responsible for the gender.  
Terms like damdn-
liberality', omdn- ' favour (of the gods) ,  
i 
and bhumdn- • abundance J are regarded in the Vedic hymns as 
divine powers in their own right. Disease (takmdn-) and sin 
(dhvasmdn- J papmdn-) are likewise regarded as active evil 
powers. A t the same time there are some more n1echanical 
h:ansfers. 
The abstract formations in -imdn~ (prathimdn­
( width', varimdn (id " etc.) take the masculine gender as a 
class, and there is probably a rhythmical reason behind this 
because the formations in -man- preceded by long i remain 
neuter (vdriman- ' width " havfman-'I' call " etc.). 
Masculine action nouns of the same type are common in 
Greek: -rl.pp.wv' boundary' beside TEPP.U nt. ' id' (Lat. termen), 
;\! ~"L
Xf.l.p.wv < wint.er ' beside X€ip
nt., erJl.lwv ( heap 1 beside efJp.u nt. (d"<1 
(Skt. dhifman- nt. with different sense), AELP.dJV 'meadow " 
ALJ.L~V 
i harbour'. d.o~v (gland' (Lat. inguen nt.). In Latin 
there are both masculine (ordB, sermB) and feminine (margo, 
legio, cuPido) n-stems of this type. 
Owing to their early obsolescence the neuter r-stems have not 
undergone this transference with the exception of a single 
example. The defective stem u~ar:"~us!~) ( dav"ril ' is feminine 
(acc. pI. usrds) but was originally:8. "neuter r-stem (d. tt~arbudh 
§ 4)· 
§7. 
THEMATIC EXTENSION OF NEUTER STEMS  
IN rAND n  
The original :fi!.D.~f the thematic suffix was adjectival 
~!l~ i~ this case it was accented: kara1J-d' doing " etc. This 
conchision IS mdlcated by Hittite which possesses such stems 
(vtstaras 'herdsman , etc.) but no thematic neuters like the 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
other languages. When we compare the thematic type of 
neuter, e.g. Skt. sdnara-
l acql!isition.', kdrvara- ' act ' with the 
non-thematic stems in -ar, -var, etc., illustrated above, it is 
clear that the thematic suffix here has no grammatical function. 
This, coupled with the absence of such fonnations in Hittite is 
an argument for the secondary origin of this type; clearly as 
between Lat. unguen and Skt. aiiy'ana- the former is the older 
fonnation. It is not difficult to see how such forms arose. 
There were agent nouns of the type brahmdn- beside brdhman­
nt. but also from the earliest period another type of agent 
noun/adjective made by the addition of the accented thematic 
vowd (Gk. laTp6s beside 
laT~p, Hitt. vestaras beside Av. 
vastar-). It was then natural and easy to create a neuter 
thematic type balancing the thematic adjectival type (kdra1}a­
nt. after kara1Jd-, etc.). 
Thematic neuter stems corresponding to the various roo and 
n-stems listed above may appear either with the gUI)a of this 
suffix (kdrvara-
deed ') or with the reduced grade (dhartra­
4 
, support '). Both types occur from simple r-stems: (I) sanara­
< gain', tdsara-
shuttle', paiiy'ara- ' cage'; framework of the
t 
ribs (cf. pay'rd- adj. fixed, finn " Lat. pango, etc.), gambhdra­
4 
•depth', uddra- ' belly'. It will be noticed, here and below, 
that there is a certain fluctuation in the accent of the tri­
syllabic forms. Final accentuation, the characteristic of adjec­
tives, is avoided, but the accent may fallon the penultimate 
-syllt~,ble instead of on the root. (2) dgra- 'point', rdndhra­
thole', Svdbhra-
pit'. There are a few substantives with final 
4 
accentuation but these are adjectival in origin, e.g. krcchrd- nt. 
, difficulty'; but also krcchrd- adj. ' difficult " riprd- nt. ' defile­
ment J, but cf. Gk. At1Tap6s ' greasy', abhrd nt. ' cloud', d. Gk. 
ac/>p6s' foam' masc. (nt. dmbhas-
moisture' beside which
t 
/vf.it'? there must have been *dmbhar, d. Lat. i'fl1l.Jer) , k$ird- nt. 
t milk' of uncertain etymology but from its accent of adjectival 
origin. 
In sth-dla- ( place, ground • there is a thematic neuter forma­
tion involving the I-suffix. 
A few old neuters in -var have been extended by the thematic 
vowel: .kdrvara-
deed', replacing earlier *kdrvar, gdhvara-
t 
4 
t
hiding ,place', phdrvara-
sowing, sowed, field' (*(s)phar-: 0
Gk. 01TElpw), catvara-
I quadrangle, cross-roads' (from a neuter 
*catvar on which the adjectival catvO-ras four 1 is ba.')ed). 
{
t 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
137 
With the tar-suffix we have a neuter formation in -tara in 
srastara-
l bed of grass' (J-sra,,!,-s-) and a fairly abundant series 
of neuters in -tra: dtra-
< food' (: atrd- m. 
eater '), kdrtra-
I 
, spell', k$etr4- • field' (: Av. soiOra-
habitation '), vdstra­
l 
( garment', srotra- 'hearing" ear' (: AS. hkopor 
noise '), 
l 
satra-"'thread ' (d. the Lat. agent noun sutor). In addition to 
such words which can be explained quite simply out of primitive 
neuter tar-stems, there is another series of neuters with the 
suffix -tra less easy to explain since they have paradoxically 
accent on the final syllable. Such are antrd-, iintrd- (: Gk. 
€VTEpa pI.) , astra-, 
de~tra-
• direction " netrd-
(guidance',
C't>'jO!(jU<-. 
rii#ra- •rule, kingdom " sastra- t invocation " sattra- ' sacrificial 
session " siistra~ , command " stotrd- • praise, hymn of praise " 
sthiitra- • station', kotrd- • office ot kotar-, oblation', potrd­
, office of potar· " ne~trd- ' office or vessel of ni~tar- '. A few of 
these forms may be explained as originally adjectival, e.g. 
antrd- · what is inside', astra- 'what is thrown', but the 
majority clearly cannot be explained in this way. They must be 
explained from a different point of view. There is a series of 
agent nouns in -tar denoting holders of professions and priestly 
offices, e.g. sd,,!,-star-
reciter' kotar- • sacrificial priest I, potar­
t 
t purifier' and closely associated the ne~!ar- (prob. • sifter' J d. 
Gk. VE"K7JT~P A£Kf'1J~P Res.). Such nouns as a class have the 
nominal accent, i.e. on the root. The above neuters, hotrd­
, office of kotar-', etc., have become, as far as their meaning is 
concerned, secondary derivatives from these agent nouns, thus 
reversing the position originally prevailing between neuters 
and agent nouns. In ordinary taddhita derivation there is a 
special rule in Sanskrit whereby the taddhita derivative is 
accented on the final -a if the primary formation from which it 
is derived is accented on a previous syllable: nairhasta- •hand­
lessness " iitithyd- (hospitality', saumanasd- • friendliness' 
from nirhasta-, dtitki-, sumdnas- (and vice versa, plilitya!. from 
palitd- • grey-haired '). There are also examples from non­
vrddhied formations, e.g. sakhyd- (friendship' from sdkhi-. 
This is a new way of using accent in derivation which Sanskrit 
has developed, and it is this system which accounts for the final 
accentuation in Itotra-, etc. These formations are however not 
from the beginning taddhitas, but a subdivision of the old 
simple neuters in -tra which have been adapted for a special 
purpose and have had their accent altered accordingly_ 
K'\ ~'-.
~""yr

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
There are a fair number of neuters with the gradation -atTa, 
e.g. ndk$atra- 'lunar mansion' (nak$-
to reach '). pdtatra­
f 
• wing " vddhatra- ( weapon'; with penultimate accentuation, 
krntdtra- ' piece cut off I, d-dtra- ( gift '; with taddhita accent, 
k$atrd- ( sovereignty'; post-Vedic kalatra- ( wife '. 
,-7 P:; 
A thematic extension of an old neuter sar-stem appears 
in tamisra-
(darkness 1 
(cf. Av. tf/,{}ra-); 
with 1 pdtsala­
'way 'UI). 
In Hittite there is a neuter suffix in -an (not alternating with 
-ar) making primary verbal abstracts, benkan • death', etc. 
The same suffix appears in the Greek infinitives in -EV and 
sporadically elsewhere (Lat. unguen). In Sanskrit the thematic 
extension of this suffix has become exceedingly productive in 
the formation of neuter action nouns from verbal roots. They 
frequently stand in opposition to agent nouns having the same 
suffix but accented on the last syllable: kdra1Ja- nt. ' deed', 
kara1Jd- masc. 'doing '. Examples with radical accent are 
d1ijana- ' anointing, ointment " cdyana- ' heaping up " ddrsana­
• vision", pdtana- ' fall', bh6jana- ( enjoyment', sddana- ( seat', 
etc., etc.; from a non-verbal root, samana- ( assembly'. Such 
words sometimes appear with weak form of root, e.g. bhuvana­
'world', and, when the root-vowel is a, sometimes with vrddhi 
bhdjana-: ( vessel'. There is a tendency in the later language to 
associate these latter formations with the causative of the verb, 
e.g. tdratJa-
crossing', ttira1Ja-
getting (somebody) across,
I 
i 
delivering '. Penultimate accent is sometimes found: vrjdna-
I enclosure, settlement' (also vfjana-L krpa1Ja-
(misery' 
(: krpa1}d- • miserable '), da1J1sdna-
wondrous deed', ve~d1Ja-
I 
( service', dh-dna- (wealth " r-a1Ja- (battle 1 (d. Av. armu­
• id '.). 
Similar neuter formations are found occasionally from the 
compound n-stenlS: uayuna-
delimitation, appointed time'
I 
(; velli 'limit, time, etc.'), karutJa- < deed t; drdvi1Ja-
I property', 
/~~w v4jina- I race, contest'; vitana- (wage' (J vi), r-dtna- ' treasure' 
(ra- ; to bestow') ; mdtasna-
I lung '. 
The neuter suffix men/mn could be extended by the suffix -t 
(Gk. (]WP.O:TO~ gen. sg'J etc., d. the Hittite infinitive forms in 
-manzi, -wanzi). This complex could also receive the thematic 
extension, Lat~ augmentum, striimentum, etc. There is one such 
example in Sanskrit, sromata- nt. fame' (-mat-<*-mt,tt-), cf.
f 
OHG hliumunt,Germ. Leumund. 

139 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
§8. 
MASCULINE FORMATIONS OF THE TYPE 
brahman-FRoM r-
AND n-STEMS 
The essential feature of this type is the suffixal accent as 
. opposed to the radical accent of the neuters, and vrddhi in the 
nominative singular. There is some evidence that originally 
they were themselves capable of being used as adjectives with­
out any change of form. Examples of this are found in many 
languages, e.g. Gk. I-U1.I(UP 'blessed', fuipTVp 
witness', Lat.
t 
iiber in the sense of ' rich', Hitt. kurur meaning both' enmity' 
and inimical, enemy'. In Sanskrit there are two formations 
t 
which may be.compared with Gk. ,.uifYTVP, although they have 
accent on the suffix, namely aptur- ' active in holy works' and 
yatttUr- ' controller '0 With the suffix -u~ we have forms like 
ndhu~-
t neighbour' and mdnu$- · man ' which are not in any 
way distinguished from the corresponding neuter types. Such 
formations are, however, very much iff the minority, because 
Indo-European early developed this method of indicating the 
adjectival function of a stem by switching the accent. 
In some cases in Sanskrit the two types exist side by side, 
notably in the case of the suffixes -man- and -as-, but more 
often the old system has broken down. This is mainly due to 
the elimination of the old neuter types, which has left important 
dasses of masculine agent nouns standing isolated. In Sanskrit 
there is an abundant class of agent nouns in -tdr, kartdr-
t doer', 
etc. The nature of this formation only became clear with the 
discovery in Hittite of an archaic class of neuters in -tar, \Ve 
have seen above that this, like similar formations, has left many 
traces in other languages and therefore must at one time have 
been widely prevalent. This means that the two types *kdrtar 
nt. ' doing, action' and kartdr- masc. {doer, agent' must at 
one time have existed side by side, and this being so it becomes 
immediately clear that the relationship of the two types is 
exactly the same as that between brdhman- and brahmdn- Skt. 
kartdr ' doer' is one connected with *kdrtar (doing 1 and 
sthiUar- · one who stands' is similarly related to that sthlitar nt. 
which, as we have seen, is preserved in a somewhat disguised 
form in one passage of the f!.gveda. 
Since this is one of the commonest formations in Sanskrit the 
citation of further examples may be dispensed with. A few 
words are necessary about the accent. Suffixal accent is proper 

THE FORM.ATION OF NOUNS 
to this type and occurs most frequently in Sanskrit, but there is 
also a type with retracted accent associated with a curious 
syntactic distinction: datii vdsiinam but diita vasunt. It has 
been noticed above that specialist words with this suffix (h6tar-, 
etc.) have also as a ntle accent on the root. In Greek also there 
are two sets of forms, with suffixal accent, SOnJp 'giver'. 
fJaT'Tjp , goer' I 8En1p '-establisher', and with radical accent~ 
8cln-wp , giver', etc. The first of these preserves the most ancient 
form, with reduction of the root consequent on the accentuation 
of the suffix. In Sanskrit the suffixal accent is preserved to a 
large extent, but apart from very few exceptions, e.g. dr1Jthitdr­
, one who makes firm " gU1J.a is universal in the agent nouns. 
Its maintenance or reintroduction in spite of the basic law of 
apophony may be ascribed to the influence of the related 
neuters. 
This suffix is prominent in the formation of nouns of family 
relationship: pitdr- (father' (cf. Lat. pater, etc.), duhitdr­
'daughter • (d. Gk. 8vya:r'lp, etc.), matdr- ' mother' (Gk. p.~rqpp 
Dor. p.a.r"p, OHG muoter, etc.); bhriitar- 'brother' (Gk. 
cppJ,TWP, cppa.rqp, cppii~p • member of a pbratry " Goth. bro/Jar, 
OHG bruoder, etc.), jiimatar- ( son-in-law' (Av. zamatar-, Alb. 
Sender): yiitar-
wife of husband's brother' (Gk. £lvaT€p€s, Lat.
I 
ianitrices -plur., O. S1. F:try, Lith. jente); ndptar- • grandson' 
(secondary substitute for ndpat=Lat. nepos). Of these it is 
probable that the word for 
father' is an old agent noun
I 
(p-i-tdr-
protector' from pa-(y)- • to protect '), but in the
I 
majority of cases the etymology is too obscure for it to be pos­
sible to say much with certainty. Its gradation is of the old 
type (d. Gk. 8o-nJp, etc.) as is to be expected in such a word. 
Only duhitdr- agrees with pitdr- in accent and apophony; the 
rest have both accent and gU1J.a of root with the exception of 
matdr-, and even here Greek has radical accent, which may 
easily be original in spite of the agreement betwe~I1 Sanskrit 
and Germanic. I t is not unlikely that these contain some old 
neuters (*miiter, etc.: Lat. materies would be an extension of 
such a neuter) which were adapted when the gender-system 
developed. There is also the possibility of the analogical exten­
sion of the suffix. This has certainly happened in Skt. ndptar­
and probably in the unusually formedjiimatar- (cf. Gk. yap.f3po, 
son-in-law' differently formed. 
The defective noun star- (instr. pI. stfbhis), tdr- (nom. pI. 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
141 
ttiras) = Gk. aarrlP is formed with this masculine suffix; the 
word has become so red~ced that in the latter form only the 
suffix is left. 
The suffix -tar is the- only one of the r-suffixes that has be­
come prolific in the formation of agent nouns. But both the 
simple r-suffix and the various compound suffix~s which have 
been enumerated were capable of being used in this way and a 
small number of examples have survived. 
An example with the simple r-suffix is seen in ndr-
man,
I 
warrior' (Gk. a.vr]p, Umbrian ner-, etc.),- A corresponding 
neuter *dner is deduced from certain derivatives (Gk. ~JIOpl'f}, 
'':In]vwp, etc.). 
The suffix -var is so used in catvdras masc. pI. · four '. The 
corresponding neuter *cdtvar 'square' is not preserved, but 
there is a thematic extension of it in catvara- nt. ' quadrangle, 
cross-roads '. Another example is devdr- ( husband's brother', 
cf. Gk. oii~p (for oa.,F~p). Lat. levir, etc. There is no example of 
'Such a formation with the mar-suffix, but it will be noted below 
that karmdra- ( smith' implies an earlier karmd(r). 
The suffix -sar appears in this class in the word svasar­
·4 sister J (sva- lone's own ') with retracted accent, and in the 
numerals ti!irds, cdtasras ( three, four I (fern.). Here the accusa­
tive form has come to be used for the nominative; the old 
nominatives *tisores, kwetesor-es are represented in Celtic (0. Ir. 
teoir, cetheoir). Lat. uxor • wife' is a noun of this class, being 
based on an r-extension of. the s-stem which appears in Skt. 
okas- nt. ' home '. There seems to have been a tendency for this 
suffix, when used adjectivally, to be specialised in the formation 
of feminine nouns, and with the above we may compare the 
thematic derivative in Hittite iSbassaras ' lady' -(islJal- ' lord '). 
Similarly agent nouns and adjectives are formed with the 
accented n-suffixes, related in the' same way to the neuter 
n-stems: 
tdk~an- 'carpenter' (: Hitt. taksan nt. 
joining '), 
l 
f·d;jan- ( king' (: rajdni nt. under the guidance of " alternating
I 
¥-stem in Av. riizar- nt.), pratidtvan- • opponent at play', 
vibhvan- t vibhvan-
powerful '. There are a few old masculines 
I 
()f this formation no longer referable to verbal roots, yuvan­
I young man' (d. Lat. iuvenis, etc.; yo-~-it ' young woman, 
woman '), svdn-
dog' (Gk. KVWV), Examples from other lan­
l 
guages are Av. spasan- 'scout, spy I, vindan- 'one who ac­
quires " Gk. 7T£Ve~V 'spy', aprJ'ywv 'helper I, Lat. edo 'one 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
given to eating', etc. In addition this formation has provided 
in Greek the nom. sg. of active participles of the thematic type 
(cPlpwv, AL7TcfJv, alternating with -OVT- in other cases, as opposed 
to 8,8ovs, etc.) and in Germanic it forms the basis of an adjec­
tival declension. The accent is generally retracted in Sanskrit. 
It has already been remarked that this is usual in the case of 
words of adjectival origin which have become completely 
nominalised (e.g. rdjan-). 
The accent is likewise retracted in the adjectival formations 
in -van, but here the weak grade of the root shows that this is 
not original 
Examples are fkvan-
'worshipping, praising' 
(: Hitt. arku/limr nt. ' prayer '), druhvan- ' injurious' I yudhvan­
, fighting " st'tbhvan- ' beautiful', stubhvan- ' praising J, patvan­
, flying' (: nt. pdtvan- 'flight '), mddvan- 'exhilarating, ex­
hilarated " jdsvan- 'famished'. Suffixal accentuation appears 
only in mu~ivdn-;- , thief'. Roots ending in i, u, , take the addi­
tional suffix t before this suffix: kftvan- 'active', sutvan­
· pressing', sftvan- ' moving'. That these are lJased on an old 
set of neuters with alternating rln stem is shown by the fem­
inine. This is based on the r-stem of the neuters, e.g. pivari fern. 
, fat' is derived directly from the neuter stem which appears in 
Greek as 71 Lap. whereas the masculines are derived from the 
associated n-stem. 
Exactly the same distinction between 
masculine and feminine is found in Greek: 7Ttwv masc., 7TL~fpa 
fern. ' fat'. Similar feminine formations in Sanskrit are :;djvari 
t pious', sarvari {night', °sivari 'lying', °yavari 'going', 
°ddvari 'giving' (e.g. Godavari' cow-giving', name of the 
river). The suffix forms both primary derivatives, as above, 
and secondary derivatives. 
Such are rtiivan- 'righteous', 
satyiivan- ' truthful', maghdvan- 'bountiful', and svadhiivan­
, powerful '. A fair proportion of the secondary formations re­
tain the adjectival accent: amativan- 'indigent " arativan­
, hostile', !ttavan-
indebted '. sru~tivdn-
obedient '. 
Their
I 
t 
feminine is likewise in -vari (rtiivari, etc.), indicating that there 
existed at one time also secondary neuter formations in varin 
of the type *,tavar ' righteousness'. 
In the case of the suffix -man a number of pairs are found in 
the Vedic language with varying accent and meaning illustrat­
ing the general principle of noun-formation in Indo-European: 
brdhman-: 
brahmdn-; 
sddman-
sitting, seat': 
sadman­
t 
• sitter '; dhdrman-' ( ordinance ': 
dharman-
• ordainer ' ; 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
143 
daman- ' gift' : damdn-' giver'. Other masculine agent nouns 
of this type are darmdn~ , breaker " bhujmdn- < fertile J, soman­
I soma-presser', There is one secondary formation in -mdn, 
aryamdn- ' friendly, allied '. In Avestan there is the same anti­
thesis between neuter and masculine man-stems in cinman- nt. 
I care r: linman- masc. {caring for'; zaeman- nt. · wakeful­
ness': zaeman- rnase, ' wakeful '. Formations of this masculine 
type in Greek are 'tSj.LWV 
< one who knows', (: 'lcp,€v-a, inf.) J 
TA~fWJV ' enduring', ~y€p,dJv < leader', etc. ; in Latin an alimones 
nom. pI. (>alhf1,onia) is quoted. 
Masculines with the suffix -san- are very few: Pu~dn-, name 
of a god (cf. pii~ar'ya- above, § 5). vf~a1J- 'male', uk~d1J- ' ox ' 
(Eng!. ox, oxen, Welsh ych, pI. ychen, Toch. okso). The last two 
involve extended roots with incorporated s-suffix (vak~-, vr~-) 
and from that point of view may be classed as an-stems. A 
feminine san-stem appears in y6~an- · woman '. 
Masculine ian-stems are not found in Sanskrit, but appear 
occasionally in other languages: Av,, maratan-
· mortal " 
aiwixsaetan- 'dweller, occupier', Gk. T/.KTWV, yEtTWV • neigh­
bour '. 
The compound suffix -in- is one of the most productive 
adjectival suffixes in the language. It may appear in primary 
formations, arctn- ' shining', but it is used much more fre­
quently in secondary formations with a possessive sense, asvin­
{ possessing horses " dhanin- • wealthy', pakfin-' winged " etc., 
etc. Such adjectives may be formed in any number from stems 
in -a and -ii, in which case the final vowel of the stem is replaced 
by -in-, and less frequently from other stems, e.g, sVa1-tin- ' keep­
ing dogs '. savasin- 'strong'. The suffix has invariably the 
accent, which is proper to these adjectival types, but it is in­
variably in the weak grade, which cannot be original, and this 
is associated with the formation of a new analogical form of 
nom. sg. in t. Originally there must have been vrddhi. in the 
nom. sg. and vrddhied forms of this formation are found in 
other languages (Gk. 
ovpavtwv~s, etc} In Latin there are 
some feminine action nouns which use the same formation (just 
as bhuman- ' abundance', etc., have taken on the form proper 
to action nouns, see above, § 6), legio, legionis, etc. These have 
likewise generalised the strong form. The original system with 
alternation of strong form in nom. sg. and weak form in gen. sg'J 
etc.• is preserved in Oscan which uses a weak form of the stem 

144 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
in the oblique cases: dat. sg. leginei. etc. The use of this suffix . 
in a specifically possessive sense is found also in Iranian, e.g. 
Av. parJnin-
I having wings " but examples are comparatively 
few. 
A fair number of adjectives are formed with the accented 
suffix -vin: sragvtn-' wearing a garland " tapasvin- ' heated', 
tejasvin- ' brilliant', etc. This complicated suffix which is un­
known outside Indo-Aryan, seems to be a contamination of the 
suffixes -van- and -in-, Beside it there is a rarer suffix -min (like 
-mant beside -vant), e.g. viigmin- ' eloquent " gomin-
I possessing 
cows " svamin- ( owner, master' (sva- ' one's own '). 
§ 9. 
ADJECTIVAL FORMATIONS IN -nt-
It has been noted above that -n as a neuter suffix could in 
Indo-European take the extension -to This appears regularly in 
Greek (vowp, voaToS' etc.). and elsewhere there are traces of it, 
though not many (Skt. vdrimat-, etc.). The -t could also be 
added to the adjectival n-suffix, and the compound suffix so 
produced has proved more productive than the neuter -nt-. In 
Sanskrit it appears in the suffixes -ant, -vant and -mant, all of 
which are highly productive. 
The suffix -ant- appears in a small number of adjectives, 
namely brhant- (great', mahant- 'great' i rhant- 'small', 
Pf~ant- ' speckled' and rusant- ' bright', to which may be added 
the pronominal adjectives iyant- {so much' and kiyant- ' how 
much'. The first three have the proper adjectival accent, and 
in Pf~ant-, rusant- the apophony shows that the radical accent 
is unoriginal. Similar adjectives in Iranian are seen in bJrazant­
, high' and mazant- ' big '. These are related to neuters in the 
usual way (Av. baraza1t- ' height', mazan- ' greatness ') but in 
this case the adjectival forms have received the t extension 
whereas the neuters have not. 
) 
These adjectives are sometimes referred to as being ~parti­
cipial origin. This is obviously not so, since the specialisation 
of this suffix in participial use, though ancient, is nevertheless 
a secondary development. The common usage of the suffix in 
active participles had not been fixed at the time of the separa­
tion of Hittite, because there the participles in -ant have a 
passive sense as opposed to the active sense which prevails in 
the rest of Indo-European: kunant-' slain i as opposed to Skt. 
ghnant- (slaying'. Both are specialisations out of a more 
Ii 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
145 
general sense / one connected with slaying', Such a general 
meaning is all that is inherent to begin with in any adjectival 
formation, and it is by ad,aptation that the special functions of 
the various suffixes arise. 
j The non-thematic participles and those from thematic verbs 
which are accentuated on the suffix keep the suffixal accent: 
addnt- ' eating', tuddnt- ' pushing', etc. Elsewhere it conforms 
to the regular accentuation of the verbal stem: bhdrant-
bear­
t 
ing ',jighiitttsant- · desiring to slay', etc. This accent is shifted 
to the suffix in the weakest cases, an ancient feature which has 
often been levelled out, and the same applies to the suffixally 
accented adjectives: gen. sg. adatds, brhatds. In the nom. sg. 
the stems in -ant differ from the adjectival types in simple -n in 
t~lat the case is denoted by the termination s and not by vrddhi. 
This is so also in Hittite and it seems that from the earliest 
period of Indo-European that can be reached the nom. sg. was 
normally expressed in this way in the case of stems ending in 
occlusives. 
The suffix -vant occurs in a number of primary formations 
which illustrate its origin from the compounding of simpler 
suffixes. Primary formations are: vivasvant- also vivdsvant­
, brilliant' (: simple n-stem in vivasvan- nt. ' brilliance' and in 
the Av. derivative Vivayhana-), sasvant- 'numerous, all ' (cf. 
sasiyas- 'more numerous' and sasaya- ' abundant '), drvant­
• swift, steed • (: drvan- ( id '), fkvant- 'hymning, worshipping' 
(: fkvan- • id '), satvdnt- · name of a tribe of warriors • (: sdtvan­
, warrior '). yahvant 'young, younge$t' (: yahu- 'id '), vivak.. 
vant- · eloquent'. The existence of pairs like fkvan-: fkvant; 
drvan-: arvdnt illustrates the fact that this suffix is a t-exten­
sion of a simpler van-stem. In yahu : yahvatit the analysis goes 
further and a simple u-stem is left. In A vestan we find dragvant­
, wicked', as opposed to Skt. druhvan-
id ., and an interesting
t 
treble 
~rnu-, ~rnvan-, arnvant- ( straight' which shows 
how the compound suffix is built up step by step. Av. b~zvant­
I abundant' bears the same relation to Skt. bahu-, as Skt. 
yahvdnt- to yahu-. 
Such pairs are found also in Hittite: 
dassu-': dassuwant-' strong, healthy'. 
It is as a secondary suffix that -v ant is most irequently used 
in Sanskrit: dsvavant-
possessing horses', kesavant.. / hairy',
I 
putrdvant ( having a son' and so on in unlimited number. The 
usage also occurs widely in Iranian, Av. zastavant-
having
I 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
hands t, amavant- ' strong 't etc., and, outside Indo-Iranian, in 
Greek: Xaplf.ls, xapln'7a (for a FHS, °Fevra) 'having grace, 
graceful " lX8v6f.IS ' abounding in fish " etc. 
In the lJg'Veda there are occasional examples of non-adjectival 
formations in -vant; for instance ast'avant- sometimes appear£. 
not as an adjective, but as an abstract-collective noun, e.g. 
I. 83. I, asviivati prathamo g6~u gacchati ' he goes first in (the 
possession of) horses and cows', where the singular collective 
corresponds to the plural g6~u. Such traces are valuable in that 
there was originally an old class of neuters in -vant related to 
the adjectives in -vant according to the usual principle. Second­
ary formations with the neuter suffixes are known in Hittite 
(antulfsatar ( mankind " from antubsas, ' man " etc.). and such 
are to be ascribed to Indo-European. We may construct on 
these lines a neuter *asvavar (collectivity of horses) property in 
horses> alternating in the way usual in the case of neuters with 
*dsvavan-} or with extension dsvavant-, on the basis of which 
*asvavdnt ' possessor of horses would be derived in the usual 
way. Another piece of evidence is got by comparing Av. 
karsivant- ' cultivator> with Skt. k!~ivald- and hiir~iva1Ja- ' id '. 
The aJternation of suffix between the last two words can only 
be explained by the existence of an old alternating neuter 
*kdr~ivarJn, and from this Av. karsivant- has been derived in 
the same way as asvavant-. 
According to the usual system one would expect the original 
accent of the adjectives in -vant to have been on the suffix. In 
the secondary formations in Sanskrit this accentuation appears 
in nrvdnt-
manly', padvdnt- 'having feet' and nasvdnt­
I 
, having a nose' 1 where the primitive stems are monosyllabic, 
and in some cases where the primitive stem is accented on the 
suffix (but never when this stem ends in -a or -a), agnivdnt­
t having a fire', dsanvdni- ' having a mouth', etc. The primary 
formations have the accent only in a minority of cases. The 
same tendency to throw back the accent was observed in the 
adjectives in -van. 
The suffix -mant appears in very few primary derivatives, 
namely virukmant- ' shining " dyumdnt- ' bright' (d. dyumnd 
nt. 
brightness' 1 
su~umdnt- 'kind' (d. su~umnd- nt. 'kind.
I 
ness '), dasmant- ' glorious t (only daS11tdt nt. sg. used adverbi­
ally). The relation of asumant- ' swift' (asumdt adv.) to asu­
recalls that of yahvant- to yahu-, etc. Elsewhere it is used as a 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
147 
secondary suffix in exactly the same sense as -vant. Occasion­
ally the two suffixes are used after the same word, e.g. agnimant­
beside agnivant-, but usually one only of the two suffixes is 
used in connection with each word. There are no absolute 
rules to say when each suffix will be used, except that -mant 
is regularly employed after stems in -u, pasumant- ' possess­
ing cattle', etc. (frequently also to avoid repetition of v, 
yavamant- 'rich in barley -, etc.). This rule is interesting 
because much the same kind of rule is found in Hittite 
both in the case of suffixes related to this (Inf. arnummar to
i 
bring', Supine waynumanzi ' to tum (trans.) , as opposed to 
esuwar, asuwanzi from es-
to be " etc,); and in the 1st person 
i 
plur. of the verb (arnummeni ' we bring' as opposed to epweni 
, we hold', etc.). The accent of the adjectives in -mant follows 
the same rules that apply to the formations in -vant. 
§ 10. 
THEMATIC ADJECTIVAL FORMATIONS FROM 
r-
AND n-
STEMS 
There was an alternative way in Indo-European of making 
adjectives and agent nouns from the primitive neuter forma­
tions, and it was equally commonly used. This was the addition 
of the accented thematic vowel. These derivatives have the 
same meaning as those just described, and the two types of 
formation often exist side by side, e.g. Skt. atra- 'eater' : 
attdr- 'id'; Hitt. vestaras ' herdsman': A v. viis tar- 'id'; 
Gk. la-rpos, 
lii-r~p 
physician'; Gk. {1J-rpos 'executioner' :
i 
Skt. yatar- ' avenger, punisher' (d. yatana ' punishment, tor­
ment' with -n- indicating an old alternating neuter). The 
accent is normally on the suffix, but it is occasionally transferred 
to the radical syllable: dd1J1-#ra- i fang'. Thetype has prospered, 
and with the dying out of the bulk of the old neuter types, the 
suffixes -ra, etc., have come to have the appearance of primary 
suffixes. Formations of this kind are made on the basis both of 
the simple neuter suffixes -(a)r, -(a)n and of the compound 
suffixes. 
(i) Examples of formations in -ra are: ugrd-
i powerful' 
(: Avo aogar- ' strength '), usrd- 'matutinal, shining like dawn ' 
(vasarO, u§ar- ' dawn '), udrd- ' water-animal, otter' (Gk. vowp, 
etc.), a-vadhrd- 'not injuring' (vddhar 'smiting; weapon '), 
k§udrd-
' small " 
k~ipra- 'swift', vakra- 'crooked', hasrd­
, laughing " etc. An old neuter alternating rjn stem is often 

I 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
indicated by the existence of derivatives from the n-sten1 side 
by side with these formations in -ra, e.g. beside vipra- · inspired' 
(with retracted accent), vipanyJ, etc. '; d. also k~iprd- ' quick' : 
~epnu-, k~iPat)u-; grdhra-' greedy' : grdhnu- ' id '; dhvasrd­
• dusty': dhvasani- (sprinkler (a cloud) '; svitrd-' white J 
: 
svetana • dawn ',etc. The accent is thrown back in only a 
minority of cases and these are mainly substantivised adjec­
tives: sdra- (strong man, hero' (Gk. aKvpo> 'powerless '), 
ajra- ' field' ( • .raj-; original accent in Gk. aypd's; Gk. ay£[pw 
gather, collect " is formed from a primary neuter *ager, cf. the 
type ratharydti), vdjra- ' club, thunderbolt' (' smasher, crusher', 
d. Gk. ayvvJ.Lt) vapra- ( mound, earthwork' (Av. vafra- ( snow'), 
tumra-
humped', of the Indian bull (cf, Lat. tumeo, tumor, 
I 
etc.). 
In this, the oldest type, the thematic vowel preceding the r is 
eliminated on account of the following accent. There are also 
a smaller number of adjectives in which the -d is added without 
any such reduction: dravard- 'running', patard- 'flying', 
nyocara- ' suitable, agreeable " dvara- ' lower' (: avdr), upara­
, nearer'; with vrddhi, viinara- ' monkey' (vanarO , forest '), 
viisard- ' matutinal' (vasarO early morning '). The same type
l 
with full vowel before the r appears also in other languages, 
Av. aBara- (lower', urvisara- 'fugitive' (urvaes-), Gk. EA£v­
(}f:POS ' free', etc. Such forms must have originated at a time 
when the accent had ceased to have the effect of reducing un­
accented syllables. 
A parallel series in -16 was formed in Indo-European. In the 
Vedic language this suffix would also appear 3.:5 -rd. Instances 
of -ld occur in Sanskrit, e.g. suk1d- 'white J (also sukrd-), 
sthu1d- ' thick' (also sthurd-) , gOPiild- ' cowherd " but it is never 
possible to be sure about the origin of 1in Sanskrit. 
(ii) From the base -varjur: With strong form of suffix, 
bhiisvard- ' brilliant' (*bhiisvar nt. 'brilliance '), iSvard- ' lord', 
siikvara- 'strong', adhvard- · sacrifice' (of adjectival origin 
from its accent; d. adhvdn-
way'), sthiivara- ' stable' (also
l 
sthiivand- showing old alternating neuter), nasvara- . perish­
able', vyadvard-' a gnawing animal' (: Gk. £t8ap nt.), ni~advard­
, mud'; with t-suffix inserted, itvard- ' going I, srtvara- ' id " 
jitvara 'victorious'. The variant -vala appears in vidvald 
, clever' (d. Gk. £l8vMs ' id '), palvald- ' pond' (d. Lat. palus 
• marsh '), and in a number of secondary formations. kr~ivala­

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
149 
, cultivator' (: k4r~ivatza-
C id '), urjasvala- ' strong " pari~ad­
vala- ' having a pa.ri.;;ad, king " iisutiviila-
C priest who presses 
soma'. A vrddhied formation is seen in bhiirvard- t impetuous I 
(cf. bhurvdtzi- tid.' and Lat. fervor, etc.). These formations often 
exist side by side with adjectives in -van: iSvard-
t lord': Av. 
isvan- ; itvard- t going'; °itvan-; sthiivard- ( standing, stable', 
sasthdvan- ' standing together'; pivara- ' fat ': pivan-
id ':
I 
This relationship is based on old alternating neuters, *iSvarfn 
, authority' J etc. 
The weak form of the suffix appears in bhiisurd- ' shining 1 I 
chidurd- ' tearing', bhangurd- ' breaking', bhidurd- ' splitting', 
vidurd- ' wise " medurd- ' fat', ankura-
bud, shoot; swelling
t 
tumour' (: Gk. oYKUAOS ' swollen, proud '), k~urd- 'razor' (Gk. 
~vpov nt., d. O. 51. cesati ' to comb " etc.). In the nominalised 
svdsura- the accent is retracted. as commonly; the accent of 
Gk. €K.VpOs is more original. Beside patftsurd- 'dusty', and 
madhura- . sweet' forms with 1 appear, Pii1Jtsula-, madhuld-, 
without it being possible to say which is original. 
Beside 
smasrula- (bearded' there is smasru1Jd-. The weak form of 
the suffix appears as -vr- in tivra- ' intense'. 
(iii) A parallel suffix -ird appears in rudhira-' red' (as opposed 
to simple -ra- suffi:x in Gk. €pvOpoS, etc.), badhird- 'deaf' 
(j-ba(n)dh- ' to bind, obstruct '), madird- ' intoxicating I, i$ird­
, vigorous' (: Gk. t€POS from simple r-:-stem) , sithira- ' loose " 
rathira- ' charioteer', medhira- ' wise' (with retracted accent), Ii';1Jl' 
sth-ira- ' firm', sph-ird- • fat I, rucira
N 
bright '; more rarely 
• 
-ila. trdild- 'porous' t s'ltild • flowing I, nt. 
water' beside
t 
sarira-, sithild- t loose' beside sithira-; with guJ)a of suffix (like 
-vara-, vald) samu~yald-
t cohabiting' (sam +vas-). 
(iv) From the neuter suffix -mar there are a few such de­
rivatives: admara-' gluttonous' (implying *admar nt. 'eat­
ing '), ghasmard' id " srmard- ' a swift moving animal' (d. Gk. 
c,,~4 
op/Lalvw, denom. vb. from n-stem), pamara- ( scabby; miser­
able' (also pamana- from n-stem). asmard- • stony' (d. asmdn 
above, § 6); with weak form of suffix dhumra- ' grey'; with I 
pak~mald- ' having (long) eyelashes I (Pdk~man- nt. ' eyelash '), 
sle~mald- alternating with sle~ma1Ja- • afflicted with phlegm' 
(sle~mdn- masc. ' phlegm '), bhimala-
t fearful J. 
It was observed in dealing with the simple r-neuters that they 
might either appear with gUJ.la (tidhar) or by the weak form of 
the suffix followed by the extension t (ydkrt). Forms of the 

150 
THE FORMATION OF NOUN S 
latter type can be deduced from certain derivatives of mar­
stems: karma!ha-
workman' from *karmrthd- (*karmrt(h)­
t 
, work 1+ d; aspiration as in kdPrth-), likewise narmatha­
I 
t 
t
jester' and harmuta tortoise' (*harmrt-d-
an animal pos­
sessing a *harmrt, i.e. ' roof or shell', d. harmyd t roof '). 
(v) A few such adjectives are formed from sar-stems:
sapsard- ' attending on ' (J-sap-), matsard- ' exhilarating; ex­
hilarated ' (d.- mandasand- from the c-Qrresponding san-stem),
°rk~ard-
t hurting; thorn' (related to arsasand- ' injuring' in
the same way as matsard- to mandasaud-), samvatsard- ' year',
dhusara-
grey', krsara- 'a confection of sesamum, rice,
t 
etc.', krcchrd- 'painful, difficult' (if for *krpsrd-) , usrd- •bull '
(for *ursrd-, i.e. *vrsrd-, -sr- alternating with the san of
vf~an-). 
(vi) Based on the old neuters in ~tar there-are adjectival fonn­
ations in -tard and -trd. Bya secondary development the suffix
-tara has come to be specialised in the formation of comparatives,
but there are a few old formations where this is not so, and where
the original, more general function of the suffix is. apparent. 
For instance asvatard- ' mule' is an animal which partakes of
the nature of a horse (*asvatar nt.) and in the same way Iranian
kapautara- ' pigeon ' (Mod. Pers. kabutar) is a bird characterised
by bluish-grey colour (*kapautar nL). 
In karotard 'filter,
sieve' there is a vrddhied formation based on neuter action 
noun *karotar 'sifting'. This root most commonly appears
with i- extension (Gk. Kptvw, etc., Ir. criathar ' sieve ') but a u­
extension, as here, is found in Goth. and-hruskan ' a~aKptvav '. 
Other examples of this type are vatsatard-
yearling calf', and
t 
with retracted accent sdnutara- ' clandestine' (: sanutdr adv.) 
and divatara-
diurnal'. The adjective dntara- ' interior' is
t 
derived from antdr ' inside (Lat. inter, etc.) and this in its tum 
from IE en ' in ' + the neuter suffix -tel'. In the same way Skt. 
pratard- (only in the adv. pratardm), Av. fratara- · being in the 
front', Gk. 1TPOT€POC; , former' are derived from pro- through an 
intermediate *proter ' the front' (adv. *proter). In this way 
there arises a class of adjectives based on prepositions, such as 
Skt. avatard-
lower' (only in the adv. avatardm) , uitara­
t 
, upper " Av. nistara-
being outside " Gk. 1TPOT€POC; , former " 
t 
v1TlpTfPOS 'higher', etc. These prepositional formations have 
a compald.tive meaning (,higher, lower', etc.) but this does not 
come from the suffix but from the nature of the base to which it 
II 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
151 
is attached. On the basis of these formations, and from similar 
cases like Lat. dexter, Gk. D€,'TfPOS ' right, being on the right' 
there was evolved for this suffix a special comparative meaning, 
with which it is added as a secondary suffix to adjectives in Indo­
Iranian and Greek (rarely elsewhere; O. lr. librither, compo of 
lebor ' long '): amdtara- ' rawer ., carufara- ' dearer', tavastara­
r stronger J, etc. : Gk. Wp..OTEPOS ' rawer', KOVCPOT£pOS' lighter', 
etc. The fact that it is not widespread in Indo-European shows 
that this use of the suffix is comparatively late. 
There are a few adjectives and nouns of ,adjectival origin in 
-lra: alra- ' eater' (for at-Ird- from ad.. ), vrtra- (enemy; n. of a 
demon', m£trd-
I friend; n. of a god', putrd- r son' (ct. Oscan puk­
lum' puerum', Paelignianpuclois, with ..kl-<-tl-; Lat.puerwith 
simpler roo suffix) ; with retracted accent, dd1J't#ra- « fang', larutra­
r victorious', vibhrtra- ' who is carried about (Agni) " jaha/ra­
. calling aloud', u~?ra- 'draught-animal, camel' (apparently i;/lf\ 
from vah- with irregular sandhi, cf. Av. vastar- (drought 
animal' vo4har-);. with vrddhi, jaitra- 'victorious'; with 
gradation -alra, amalra- 'violent', ydjatra- 'worthy of wor­
ship '. 
(vii) With -nd- there are a number of nouns and adjectives, 
.j
e.g. ste1td- ' thief', yajiid- ' sacrifice' (Gk. ayvos ' holy, pure '), 
gh!1Jd- (heat J, nagnti- 'naked', u~1Jd- 'hot'; with radical 
accent svitna- ' white '. The most common use of the suffix is to 
make participles from certa'in verbal roots (about seventy) : 
bhinnd-
'broken', bhugnd- 'bent', purttd 'full'. mliind­
( withered " etc. 
With the gradation -and there are formed a certain number of 
agent nouns: karat/,a-' active " tvara1Ja ' hastening', krosand­
, shouting', vacanti-
'speaking', svapana-
'sleeping', etc. 
-of­
These are distinguished by their accent in the usual way from 
the corresponding class of neuter action nouns: cf. kdra1;za­
, deed', vticana- ( word'. In Germanic and Slavonic this forma­
tion makes passive participles (0. S1. nesenu ' carried " Goth. 
fulgins ' hidden '). The contrast in accent between kdra1Ja- nt. 
and kara1Jd- masc. is also found in Germanic, where the infini­
tive is the equivalent of this neuter type: Goth. jilhan ' to 
hide " Julgin.s · hidden '. 
Though the old type of accentuation is preserved frequently in 
these adjectives (as above), the system was breaking down, and 
radically accented forms occur, particularly from verbs of the 

I 
152 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
first class with fixed radical accent: jdvana- • hastening' 
(jdvati), dy6tana- ' shining' (dy6tate), etc. 
(viii) Corresponding to -vard and -urd thematic adjectival 
j 
stems are made on the basis of the neuter van- suffix, with two 
gradations, -vana and -una. (a) vagvand- ' talkative', susukvand­
( shining " satvand- ' warrior '; from prepositional bases pra­
va~td- ' sloping forward, inclined'. udvana- ' elevated'. (b) mi­
thund-
'paired' (Av. miOwara-
from alternating r-stem), 
sakttnd- ' bird · (J-sak, as prophesying the future). aru1Ja- ' red " 
diiru1Jd- ' terrible'; with radical accent drjuna- ' white' (Gk. 
dpyvpo'!> 'silver' from r-stem; d. also Skt. rjrd- from uncom­
pounded r-stemL pUuna- 'slanderous, treacherous J (d. Gk. 
1TLKpOS bitter, inimical', from simple r-stern) J tdrUtia- ' tender'
t 
(d. Gk. 
T€P~V with uncompounded n-stem, Tl.pVS, uncom­
pounded u-stem), v{~u1Ja- ' various'; with penultimate accent, 
dharu1Ja- ' holding ',yaiuna- ' energetic '. 
Fuller types of gradation are found in occasional fonns: 
-avana in srdva1Ja- · lame • (Lat. cl-au-dus, etc.). lavatui I salty' ; 
nt. salt (*slavana-: Lat. sal); -ana in Sro1Jd-, sI01;Ui- ' lame', 
syond- "soft, agreeable', duro1Jd- ' house '. . 
(ix) The suffix -ina parallel to -und appears in a few words; 
vrjind- 'crooked', hari1Jd 'yellowish: deer'. amina- 'over­
powering " iisind- ' old "( J-as-) t siikina- ' strong • ; with radical 
accent, ddk~i-;;a-' right'. With gmJa of the first element the com­
bination appears as ena only in the fenlinine samidhent (fk) , con­
nected with lighting the fire'. In Iranian the combination -aina 
is common: A v. izaena- ' made of leather', drvaena- ' wooden' , 
~tc. In Sanskrit there are certain further derivatives from such 
a suffix. namely the gerundives in -enya: vdre1Jya-' desirable', 
tk~l1Jya-
< worthy to behold', etc. The gradation -yana (d. 
-vana, etc.) is not found in Sanskrit, but it appears in Av. 
airyana- ' Aryan '. The full grade of both suffixes (-ayana) is 
not found but certain patronynlics with double vrddhi (Diik­
~iiya1Ja-, etc.) appear to be based on such a formation. The 
corresponding forms in A vestan (e.g. V a1)hudiitayana-) an!' 
without vrddhi. 
(x) Adjectival formations from neuter man-stems are rare: 
nimnd-
< low; nt. depth'. The neuters nrm-;;a- ' manliness', 
sumna-
kindness' and dyumna- 'brightness' appear from
t 
their accentuation to be of adjectival origin. Fonnations of 
this type are commoner in other languages, e.g. Lat. alumnus 

THE FORMA'flON OF NOUNS 
153 
, nursling t (cf. alimones, alimonia), Gk. UTl.pC:JLVO'S ; hard', the 
Avestan middle participles in -mna, yaz-:lmna-, etc., and the 
corresponding Greek participles with gUI)a (~€p6J.L€vos, etc.). 
The two types differ in the same way as -vanaj-una, -varaj-ura J 
~tc. The corresponding Sanskrit participles with vrddhi will be 
treated below. 
(xi) There are a few thematic adjectives based on the suffix 
-san: 
kr~1Ja-
· black' (: 0. Pruss. kirsna-, 0. 51. crunu), 
slak$tpi- · smooth', ak~r;a- 'oblique I (adv. ak$r;ayii) , tik$1:td­
, sharp I J krtsnd- · all '; also a few substantives of adjectival 
origin: pyuk$r;a- • covering for a bow I, hdlik$r;a- ( a kind of 
animal; a particular paTtof the intestines'; mrtsna- masc. nt. 
e dust, powder'J de~1Jd- nt. (gift' (' what is given l 
With 
differen t grada tions of suffix kanisna-
arm " vadhasnd- masc.
r 
or nt. ' deadly weapon'; PU$a1Ja- beside PU$an, (d. satvand­
and sdtvan-). duvasand- ' going far (or the like) '. 
(xii) Apart from cyautna- 'stirring', nt. (exploit' (: A v. 
syao(Jna-) the suffixes -lna and -lana are specialised in connt:C­
tion with adverbs of time (d. the similar use of -tara in dlviitara,-): 
natana-. ndtna- ' belonging to the present time " pratnd- • old " 
I
sanatdna- ' eternal' J adyatana ' of today', hyastana-
of yes­
terday " etc. 
In the above exatuples we have a series of adjectives all 
formed in the same way by the addition of the accented 
thematic vowel to the various r- and n- suffixes. It has been 
pointed out that these suffixes were capable of taking the ex­
tension.-t, and there are a few adjectival forms which are based 
on such an extension. An example from an r-stem is muhurtd­
• moment' from muhur (: Av. 1n~razu- • short " of time). Re­
ference has already been made to certain formations showing 
Prakritic tendencies, karma/ha-, harmu!a. From the n-suffix 
extended by t there are a number of thematic formations which 
to judge by their accent were originally adjectival, vasantd­
• spring' (d. vasarO), vesantd- ' pond • (J-vis 'where rainwater 
settles ') and with weak grade of suffix avatd- ' well'. Based on 
the man- suffix there are hemanta- • winter " simdnta- • parting 
of the hair' (: siman- 'id. boundary') and asmanta- (fire­
place'; on van/un, sakunta- (bird' beside sakuna-
(also 
sakuni-, sakunti- with i-suffix, d. sdkvan-, etc.). In parvata­
· mountain', which we may compare with Hitt. peruna-, 
perunant- • rock " there is another variant of the weak form of 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS
154 
this suffix (-wtt-L and. as often elsewhere, retraction of the
accent. These formations are not very common and some of
them from quite an early period were misunderstood as if they
were compounds/with anta- ( end' as second member. For this
reason the variant forms, veSiinta-, simiinta- occur. It is not un­
likely that some other apparent compounds of this type. e.g
karmiinta- ' work, business' (Pa. t~ammanta-) which only occur
t 
in the latter form, are corruptions of this 
§ II. 
THEMATIC FORMATIONS \VITH Vf:{DDHI 
OF SUFFIX 
We have seen above that there exist two quite distinct ways
of making adjectives and agent nouns on the basis of the
primitive neuter suffixes. In addition there is a series of forma­
tions which must be classified by 
since they par­
"~'-"'I-""""'-' in the characteristics of both the above types. They
are thematic formations, frequently accented on the final
syllable, but at the same time the suffix to which the thematic
vowel is attached, has vrddhi, like the 
nouns of the type
brahman- in the nom. sg. In this 
they represent a cross
between the two systems, and they appear to be thematic ex­
tensions of formations of the brahman- type, based on the nom.
sg. For .instance we may explain Vedic karmlira- ' smith • as
follows. From the evidence of Hittite and Greek it is clear, as
shown above, that the neuter man- stems were originally alter­
nating stems with nom. acc. sg. in -mar. We have also seen that
~n the basis of all these neuter suffixes in l' and n, simple and
compound, adjectives and agent nouns could be made by the
method illustrated by brahmdn-. Instances in connection with
most of the suffixes were quoted. On this analogy we might
expect on the basis of *kdrmar nt. (obI. base karman-) an agent
noun *karmor. Vedic karmlira- is a thematic extension of such
a form, and it has been already pointed out above that this
tendency to thematisation, which is familiar from the later
history of Indo-Aryan, had already been operating in the pre­
historic period. Another formation of this type appears to be
miirjiird... 
cat', but they are exceedingly rare from r-stems.
I 
On t~e ot~~..~are common in the cas.!:
the ~! and in particular they have given rise to a seri§
oT§ddle participles in. ~.~. to which nothing exactly cor­
1 ~Ends in!h~ other languag~s: 
~ 
- ~-
-
­

THE FOHMATION OF NOli'?-JS 
155 
From the simple It-suffix we have the suffix -and which is 
used in the formation qf middle participle~ of the type adiind­
( eating', duhand- • milking, etc.' Skt. adand- is a thematic 
formation corresponding to the non-thematic Lat. edo-onis. A 
formation of exactly the same kind is Lat. colonus, but such are 
exceedingly rare. There is final accent in the above examples, 
and in the perfect participles, bubudhand-
I waking ., etc.; but 
in the reduplicating presents and in the desiderative, initial 
accent. 
Other formations of this type are rare: samiind- (same, 
common', a thematic extension of a masculine n-stem such as 
appears in Goth. sarna (as sdmana- nt. is an exteI).sion of a 
corresponding neuter n-stem) and ptfrii1}d- · ancient "­
On the basis of the man-suffix there are middle participles in 
-amana, ydjamiina- ' sacrificing', etc. It is based on that form 
of the neuter men-stem which is attached to-the toot with the 
thematic vowel: Gk. 
~'P€p.€" inf., etc. The vrddhied mas~ 
culines corresponding to this type are represented by such forms 
as Gk. ~ji€P.ciJ" I leader " KrlJ€p.ciJv 'one who cares for J. Them­
a tic extension of such a type produces the Skt. type yajamiina-. 
In the thematic conjugations to which this type of participle is 
attached, the stable verbal accent prevails. This type of parti­
cipial formation is peculiar to Sanskrit, since the most closely 
rela~d types of participle (Av. yaz~mna-, Gk. ~€p6p.€vos) are 
differently formed, in the manner indicated above. As has 
happened in other cases it was by adaptation that such forma­
tions acquired the status of, middle participles,and this adapta­
tion seems to have been comparatively late, since such parti­
ciples are known from only a small section of Indo-European. 
There is a parallel series of fomlations in -asand, most of 
which have the character of pseudo-participles. Such are: 
jrayasiind 'far-extending'; namasand.;. 
rendering homage' J
I 
(I'f""wP.J.)bhiydsana-
'fearing', mandasand-.' rejoicing ',. vrdhasand­
, growing', savasiina-
I strong', arsasiina- ' injuring ~, sahasiina­
, overpowering;. In many cases there exists a neuter -as- stem 
beside these formations (jrdyas-, namas-, sdvas-, sdhas-). Wehave 
seen that the neuter as-stems were capable of taking the extension 
rIn. On the basis of the san-stem produced by such an extension. 
(*ndmasan-, etc.) these adjectives have been produced by the 
combined method of vrddhi of the suffix and addition of the 
accented thematic vowel. It will also be observed that they bear 
# {
tI... {(~
d
':::,( 'I ~ ',

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
the same relation to the infinitives in -sen (Gk. 4>'P€
i.e. 
*4>€P€
*bheresen) as exists between bhdramiina- and 4>€
To some extent they have acquired the character of participles, 
but the process of adaptation is incomplete. Unlike the parti­
ciples in -mana they are not integrated with any tense stem, and 
the practice of classifying them with the participles of the s­
aorist was more of an emergency measure than a serious attempt 
at their analysis. 
In urdhvasand- (erect' we find -sand used purely as an adjec­
tival suffix. In Pa. rakkhitamiinasiina-
I whose mind is guarded;t 
a formation of this type is used to provide an adjectival termin­
ation for a bahuvIihi compound. 
Suffixes of the same type are made on the basis of the other 
com pound n-suffixes: -aviina- in bhfgavana- ' shining " vasa­
vana- ' possessing riches'. and in the proper names A'pnavana­
and Pfthavana-; 
-ayana- in Uirvaya'tta-
• victorious' and 
H arayiit;ta- n. pr. Here belong the-'!piddle participles in -ayiina-~ 
"Ir'~~ made in the Epic language from tenth class and causative verbS: 
1"'....  
cintayana-, palayana-, etc. Though not used in the Vedic lan­
guage, nor allowed in the Classical, this formation could be an 
ancient dialectal feature. 
§ 12. 
VARIOUS EXTENSIONS OF THE rAND n 
SUFFIXES 
The suffix -a is regularly used to make the feminine of the 
thematic adjectives classified above. In addition it appears in a 
number of independent formations. In y6~at;tii (once yo?a1Jii) 
• woman J and kanytina girl' it appears as an extension of 
l 
feminine n-stems (y6~an- ( woman " Av. kainfn- • girl '). The 
formation kanydlii which is also found shows that the fern. 
*kanyan- on which kanydna is based was originally an alternat­
ing neuter. There are also words which may be of adjectival 
type though no corresponding masculine occurs, e.g. d#rii 
< goad 1 (' driver '). In addition there are a number in which -a 
is simply an extension of old neuter rand n stems, adding 
nothing to the meaning, e.g. mtitrii 'measure' (*miitar + ii). 
Others are sura i intoxicating liquor', dhdrii cutting edge ' 
t 
~ 
urvdrii ' cultivated land' (Av. urvarii ' crop ': an old '1/n. neut. 
of Indo-European is attested by Ir. arbor, nom. acc. pI. arbann)~ 
vagur4 {net', tdmisra I darkness', Mtra ' oblation '. The same 
type is fonned on th~ basis of the n-suffix: tf11Ja i thirst ',. 

i 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
157 
sena •army', sthii1Ja ' post', dhl!na • milk-cow'. The gradation 
-ana is common, the words being accented either on the last 
syllable or the penultimate (for accent of a-stems see below, 
p. 191) : arhd1Jii' worth', barhd1,tii ' might', vadhdna ' slaughter' I 
van-dna 
desire'; asand ( missile " jara1Jii ' old age', dyotanii 
" brilliance', rasanti 
rein', hasanJ. With these action nouns 
r 
in -ana compare the Greek type ~aovry , pleasure '. 
There are a few such formations in -1: and -u: rdtrf-
night "
i 
tandrt- ' sloth " nabhana- ' spring " 
Stems are frequently made by the addition 1)f i and u to the 
T and n suffixes. 
(a) The suffix -i serves as -ail enlargement of r-stems in 
dngh-r-i mase. 'foot' (cf. O. S1. noga 'foot' from different 
gradation of root) dbhri- fern. ' hoe', dsri- fern. ' edge, point', oc~f"
anguri fern. ' finger', Adjectives are arcdtri- ' singIng hymns " 
dtri-
devouring', bhiiri- 'abundant', subhri- 'beautiful',
r 
jdsJlri- ' exhausted', ddsuri- ' pious', sdhuri- ' mighty J (cf. Gk. 
€XVPo~, dxvpos 'firm' with thematic suffix); nouns of adjec­
tival origin, suri- ' patron' (J-stt-, as the instigator of the sacri­
fice), vddhri- ' a castrated animal' (: vadhar; Gk. lOpts ' id.'). 
The suffix -i is in the same way added to the n-suffix in (fern., 
srdtz,i- ' row', sro1,ti- : hip " sf1,ti- (sr1J{-) , sickle', jur1Ji- ' heat', 
jyani- 'loss' I gian{- 'fading '; (mase.') ghf1Ji- 'heat', y6ni. 
" womb'. The suffix -ni is used to form a number of adjectives 
and nouns of adjectival origin. 
Such are asni- 'eating', 
vcihni- 'carrying 1 (later 'fire '), Uir1Ji- 'speeding' I dhanJi­
, sustaining' > pre1Ji-
(loving', pfsni-
'speckled' (cf. Gk. 
r.EPKVO~ with thematic suffix); of adjectival origin,agni­
, fire '. With the gradation -ani there are such nouns as (fern.) 
dyotani- ' brilliance', vartant ' track I, arci1Ji-
fires tick ' (ar- ( to
t 
fit " alternating r in arari- ' door-leaf '). Adjectives are taratJi­
, sWift'. carci1Ji- ' moving', etc. Similar formations from the 
'Compound n-suffixes are: hriiduni- fern. (hail', tuvi~vd1Ji­
, powerful' (-vani as secondary suffix), aratnl- rnasc. (elbow, 
cubit I, i~tdni._epithet of Agni, turvd1Ji- ' overcopling " bhurod1Ji­
agitated', susukvdni- ' shining', par~d1Ji-
I carrying across', 
sak~d1Ji- ' overcoming', car~a1Ji- •active'; no longer of clear 
derivation, vr~1Ji-
I ram " pd:r~1Ji- fern. ( heel' (Gk. 1TTl.pva, etc.). 
(b) The u-suffix in combination with r produces occasional 
neuter nouns, asru ' tear' (Toch. A. iikar, plur. iikru-nt), smaSr" 
~ beard J, and some adjectives, dhiiru 'suckling' (Gk. lJij).us 
I 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
• female ') 1 bhitu- 'timid', patdru- • flying'; in combination 
with n some adjectives and nouns of adjectival origin: dhr~'1;tu­
I bold " grdhnu­ 'greedy', sij,nu- 'son', dhenu- fern. 'cow,' 
bhiinu­ masc. 'light'. The combinations -tnu and -snu were 
fairly productive in the formation of adjectives: 
krtnu­
j active " dartnu­ 'breaking', dravitnu­ 'running', piyatnu.­
• reviling', stanayitnu­ ' thunder', kavatmJ­ 'stingy, mean' ; 
vadhasm~- • murderous " ji~~u- · victorious', cari~ttu- ' wander­
ing ',etc. The combination -vanu appears in vagvanu­ ' noise'. 
§ 13. 
THE SUFFIX s 
The neuter suffix -as is better preserved than any of the other 
old neuter suffixes, and a larger number of words of this type 
have directly corresponding words in other IE languages than is 
the case with any other suffix. Such are: srdvas-' fame' (Gk. 
KAl.oS, Ir. clu · id.', O. Sl slovo •word '), jdnas- 'race' (Gk. YEVOS, 
Lat. genus), mdnas- • mind' (Gk. p.ivos ' spirit '), hdras- ' heat' 
(Gk. Blpos ' summer '), ndbhas- • cloud, sky' (0. S1. nebo, Hitt. 
nepil-), drsas­ 'piles' (Gk. iAKos, Lat. ulcus ' ulcer '), vdcas­
Gt
, word' (Gk. FeTfos, ; 110S) , sddas­ 'seat' (Gk. EOOS) , pdsas­
, male organ' (Gk. rrl.os), tdhas­ · fuel' (Gk. atBoS' · burning '), 
sdhas- 'strength' (Goth. sigis 'victory')' dpas- 'work' (Lat. 
opus), dnas­ ' waggon ' (Lat. onus (burden '), vdnas­ ' charm. 
desire' (Lat. venus). Other examples of this very frequent 
suffix are tdpas- {warmth', prdyas­
f pleasure', tejas­ ' splen­
dour', d6has­ ' milking', kdras- {deed', hi~as I injury J (hi1fts-). 
etc. 
The normal type has the regular radical accent of neuters, 
also gUQa of suffix. Accent shift in declension (type ydkrt) 
yaknds) has been abandoned, and the accent remains on the root 
throughout the declension. There are some variant types of 
gradation, namely (r) vrddhi of root in dgas- •sin' (Gk. ayos-), 
4pas­ « work' (usually dpas-). vtlsas- • garment " vilhas- {offer­
ing " ptijas- • side, surface'; (ii) weak grade of root in uras­
::-
( breast " siras- {head " juvas-
C speed I (also jdvas-), mfdhas­
{contempt', duvas­ ' offering'; (iii) reduction of suffix in y6s­
• welfare' (Av. yaol-, Lat. ius), d6s- 'arm '. These variants 
show that the working of apophony. was at one time active in 
these formations, although in most cases it has been levelled 
out. The type with weakened grade of root is interesting since 
it can only be explained out of original terminational accent in 

~ 
I 
THE 
FORMATrO~ OF NOUNS 
159 
the oblique cases. There are rare examples of this switch of 
accent in declension, e.g. bhiyas- 'fear' (transfer to fern.) 
instr. sg. bhi~ii (beside bhiyasa). 
Some twenty-five dative infinitives are formed with this 
suffix. These are sometimes accented on the root, ayase ' to 
go " cak~ase ' to see', dhiiyase ' to cherish', but much more 
commonly on the suffix, tease 'to praise', carase 
to fare', 
fivase ' to live I, dohdse ' to milk', bhoJdse ' to enjoy', sobhdse 
'to shine', spurdhdse 'to strive', etc. The origin of this 
anomalous accentuation, which is in contrast both with usual 
fixed radical actent of as- stems and with the original termina­
tional accent of the oblique cases, is not at all clear. It may be 
noted that it recurs in other types of infinitive: davane' to 
give I, vidmdne ' to know'. In a very few dative infinitives 
based on the s-suffix terminational accent is found with reduc­
~  
tion both of root and suffix: 
ji~e 'to conquer', stu~e ' to 
~ 
praise '. 
The normal locatival accent appears in upasi ' in the lap' 
(only this form), d. ak~d1Ji, etc. The related adverbial accent 
appears in purds ' in front', tiras ' across' and mithds ' mutu­
ally S 
; d. a~'ar, etr.. 
There are a few instances of transference of gender in the 
case of action nouns in -as. Such are, (masc.) tavas- ' strength' 
(as well as strong' adj.), fern. jards- ' old age " bhiyds- ' fear'
I 
~  
and u~ds- ' dawn' (d. Gk. ijw~). These appear mainly to be due 
to personification. The transference involves the adoption of 
the adjectival accent (as in bhumdn- 'abundance', etc., 
above). 
~ 
This neuter suffix was capable from an early period of being 
extended by the addition of the neuter r- and n-suffixes. 
Examples of this (sir~tlds, dO~1Jds, gen. sg., etc.) have been given 
above, together with derivatives from such stems (matsara-. 
mandasand-, etc.). It could also be added to other suffixes, pro­
ducing a variety of compound suffixes, e.g. : -tas in retas ' seed " 
srotas • stream' (simple t-stem in sravat;; -nas in riktJas- ' in­
heritance, property I, dpnas- 'wealth I, drttas- • flood " and,
• 
preceded by i and i, drdvit;as- 'property' I Pdri~tas- • abund­
ance '; -sas (repetition of the suffix) in ddk{)as- 'ability, 
dexterity' (simple -as in dasas-ydti) and pdk{)as- ' side J (simple 
I
-as in pJ,jas); -vas in ptvas- ' fat', vdrivas-
expanse J. This 
.. 
latter combination normally appears in the weak form -u~ : 

r60 
THE FORMATION OF l'iOUNS 
r.i1'U~- {wound' J 
tiyu~- ( length of life " tdpu$- (heat ., tdru~-
, victory'. ydju~- ' sacrificial formula', vdpu$- ( beauty'. pdru$­
· knot (of plants) '. dhdnu$- ' bow'. An alternative n-extension 
appears in dhdnvan- ' bow J and pdrvan- ' joint " and the simple 
u-stem ayu nt. appears as well as iiyu-;;- (d. also aru- in arun­
tuda-). In the same way s is added to the i-suffix to produce the 
compound suffix -i$. Of these neuter nouns jy6ti$- 'light', 
and vycithi$- {perturbation' are accented on the root according 
to the general rule. In the rest the original accent system has 
been disturbed, and they appear with accent on the suffix: 
arci$- 'flame' (also transferred to feminine), chardi$- 'pro­
tection, cover " barhi$- ' bedding, straw' (Av. bar<Jzis-), roci$-
"
, light', varti~- ' track', soci$- (flame', sarpi$- 'butter' (Gk. 
tA1TOf) ~ith simple s-stem), havi$- ' oblation " kravi$- ( raw flesh' 
(simple i-stem in dkravihasta- ' whose hands are not bloody', 
d. also kravyd-, Lith. kraujas, etc.). 
The neuters in -as can be turned into adjectives and agent 
nouns by the usual process of suffixal accentuation associated 
with vrddhi of the nom, sg. The neuter and adjectival types 
appear side by side in the case of dpas- •work' : apds- ( active '; 
o-;;w.,,,c-""~  tdras- 'energy, force': tards.:. 'forceful'; ydsas- {beauty, 
glory' : yasds-
t beautiful' ; tydjas-' leavingt- something let go 
of ': tyajds-
'offspring'; 
mdhas-
'greatness;: 
mahds-
N
, great'; 
rdk~as-
'injury, damage': 
rak$ds-
'demon'; 
duvas- ' worship': duvds-' worshipping', Other examples of 
the adjectival formation are tavds- • strong ., tosds- ' bestowing '. 
i 
dhvards- • deceiving', yajds-
worshipping • and vesas- ' neigh-
I 
I 
bour '. The same antithetic types appear in Gr~~k: .p£iJ8os 
C falsehood ' : ifJEv8~s (false', etc. 
From the compound suffix -vas there are some adjectival 
formations. The usual antithesis of the two types is seen by 
comparing vdrivas- nt. {expanse' on the one hand, and okivds-
(,
masc. C accustomed to, familiar I on the other. Formations of 
the same type are seen in mif/,hvds- • liberal I. diisvds-
worship-
I 
( (f--b '" lA1 Y.\ping , and siihvas- • overcoming " which inflect like perfect par­
"--
ticiples. On the other hand in fbhvas- ' skilful' and sUwas- ' id.·  
are influenced in form and accentuation by the coexisting van­
stems. There is a special connection between the adjectival  
suffixes -van and -vas in Sanskrit, because the latter is used to  
make the vocative singular of stems in the former (]'lavas,  
vibhavas, etc.; likewise ·of vant-stems: rayivas, bhagavas,  

THE FORMATIO~ OF NOUNS 
161 
sacivas, etc.). In A vest an we find this suffix used to form the 
nom. sg. of vant-sterns, amavd nom. sg. of amavant- ' strong '. 
Apar~ from the above examples the adjectival -1)aS has been 
specialised in the formatiQn.... of perfect participles: 
cakruds:-{"-fl
'1;,"<-t'~ having done', jigivds- ' having conquered' 1 tasthivds- 'having c..:
j&.« ......." 
stood I, babhuvds- 'having been'. susruvas- 'having heard I, 
Ci\I.>
etc. These stems show an ancient apophony in rleclension, even 
though the original terminational accent in the oblique cases 
which caused it has been given up (gen. sg. tasthusas for 
*tasthu~ds) . 
The adjectival vas-suffix was capable of taking the enlarge­
ment -'1t (d. vagvanu- above, a parallel extension of -van). ?i.
Examples are vibhavasu- ' brilliant' and sacfvasu- ( powerful' 
based on the vas- stems which occur in the vocatives noted 
above. Compare also Pa. viddasu-
wise' for *viif,vasu-.
i 
The specialisation of the adjectival -vas in the formation of 
these participles has resulted in its being separated completely 
from the corresponding compound neuter suffix which, as we 
have seen, usually takes the form -u~. Consequently when 
adjectives are needed from these, it is done simply by adapting 
the neuters without change of form. As noted above (p. 138) 
this practice has parallels elsewhere and is old, although rare 
through the prevalence of the normal system. Examples are 
cdk~u$- ; eye; seeing'. vdPu~- · marvel; wondrous' I 
tdPu~­
· heat; glowing'; without corresponding neuters, 
ndnu~­
, Ifeighbour " mdnu~- <man " and with suffixal accent but not 
the corresponding gradation, vanu$- 'eager', jayu$- 'victor­
ious ' and dak$u~- · flaming'. 
There is an adjectival suffix -yds which likewise underwent 
early specialisation and became totally divorced from the neuter 
suffix -i$. This is used in Sanskrit, and in other languages for 
making comparative adjectives. 
Examples are: 
ndvyas­
, newer " pdnyas-
I more wonderful I, bhiiyas- · more " rdbhyas­
'more violent', vdsyas- 'better', sdhyas- 'more powerful', 
sdnyas- • older '. tdvyas- / stronger '. Similarly A vestan has 
spanyah- ' more holy' .. tq,lyah- ' stronger " asyan-' swifter " etc. 
This formation is the regular one in Avestan, but in Sanskrit it is 
'" (
much less common than a formation in which the -yas- is added 
not directl to .the root, bliftOt.he~yas-
"vioL-
MI"J
younger I (d. gen. pI. kani-n-am), ndvtyas- t newer " mrddiyas­
, softer " prdthiyas- ' broader" vdriyas;. , wider I (cf. vdr-i-man 

162 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
. width '), tdrfyas-
< very swift I (d. tari-~dtli inf.), rdghiyas­
, swifter'. mdhiyas-
greater " sthdviyas- 'stouter' (d. Av.
t 
ra1tJyah·, mdzyah-, staoyah-). In both accent and apophony all 
these forms (excepting bhayas- with weak grade of root) are 
reminiscent more of thfL11~es (d. vdriman-, vdrivas- : 
vdri.,vas). The reason for this is not clear, though it must have 
some significance in the question of their origin. 
Corresponding forms of the comparative exist in I talk and 
Celtic: Lat. senior, O. Ir. siniu, (IE *senyos) , older I. The e­
grade of the root and the o-grade of the suffix indicate an accent 
identical with that of Sanskrit (sdnyas-). In Greek the same 
suffix appears in some cases: €AaaaW (*E'Aax-yos--a) acc. sg., 
EAaaaovS' (*€Aax-yoa-E'S) nom. pI., but in other cases a -yon­
suffix with similar function appears: J.Aaaawv, JAaaaovos, etc. 
In Greek, as in Sanskrit, a suffixal i may be inserted before the 
comparative suffix: ~stwv' sweeter'. In Germanic a compound 
suffix -is-on- is utilised: Goth. batiza · better'. etc. 
The weak form of the suffix (-is-) could make adverbs with 
comparative sense, e.g. Lat. magis' more '. It also forms the 
basis of superlatives which are made by the addition of the 
further suffix -tha (elsewhere -to): 
kdni~tha-.' smallest, young­
est " jdvi$fha-
< most speedy', nedi~tha-
< nearest' (Av. naz­
dista-), iisi${ha- ' swiftest' (Av. iisista-), 6ji~tha- 'strongest' (Av. 
aojista-), gdri~tha- ' heaviest ',etc. As with the comparative the 
accent of the superlatives is invariably on the root and the 
apophony is according. Superlatives of the same formatiof1, are 
found also in Greek (7jot.crroS' = sviidi~tha- ' sweetest ') and in Ger­
manic (Goth. frumists ( first " etc.). 
As with the other neuter suffixes, adjectives and nouns of ad­
jectival type ca.n be made by the addition of the accented 
thematic vowel to the neuter s-suffix. These are of the usual two 
types, an older type in -sa v'lith reduction of the suffix OIl account 
of the following accent, and a more recent type in -asa fonned 
from the neuter as-stems with gUI).a of suffix. Unlike some other 
suffixes of similar structure, -:sd never became very productive or 
developed independently to any extent. 
sa: ruk$d- ( shining' (rocas- ' light '), dyuk{d- ' bright' (for 
*dyutsa.. after ruk~d-; d. also dvak$am for dviitsam, etc.), 
P.rk$d- ' nourishment' (Pfk$-
nourishment " a reduced s-stem 
i 
which has been adapted as a fern. root noun), ghra1ftsa- < heat of 
the sun', vatsa- 'calf' (Gk. F€'TOS 
year 'j, v,k~d- 'tree'
I 
('

-fr1"1~~.:c.... 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
r63 
(vdlSa-' foliage '), yak~d- 'supernatural being' (ydsas- 'beauty'), 
sU:5d- ' strong' (sdvas- ' strength '), pak~d- · side' (plijas- • side, 
surface '), ruk~d- ' rough, dry , (J-ru~-), drapsd- · banner' (Av. 
drafsa~; d. drapi- 'mantle '), drapsd- · drop' (for *drabzha-, 
d. Gk. TPE~W, etc.), grapsa- and glapsa- ( bunch • (*grabiha-, 
J-grabh-), sak~a- ' overpowering' (sdhas- 'strength '), hatttsd­
1.
, goose' (Gk. X~v. etc.). In a smaller number of words, chiefly 
substantives, the accent appears on the root, d1!~Sa- ' shoulder' '!
(Lat. umerus with gUl.la of suffix). utsa- (spring' (Gk. ;;l>o) 
nt.), rk~d- ' star' (arc- ( to shine '), ddk$a- • clever' (d. dasas­
ydti), gftsa- ' dexterous, able'. 
-asa: vacasd-' eloquent', a11jasd- · straight', ar1Jasd- ' flow­
ing " tamasd-
'dark-coloured', nabhasd- 'cloudy'. rajasd­
, dusty'. rabhasd- ' wild " manasd- ' wise'. upanasd- ' being near 
a waggon' I vetasd- 'reed'. camasd- 'cup' I pivasd- · fat', 
divasd- ' day I, prapyasd- · swelling (with milk) '. 
Thematic extensions of neuter as-stems, such as are common 
in the case of the suffixes rand n, are rare if they exist at 
all. It is possible that ydvasa- (masc, and nt.) might be of this 
origin, but otherwise such neuter nouns in -asa as occur are 
oxytone, a fact which indicates their adjectival origin: 
ankasd- ' flank I, avasd- • refreshment I, qtasd- • bush " parittasd­
· abundance '. 
Adjectival derivations with vrddhi are ayasd- 'made of 
metal J, viiyasd- {bird I, manasd- ' belonging to the mind ' and 
so forth. 
Similar adjectival formations from the is- and us- stems 
occur: tavi$d-' strong', bhari~d- ' rapacious', mahi~d- ' great; 
buffalo'; paru$d- ' knotty (as reed); rough' I paru$d- {grey, 
17M
speckled white' (Av. pourusa-; d. Engl. fallow, etc.), aru~d-
· red J; with vrddhi, llapu$d- ' wonderful '. The radical accent 
of ndhu§a-
< neighbour', mdnu$a-
< man ' and vdpu$a- 'won-
drous' is connected with the fact that the corresponding us-
stems are themselves used adjectivally without change of accent. 
Similar accent is found in tdru~a- • overcoming' and pitru$a-, 
puru$a- • man' (related to puru- 'man; n. of a tribe' as 
mdnu;;a- is related to mdnu-). 
There are a few closely related formations in -i~a and -u$a 
(iju+s+a), rji$d- epithet of Indra, ii:ngu$d- • hymn' and the 
neuters pUri{ia- ' rubbish J, kdri$a-
dry cow-dung 1 and piyfi.$a­
l 
• beest milk' (d. PiPyu$i and Gk. wvos <*pyusos). 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
There are a number of miscellaneous stems made by the 
addition of various suffixes to s-stems. Such are: bhi~Ii' fear', 
mani§d ' understanding " savast ' strength " tdvi$i l id " sarast­
, I 
jl\.~' 'lake'; plu$i' flea' (J--Plu-) , dhiisi- 'abode', siinasi-
victor­
l 
ious', dhartJasi- 'strong', atasi- 'beggar'; ddk$u-, dhdk§u­
, burning'; 
bhuji~ya- 'free'; the rare infinitival forms 
avyathi$yai' not to tremble • and rohi~yai; masti§ka-' brain' ; 
l
nari$fii 'joking'; updstha- flap' (d. uPdsi), vani~thu-
en­
trails' (d. Germ. wanst; different suffix in Lat. venter). En.;. 
largement with the suffix -ti appears in a fair number of ex­
amples: gdbhasti- 'hand', palasti- 'grey-haired' (d. palitd­
, id '), pulasti- ' having straight hair · (d. pulaka-
bristling of 
l 
the hairs of the body') Agdsti n. of a f!?i. This suffixal combina­
t 
tion is well developed in Slavonic, where, however, it makes 
abstract nouns (0. S1. dlugostl' length ., etc.). It appears also in 
Hittite with the same function: dalugasti' length'. On the 
other hand it appears occasionally in Latin in adjectival use, as 
in Sanskrit: agrestis' rural ., caelestis ' celestial'. From i$- and 
"'$- stems there appear formations of the same kind: ndvi#i­
f hymn of praise', pdni$ti- ' admiration t, tatamt~ti- ' spreading 
out '. 
§ 14. 
THE SUFFIX t 
The suffix t existed with functions like the above simple 
suffixes, but as an independent suffix it has become much rarer. 
I t also very rarely provides neuters, since the tendency was from 
a very early period to incorporate the stems ending in occh,lsi ves 
into the common gender system. Its original function as one of 
the primary neuter suffixes is seen most clearly when it serves 
as an extension of the neuter r- and n- stems, e.g. in Skt. sdkrt, 
yakrt and in Gk. x€tJLa, gen. sg. x£tJLar03 ' winter' (but the 
corresponding -nt- stem in Hittite, gimmant- ' winter " is com­
mon gender). Similarly the primitive suffix t on which the suffix 
-t-ar has been built may be presumed to have been neuter. 
Apart from this there remain in the various languages a few 
sporadic instances of a neuter suffix t: Skt. p;~at- 'drop', 
upatdpat- ' fever'; Gk. JL€i\t, (for *JL€i\t,r), Hitt. milit f honey' ; 
Gk. y&.Aa, ycUaK'T03, Lat. lac, lactis ' milk', Lat. caput' head'. 
The use of the simple suffix t, in the common gender, to make 
action nouns and abstracts, is fairly well developed in Hittite, 
e.g. ka,timmiatt-
I anger '~ duskaratt- • joy'. They are rare else­
where, but where they occur such nouns have normally acquired 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
r65 
the feminine gender: Skt. n(iJd- 'night', Lat. nox, Gk.vv~; 
Lat. quies, salus, etc. Gk. fUJLt~, xaplS. 
The reason that such formations are so rare is that as a 
general rule they have been supplanted by extensions of the 
simple t-suffix, namely by ti in the case of action nouns, and by 
tii in the case of abstracts. In Skt. dasdt {decade' beside 
J-tC;
dasati- 'id.' we have an example of the unextended and ex­
tended. form side by side. An isolated avtrat- t absence of heroes .' 
(avtrate dat. sg. RV. 7.I.19) represents a type that has otherwise 
been universally supplanted by the compound suffix tii. 
A very sman number of feminine nouns in -t appear in Sans­
krit: sravdt-, vahdt-, both meaning · stream I, sascdt < obstacle', 
vehdt- ' cow which miscarries '. Of these the last is presumably 
adjectival and the others could be. A masc. adjectival form 
appears in vaghdt- ' worshipper'. This adjectival suffix appears 
elsewhere, cf. Lat. pedes ( footman " eques ' horseman '. 
In ndpat- ' grandson' there is a formation with vrddhied 
suffix which may be compared with ,the similar formations 
analysed above. This stem is also interesting because it retains 
an ancient type of declensional apophony. A reduced grade 
appears in Skt. nddbhyas dat. abl. pl., Av. napto abl. sg., nallu 
loco pI. (with reduction of the three consonant groups). There 
are other examples of the vrddhied suffix in adjectival forrna­
tions in other languages: A v. ravas-carat- ' moving in the open 
country', Gk. aP'Y~~ < shining' (apyfj-r- or apyh- in the oblique 
cases, cf. the two types oo-rfjpa and 7ToLJLlva), 7Tbrr}s 
poor',
l 
YVJL~S ' lightly armed soldier', Lat. aries ram' (gen. -ltis),
I 
B'I'<!~ 
AS. hale' hero' (xatejJ). They differ from the vrddhied forma­
tions involving the other suffixes only in that they take the 
nominative -s, which is the normal practice with stems in 
occlusives. Skt. padati-
foot soldier' and patti- lid.' are both
I 
i- extensions of at-stem; the two different fonns derive from 
the declensional apophony of the primitive stem. 
In one special case the suffix t remains a living formative in 
Sanskrit. It has been noted above (§ 2) that roots ending in the 
vowels i, u and r cannot, like other roots, function without any 
addition as nominal stems. Where other roots do so they in­
variably add the suffix t: stut-
I praise', samit- t battle', niyut­
I 
I 
I
team', vrt- (anny, host', rit-
stream', mit-
post', hrut­
l treachery; foe'. These stems, like the root stems, may be 
used either as action nouns (in which case they are feminine) or 

166 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
agent nouns; in the latter use they also appear most frequently 
as the latter members of compounds: devastut-' praising the 
gods', visvajit-' all-conquering ',jyoti~kft-' making light', etc., 
etc. Like the root stems they have generalised the weak grade 
in declension. 
In this way the t- formations have come to form one system 
with the root nouns, since they are used in identical circum­
stances and with exactly the same function as the root stems 
in the case of other roots. For this reason the Indian grammar­
iims do not class the t which appears here as an ordinary suffix 
(pratyaya-), but consider it to be a special addition or augment 
(agama-). The suffix t has acquired this character of augment 
in a number of other formations, notably in the gerunds in -ya 
C)itya ' having conquered " etc., as opposed to °drsya ' having 
seen ') J and in the adjectival formations in van (kftvan- '-active' 
as opposed to ydjvan- 'worshipping '). In these cases too it 
appears to strengthen the roots ending in i, u and r. We shall 
see below that the same kind of dcveloplnent has taken place, 
and to a greater degree, with the suffix i. 
The compound suffix -it appears in a few examples, yo~it­
· woman', divit- 'brilliance' (whence divitmant- '"brilliant ') 
sarit- · river', harit- ' green, yellow', rohit- ' red'. These are 
accented on the suffix, but this does not agree with the apo­
phony; d. the type soct~-. The adjectives harit- and rohit-, 
which must originally have been accented on the root, were at 
one time stems which could be used indifferently as-nouns or 
adjectives. 
Of these the adjectives hdrita- and r6hita- are 
thematic extensions, and they preserve the original accent of 
the simpler forms, because they belong to that small class of 
adjectives which do not take the normal adjectival accent 
owing to the adjectival character of the stems on which they are 
based (cf. vdPu~-, vdPu~a- above). 
A suffix -ut appears in 1\1arut- n. of the storm gods (*mar- ( to 
shine': cf. mdrici- ' ray' and Gk. JLapJLaLpw, aJLftpVCTCTW), also in 
garmut- fern. ' a kind of grass " and garutO- which is found only 
in the derivative garutmant ' winged'. The gU1)a grade of this 
suffix -vat is employed in the middle cases of the perfect participles 
(vidvddbhyas, etc.) and the nom. ace. sg. nt. (vidvdt). In Greek 
it is used throughout the masculine (flaws, ElSo-ros, etc.). 
A few adverbs are made with this suffix: sanat' of old'. 
pradak$itJ:it ' moving to the right', cikitvit ' carefully'. Simi­

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
167 
larly Av. paityaog31 ' backwards " etc. An adverbial suffix -tas 
has been abstracted from the ablative singular of t-stems. 
Originally the type dak#1}atds 
from the right' was to be
i 
analysed dak#1;tat-ds (d. pradak#~tit for the t-suffix in connec­
tion with this word). With the growing obsolescence of the t­
suffix, formations of this type came to be analysed dak:;itta-tds, 
etc., and the -tas thus abstracted became very productive in the 
formation of adverbs with ablatival meaning: mukhatas' from 
the mouth ., agl'atds 
in front', sarvdtas 'on all sides'. tdtas
i 
, from there " paritas ' around " etc. 
Adjectives in -ta arose in the usual way from the addition of 
the accented thematic vowel to t-stems; so, Pr~atd- ' speckled' 
from pf:;at- · spot, drop'. Since t-stems have mostly dis­
appeared, such adjectives appear normally as independent 
formations. Some have the suffix in the form -atd, e.g. darsatd­
. visible' (Gk. °lUpKETOS), yajatd-
to be adored', bharata,
i 
, (t~ be maintained), epith. of Agni. n. of a tribe', rajatd­
, silver ' (cf 0 Av. ~r:JZata-), others in the form -ta. tr~fd-
i rough '­
syetd- (white " anapta- (not wet' (Avo napta- wet), dutd~ 
• messenger', sutd- ' charioteer', niipitd- ' barber' (for *sniipitd-, 
cf. Pa. nahiipita-) ; in other cases it is preceded by some other 
suffix (i, u, etc.): tigitd- (sharp " paUta- 'grey-haired', 
dmanyuta- • free from anger', ddbhuta- • wonderful I, kapota­
i bluish-grey; pigeon '. Mention has already been made of its 
addition to the suffixes 'It and r (vasanta-, muhurtd-). The colour 
wordshdrita-androhita- have radical accen t due tothe original use 
of the simple t-stems as adjectives. Radicalaccentappearsinsome 
other examples, dsita-
i black', t!ta- ' speckled'. mdrta- ' mortal'. 
The colour adje~tives either substitute an n-suffix in the 
feminine: ent, syent, hdritt/i, or add n with change of t to k : 
asiknf, pdlikni. Here there are apparently traces of an old 
alternation corresponding to that of r- and n- stems. 
4i>art from these adjec~ the suffix -td is specia1ised jn ~ 
formation of -past passive particirues, a function which appears 
'~in the other IE lan~.:._.There is a reduction both of root 
and suffix before the final accented d (bhrtd-, as opposed to 
bharatd-) which is characteristic of the most ancient formations. 
These participles are very numerous and are formed from all 
roots except a smaU number which take -nd: srutd-' heard' 
(Gk. KAvros, Lat. in-clutus, Ir. cloth), srutd- • having flowed) 
(Gk. pVTOs) , tatd-
stretched'. (Gk. T(lTOS', Lat. tentus). hatd­
j 

IIII 
\j 
j 
",,,,,,Mi 
r68 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
t slain' (Av. O. Pers. Jata-, Gk. ~aTos), gatd-
gone' (Gk.
l 
{3aTos 
that can be traversed '), niktd-
wasaed ' (Gk. aVL1T7'OS
t 
I 
, unwashed '), u$Fa-
burnt' (Lat. ustus), vrttd-
'turned'
l 
(Lat. vorsus, versus), dr#d- • seen' (AS. torkt ' clear ') I 
mi~#a­ 
savoury (of food) <mik$-. d. Lat. mixtus.  
As elsewhere the specific function of this suffix is not inherent 
in it from the beginning but acquired by adaptation. The 
fundamental meaning of kluto- for instance, like that of any 
other adjectival form of the same type, is no more than ( one 
connected with hearing'. In Greek the specialisation of mean­
ing has not gone so far, since beside a passive sense, an active 
sense is frequently found: 
i)VvaTOS (possible' and 'able', 
O'VV€TOS 
(intelligible' and • intelligent " etc. In Sanskrit an 
active sense is seen in sutd-
charioteer' (' driver', i.e. • one 
I 
connected with *su-t- (driving'. from su-, suvati) and in  
napitd- ( barber'.  
The reason for the rarity of the simple suffix -t is that it has  
normally been replaced by compound formations in which a  
further suffixal element is added to the t. The commonest of  
these, which makes verbal abstracts is -ti. This is the com­ 
monest of a]) the suffixes making verQill. -abstTac~ct!on  
~nouns, and words form.ed with this suffix show less tendency -to ­
develop a concrete sense than is the case with other suffixes. 
These words are feminine, in contradistinction to the action nouns 
Tormed with the suffixes previously discussed, .which are neuter. 
In this respect they follow the simple t-stems which in most IE 
languages are feminine, and in Hittite common gender. The 
only traces of neuter ti-stems that can be found are the pro­
nominal forms kdti (how many', tdti •so many', ydti • as 
many' which are such in form though they function differently. 
It is clear that those stems were among the earliest to break 
away from the neuter system proper to action nouns as the 
gender system developed. 
The process of the ·enlargement of t-stems by the addition' of  
the suffix -i is seen in such pairs as samlt-, samiti- ( assembly' ;  
ndkt-, ndkti- ' night '; dasdt-, dasdti- ' decade 'A 
The accentuation of these 'action nouns is subject to no rule. 
It may appear on the root as in fddhi-
t prosperity', gdti- 'go-
jng " ju~#- satisfaction', dhfti- ' firmness', ,rdti- t enjoyment' t
t 
vfddhi- ' growth I, sdkti-
t power " santi- t peace " or somewhat  
more frequently on the suffix: uU- ( helping', k#tl- • abode I, 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
r69 
juti-
< speed', dhiti- 'thought', pu!}ti- • prosperity " bhakti­
, sharing', bhrti-
'maintenance', mati-
'thought', stuti­
, praise J. This lack of rule in the accentuation is characteristic 
also of the simple -i stems} as will be noted below. In Greek the 
accent is normally on the root, but since the radical vowel in 
these formations, in Greek as in Sanskrit, appears always in the 
weak grade, it cannot have been there unchanged from the be­
ginning. Compared with the general system~accent and guna 
of root for action nouns and vice versa for agent nouns-these 
formations present a striking anomaly, and it is not now pos­
sible to say what particular developments in early Indo­
European were responsible for this state of affairs. 
Examples of this formation are abundant also in Greek and a 
number of parallel forms can be quoted: dpaciti- 'retribu­
tion " Gk. a'7T6·nu(.S" id'; k#ti- < dwelling', Av. !iti-, Gk. KTlu(.S' 
· settlement"; k#ti- ' destruction " Gk. cp8tutS'; a-huti-' obla­
tion " Gk. XVO'tS' 'pouring out'; srutt-' flowing " Gk. PUU(S; 
pluti- 'floating', Gk. '7TAVO'(,S'; gdti- 'going " Gk. ~c1Ur.S', cf. Goth. 
ga-qumps; tati- 'stretching, row', Gk. Tc1O'tS'. In Latin they 
have been replaced by a still further developed suffix -tiim-, 
made by adding the vrddhiedn-suffix to the -ti. '"{hese are 
feminines because the ti- abstracts on which they are based were 
feminine: mentio (Skt. maii-) iunctio (Skt.yukti-,Gk. '£fj~fS), etc. 
The gradation -ali appears in a number of examples: 
a""haU- • distress'. d!sati- • appearance J. mithati- • conflict " 
vilsati- ' abode ., pak~ali- ' root of the wing '. 
A few datives of ti-stems are classed as infinitives: i~tdye ( to 
refresh I, pitaye < to drink'. vitdye ( to enjoy', satdye ' to win ., 
utdye ' to help '. 
There are also a number ofti- stems functioning as agent nouns, 
mainly in the early language: jitiiti- 'relation " (: Lith. gentis 
, id '), patti-, padati- · foot soldier I I addhiiti' sage', riiti- ' liberal', 
dhuti.. ( shaker'. sdpti- ' steed ., dhf~~i- ' bold '. frdti- ( putrid " 
vd~#- ( eager '; dmati- •poor'. sthapdti < governor; architect', 
vrkdti- 'robber'. rdmati- 'liking to stay'. p-dti- • master '.1 
The position of the accent is subject to no rule~ as is the case 
with the action nouns, and the two classes are not distinguished 
in the usual way. 
1 From pa- ' to protect. govern'. That the t in this word is suffixal is evident 
from its absence in Gk. 8401101.110•• Therefore pdli- is to ·pa- ("",pa-. etc.) as 
"tkati- to vllla-. 

170 
THE FORMATIOK OF NOUNS 
The a,djectival formations are occasionally extended by the 
addition of suffixal 'n, abhimatin- ' insidious' (abhimati- «id '), 
-/ 
raUn / liberal I (rali / id '). Compare the similar extension in 
I.. 
Latin in the action nouns. 
A suffix -ttt is produced in the same way by the addition of u 
to the simple t-suffix. These are less numerous than the ti­
stems, and morphologically less altered from the ancient 
system. There are for instance still a number of neuters pre­
served: diftu 'division', vifstu / abode I (Gk. (F}auTv ' city '), 
vastu (thing I, mdstu 'sour cream' (cf. Gallo-Lat. mesga, If. 
medg with different suffix). A neuter formation in -tu used 
adverbially appears in jiitu at all, ever'. These neuters have
i 
the regular radical accent, associated with gUI)a, which is the 
characteristic of neuter action nouns. The same accent and 
gUI)a appears also in the following masculines (this is the gender 
which the non-neuter action nouns in -tu normally adopt; con­
trast the feminine ti-stems): 6tu-
weft' I tdntu- 'thread',
t 
dhlitu-
element " sdktu- «groats', sittt- (bund, dam', s6tu­
t 
, libation'. Occasionally 5,uffixal accent appears: giitu- ' way', 
hetu- (but with,gu~ta of root), Pit1t- ( nourishment'. GUI).a of the 
first element of the suffix appears in edhaM,- , welfare " vahatu­
, wedding' and kr-dtu- • intelligence' (kf-
to think, com­
i 
memorate '). There are very few feminines: vastu-' morning' I 
sdt~t- ' giving birth I, jivdtu- ' life'. 
Agent nouns and adjectives are rare: mdntu-' councillor' 
and dhiftu- ' suitable for sucking' do not have the proper adjec­
tival accent, which contrasts 'kith the formations in simple -u. 
Regular suffixal accent appears in tapyatu-
glowing t and
I 
si~asatu- ' desirous of obtaining '. 
The suffix -tu is a rich source of infinitives. These are regu· 
larly accented on the root which normally takes gUI).a. They 
appear in the accusative, dative and genitive. 
(1) The accusative infinitive in -tum is th~!y~ne use~ ip. 
~age: 
kartum 
to do " gantum 
t to go',
I 
datum t to give ., srifliim't to hear " nitum ' to lead " m6ktum I to 
release " etc., etc. In the Vedic language which is rich in other 
kinds of infinitives, this formation is exceedingly rare, appearing 
in some five examples in the J1.gveda, and in five others in the 
Atharvaveda. It is equivalent in form to the Latin 
factum, itum, etc. 
(2) Over thirty dative infinitives formed with this suffix are 

THE FOHMATION OF NOUNS 
171 
found in the Vedic language. They are in variably accented on 
the root which takes gUl)a (except s-atave ' to bring forth' be­
side sdvitave): Itave {to go " kdrtave • to do " dtitave • to give;, 
mdntave ' to think ;, yd§!ave • to sacrifice " etc. 
(3) The ablatives occur less frequently: hdntos' from being 
struck', itas ' from going'; etc. The formation appears occa­
sionally also in a genitive Sp.llse, kdrtos ' doing' (with madhya), 
diitos' giving' (with iSe). 
In addition to these three types there also occurs occasion­
ally in the Veda a type in -tavai: ttavai ( to go " hdntavai < to 
slay'. It has the anomaly of a double accent which has not been 
explained, and it is always followed by the particle -u. It 
appears to be based on a thematic extension of the gUl;ated 
tu-suffix (*etava- nt.) with the old form of the dative singular 
(Av. -ai). 
The neuter suffix -tva which must in origin be a thematic for­
mation based on the ttt-suffix, is frequent, and is used exclusively 
in the formation of secondary abstract nouns: amrtatvd-
< im­
mortality', devatvd- • divinity', sucitva-
purity', satrutvd­
f 
( enmity " etc. The accent of these secondary formations has 
nothing to do with the old system, but comes from the tendency 
to evolve a special taddhita accent for secondary neuters which 
has been noticed above. A vestan has such formations. though 
not abundantly (ratuf)wa-' office of ratu- " etc.), also a number of 
primary formations with this suffix, vq,{}wa-
herd', stao8wa­
f 
( prayer'. Primary formations with this suffix are represented 
in Sanskrit by only a few forms and these are confined to 
Vedic, namely petva~ , ram, wether " and a series of words in 
which -Pitvd is combined with various prefixes. The commonest 
of these are prapitva- ' going forth, time of going forth, morn­
ing I and abhipitvd- ' coming in, coming home in the evening, 
evening time '. 
The further extended suffix -tvand appears in the Veda in the 
same sense: mahitvand-' greatness " sakhitvand- 'friendship ., 
etc. Though ignored by classical Sanskrit it turns up again in 
Middle Indo-Aryan (-ttana~), and has been preserved even to the 
modem period (Hi. -pan). 
There are some thematic adjectives based on the suffix -tu 
which are used as gerundives in the Veelic language: kdrtva­
•to be done ., jetva- ' to be won', vdktva- ' to be said " sdnitva­
• to be gained .) hdntva- ' to be slain '. Likewise in A vestan, 

172 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
f~(Jwa- ' to be slain'. These are all accented on the root con­
trary to the general rule for adjectives. Th'} classical type in 
-tavya (kartavya-, alternatively kartavya- ' to be done " etc.) is 
made from the gUl}ated tu-suffix with addition of the adjectival 
suffix -ya. 
In Greek yet another variant (-tewos) occurs,_ 
1TO'7]TEO), etc. 
By yet another enlargement of the -tu suffix the gerunds in 
-tvii are provided which are used with uncompounded verbs. 
These appear with the root normally in its weakened form, and 
with the accent on the suffix: i#vii.' having sacrificed " krtva 
, having made " gatvii ' having gone " tirtvii ' having crossed " 
dr~tvd 'having seen', pitva 'having drunk', sniitvii 'having 
bathed') etc., etc. 
These formations have at first sight the appearance of being 
instrumentals of action nouns in -lu. As such their form would 
be in order, assuming they are ancient forms, since originally the 
accent was on the termination in the weak cases and this caused 
reductio~ of the root. The chief difficulty against such an ex­
plana tion is the co-existence in the Veda of a gerund in -tvi. This. 
formation is actually more frequent in the lJ.gveda than the 
gerund in -tva-: k,tvt' having done', gatvi 'having gone',. 
bhutvi ' having become ., etc. The latter formation cannot be 
explained as an instrumental or any other case ending of a 
verbal noun in -tu. Since the explanation of both forms must 
run on parallel lines, it follows that the forms in -tvii are also. 
not case endings. The only explanation possible is that these­
are the suffixes aand i, and the fact that they function here in 
the same manner is in accordance with the close relation be­
tween them elsewhere. So we must have here two compound 
suffixes used adverbially with the final accent that usually 
appears in the adverbial use of nominal stems (priitdr, etc.). 
The suffix -tii, an extension with the ii-suffix of the simple t­
suffix, is specialised in the making of abstract nouns from 
adjectives. As a primary suffix it is v~ry rare, e.g. citii ' layer', 
more common in Greek, YE'VE7'~, etc. The usual type is repre­
sented in the Veda by such examples as devdta 
< divinity J J 
puru~dta • humanity', bandhUtii ' relationship'. vasuld t wealthi­
ness', etc. In classical Sanskrit they are made freely from all 
adjectival stems: kr$ttata • blackness', purttatii. • fullness I,. 
tlirghatd .. longness ',etc. The suffix appears with the same func­
tion in .other IE languages: Russ. polnota • fullness' O. SL 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
173  
crinota ( blackness" dlugata ' length " OHG. fullida • fullness I,  
Goth. diupifta ' depth', Lat. iuventa (youth .  
This suffix could be strengthened by the further addition of  
suffixal t, producing the suffix -tat. Examples (found only in the  
lJ.gveda) are upardtat-
• proximity', devdtat-
godliness "  
I 
vrkdtat-
'wolfishness, murderousness " sarvdtiit- (complete­
ness '. The same suffix appears in Avestan (haurvatiit- • whole­
ness/ etc.), Greek ({1apVrrj> 'heaviness', etc.). where it com­
pletely replaces -ta as a secondary suffix, and Latin (civitas, 
etc.). 
Just as the simple suffix ·t could be extended by the addition 
·of suffixal -i (dasat-, dasati-), so the compound could be ex-
tended to -tati. 
Examples are 
jye~#hdtiiti-
'superiority', 
devdtati- ' divinity', sarvdtiiti-
C completeness', vasutati- •wealth', 
satydtiiti- ( truth ., sdntati- •good fortune '. The last two may 
also be used as adjectives (like certain formations in -ti). 
§ IS. THE SUFFIX m 
The suffix m plays an important part in nominal derivation 
in Sanskrit and the other IE languages. It has already ap­
peared in the groups -mar, -man, -mant, -min. It is also produc­
tive of thematic adjectives in -ma, and occasionally appears in 
other formations. The problem with this suffix is that, in con­
tradistinction to all the others, it is hardly ever found as a 
simple, uncompounded suffix, although the various compound 
suffixes mentioned must have been formed, like other compound 
suffixes, by additions to just such a simple suffix. The only 
surviving examples appear to be the numeral stems sapta and 
ddsa, Lat. septem, decem, IE *septtjt (earlier sipttit on account of 
apophony)~ dik1p. Here the suffix appears in its weak form like 
the n-suffix in niima (Lat. nOmen), etc., and these numerals are 
{)f exactly the type as the primary neuter nouns. 
The frequency of In in various derivative suffixes shows that 
it must have originally been common as a primary neuter suffix. 
The reason that it does not appear as such. is that it has been 
replaced by other formation&, and this h~ come about in two 
ways. The first process is illustrated by the juxtaposition of 
yugam nom. acc. sg. nt. yoke' and yugma-
paired'. Like
I 
I 
other thematic adjectival suffixes yugmti- is to be analysed 
yugm-a and the consonantal m-stem on which it is based is none 

174 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
other than the neuter yugdnt. The m in the neuter yugdm was 
originally the nt-suffix, but owing to similarity 'with the accusa­
tive singular of thematic stems (originally all adjectival and of 
common gender), it came, by an easy process of adaptation, to 
be treated as a termination, with the consequence that forma­
tions of this kind were turned into neuter thematic stems and 
declined accordingly. The neuter thematic type then became 
productive, particularly in forming extensions of neuter con­
sonantal stems (-ana, -atra, etc., above). 
The relation that exists between yugdnt and yugmd appears 
also between bhaydm fear': bhimd-' fearful J and mddhyam
I 
nt. middle: ntadhyam-d- adj. ' being in the middle'. The adv. 
sddam can be explained as a neuter nt-stem in view of the deri­
vative sddman- ' seat'; likewise aram, dlam 'fittingly, suit­
ably' from the IE root ar- ' to f:!t by comparison with deriva­
J 
tives like Gk. ap/Los. 
Ancient thematic neuters in IE are very rare. Skt. yugd'rn is 
shown to be ancient by the correspondence of Gk. 'vyov, Lat. 
iugum, etc. Another ancient word is Skt. paddm ' step', Gk. 
7T£SOV, Hitt. pedan, which may be presumed to have originated 
in the same way, though direct evidence is lacking in this case. 
Gk. EPYOV ' work' with the same rare and no doubt ancient 
apophony as m£c'ov is to be classed with it. It should be noted 
that such primitive thematic neuters, which according to this 
theory are transformed m-stems, are not only exceedingly rare, 
but they are the only class which provide certain word equa­
tions between different IE languages. 
Thus the thematic 
neuters of secondary origin, namely (I) extensions of neuter 
consonantal stems and (2) the still later though numerous 
taddhita formations, are of later origin. It would be difficult 
otherwise to explain the absence of detailed agreement among 
these formations between the various languages. In this con­
nection also. we must note the complete absence of the latter 
two formations in Hittite. 
The rarity of the thematic neuter formations of the type 
paddm, yugdm shows that, although this was one way by which 
the primitive m-sterns were removed, and although it provides 
the only plausible e:xplanation for the existence of neuter 
thematic stems at all, this was not the only, or indeed the main 
way by which this was done. The other process which operated 
and which accounted for many was the extension of m-stems 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
175 
by the addition of the r- and n-suffixes. Just as in Hittite the 
primary s-stems were almost entirely replaced by formations of 
the type bannesar/-esnas, so over the whole of Indo-European 
'with the exception of a few stems that were turned into a new 
type, the thematic neuters, the m-stems were replaced by the 
mar/man stems. Later in most languages the mar-stems were 
ousted by the man-stems. In Hittite the gen. sg. of neuter 
stems in -mar is in -mas (arnummar 'bringing', gen. sg. 
arnummas). It is usually said that there has been assimilation 
of ffln in such genitives, but this cannot be proved, and the 
alternative theo~y is possible that such genitives are formed from 
the unextended m-stem. Here we may compare certain Vedic 
instrumentals, draghmii, rasma, (draghman- ' length " rasman­
, rein ') which in the same way may well be formed frolll the 
simple m-stem and not from the extended stem in -man. 
Thematic derivatives from man-stems frequently appear 
without the final element of this suffix: priyddhiima-
f fond of 
home J, viSvdkarma- ' accomplishing all ' containing the stems 
dhaman- and kdrman-; d. also dhdrma- masc. 'law': dhdr­
man- nt. 'id'; e-ma-
way, course': eman- tid'; t6kma­
I 
· shoot, offspring': t6kman-' id ' ; ydk§ma- ' disease': ydk~­
man- ' id ' ; danna-' destroyer ' : darmdn-' id '. In these cases 
also there is no evidence to support the theory of a change mn to 
tn, and the thematic type illustrated by these examples must 
t 
have been based on the simple m-stem. 
The suffix -ma makes a fair number of adjectives and nouns 
of adjectival origin: ajma-' career, march J (Gk. OrJ.'os; man­
stem in cijman-, Lat. agmen), idhma-
I fuel " gri~md- • summer' 
(gr-i~-md-, d. guru- ' heavy'), gharma- ' heat' (originallyadjec­
I
tival, d. Gk. 8EPP.OS, Lat. formus 
hot '). jihnui- {athwart, 
oblique', tigmd- ' sharp' (Gk. Q'T£yp.os ' puncture', n-stem in 
GTiYJ.'a, nt.), dasmd- 'wonderful' (dasmdnt-
id '), dhuma­
f 
• smoke' (d. mar-stem in dhumrd-) , nartna- ' sport, pastime' 
(also ndrman- nt. ( id '), yudhma- ' fighter " rukma- ' ornament' I 
vamd- • charming • (J-van-), sagma- ' benctficial ',syiima-' black' 
(sy«va-, with alternative suffix), hima-
I cold, frost '. The adjec­
tive 1,1ma- ' helper' has anomalously the accent on the root, but 
the weak grade shows that this is not original. There are a 
number of thematic action nouns with the normal radical 
accent and masculine gender, presumably to avoid the repeti­
tion of m : dharma-
< law J, bhdma- • illumination J, k~/ma- ' re­

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
sidence; security', sarma- 'flowing', soma- ( the pressed out 
juice of the soma plant' (Av. haoma-), stoma- .'hymn of praise', 
h6ma- 'offering'. The customary alternation of accent be­
tween substantive and adjective appears in sriima- ' lameness' 
and sriima- ' lame '. 
The gradation -amd appears in dasama- ( tenth' (i.e. dasam-d-, 
Lat. decimus; ddsa, decem), saptamd ' seventh' (after which 
a~tamd-' eighth '), madhyamd-' middlemost ',adhama- ' lowest' 
(Lat. infimus). paramd- ( furthest, highest'. From the ordinal 
saptamd- there is extracted tama which is applied to other 
numerals (vi1!f-satitama-, etc.). This is identical with the super-
I,  
1ative suffix -tama which presumably arose in the same way: 
antama- ' nearest, most intimate' (Av. antJma-, Lat. intimus), 
uttamd- 'highest ' J ugratama- ' strongest " miljhu$/ama- ( most 
gracious " matftama- 'most motherly', ratnadhatama- -( most 
wealth-giving ., etc., etc. 
A compound suffix -ima appears rarely: agrimd-' foremost', 
and in combination with other suffixes, krtrima- ' artificial " 
bhidelima- ( fragile'. etc. Other combinations of suffixal mare 
-mi: (masc.) urmi- (wave' (Av. varami-, AS. wielm), rasmi­
~"G~ (rein, ray' ; (fern.) bhami-' earth'; -mi, (fern.) lak$mt ' mark, 
sign', surmi ' tube'; -ma: hima' cold season', k$umii ' flax '. 
2U:"~ 
§ 16. THE SUFFIXES i AND u 
These two suffixes, like the other suffixes, had in Indo­
European a gUI)ated form, ei, 81,1, and a weak form, i, ft, depend­
ing on the position of the accent. They could also be vrddhied 
under the same circumstances as the other suffixes, and in 
general they develop on the same lines. The neuters were the 
most primitive type. and on the basis of these, adjectives could 
be formed by accenting the- suffix, old neuters may be trans­
ferred to the masc.-fem. class, a process which is very common 
in the case of these suffixes; there are neuter thematic ex­
tensions, and adjectives are formed by adding the accented 
thematic vowel. They combine with other suffixes in the usual 
way; of these combinations the suffixes -ira, -in, -ina, Mri, -ni, 
-var, -vara, -ura, -van, -vana, -una, -vant~ -ru, -nu, -is, -us, -yas, 
-vas, -i~a, -U$a, -it, -ut, -vat, -ti, -tu, -ima, -mi have already been 
mentioned. 
Neuter nouns in -i are rare; it is a type that early tended to 
become extinct, largely by the transference of such stems to the 

177 
THE :FORMATION OF NOUNS 
masc.-fem. class. The few that remain are mainly defective. 
Of these sami • work ' is indeclinable; dsthi < bone', dk# ' eye '. 
sdkthi <,thigh' and dddhi 'curd' substitute an n-stem in declen­
sion (gen. sg. asthnds, ak~1JdsJ sakthnds, dadhnds) ; viiri, 'water' 
adds n to the stem in the same circumstances (gen. sg. varitz,as J d. 
the same thing with neuter u-stems, and occasionally elsewhere, 
e.g. siras, sir~1;tds); hardi ' heart' substitutes the root stem 
(gen. sg. hrdds, etc.). There is one rare neuter with the com­
pound suffix ··vi, srkvi which inflects like vari. 
The neuters have not preserved an inflection in which the i­
suffix is preserved throughout, in contradistinction to the 
neuter tt-stems where such exists (mddhu, mddhvas). It can be 
traced however in the declension of avi-
t sheep " gen. sg. dvyas. 
This type of inflection contrasts strongly with the adjectival 
inflection (agnes, etc.; in the end this becomes the only in­
flection), and when the similar opposition in the u-stems is con­
sidered (mddhvas; s·un6s) it becomes clear that this first type of 
declension is that proper to the ~euter nouns, as opposed to the 
adjectives. The difference is due to the different accentuation of 
the tW0 types of stem, corresponding to that which we have 
found elsewhere. The declension of dvi- indicates that it was 
originally a neuter; it has been transferred, on account of 
natural gender. but has retained some of its old features in de­
clension. Greek has the same inflection in this word, and retains 
the more ancient alternating accent: or.'), ol6s. 
There are occasional neuter i-stems which have come to be 
used as adverbs: sdci t with ., prdti • against' (pr-ati, ti-stem). 
Often original neuter i-stems have been replaced by various 
extensions: ndbhya-
nave' retains the old neuter gender of 
t 
the i-stem which in nJbhi- • navel J has been replaced by the 
feminine gender. An old neuter *mddhi 
< middle' (in Av. 
mai8yairya-
< belonging to the middle of the year' for *mad-hi­
yarya-) is replaced by mddhya- nt. (originally madnyam-, m­
stern, d. above); likewise krdvi 'raw flesh' (dkravin.asta-) is 
enlarged to kravya- (kravyJd-, cf. Lith. kraujas), and alterna­
tively by addition of the s-suffix to kravi~-. Similarly the 
neuters arci~- 'flame J. roci$- 'light' and soci~-
flame' are
t 
s-extensions of old neuters in -i, but the i-stems arci- mase., 
sod- fern., ruci-, roci- fern. have been transferred from the neuter 
to masculine or feminine gender. 
This and similar evidence makes it quite clear that neuter 

THE FORMATION OF 
NOU~S 
action nouns in -i were originally common. Further evidence 
comes from another quarter. At a time when these formations 
were readily made, the whole category of i-neuters was incor­
porated in the verbal conjugation, and served to form 
aorists of the third person singular. As such they are well re­
presented in Indo-Aryan and Iranian: tdri, jdni, darsi, piidi, 
siidi; with augment dkari, etc. Similarly Av. sriivi ( is heard " 
etc. The accent is on the root as regularly in the case of neuter 
stems. 
Neuter u'-stems remain more common than neuter i-stems. 
They are regularly accented on the root and not uncommonly 
have vrddhi: mddhu 'honey , (Gk. ,..d.8v, AS. med'u), vdsu 
< property', iiyu-
< life' (RV. I,89,9 and 3,49,2, restored from 
evidence ofmetre),jdnu-' knee' (Gk. yovv, Lat. genu, Ritt.genu), 
daru wood' (Gk. Sopu, Hitt. taru) silnu 'summit, top' (also
I 
mase.), ddnu (moisture I (also fern.), pdsu ' domestic animal' 
(RV.3. 
23. Goth. fa-ihu, Lat. peeu; elsewhere transferred to 
the masculine and accented on the suffix). smdsru ' beard " dsru 
, tear' (Tach. A. akru-nt pl.), jdtu ' gum' (AS. ewidu), jdtru 
/ collar-bone 1 (also jatru- mase.), tiilu 'palate I, trdpu · tin " 
yilsu ( sexual embrace', snilyu ' sinew I, iitau ' sieve'. 
The u-stem could serve throughout as the basis of inflection. 
This type of neuter intlection is seen in mddhu ' honey " gen. 
sg. mddhvas and vdsu (wealth I gen. sq. vasvas. The same type 
appears in Gk. yovvos, SOVp6S, with the more ancient termina­
tional accent in the gen. sg. which Sanskrit has abandoned for 
the fixed radical accent as in other kinds of neuters (gen. sg. 
niimnas, vdcasas, etc.). The old terminational accent is seen in 
gen. sg. PaSvds but it has come to be associated with an altered 
type of stem. The old IE neuter plku {Lat. pecu, etc.} is pre­
served in one instance in the If.gveda (see above) as pdsu, show­
ing that the change is of recent origin. The change of gender in 
the usual PaSu- is due to natural gender. The change of accent 
which has also occurred is due to the old terminational accent of 
paSvds gen. sg'J etc. Since the normal neuters have adopted the 
fixed radical accent, the only stems in which there is commonly 
altelnation of accent from stem to suffix in declension are 
suffixally accented masculines with reduced grade of suffix in the 
weak cases: nom. sg. Pitii, dat. sg. Pitre, nom. sg. Pu~ii, gen. 
sg. PU;;1}ds, etc. On this analogy it is easy to see how a suffixally 
accented pasvds (after the style of the old neuters) still pre­

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
179 
served at the time of the change of gender should bring about 
the suffixal accentuation of the new nom. sg. pasus. In the 
same way we may judge pitu- ' food " gen. sg. Pitvds, which 
from being an action noun and from having the neuter type in­
flection, may also be regarded as a transferred neuter. The stem 
krdtu- ' intelligence', old neuter for the same reasons, has on 
the other hand established radical accentuation throughout. 
Alternatively neuter u-stems operate in the weakest cases 
with an extended suffix -un-(d. viiri~as gen. sg.): gen. sg. 
mddhunas, vtisunas, dru~as; Loc. sg. dyuni (d. Gk. a'lFev, loco 
without ending), sdnuni; gen. loco duo janunos (d. Toch. A. 
kanwer{lt ( knees' with strong form 'Jf same suffix appearing in 
dual). Greek, when extending the suffix in these cases, has the 
extra t-suffix as with other neuter n-stems: gen. sg. YOVVUTOS'J 
oovpaToS'. 
In addition the Veda has sonle forms from these stems in 
which the adjectival type of inflection. is employed: dros, snos, 
mddhos. This is not surprising since the adjectival type of in­
flection has become universal in i- and u-stems by the classical 
period, and the process was already far advanced in the earliest 
period, only a few of the old type being left. 
Beside the neuter i- and it-stems there is a fair number of 
action nouns in -i and -it which appear as masculines orfeminines. 
The action nouns in -i are normally feminine: jdZP-i-
mutter­
I 
ing " rd1!thi- ' speed " rdji- ' direction ' (Lat. regia with addi­
tional n-suffix; d. the same feature in connection with the 
ti-stems, above), ropi- ( pain', dhrtiji-
impulse, force' I ndbhi­
i 
i navel' ; tvi~i-' splendour', ruci- {light'; with suffixal accent, I1rn
sani- ' winning', iiji- ' contest', kr~i- ( ploughing', citi- ( under­
standing " nrti- t dancing " bh1tj!- ( benefiting '. The few datives 
of i-stems classified as infinitives have likewise suffixal accent, 
drsdye to see', yudhdye ' to light " etc. Masculines are rare: 
I 
arci- ( ray I, dhvani- ( noise', rayi-
I wealth '. 
With the i-stems as with the ii-stems the old rules about 
accent and apophony have long been superseded. All possible 
types are represented (jdlpi- J sani-, tvi~i-, kr#-) and the varia­
tions are of no grammatical significance. 
Obviously rajl'­
f 
I direction " which has a connection in Lat. regio represents the 
oldest type. In rayt-, gen. sg, rayds (for raHi-, raHyds, earlier 
rdHi-, raHyds) we may recognise the same accent development 
as has taken place in PaSu, pasvt.s. The differences in apophony 

180 
THE 
I~ORMATION OF NOUNS 
between dhvani- ' noise' and dhulli- ' roaring' are those that 
exist between action and agent nouns, but the' accent position is 
reversed. Obviously very complicated changes, which cannot 
now be followed, have affected the i-stems to produce this com­
plete lack of system. This is associated with the fact that in 
(his type of stem the earliest mass transfers from the neuter of 
action nouns took place. 
011 the other hand the non-adjectival masculine and feminine 
u-stems have as a rule accent and gUI)a of root: masc. dsu­
· life' (as- ( to be ': Av. a?Jhu-) , svdru-
< stake, post " mdnu­
, man', bdndhu- 'relation '; fern. jdsu- ' exhaustion', dhdn'u­
· sandbank', pdrsu- 'rib', sdru- 'dart', hdnu 'jaw' (Gk. ylvvS', 
Tach. A. sanwe1.n du.). The words atJts1l- . filament, ray' (Av. 
ifsu- ' shoot '). retlU- ' dust' and sanku- ' peg. stake' have final 
accent, but at the same time gUI)a of root. The accent of baku­
I arm • disagrees with that of Gk. 7ifixvS'; the apophony shows 
the Greek to be original. The weak grade of the roof in i~u­
masc. and fem. ' arrow' and sindhu- mase. and fern. ' river 1 is ex­
ceptional; they are probably of adjectival origin with the shift 
of accent seen frequently in nominalised adjectives. 
There is a small number of neuters in -ya to be classified as 
thematic extensions of i-stems: mddhya-' middie ' (see above), 
kravyaO , raw flesh J, ndbhya- ' nave " ajya- ' clarified butter" 
drdvya- ( substance', rajya- ( kingdom' (Ir. rige). The forma­
tion is not uncommon in tatpuru!?a compounds of the type 
havirddya-
eating the oblation', hotrvarya- {choosing a sacri­
t 
ficial priest ., brah1nabh£iya- {becoming Brahma '. In sa'khya­
• friendship' as opposed to sdkhi- the normal accentual relation 
is reversed because sakhyd- is a secondary neuter, just as in the 
case of hotrd- nt. : hdtar- masc. (see above, p. I37). In hfdaya­
, heart J the thematic extension is added to the gUI)ated suffix. 
The neuter suffix -ya originating as a simple extension of -i 
has developed independently and on a very wide scale in the 
formation of secondary neuters, either with vrddhi, as usually 
in the later language, saubhiigya- • welfare '. etc.. or in some 
cases without. dutya- ' embassy •t etc. 
As with the other neuter suffixes adjectives and nouns of 
adjectival type could be made from neuter i and u stems by 
shifting the accent to the suffix. For instance we have, with 
the oldest type of apophony, the IE neuter pelu (Goth. filu 
• much ') and with accentuation of suffix and reduction of root 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
181 
an adjectival stem pleu- which appears in Gk. 7T),'€£S {for 
*11AEF-ES}. The system has undergone various modifications, 
and several different types of declension have emerged as a 
result. 
(I) The first, and oldest type, is represented by sdkhi-, nom. 
sg. sdkha • friend '. This is characterised by vrddhi of the nonl. 
sg'J and in declension it follows the general lines of the declen· 
sion of the agent nouns in rand n (nom. acc. dat. sg. sdkha. 
sdkbayam, sdkhye; svdsii, svdsaram, svdsre). This rare type is 
found also in apratd RV. 8, 32, 16 (nd soma apratd pape ( soma 
is not drunk which gives not a return '), and in A v. kava nom. 
sg. (kavi- title of kings, Skt. kav£ ' wise man '). In Sanskrit this 
type has usually been replaced by that in which the nom. and ace. 
sg. terminate in -is and -im, but considerable traces remain to 
show that the formation was originally more widely used. 
,The feminine derivatives Agndyi and M andvi are based on 
the old vrddhied nominative singulars *Agnd(y) and *Mandv. 
An old vrddhied nom. sg. forms the first member of the com­
pounds Agndvi~ttu (d. matapitarau) and kaviisakhd-
he who 
t 
enjoys the friendship of the wise '. 
Above all the usual 
form of the loco sg. of i- and u- stems (agnd, later agnau, sunau, 
etc.) can only be explained as a locative without ending equi­
valent to the old vrddhied nom. sg. of adjectival stems. 
(2) The few u-stems which have retained vrddhi in the nom. 
sg. add the nominative s to this. The type is represented in _ 
Sanskrit nom. sg. dyaus <. sky, sky-god I (Gk. ZeuS'; the mean­
ing sky-god' is the original one, and this accounts for the
t 
adjectival form of the word) and in gaus i cow'. It is somewhat 
more frequent in Iranian. ~xamples being O. Pers. dahyaus 
t 
r
land' and Av. hiBiius ' companion' and uzbiizaus with up­
lifted arms'. In Avestan a tendency to differentiate adjectival 
and nominal declension is seen in the contrast between uzbiizaus 
and biizus ' arm ' in the nom. sg. and between dari1go-arstaem 
and friidal-fsaam as opposed to ar!tim 
spear' and pasum
f 
, domestic animal · in the acc. sg. In Greek this type has become 
productive, and a distinction has been developed between agent 
nouns of the type fJaUlAEUS 'king' YOVEUS 
parent' (: Skt.
i 
janu-~- nt.) and the adjectives of the type 110.:\US. 
The Vedic nom. sg. ves bird' is also of this type, but the
t 
gu1,la instead of vrddhi is unusual arid unexplained. The corre­
sponding Latin word avis confonns to the usual type of i-stems. 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
Gk. <pov egg' *( <owyom) is a thematic extension of an old
I 
neuter 
' egg' (with vrddhi of root as frequently in i- and 
u- stems). Skt. vis is therefore a formation of adjectival type 
(' one connected with eggs, egg-bearer ') and the suffixal accent 
which is proper to adjectives has brought about the reduction 
and disappearance of the radical vowel. 
(3) The usual adjectival type forms the nom. and acc. 
singular in -is, -im, -us, -U1'n. Adjectives in accented -u are very 
common and frequently have corresponding forms in other IE 
languages: 
tr~1i,-
'thirsty I 
(Goth. 
jJaursus 'dry'). ripu­
· treacherous, enemy' (Lith. lipt'ts 'sticky, slimy'), Prthu­
· broad I (Av. pJraeU- • id I, Gk. 7TAan}) . fiat', Lith. ptatus 
'broad '}, raghu-,laghu- (swift, light' (Gk. eAaxvs),guru- ·heavy' 
(Gk. {3apus Goth. kaurus), bahu- ' much' (G'k. 7Taxus ' thick '), 
puru-, pulu- ' many' (Gk. 1TOAVS; the corresponding neuter in 
Goth. filu), Ur1l- 'broad' (Av. vouru-, Gk. (Upus), tanu- ' thin' 
(Gk. TavvO), aStt- ' swift' (Av. asu-, Gk. 6JKus), svadu- · sweet J 
(Gk. 
~Sus), atJ'Lhu- 'narrow' (Goth. aggwus, O. 51. 9:zu-ku), 
rjlt- 'straight' (Av. ;;rJZu-) , krdhu- 'shortened, mutilated' 
jiiyu- ' victorious " daru- ' destroying', nrtu- ' dancer', piyu­
• spiteful " valgtt- ' handsome', vidhu- • solitary', sayu- · lying', 
siidhu- ' good '. 
The accent in gurus nom. sg., etc., is what is expected for 
adjectives, but it is in complete contradiction to the weak 
grade of the suffix which appears in the nom. acc. sg. It follows 
clearly that such a form of adjective cannot have remained un­
altered from the beginning. \lVe have seen that an older type is 
represented in a few archaic examples and that evidence exists 
that this was once more widely spread. The forms in -us, -um 
may therefore be regarded as substitutes for this older type, 
but they are very ancient substitutes because they o~cur 
not only in the languages represented in the examples quoted 
above, but also in Hittite: nom. sg. alJuJ • good J, parkus 
, high " etc. 
The strong form of suffix which should go with the accent, 
but which has been replaced in the nom. acc. sg. appears in the 
case of these stems in the dat. and gen. sg. Here the adjectival 
declension (agnes, guros) is differentiated from what remains of 
the oldneu~er declension (mddhvas) in a way that accords with 
the position of the accent in the two types. The reduction of 
the tennination of the gen. sg. to -s in accordance with the old 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
183 
rules of apophony shows that this form is 
ancient. The 
same guJ)a is found in Goth. sunaus, Lith. sunails and, without 
reduction of the termination, in Gk. ~olos and Hitt. a/sawas. 
The distinction between neuter declension and adjectival de­
clension appears elsewhere: Hitt. genuwas as~ opposed to 
assawas, etc. 
The extension of the gUI)ated suffix to the dat. and gen. sg. 
distinguishes these stems from the adjectival n- and r-stems. 
The latter are not normally distinguished in form in these cases 
from the neuter stems (yaknds, uk~1Jds), because the adjectival 
stems retain the terminational accent. But outside Sanskrit 
there is some evidence that even these stems shared to some 
extent the tendency, notably in the case of Av. pitars gen. sg. 
which is parallel in every way to agnes and sunos. On the other 
hand we have seen that sdkhii. dat. sdkhye follows the type of 
the adjectival r- and n-stems, showing that two alternative types 
of inflection existed for adjectival stems. One became pre­
dominant in r- and n-stems. the other in i- and u-stems, but to 
a certain extent both are represented in each of the two classes 
of stem. 
The root in these adjectives has usually the weak form in 
accordance with the accentuation. In the case of su-
I good' as 
opposed to Hitt. assus, Gk. EUS the suffixal accent has resulted 
in the 'complete reduction of t4e radical vowel. Since the word 
has ceased to be used except in composition, there is no evidence 
as to its earlier inflection, but in Av. hao-sravah- the gU1).ated 
suffix which is in accordance with the adjectival accent is repre­
sented. The prefix ku-
I bad' appears to be of the same nature. 
The usual association of this with the interrogative pronoun can 
hardly be justified. so we may take it to be au-adjective, 
similar in form and function to suo 
There are a few instances where corresponding neuters exist 
beside adjectives in -u: ilyu-
length of life I (formed with 
t 
simple u-suffix and vrddhi from the IE root ai- ' to -:> .....'r\r\T·+'r'.... 
give', Le. lone's allotted span '): ayu-
I alive, mortal'; Gk. 
1TWV ' herd, flock': Skt. payu- ' protector '. The plural jatrdvas 
, cartilages of the collar bones' differs in meaning from the 
radically accented neuter jatru- ' collar-bone' and is therefore 
likely to be an adjectival form. Earlier it may be presumed that 
such doublets were more regularly met with, and the interaction 
of the two types will account for radical guna or Vfddhi appear-
G 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
ing in the suffixally accented adj~ctives. It is clear that the 
strong form of the radical element in ayu- derives from the 
neuter ayu where it is in accordance with the rules of apophony, 
and it may be assumed that similar mutual influence of the two 
contrasting types accounts for the form of such adjectives as 
asu-
swift', etc. The Hitt. nt. assu is used as a noun in the
i 
sense of ( goods, property' (like SId. vdsu), and as such it must 
be regarded as continuing the primary neuter on which the 
adjective was built (tsu: (e)seu-). From this source comes the 
gUJ)a in Hitt. assus, Gk. 1.6) as opposed to the reduction of the 
root in Skt. su-. No doubt also the early prevalence of the form 
of the nom. acc. sg. in -us, -um, as/opposed to the forms with 
strengthened suffix, was assisted" by .the coexistence of such 
neuters. Obviously an easy alternative for distinguishing the 
two types existed in the simple addition of the terminations -s, 
~m to the neuter stem in these cases. As a general rule this was 
done in conjunction with the retention of the adjectival accent. 
On the other hand radical accent appears in d~u-' fine, small " 
mddhu- {sweet • and vasu-
t good '. The two latter stems occur 
more abundantly as neuter nouns, and their adaptation as 
adjectives with the minimum change of form appears to be 
comparatively late. 
Adjectives and nouns of adjectival origin terminating in the 
i-suffix, and inflecting after the same pattern as the u-ad jec-
tives above, are fairly numerous: agni- 'fire' (Lat. ignis, 
etc.), apt (friend' (Gk. 7JTTws t friendly, kind'. thematic), kaPi~ 
, monkey' (originally adj. of colour, cf. kapild-), kavi- 'wise 
man' (older inflection in Avestan, ef. above), kiri- ' singer " 
kri¢i- ' playing', jiimi- 'consanguineous,' closely related' (d. 
Lat. gemi-nus 'twin'), nadi- 'roarer', svari- (noisy', etc.;  
with radical accent f~i- . seer'. kiiri- ' singing hymns', gfbhi­
, containing " muni-
(sage J, suci-
'shining, pure', hdri­
( green ',t-arvi- {overcoming " plu~i-
t flea' (d. Alb. pl'est, Arm.  
lu, etc.; J-pht' hop, jump ').  
As with the action nouns in -i there is complete absence of 
rule in the matter of accent and apophony. For this reason it is 
not always possible to decide to which class a noun originally 
4 c fi1C belongs, e.g. asi- ' sword' (Lat. ensis), giri- 'mountain' (Av. 
W;\(c  gairi-), tihi- ' snake' (Gk. EXtS', ocp;c;) , matti..: ' jewel ',etc. The 
original system, however, has left its mark in declension (agnes 
as opposed to dvyas; d. Hitt. !allaias: lJalkias), in the same 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
18S 
way as in the u-declensi9n. As with the u-stems the adjectival 
declension has spread at the expense of the nominal, and to an 
even greater extent. 
As with the suffixes previously dealt with, thematic adjectives 
could be made on the basis of i- and u-stems, and this served as 
an alternative to the type with accented suffix. Thus Lat. 
socius · ally J bears the same relation to Skt. sdkhi-. nom. sg. 
sdkhii friend' (d. the old neuter stem preserved as adverb, 
I 
sdci), as Hitt. vestaras to Av. viistar- or Gk. liirpos to larrlP' 
The suffix -ya is very frequent and at an early period in Indo­
European it developed widely as an independent ~uffix. so thai 
the connection with i-stems has for the most part ceased to 
exist. The way the suffix originated is made clear by such 
examples in Sanskrit as urmya- · undulating " sf1Jya-' furnished 
with a sickle ., kavyd- 'wise' J dvya- ' coming from a sheep " 
bhumyd- ' terrestrial '. yonyd- • forming a receptacle'. aryd­
· kind, devoted, pious', which have corresponding i-stems 
(urmi-, sf1Ji-, kavi-, dvi-, bhami-. yoni-, ari-). The suffix, 
origin a ting in this way, became widespread at an early period 
producing adjectives meaning 'belonging to ... , connected 
with'. In the case of thematic stems the suffix is substituted for 
the thematic suffix. In the case of a word like ajrya- ' belonging 
to the-plain ' (Gk. aypws • wild ') the derivative could have been 
formed on the old neuter r-stem (ager) from which djra- and 
Gk. aypos are themselves derived. It is in some such way that 
this type of substitution must have been evolved. 
In the case of the derivative -ya the accent in Sanskrit may 
appear either on the suffix or on the root: (a) agryd-. agriyd­
{foremost', divyd-
heavenly' (d. Gk. oro!)'), satyd-
true',
I 
i 
griimyd- 'of the village', somyd- 'relating to Soma', riijyd­
, regal' (La t. regius).; 
(b) dngya- 'of the limbs', gdvya­
i bovine', ttdrya- {manly', jdmbhya- ' an incisor tooth' (Gk. 
yOlLtPwS'), k~dmya- ' terrestrial' (Gk. X8ovwS'). pttrya-
r paternal' 
(Gk. 1To.:rpws, Lat. patrius), siirya- 'sun J (Gk. -rlfD\ws, -,j'Atos), 
vdnya- ' belonging to the forest I, etc. 
This suffix, associated with accented root, is commonly used 
to produce adjectives from verbal foots which function as 
gerundives: guhya ' to be hidden'. ttJ,ya- ' to be wvfshipped ' J 
y6dhya- ' to be fought', hdvya- ' to be invoked', jdyya-, jeya­
{to be conquered J J vdcya-
I to be spoken', etc. 
Vrddhied derivatives appear abundantly from the earliest 

I 
186 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
period: adityd-' descendant of Aditi " graivya- ' relating to the 
neck', prajiipatyd- ( relating to Praj apati " p&iicajanya- ' relat­
ing to the five peoples', etc. 
In the Sanskrit suffix -ya two suffixes have been confounded. 
These are distinguishable in the Veda by means of the metre 
which shows that there is a monosyllabic -ya appearing in such 
words as kavyd- ' wise', dvya- ' belonging to a sheep " vdnya­
, of the forest " etc., a'nd a disyllabic suffix -iya appearing in 
ddmiya- 'belonging to the house' t rdthiya- (relating to a 
chariot J, jdniya- ' relating to the people', viSiya- ' belonging to 
the conlmunity', udaniya- ' watery I, etc. Of these -ya is the 
suffix discussed above, and it was formed on the basis of the 
suffix -i by the addition of the thematic vowel. On the other 
hand the suffix -iya represents earlier -iRa and it was formed on 
the basis of the suffix -iR> f. These formations are therefore 
dealt with in the next section in connection with that suffix. 
A small number of thematic formations have the i-suffix in 
the gUQa grade. Such are: sasayd-' abundant, frequent' (d. 
sdsiyas- '·more numerous' and sdsvant-) , sU$mdya- 'strength­
ening', gavayd- ' Bos gavaeus', sdnaya-, sandya- ' old " tdnaya­
, offspring, son', kupaya-
'seething', ddsataya-
'tenfold' 
(: dasati- 'decade'); also a couple of double formations 
hira1Jydya- 'golden', gavyaya-
(bovine'. 
The same type 
of suffix is found in other IE languages: Gk. xpvaEoS' ' golden". 
Lat. aureus, igneus, etc. 
Though the adjectival suffix -va is not uncommon, it never 
received anything like the extension of -ya, and its connection 
with the u-suffix, or other derivatives from it, remains in most 
cases evident. Examples with final accentuation are r$vd­
'lofty '(Av. ~r~!va- (upright, exalted 1. urVtf.;; (enclosure' 
(vf-
to surround, cover', originally adj. ( enclosed '), hrasvd­
r 
'short', urdhva- 'erect' (Av. 
<1r~Swa-, Lat. arduus) , takvd­
speedy' (beside tdkll-)' yahvd- ( young, youngest' (Av. yezivi 
fern. ; besideyahu- ( id '). rkvd- ( singing hymns' (beside fkvan-, 
f/roant-, 
id '), dhruvd-
C firm i (Av. drva-, O. Pers. duruva­
( sound, healthy'). malvd- ( foolish " syiivd- • dark' (Av. syiiva- ; 
beside syiimd- with'm-suffix), rat;vd- ' joyful, enjoyable' (be­
side rti1Jvan-),jivd.. ( alive,living being' (0. S1. iivU, Lith. gyvas, 
Lat. vivus, Osc. bivus nom. pl.), pakva- 'cooked, ripe' (adapted 
as past participle),sarvd- n. of a deity (Av. saourva-, lit. · one 
armed with a sar'U-, ' dart '), sr'ltva- ' ladle " sikva ' skilful' (be­
I 

187 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
side sikvan- ( id '), kharva-
~ mutilated' (Av. kaurva- ( id '). In 
these, the most numerous examples, the original:' adjectival 
accent is preserved. A small number have radical accent: 
.asva- ( horse' (Lat. equus, Goth. aUva 0., etc. ; d. asu- ( swift '), 
sarva-
I all ' (Av. haurva-, Gk. o"os. ovAoS', etc.). piirva-.' former' 
(0. Sl.pr2':tvu),ptva-' fat' (besidepivan-' id '). Thestemkulva­
, bald' (Lat. calvus) appears only in the cpd. atikulva-. 
The u-suffix appears with gUI.1a in arttava- ' waving; flood l 
ocean " kesavti- ' long-haired' (d. Av. gaesav-' hair '), pdvfrava­
t having a metallic share' (pdviru-) , vidhdvii ' widow' (Lat. 
vidua, etc.; d. vidhu- • solitary '). 
In some cases -va has acquired the character of a secondary 
suffix: aiijiva- 'slippery', santivd· 'beneficial', sraddhivd­
.. credible'. riijiva-
'striped~ streaked; blue lotus', saciva­
, companion, minister'. 
Stems in -u are oCc;lsionally enlarged by the addition of the 
suffix -i : ghf~vi- {li-\i-ely, joyful' beside ghf~u- ( id'; other vi­
stems are dhruvi- ' firm', ddrvi- fern. ' ladle', jligrvi- ( wakeful 
dlidhrvi- ' sustaining', didtvi- {shining', susisvi- ' swelling or 
growing well (in the womb) " d. s{Su- ( child'. This addition 
appears also in other IE languages, notably in Latin, where all 
the old adjectival u-stems are supplanted by vi-stems: levis 
'light' (Skt.laghu-L mollis (soft' (Skt. mrdu). brevis,gravis, etc. 
Conversely -u is added to the suffix ~i producing the com­
pound suffix yu: ydjyu 'pious', sundhyu-
pure " sdhyu­
t 
'strong't manyu-masc. anger', mrtyu mase. 'death' (Av.
t 
m1Jr1J8yu-), dasyu- ' barbarian " bhujyu- ' wealthy'. In Sanskrit 
this has developed chiefly as a secondary suffix: duvasyu­
~ worshipping', udanyu- 'irrigating', adhvaryu- (a kind of 
priest '. It has come to be specially connected with the de­
nominatiye verbal base, devayu- (pious': devaydti (he is 
pious', etc., and it tends to acquire a desiderative meaning, 
vasuyu- ( desiring wealth ',etc. The formation is very produc­
tive in the Veda, but disappears almost completely in the later 
language. 
§I7. THE SUFFIX i AS UNION-VOWEL 
It was noticed above that the suffix t acquired under cert~in 
circumstances the character of an augment or special insertion 
between root and suffix (kr-t-ya- ' to be done', etc.). The suffix i 
also functions in this way in Sanskrit on an extensive scale. 

188 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
The use of i as a connecting link between root and suffix or be­
tween root and termination is' particularly common in the yerbal 
fonnation. The Indian grammarians call the i so used it. and 
according to their terminology the forms which take this i are 
called set (with it) and those that do not are called ani? (without 
if). The two types of conjugation may be illustrated by the 
following examples: 
I. Present, root-class, tsi~e, isidhve, Hire; future, pati~ydti, 
bhavi~ydti, vardhi~ydti; aorist, -i~, droci~am, djivi~am; desider­
ative, jijivi~ii.mi; perfect, I pI. oct. bubudhimd, tenimd, 3 pI. 
mid. bubudhire, ten ire ; pass. part. sankitd-, lajjitd-; gerund. 
patitva, yacitvii; infin. vdrdhitum, yricitum. 
II.. Present, root-class,dtsi. vitse, 
se~e; future, 
vak~ydti. 
chetsyati; 
aorist, 
-5, dcchaitsam, 
ddrak~am; desiderative, 
dldrk~ati, vivitsati; perfect I pI. act. cakrmd, jagrbhmd, 3 pI. 
mid. yuyujre, vividre; 
pass. part. krtd-, d!$#d-; 
gerund, 
chittva, krtvli; infin. kdrtum, drd#um. 
This i. is also found in nominal derivatives other than the 
participial and infinitival forms illustrated above. In the agent 
nouns in -tar it appears mostly in agreement with the forms of 
the infinitive and gerund: yacitdr-, vardhitdr-, etc., as opposed 
to kartdr-, dra~t:dr-. etc. Examples in the case of other suffixes 
are: 
prathimdn-
'breadth', khanitra-
(shovel', 
roci~~u1-
, shining', varivas- ' wide space', dtithi- ' guest' (as opposed to 
Av. asti-), dravitnu- ( running JJ etc. 
I t is not possible to formulate any simple general rule govern­
ing the presence or absence of this i in the verbal conjugation 
and elsewhere, but a general tendency is observed to use the 
set-forms where inconvenient consonant groups would result 
(paptimd, etc.). The use of -i- is more predominant in the later 
language than in the V eda. For instance the Vedic language has 
both -re and -ire in the 3 pI. mid. of the perfect, but the classical 
language knows only -ire; in ,later Sanskrit the stems in -i~ya 
account for three-quarters of the futures, while in the earlier 
language the larger proportion (five-ninths) are still formed 
with simple -sya-. This continues a process which had been 
going on in pre-Vedic times. Old Iranian, close as it is to San­
skrit, shows very few formations of this nature, which makes it 
dear that in the main the great extension of the use of -i- in the 
verbal conjugation is a special development of Indo-Aryan. 
Its adoption on such a large scale is clearly connected with 

THE FORMAtION OF NOUNS 
r89 
characteristic tendency of Indo-Aryan, observ'able from the 
very beginning, to get tid of consonant groups. 
To begin with the i in verbal and nominal derivation must, 
in such cases where it existed, have had etymological justifica­
tion, that is to say it must have been the suffix i compounded 
with other suffixes in the usual way. A number of such suffixes 
containing i have already been enumerated, -i~, -i~a, -ira, etc., 
formed on the basis of the i-suffix in the same way as -U~, -u~a, 
-ura, etc., are fonned on the ba::;isof the u-suffix. The suffixes 
forming the verbal stem are the same as those of the corre­
sponding nominal stems. For instance the stem of the -i~ aorist 
droci~am appears also in the nqun roci§- ' light'. stnce roci$­
( light' is an extension of the simpler i-stem in ro,.£-, ruci-, 
the verbal stem also is originally built up from tite i-stem. 
Similarly in the future the suffix syd is formed from the 
s-stem with the addition of the denominative yd, (the stems, 
vak~yd-ti, etc., differ only inapophony from denominatives of the 
type namasyciti). In' the same way the future in -i~ya was to 
begin with based on the i~-stem. As regards the form of the 
stembhavi~yd-, etc., are exactly parallel to the denominatives in 
-u$yd (uru~ydti, vanu~ydii), and in the ~gveda a number of such 
formations are clearly to be classed as denominatives. Such are 
avi§yd#, 
sani~ydti, which have beside them nominal forms 
(avi~y,t avi~yu-, sani~yu-) which 'are commonly associated with 
the denominative but never with the future. 
Those participles in -ita where the i may be considered to be 
original have incorporated an i-suffix which appears elsewhere in 
the inflection of the root. This is the case for instance in sitd 
~ bound' (sa- ' to bind ') where the suffix i is so frequently 
associated with the root that the simple root (aor. dsat) has be­
come comparatively rare; e.g. s-yciti t binds ',s-e-tave t to bind " 
si~iiya ' bound' 1 etc. The -ita of the participles from other roots 
t
in -a (sitd- ' sharp', ditd- ' bound " sthitd stood' I etc.) origin­
ates in the same way. The participle of causative and tenth class 
verbs (gamitd- : gamdyati, etc.) includes the suffix which is used 
in the formation of the present, and comparative evidence 
shows that this practice is old (d. Goth" gatarhips: gatarhjan; 
wasips: wasjan, etc.). The same connection is seen between 
participles in -ita and presents of the fourth class (kupitd: 
kupyati, cf. Lat. cupio, cupitus) or presents in athematic i 
(stanita-: stanihi, d. further stanayitnu-, tanyatu-, O. 51. sten/e, 

190 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
etc., for the prevalence of the i-suffix in connection with this 
root). A similar incorporation of suffixal u is seen in ddbhuta­
and dnatidbhuta- from the root dabh- (pres. dabh-n-o-ti). 
In the same way we may account for -itar beside -tar in the 
agent nouns: mar4itdr- 'forgiver', d. mr4dyati, mr4ayitku-, 
mr4ikd- (Av. m'Jrai.dika-L panitdr- 'praiser', d. pandyati, 
paniiydti, pani~#a, aor., panayii.yya, Pdni~#-); likewise vardhitdr-: 
vardhdya-, coditdr-: coddya-, etc. The process is illustrated by a 
similar development occasionally in connection with the u­
t
suffix. The agent nouns tarutdr-
t conqueror' I dhanutdr-
run­
ning swiftly' and sdnutar- ' winning' incorporate the u··suffix 
which appears in the present tense (tarute, ttirvati; dhdnvati ~ 
san6ti) and elsewhere (tdru~a- etc.). 
From these instances it is clear that the i in a fair number of 
verbal forms and nominal derivatives was etymologically justi­
fied, and the analysis in such cases does not differ from that of 
any other forms containing compound suffixes. What Indo-
Aryan has done is, on the basis of a modest number of such 
forms to extend the use of i in the verbal derivation on a vast 
scale. The analogical i which then comes to be so abundantly 
used, ceases to be subject to the usual analysis and acquires the 
character of a union vowel or euphonic augment. 
The i which appears in the alternative form of certain termin­
ations (papt-imd beside cakr-md, etc.) was also in origin .suffixal. 
There are some non-thematic presents in -i (svdPiti, svdsiti. 
dniti, jak#ti, etc.) "ith parallels elsewhere (Lat. capia, capis, 
capit, etc.). They are defective, and since they no longer form a 
complete present system, they have been attached to the root 
class, the i being treated as union vowel. There are also some 
scattered preterite forms (ajayit, badhithiis, atarima, aviidiran,. 
asth-ithiis, asthiran, etc.) which have become attached to the 
i§~aorist. This type of conjugation is based on the i~stem, just 
as Vedic tarute is based on a u~stem, so that-in -origIn tne i here 
is not different from suffixal i elsewhere. But it came to have 
the character of an addition to the termination and this enabled 
this type of tennination to be transferred to the perfect. The 
perfect stem is based only on the root, so the i in the perfect 
terminations can only be accounted for as a borrowing from the 
present and preterite forms of the above type where its presence 
is etymologically justified (bubudhimd, dadimd; bubudhil'e,. 
dadhire, etc., after aiiil'ima, tsire, etc.). 

191 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
§ lB. 
THE SUFFIXES ii, i, it 
The suffix -a has two functions. On the one hand it forms the 
feminine of adjectives in -a 
(bala~ masc. (boy', balii fern. 
I girl '), and on the other hand it appears as an ind~pendent 
suffix of derivation, producing action nouns, abstract nouns, 
and the like. In having the two functions, adjectival and non­
adjectival, it resembles the suffixes previously discussed, but it 
differs from them in that its adjectival use is confined to the 
formation of feminines. This was the result of specialisation since 
the feminine gehderwas not present in theearliest Indo~European, 
and as a result of this development of adjectival -a, the action 
nouns too, which to begin with did not differ from the ordinary 
neut'ers (ii, i.e. -aH, like -as, -ar, etc.), have acquired the feminine 
gender. 
The following are examples of action nouns and the like ter­
minating in the suffix -a in Sanskrit: kritjo. t play', daya ' pity J, 
ninda ' blame-', sankii ' doubt', hi1ftsa.(-injury', k$ama ' pat­
ience " bha$a 
speech " seva ' service " sprha 'desire', siikhii
t 
• branch " sipha whip' (d. Av. sif- ' to strike with a whip '), 
I 
dsa ' direction " ukhli (pot " ulkli 'meteor', vena 'longing', 
k~aPti r night " chaya ( shadow' (d. Gk. O'Kt.d), jarli ' old age " 
dO$a' evening " rasa' moisture' (0. S1. rosa, Lith. rasa' dew'). 
There is no consistent rule about the accentuation of such 
words, but final accentuation is the commoner; in the corre­
sponding forms in Greek (yoV7], etc.) final accentuation is the 
rule. The old general rule about the distribution of accent has 
obviously long ceased to have any relevance to this class. 
The suffix -a is added to the other primary suffixes in the 
usual manner, producing a series of compound suffixes: 
-na: 
tf~1)a' thirst " iir~ta 'wool' (Av. varana, Lith. vilna, 
etc-); -ana: jara1J,a ' old age', arhd1Ja t worth " kapana ( cater­
pillar' (d. Gk. KdfL117J ' id '); -ra, sura' strong liquor'," tamisra 
t darkness'; 
-sa, mani$a 'thought, wisdom'; -va, jihva 
, tongue' (Av. hizva), griva 'neck' (0. S1. griva 'mane '), 
6
dmJva 
I disease', apvd 'a kind of disease' 1 darva a kind of 
grass'; -ya, jayd • wife', ttuiya • magical, supernatural power', 
ityJ 'course', vidya 'knowledge', kriyii 'action', samajyii 
( assembly', etc.; -ta, k.r~1J,ata ' blackness " etc., etc. 
The suffix -i likewise is predominantly used for making 
feminines of adjectives) preferably from consonantal stems. In 

192 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
addition there are a small number of primary action nouns and 
the like. Such are : 
(a) Devi-declension: saci' power J. sami I holy work>. tdvi# 
< strength '> «sandi ' stool '. 
(b) Vrki-declension: nadf 'river'. dehi- 'wall, embank­
ment " start- 'barren cow' (G:k. (rn:'ipa), surmt ' tube', sr~i­
, sickle I, palalt- ( straw " sphigt- 'hip'. nandt- ' joy'. athart­
, flame " Ot,J- 'breast', k$o~i- {flood' j khari- · a measure', 
cakrt-
'wheel', .tandri-
'sloth, lassitude', tapant- 'heat' I 
lak$mt- 'mark, auspicious mark, good fortune', tart- ' raft'. 
tantri- ' string '. 
The suffix -u is used for making feminines to stems in -u 
(alternatively -vi is used, or the unaltered stem functions as 
feminine), e.g. tana-' thin " phalga-' reddish ',babhra- 'brown', 
corresponding to masculines tanu-, phalgu-, babhru-. 'It also 
forms·a small number of independent nouns, cama- 'dish I, 
tana-
body I, vadha- (bride', kadra- 'soma-vessel', jata­
j 
, bat " dhanit- ' sandbank " nabhanii-
well " svasra- ' mother­
I 
in-law' (0. S1. svekry, Lat. socrus). 
Sanskrit -a in this suffix resolves itself ultimately in Indo­
European into the thematic vowel + H. Similarly i' and u re­
present -i-H and -u-H. In this form the parallelism of these three 
suffixes to the three s-suffixes -as, -is, -us, becomes clear. The 
simple suffix is -aH, which like neuter -as appears with gU:Q.a, 
and in the compound suffixes -iH and -UH, old neuter i- and u,­
stems are extended by suffixal -H, in the same way as'they are 
extended by s in the compound suffixes -is and -us. Thus sami 
fern. is an extension of sami nt. (indecl.) (d. the relation of arC£­
and arcf$-, etc.) and dhana fern. • sandbank' along with 
dhanvan- nt. and dhanu~- nt. are alternative extensions of 
dhdnu- ' id J (fern., originally nt.) The two compound suffixes 
sometimes appear withgu:Q.a (vatya 'whirlwind ',jihvd' tongue'), 
as is alternatively the case with other compound neuter suffixes, 
vdrivas, etc. The close similarity in function between the H­
and s- suffixes in ma:king primary action nouns is seen from the 
frequent instances in which the two are found side by side in 
words of the same meaning: tdna, tanas 'offspring', jartl, 
jards-
old age', tanu, tdnu~- 'body', dhana-, dhdnu~, etc.
f 
Like the other primary neuter suffixes this -a has no specific 
meaning and stems in -a frequently occur side by side with root 
nouns, the extension adding nothing to the meaning: 
k~dp-, 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
193 
k~apd •night', tan-, tana • off!:ipring', dlS-, disa • direction" 
etc. 
The Cl-ction nouns in -ii, i, it, are fonned in precisely the same 
way as the neuter action nouns made with other suffixes, but 
differ from them in being feminine in gender. Since the feminine 
gender is a comparatively late development in Indo-European, 
it is to be expected that these stems were originally neuter. 
Direct evidence of this is provided by the neuter plurals of the 
type yugd. This -ii is the same as the a-suffix, which was used 
(like some of the other neuter suffixes) as a collective, and 
eventually as a plural. In this use the suffix still retains the 
indifference to the distinction between nominative and accusa­
tive which characterises neuter stems. The reason for the 
feminine gender of these action nouns is that these suffixes in 
their adjectival use became specialised as feminines, and the 
action nouns on account of similarity of form eventually fol­
lowed suit. 
We have seen that the normal accent of neuter action nouns 
was on the root. Little trace of the general system remains in 
the formation of these stems. The accent of the a-stems is 
variable, showing the same complete absence of rule which was 
observed in the i-stems. The nouns in i and u have a regular 
accent~ on the final. This accent is in complete contradiction 
to the general rule, but the apophony, with weak suffix, and 
usually gut;1a of root (tana-, deht) shows that this is not origin­
ally; only radical accentuation will account for such forms, 
IE tenuH, etc, A parallel shift of accent was observed in the 
neuter stems in -i~, havi$-, etc. 
There is a tendency with· the other neuter suffixes for the 
suffix n either to replace or to be added to the other suffixes. 
There are some traces of that system here. Corresponding to 
kanyli f girl " Av. kainyii, there is in Avestan a genitive sin~ular r 
"~UflO 7  kainino which is related to it in the same way as Skt. sir~1Jas to 
iiras. In Sanskrit this form of the stem appears in the Vedic geni­
tive plural kantniim. The-n- is normalJ!L.:the genitive plm:al and J 
the agreement between Sanskrit and Germanic (OHG. gebono, 
ON. runono), shows that its presence in a-stems goes back to 
Indo-European. It appears that this -n- is the heteroclitic ft­
suffix, which lIas been generalised in the genitiv..!;,.plural, but 
abandoned elsewhere, though A v. kainino shows that it could 
originally appear in other cases. -­
~(,>
1

194 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
Stems in -ti are used to form a number of adverbs, in the same 
way as is done with the neuter suffixes above. Such are: sddti. 
( always','purti ( formerly', dvitti ( doubly so " mr~d I falsely', 
saca 'with'. devata 'among the gods', sasvdrta 'secretly'. 
In this class are the absolutives in -tvii and -tvi (see above, 
p. 171 ). 
In their adjectival function these suffixes are principa.lly used 
to make the feminine stem of adjectives, etc.: nava' new', 
devi (goddess', madhd 'sweet', etc. This is the result of 
specialisation in the later Indo-European period. Originally, it 
must be assumed, adjectival 
-u were on a par with other 
suffixes used adjectivally, indifferent to gender, and having the 
usual relation to the corresponding action nouns. Traces of the 
more general use of a-stems as agent nouns survive in a number 
of languages which still have some masculine agent nouns in -a : 
Lat. scriba, agricola, nauta, Gk. vaVT7JS, 7foALTTjS, O. 51. sluga 
t servant', etc. Stems of this kind have totally disappeared 
from Indo-Iranian} but there remain in the Vedic language a 
number of masculine stems in -I} of which the commonest is 
ratht-
charioteer' as well as two rare and obscure masculines 
t 
in -u (prasu-, krkadasa-). These are the remnants of an older 
system in which adjectives and agent nouns Qf a general ~_ 
~ld be made with these suffixes in the same way as with~r 
;mffixe~ 
Some evidence that there originally existed a formal distinc­
tion between the action nouns and adjectives of this class is pro­
vided by the existence of two types of declension of i-stems in 
the Vedic language. One type is tepresented in the declension of 
rathi-, nom. sg. rathis, gen. sg. rathiyas and the other in that 
of devil nom. sg. devi, gen. sg. devyas. This distinction corre­
sponds exactly to that between the two types of i- and u-stems 
(gen. sg. dvyas, mddhvas: agnes. baMs). In the case of the -i- and 
u-stems there was evidence enough to show that one type was 
the declension proper to the neuter action nouns and that the 
other was the special adjectival declension. It is likely therefore 
that the same is the cause of the different declensions of the 
i-stems. The bulk of the feminines formed from adjectives and 
agent nouns (devt ' goddess t, Prthvi 'broad', adati ( eating • , 
jagmtt~i 'having gone', ndviyasi 
t newer', avitrl 
helper I,
j 
dhenumatf 'possessing cows', dmflvati (strong', sarftrajni 
• sovereign', rtiivari ' pious' and apatihgni not slaying her 
C 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
195 
husband', illustrate the various types) inflect in what according 
to this theory is the adjectival declension. The weak stem in 
the nom. acc. sg. is parallel to that of the i- and u-stems. The 
origin of the variation is not clear, but as with the i- and u­
stems, it appears that a more original form of the adjectival 
stem is preserved in the gen. sg., etc. 
Stems of the vrkt type comprise both action nouns and agent 
nouns together with some miscellaneous feminines. The de­
clension of this type (rathi-, gen. sg. rathiyas) and its accentu­
ation is closely analagous to that of the adjectives in -in (bali, 
baUnas). In the case of the latter t:ype it was observed that the 
generalisation of the weak stem (from gen. sg., etc., which were 
originally suffixally accented) was secondary, and that compara­
tive evidence indicated original vrddhied nominatives of the 
usual type. The same type of generalisation of the weak stem 
is likely to have happened in the case of ratht, vrki, etc., and in 
Avestan some traces of an older type of declension are preserved. 
The Avestan word for tongue is declined as follows: nom. sg. 
hizva J acc. sg. hizvtfm, instr. sg. hizva, gen. sg. hizva, loco sg. 
hizva, instr. pI. hizubil. This is clearly the same type of declen­
sion as is found in data, dat. sg. datre, sdkha, dat. sg. sdkhye, 
uk~dn-, gen. sg. uk~1Jds, etc., with weak form of suffix in the 
oblique cases. As remarked above there are two forms of adjec­
tival declension, one with the weak cases having the same fonn 
as the neuters (datre, etc.), and another with strong form of 
suffix and weak form of the gen. sg. termination in these cases 
(Av. pitars, Skt. agnes, etc.). Both types are found among 
i-stems (sdkhye: agndye) and among the i-steIns they are repre­
sented by vrki- (gen. sg. vrkiyas) and devi (gen. sg. devyas) re­
spectively. The oldest type of inflection is that which appears 
in the vii/u stem hizvii(ft in Avestan. Leaving aside the hetero­
clitic -t't- the same type of inflection appears in A v. kainya, gen. 
sg. kainfno and in Skt. kanyli, gen. pI. kantniim. Elsewhere the 
weak stem is gellcralised as in balt, balinas. Alternatively the 
strong form was generalised in which case there was a transfer 
to the a- declension: jihvd, jihviiyrls. 
The adjective mahii ' great' remains in Sanskrit the only 
non-feminine adjectival a-stem, and it is defective. Apart from 
compounds where it remains in use in classical Sanskrit, it 
appears only in the Veda in the acc. sg. masc. mahdm. The gen. 
sg., etc.; appear as mahds, etc. The other IE languages show g 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
in this root (Gk. /LJ'Ya~) and the h «gh) of Sanskrit is due to a 
combination and the H which originally belonged to the suffix. 
The original genitive was therefore meg-H-es with terminational 
accent and weakening of the suffix of the adjective (d. uk~1Jas, 
etc.). This is the only place outside the thematic and other 
derivatives to be mentioned below. where the ii, i.e. aH of the 
suffix appears in its weak form. Elsewhere the strong form is 
generalised in both action nouns and adjectives, between which 
no formal differences exist. In the neuter sg. of this adjective a 
stem mahiwithan extrasuffix-i is used (meg-H-i, d. Hitt. mekki-). 
The thematic vowel and other vocalic suffixes could be added 
to the suffix -all (ii) and the latter. being unaccented was 
weakened to H', This H remains in Sanskrit in the form of the 
aspiration of a preceding occlusive. Thus caturthd- 'fourth 1 
may be explained as *caturtii (<oaH) • fourness, group of four' 
+adjectival -a, i.e. 'one connected with four, fourness'. 
Similar1y ratha- (chariot' is formed by the addition of the 
thematic suffix to *rotaH> Lat. rota 'wheel'. Originally an 
adjective ( wheeled' it has had the accent thrown back on to 
the root. in comnlon with many other nominalised adjectives 
(vfka- ' wolf', etc.). The compound suffix -tha out of -t-H-a is 
not uncommon: artha- nt. ' object, aim " vdrutha- nt. ' protec­
tion '; yajatha-
'worshipping'. vak$atha-
m. 'growth> t 
sapdtha- m. 'curse', sacatha- m. 'companionship', sravdtha­
m. ' flowing', ucdtha- nt. ' utterance', viddtha- nt. ' worship' ; 
with final accent, giithd- m. ' song " bhrthd- ' offering); (neut.) 
uktha- ' utterance', tirthd- ' ford', yuthd- ' herd', rikthd- ' inheri­
tance '. Most of these forms seem to belong to the class of themat­
ically extended action nouns formed in exactly the same way as 
ndk$atra-, pdtatra-, vddhatra-, etc., above. Those finally accented 
are presumably adjectival in origin, e.g. rikthd- ' that which is 
left '. The th in the suffixes -thi (dtithi- ' guest ., etc.) and -thu 
(vepathur' quivering " etc.) is in the same way a combination of 
the suffixes t and H; d. -tri, -tru. 
Other 
of aspirates concerning this suffix are: 
sakhi- ' friend' from sac- ' to associate (simple aH> ii suffix in 
sdca ' with '); makha-' happy, exulting' from a *makaH to be 
compared with Gk. luiKap (old neuter adapted as adjective) with 
variant r-suffix; nakhd-' nail t, where ultimately both k and 
H are suffixal since other languages have a variant g (Lat. 
unguis, etc.), saiJkhd- ' shell " Gk. K6yxoS (adjectival accent, 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
197 
original meaning 'curved, coiled' I saphd- • hoof s r striker', 
,,~. -f "
d. Gk. K67TTW and S1. kopyto}, sindhu- ( river J for sind-H-u-, cf. 
syand- {to flow I 
; 
sddhi~-' seat, abode' for sad-H-is-: sad- {to 
sit '; aghd-' wicked J perhaps from an *dgaH side by side with 
ligas, Gk. <iros ( sin'. 
§Ig. OTHER SUFFIXES 
Of the remaining suffixes the most important is the suffix -ka. 
In other IE languages the element k may appear as a non­
thematic suffix: La!. senex t old man', Gk. p..:ipag < lad, lass'. 
This state of affairs has disappeared in Sanskrit, which has 
corresponding to these forms the thematic stems sanakd- told' 
and maryakd- {young man'. The suffix rarely appears in 
primary formations in Sanskrit; such cases are su~ka- {dry j 
(Av. huska-), sroka- {call; fame; verse' (: sru- ' to hear') and 
dtka- {garment' (Av. a8ka-). Normally it is added after vocalic 
suffixes, in particular after the thematic vowel. The latter type 
is rare in other IE languages but in Sa~skrit it is exceedingly 
frequent. Examples are diirakd- {distant', vamrakd- {ant',
t" e........  
arbhakd- < small " kumarakd-
t little boy', putrakd.. ( little son '. 
It is often simply an extension which adds nothing to the mean­
ing, but also it has iri some cases a diminutive sense seen in the 
last two examples. More rarely it is used to form adjectives 
from nouns: dntaka-
t making an end', rupakd- {having an 
assumed form '. Other vocalic suffixes are likewise extended : 
avikd 'sheep' (0. Sl. oVlca), m,4ikd- nt. (grace', dhenuka 
< cow ., ghlituka- • killing ., jatukii ' bat '. It is more rarely added 
to cortsonantal suffixes: 
at)iyaskd-
(thinner', mastf§ka­
{ brain " vik#1Jatka- ' destroying '. The feminine of the com­
bination -ika is extended beyond its original field (avikli, etc.) 
and it comes to function as the feminine to masculines in -aka : 
kumiiraka- ' little boy', kumiirikd t little girl " etc. 
Suffixal k is followed by i and therefore palatalised in marici­
, ray of light • and svitici- ' bright'.. It is followed by -u in a 
few formations like Pfdiiku- {water-snake' and yuvdku-
be­
t 
longing to you two '. 
The corresponding suffix in the centum-languages is k to 
which in Sanskrit s is the most frequent corresponding sound. 
But in the case of this suffix such s appears only rarely, e.g. 
yuvasa- 'young J (Lat. iuvencus), ;'omasa- • hairy I, babhrusa­
, brown " kapisa-
~ tawny'. 

I 
Ig8 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
The voiced guttural, palatalised to j appears in the following 
athematic formations: 
dh!~dj- {bold', sandj-
old '. bhi~dj­
I 
physician' (d. Av. "bis, bisaz-) srdj- {garland' (d. pratisara­
and Lcit. sero) , t!~1)dj- 'thirsty', dsvapnaj- 'not sleeping' ; 
(with weak form of suffix) usij-
< a kind of priest' (Av. usig-), 
va1J,£j- ' merchant', bhurij-
shears', sphij- ' hip' (: d. sphyd­
I 
, flat ladle '). 
In the nominal forms t!~1Jdj- and dsvapnaj- we 
have the same suffixal combination as is used in the formation 
of the seventh class of verbs. 
A thematic -ga appears rarely, e.g. in srnga- nt. ' horn' (d. 1"
Lat. cornu, etc.), vd1J1saga- • bull' (of uncertain etymology), 
pataga, patangd- ' bird " 
Suffixal d appears in a small number of athematic formations: 
drf>dd- 'stone' (d. Gk. o€tpas), darad- ' cliff, ravine' (themat. 
darada- 'Dard '), sardd- 'autumn' (d. Av. sarJd- 'year '), 
bhasdd-
< posterior, rump', vandd- ' desire', kakud- ' summit' 
(d. kaku-bh- with different suffix). It appears compounded 
with n in sadandi- 'permanent' {d. the -nd- of the Lat. 
gerundive}. 
The suffix gh/h is likewise extremely rare. It occurs in dirghd 
• long' (d. Gk. SoAtX6s, Ritt. dalugas; note that it is preceded 
by three different suffixes in the three languages, Ritt. u, Gk. i, 
Skt. H, i.e. dj-H-gh6-). The root appears without this suffix in 
O. S1. dlina ' length '. Other cases are variihd- ' boar' (: Av. 
varaza-; the root in Lat. verres, etc.), sardgh- ' bee " and com­
pounded with r it appears in sfghrd- 'swift; (: sibham adv. 
, quickly' with different suffix). 
Suffixal dh appears in a number of combinations. The sllffix 
-dhra appears in vdrdhra- · thong' (: varatra 'id ') ; it is common 
in certain other IE languages. The combination -dhya- appears 
in infinitives like gdmadhyai ' to go', bhdradhyai 'to bear' 1 
sdhadhyai 'to overcome' and the like (some thirty-five in­
stances). 
A suffix -pa appears in a few rare instances like yapa- ' sacri­
ficial post' (yu-
to attach, join', d. yuthd- ' herd' for u) and
I 
sttipa- ' top-knot' (d. °stu and stuka ' id '). 
Non-thematic -bh appears in kakubh- ' summit' (d. kaku-d­
above), and thematic -bha in a small number of nouns, mostly 
atlimal names: 
vr~abhd- and tf>abhd..; , bull', gardabhd-- ' don­
key', riisabhd- ' id " salabhd-
< locust " sthulabhd- •big'. The 
specialisation of this suffix in animal names is known also 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
199 
in other IE languages: Gk. l.Aacfoo~ , stag', O. S1. golQbi' dove', 
etc. 
This completes the list of Sanskrit and IE suffixes. As will be 
seen all IE consonants were capable of being used as elements 
in the suffixal system. 
§ 20. 
V~DDHI IN DERIVATION 
In its use of vrddhi Sanskrit has developed a system of deriva­
tion which was totally unknown in the parent IE language. It is 
used in connection with a number of suffixes, which may also 
function without being associated with vrddhi, and as such have 
already been treated. Its use is a speciality of the secondary 
as opposed to the primary derivation. In the earlier language 
alternative forms without vrddhi occur. Thus the suffix -a 
(normally accented) which makes adjectives on the basis of the 
old neuter-'suffixes, may be associated with vrddhi, e.g. mJnu~a­
· connected with men; man' beside mdnu~a* · man I, and 
viipu~d* beside vdPu~a- ' beautiful' from vapu~-. This type of 
formation may be illustrated by a few examples classified 
according to the various suffixes. 
Suffix -a: iingirasd-' descended from Arigiras " miiruta-
re­
C 
lating to the Maruts " miinavd- ' human; man'~ jaitra- ' vic­
torious 1, ausijd- · connected with the priests' called usij-, 
marq,ikd- nt. mercy '. 
r 
Suffix -ya: da£vya-' divine', saumyd- (relating to Soma'. 
viiyavyd- ' belonging to the wind'; neuter abstracts, pdlitya­
, greyness " drtvijya- ' priestly office '. 
Suffix -i: Agnivesi- 'a descendant of Agnivesa-', Pauru­
kuts£- ' a descendant of Purokutsa '. This type is almost en­
tirely confined to patronymics. 
_ 
Suffix -ayana: patronymics, Ka1;tviiyana-, Diik~aya1;ta-, etc. 
Suffix -iya: parvaiiya- 'of the mountains'. This type is 
practically confined to the ~later language. 
Suffix -ka: mamakd-' mine " avasyaka- ' necessary ., vt'isan­
tika- ( of the spring time " dhiirmika- r religious " etc. ; this type 
is mainly confined to theJ~ter language and few Vedic examples 
are quoted. 
Suffix -eya: 
iir~eyd-' descendant of a sage " ] iinasruteyd­
, son of Janasruti I, vdsteya- ' of the bladder J (vasti-), pauru­
~eya- ' relating to man " etc. 
Derivational vrddhi with other suffixes is. exceedingly rare ; 

200 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
such cases are agnidhra-' belonging to the fire-kindler ' (agnidh-) 
and asvina-
a day's journey on horsebacK '. 
f 
The exact details of the development of this use of vrddhi 
are somewhat obscure, but the material enables a number of 
observations about it to be made. The process began in the late 
Indo-Iranian period. developed rapidly in the pre-Vedic period 
of Indo-Aryan and continued to extend during the historical 
development of Sanskrit. The complete absence of any such 
formations in IE languages outside Indo-Iranian, makes it clear 
that it was a development confined to those languages, and the 
fact that in early Iranian examples of this vrddhi are exceed­
ingly rare, shows that this type of formation was only in its 
beginning at the time of the separation of Indo-Aryan and 
Iranian. Iranian examples are O. Pers. margava- ' inhabitant of 
Margiana J i from margu- ' Margiana ' J A v. dhuiri- < belonging to 
Ahura- " iihuirya- ' son of a prince " from ahura-, mazdayasni­
I :belonging to the Mazdayasnian religion', xsliivaenya- 'de­
scendant of Xstavi. The three suffixes -a, -i and -ya which occur 
in connection with vrddhi in these Iranian examples are the 
ones that most frequently occur in this connection in Sanskrit, 
and the suffix of the patronymic xslavaenya is related to the 
-ayana which makes patronymics in Sanskrit. 
The point of departure of this derivational vrddhi must be 
sought in the old IE phonetic vrddhi, which, as instanced from 
time to time above, is found sporadically in the radical syllable 
of nouns of primary derivation. Instances quoted are riijan­
I king " bhiirman- ' burden J, viisas- {garment', diiru < wood " 
st'inu-
top), grtihi- ( seizure » and the like. Examining some 
i 
of the older cases of derivational vrddhi it can be seen that 
manava-
< man', kiivyd~ , one having the qualities of a kavi-, 
wise man j, itrya- ' Aryan', and niidyd-
born from a river' and
I 
similar forms which from the point of view of Sanskrit show the 
vrddhi of secondary derivation, are not essentially different in 
form from words like danavd- {demon " bhavyd- ' which is to 
be " vitrya- ( to be chosen' and adya- • to be eaten' which are 
either classified as primary formationSi; or (in the case of 
danavd-, etc.) are derived from primary formations with phonetic 
vrddhi. Likewise Skt. vasa,.d- ' matutinal; day', would appear 
to have-derivational vrddhi (d. vasarO), but elsewhere in Indo­
European a long vowel is seen in the primary neuter (Gk. f:iap 
<*WesT, etc.). It may be assumed that primary formations 

THE FORMATION OF ~OUNS 
201 
with vrddhi of the type diiru-, nab~i-J were originally more 
general, and that forms of the type *miinu- existed in paradig­
matic alternation with mdnu-, etc.; and that when the gU1}.a 
grade, mdnu-, etc., was eventually generalised in the majority of 
the simple formations, there remained a class of thematic deri­
vatives formed on the basis of obsolete vrddhied stems, i.e. 
manavd- beside manu-. This nucleus showing the alternation 
gUlJa in the primary and vrddhi in the secondary derivative, 
would then be the starting point of the system in which"vrddhi 
came to be widely used in the formation of secondary deriva­
tives. 
This means that derivational vrddhi must have appeared first 
in the case of the vowel a, and that the use of ai and au in these 
formations must be due to analogy, for the reason that ai and 
au do not occur in primary nominal derivation. There is evi­
dence that this was the case, since in Iranian, which reflects this 
process in its early beginnings, a is the only vrddhied vowel 
which appears in this type of derivative. Forms such as 
Braetaona- n. pr. (d. Skt. traitand-) and haomanayha- t kindness ' 
(d. Skt. saumanasa-) which have been quoted as parallels to the 
Sanskrit ai and au vrddhi, contain not vrddhi but gu1}.a. Since 
the words from which they are derived had by nature a gUI}.a as 
well as a weak grade (trai-/tri- (3 '; (a)sau-j(a)su-' good ') 
there is no reason why the above formations should not be 
straight derivatives from this (like treta (triad '). It is in 
accordance with secondary origin of the ai and au vrddhi that 
cases of derivational vrddhi with these vowels are much rarer 
in the Ij.gveda than those containing ii. 
On the whole the system has been fully built qp by the time 
of the Ij.gveda. The main types are in existence, but examples do 
not occur with the same frequency as in the later language. 
There exist also a greater number of formations of the older 
type, in which the secondary suffixes are added without vrddhi, 
e.g. vdpu$a- beside vapu$d- and visyd- beside vaiSya-. In the 
later period the popularity of the vrddhied forms rapidly in­
creases, and it develops into one of the most characteristic 
features of the Sanskrit language. 
§21. 
GRAMMATICAL GENDER 
" 
In common with the other IE languages all Sanskrit nouns 
are cla'isified according to the three genders, Masculine, Fem­

202 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
inine, and Neuter. This classification corresponds only partly 
to the natural order of things, that is to say in so far as the nouns 
or adjectives apply to human beings and to certain of the larger 
animals. For the rest of the language the choice of gender is 
arbitrary an'd without any logical foundation. In spite of this 
the system has proved remarkably tenacious in the majority of 
IE languages; in the modern Indo-Aryan languages, for in­
stance, where traces of the old IE grammatical system have 
been reduced to a minimum, the system of grammatical gender 
remains in operation. Languages such as English or Persian 
which have abolished the distinction remain a minority even 
now among the descendants of Indo-European. 
A study 'of the evidence provided by the comparison of the 
IE languages particularly of those which are recorded at an 
early period, enables some insight t<? be gamed into the origin 
of this system. This is because grammatical gender was, at the 
period of Indo-European which can be reached by comparison, 
a comparatively recent innovation, and evidence enough can be 
gathered from the main existing languages, to understand the 
nature of its development. 
Two stages can be traced in this development. At the earliest 
stage there were two classes of nouns, on the one hand a < com­
mon gender 1 later differentiated into masculines and feminines} 
and on the other hand the ' neuters'. This state of affairs is 
faithfully reflected in Hittite, which is distinguished from all 
other IE languages by the absence of a special feminine gender. 
The next stage sees the development of the feminine, and it is 
only at this period that it is proper to speak of gender in the true 
sense. 
The existence of an earlier dual system is attested not only by 
Hittite, but also by abundant evidence gathered from the re­
maining languages. Meillet and others had adopted it on the 
basis of this latter evidence before anything much was known 
about Hittite, and the discovery of Hittite has gone further to 
confirm the theory_ Attempts have beenJ11ade to explain the 
dual system of Hittite as due to the loss of the feminine gender 
in that language, but no satisfactory evidence has been adduced 
for this. The fact is that the evidence of the other languages 
points unambiguously to the pre-existence of a dual system, and 
since such a system is to be found in Hittite, which in other re­
spects preserves archaic features not known to the remaining· 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
20 3 
languages, there is no reason why the Hittite evidence should 
not be taken at its face value. The evidence from Sanskrit and 
the other languages is briefly that (4-the bulk of the masculine 
suffixes is also to be found in feminine nouns, and (2) that the 
specifically feminine suffixes a, i are used also in masculine de­
rivatives. 
(1) The suffix -tar forms mainly agent nouns which are mas­
·culine. For the feminine the suffix i is added (diitri) and a 
similar differentiation appears in other languages (Gk. 80Tf.:'ipa, 
Lat. datrix). On the other hand in the ancient group of nouns in 
·-tar expressing family relationships the undifferentiated suffix is 
used for masculine (pitdr-) and feminine (matdr-, yiitar-) nouns. 
This conservative type preserves the older system which has 
been abandoned in the ordinary agent nouns in favour of a 
system in which masculine and feminine are distinguished. 
The suffix -sar which appears in svasar- ' sister', aha in tisrds, 
cdtasras, Lat. uxor and thematised in Hitt. isoassaras ' lady' 
functions adjectivally in the same way as -tar (both being 
opposed to the neuter -sar, -tar), but it tended at an early period 
to be specialised in feminine formations. The eventual adoption 
of H-suffix as the normal means of expressing the feminine 
-checked this development, and only these few survivals 
remain. 
The adjectival suffix -man is normally masculine (brahmdn-, 
etc.), but in bahuvrihi compounds it remains indifferent to 
gender according to the earlier system. Vedic examples of this 
are puru.sarma (Aditis), dyutddyamanam (u~dsam), sutdrmanam 
(ndvam), acc. pI. suciJanmanas (u~dsas), instr. pI. viiJabhar­
mabhis (fUibhis). The Atharva-veda first begins to show special 
feminine forms in compounds containing the word niiman­
. name J: pdiicanamni' having five names' 1 etc. 
The feminine suffix is added to the present participle in San­
skrit and in Greek (bhdranti, cpEpovaa), but in Latin the older 
undistinguished type is used for both masculine and feminine 
(ferens, ferentem). 
The non-neuter (i.e. accented) suffix -as functions in both 
masculine and feminine nouns, e.g. apds- ' active' mase. and 
fern. as opposed to dpas- neut. work'; likewise in bahuvrihi 
I 
compounds, sumanas nom. sg. maSe. and fern. well-disposed'.
I 
The same state of affairs appears in Greek, dAT"J~5', f:VJ.4f:V7}5', 
etc. The compound suffix -yas, functioning in a comparative 

204 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
sense, adds the feminine -i in Sanskrit (bhayasi, etc.) but Latin 
preserves the undifferentiated usage (maior, masc. and fern.). 
N on-neuter nouns in -i and -u are both masculine and fem­
inine. The adjectives in i do not distinguish a masculine and 
feminine stem (sucis nom. sg. masc. and fern.) and those in -u 
optionally follow the same system (corus masc. and fern.). The 
latter may optionally form feminines in two ways (bahvt 'much' 
tana ' thin '), but the fact that this still remains optional shows 
that it is a comparatively recent innovation. 
The thematic suffix -a, accented and forming adjectives was 
originally in the same way indifferent to the distinction between 
masculine and feminine. This state of affairs has become alto­
gether extinct in Sanskrit, but in addition to its being preserved 
in full force in Hittite, it has left considerable traces in Greek 
and Latin. It is preserved in Greek in compounds (p080­
OaK'TVAOS ~ws, etc.) and in both Greek and Latin in a number of 
individual formations. A good illustration is provided by the 
word fm: daughter-in-law which appears with the thematic 
suffix in Greek and Latin (vvos a nurus) as opposed to the speci­
fically feminine "a-suffix which appears in Sanskrit (snu~ii) and 
Slavonic (Russ. sftoxd). There is no doubt that the fonn pre­
served in Greek and Latin is the more original, and that the 
form as it appears in Sanskrit and Slavonic is an innovation due 
to the growth of the systenl of grammatical gender; IE 
snus-6~ was formed at a time when the accented thematic vowel 
was used simply to make adjectives on the basis of neuter 
stems in the way amply illustrated above (udrd-: vowp, etc.) 
and was, as still in Hittite, indifferent to gender. The word is 
based on an obsolete neuter in -us, and etymologically this 
sn-u-s- is to be connected with sn-eu-bh- in Lat. nuha, etc. 
(2) Instances in the reverse direction are quotable from a 
variety of IE languages. In dealing with the suffix -a (-aH) it 
was pointed out that it could appear with two functions, one 
originally neuter forming verbal abstracts, etc., and the other 
adjectival; also that, since the usual variations in accent and 
apophony between the two types were mainly eliminated in 
these stems, there is no formal difference between the two. The 
feminine gender developed with the specialisation of this suffix, 
in its adjectival function, as a feminine suffix, but there are still 
preserved a number of masculine adjectival formations with this 
suffix. Examples of such masculines are seen in Lat. scriba, 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
205 
nauta. agricola, etc., O. S1. sluga 
servant', vojevoda fanny
I 
commander' which are in no way formally differentiated from 
feminines. Greek also has such masculine a-stems, but bas 
differentiated them on its own by adding ~S in the nom. sg. 
(7tOf1]'T~S', etc.). In Sanskrit this type has become obsolete like 
that of the feminine o-stems. On the other hand there remain a 
number 
masculines formed with the compound suffix -i 
(-i-H) which functions side by side with a in the formation .of 
feminines. Skt. ratht- ' charioteer' is a survival from the time 
when adjectival -i was indifferent to gender, before it became 
specialised as a feminine suffix. In Italic and Celtic this adjec­
tival -:-i, by an easy change of syntactical function, was adapted 
to form the genitive singular of o-stems (equi stands to equus as 
ratht- to rdtha-). 
The existence of these common masc.-fern. formations so 
abundantly in Sanskrit and other IE languages, together with 
the twofold system of Hittite which shows no trace of a fem­
inine gender, is capable of on]y one explanation. An older dual 
system has been replaced by a threefold classification into 
genders. The old system is preserved in its entirety in Hittite; 
in Sanskrit and other languages it is still partly preserved, as' 
the above examples show, but in the main it has been replaced 
by the threefold system. 
The process of this developIl).ent cannot be followed in detail 
since it lies in the prehistory of the languages concerned. All that 
can be said is that at some period of later Indo-European the 
suffix a (-aH) together with the compound suffixes i (-i-H) and 
U (-U-H) came to be specialised as feminine suffixes. This must 
have applied first to these suffixes in their adjectival use be­
ginning possibly with a small nucleus of words-which happened 
to possess this suffix and were feminine by meaning (e.g. Skt. 
gnJ, Gk. yvvr}). The suffixes so 'used are either an addition to 
the primary adjectival suffix (rajffi) or in the case of thematic 
stems a substitution for it (newos/newa). 
The nature of the earlier dual system has been made suf­
ficiently clear in dealing with the individual suffixes above. 
The words of (common gender' from which masculine and 
feminine nouns eventually derive are in origin adjectives or, 
what from the point of view of early Indo-European is the same 
thing, agent nouns. The fundamental division is the one repre­
sented on the one hand by Gk. v8wp 'water', Hitt. arkuwar 

l 
206 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
t prayer', Skt. ydsas- 'fame', brdhma 'prayer', *sthiitar 
, stability '. and on the other hand by Skt. udrd-
water­
animal, otter 'J fkvan-
{worshipping, worshipper " yasds­
, famous', brahmdn- 'priest " and sthiitdr- {stander', and in 
other examples copiously quoted above. It is therefore mis­
leading to speak of an t animate' and t inanimate' gender as if 
the twofold classification were in origin the expression of such 
a distinction.. It is clear enough from the evidence that the 
origin of the system was primarily grammatical and not due to 
any psychological classification of objects in the external world. 
The so-called nouns of ' common gender' or ' animate gender ~ 
are in origin agent nouns, and they are predominantly' ani­
mate' (and in the main designative of human beings), because it 
is natural that the agent type of noun is most frequently applied 
to persons. It is not however exclusively so, and this may be 
illustrated by a number of Greek formations in -'T1]p. e.g. dop'T~p 
• sword-belt', Aap.1T'TIIP 'lamp-stand', KpaT~p 'mixing-bowl' i 
'TPt,~p • pestle'. 'EVK'T~P 'yoke-strap', etc. These represent 
an ancient type, better preserved in Greek than elsewhere, and 
show how,in origin the adjective/agent-noun class of stem had 
nothing to do with the distinction between animate and in­
animate. We have seen that these suffixally accented forma­
tions are originally based on a class of neuters which are well 
represented by the Hittite formations in -tar. The latter are in 
the main verbal abstracts or nouns of a similar type. The 
adjectival type with suffixal accent means somebody or some­
thing connected with the meaning of the primary neuter, and 
could originally apply to things as well as to persons. Because 
in practice such formations were most frequently applied to 
persons, the tendency was to eliminate their use as inanimates, 
so that in the case of nouns in -ler for instance such usage is rare 
outside this Greek type. 
Another type of archaism is preserved in the Vedic language. 
This is the occasional use of the masculine form of adjectives,. 
in the case of consonantal stems, in agreement with neuter 
nouns. As examples of this we may quote vdcalt ... dvibdrhii!t 
RV. 7. 8.6, sdrdho ... anarvii1}am I. 37. I, visarma1}am krtJuhi 
vittdm 5. 54. 9, sdrdho marutam.:. satydsravasam fbhvasam 
5.52.8, tad rii~frdm ojasvt bhavati MS 4. p. 47,4. These reflect an 
early state of affairs when the formations with accented suffix 
and vrddhied nominative were purely adjectival, unconnected 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
207 
with gender, and could therefore be used in agreement with any 
noun. \Vith the growth of the gender system a new type of 
adjectival neuter was created, e.g. puru beside purus ' much " 
and traces like the above were eventually eliminated. The pro~ 
cess is still to be seen in the course of development in Sanskrit in 
the case of the agent nouns in -tr; the neuter formation kartf­
, doer • (gen. sg. karth:tas) is unknown in the earliest texts and is 
a later analogical development. The older neuter forms of 
adjectives, though of early origin, were to begin with innova­
tions of the same type. 
The foundation of the non-neuter class lies in the adjectival 
fonnations, but it was early augmented by transferences which 
introduced a growing number of action nouns. These have been 
classified separately in the above pages and are illustrated by 
such examples as bhard- masc. ' burden ',jigf$ii ( desire of con­
quest 't vtfc- fern. (speech', ojmdn- masc. 'strength " bhiyds­
fern. 'fear " mati-
fern. 'intelligence' 1 and tdntu-
masc. 
, thread'. The nature of this transferen,ce seems to have been 
mainly mechanical. Personification plays a certain part but 
this is strictly subsidiary. It is understandable that a stem like 
u$ds- should appear as feminine for this reason in view of the 
place of u$ds- in the Vedic pantheon; or that omdn- ' assist­
ance' and damdn- 'liberality' which are invoked as divine 
attributes of the gods should be masculine rather than neuter. 
But no such consideration can apply to the majority of such 
nouns. For instance, while it is quite clear that vtfc- fern. 
, speech' is in Sanskrit usage quite definitely personified as 
opposed to the neuter vdcas-, it cannot be said that it owes its 
feminine gender to this. On the other hand it is capable of being 
personified because for other reasons it has- acquired the 
feminine (derived from the originally common) gender. Stems 
terminating in occlusives. in all IE languages take the nomi­
native s and distinguish between nominative and accusative. 
In this they are distinguished from the mass of neuter action 
nouns and agree with the adjectival and agent noun type. 
It is clear also from the absence of cases to the contrary that 
this must have been the case from a very early period. There 
is no logical basis for this; all that can be said is that there is a 
general rl!le that all stems of this type inflect in this way, that 
vtfk(s), viicam is so inflected because it is a radical stem ending 
in an occlusive. The fact that it is inflected in this way, and 

208 
THE FORMATION OF NOGNS 
thereby acquires a non neuter, eventually feminine gender, 
enables it to be personified. In the same way we may judge the 
relationship between ttpas, nom. pl. fern. and udakam, udan­
(Gk. uowp. etc.) ~ water'. There is nothing about radical action 
nouns as such, from the point of view of their meaning which 
~,hould cause them to become masculines or feminines; only the 
mechanical development which caused them to inflect in the same 
way as the adjectival type of noun: which formed the basis of 
the' animate I gender is responsible for their 'becoming such. 
In the same way other action noun stems ending in occlusives 
early inflected in this way (Hitt. kartimmiyat-
anger " etc.).
t 
The neuter i-stems were eliminated except for small remnants, 
and a similar tendency, though on a smalier scale is observable 
among the action nouns in -u. The thematic action nouns are 
extensions of root stems which were originally common gender, 
and this characteristic they retained; when the common gender 
split into masculine and feminine they naturally became 
masculines because this is the masculine adjectival suffix. In 
the same way the action nouns in -a are feminine because this is 
the feminine adjectival suffix. 
An essential part is played in the development of the IE 
system of gender by the system prevailing in these languages by 
which an adjective must be inflected in the case, number and 
gender of the noun with which it is in agreement. This is one of 
the most characteristic features of Indo-European, as gram­
matical congruence on this scale is hardly to be found elsewhere. 
Traces of an earlier system, in which the simple adjectival stem 
could function in attributive use, survive in nominal composi­
tion, indicating that the full system was only gradually built up, 
but it is none the less of ancient origin. It is fully developed 
in Hittite and applies. there to gender in so far as the' cornman 
gender' and the' neuter' are distinciuished, that is to say in the 
nominative and the accusative. With the growth of the 
feminine gender. which is the final stage in the development of 
the system, the system of congruence was correspondingly 
extended. 
§22. 
NOMINAL COMPOSITION 
The capacity to combine independent words into compound 
words is inherited by Sanskrit from Indo-European, and similar 
formations are found in other IE languages. Sanskrit differs 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
209 
from the other IE languages in the enormous development 
which the system has undergone, which is unparalleled else­
where. This development, however~ is characteristic only of the 
classical-language, and in the Vedic language the use made of 
nominal composition is much more restricted. It is estimated 
that in the Ijgveda the role it plays is not more important than 
in Homeric Greek. From the point of view of comparative 
philology it is mainly the Vedic language that has to be con­
sidered. The unlimited development of nominal composition in 
the later classical literature IS artificial and not based on 
spoken usage. 
The main features of a compound, though not invariably 
present, are (I) the appearance of the first member in its stem 
form, without the inflectional endings with which, except in the 
vocative, it is associated in independent use, and (2) the uniting 
of the two elements under one accent. The first feature is of 
great interest from the point of view of early Indo-European 
morphology, since it points to a time when the simple stem of a 
noun or adjective could appear in syntactical relation to other 
words of the sentence, without the case terminations which later 
became obligatory for the expression of such relationships. A 
compound comes into existence when two words appear so 
regularly and frequently together that they become to all 
intents and purposes a single expression, a process which is 
normally associated with the development of a specialised 
meaning. In the case of inflected groups this leads to compounds 
like Bfhaspdti- proper name of a divinity (' lord of prayer '). 
On the other hand a compound like vispdti- ' chief of a clan ' 
can only derive, as a type, from a state of affairs in which the 
relationship which is later expressed by the gen~five case, could 
be expressed by the simple juxtaposition of two nouns in a 
certain order (vik poti-s). The compounds as a system are the 
fos$ilised re"mains of an earlier state of Indo-European which 
haslong been supplanted by the consistently inflected type 
which appears in Sanskrit and the classical languages. 
Four main classes of compound were recognised by the Indian 
gramrnarians, 
Tatpuru~a (with a special subdivision Kar­
1nadharaya) Bahuvrl;hi, Dvandva and Avyayibhiiva, terms which 
will be defined below. Of these the last two are in the main 
specifically Indian developments; the types inherited from 
Indo-European are those classified as tatpuru~a and bahuvrihi. 

210 
THE FORMAT.ION OF NOUNS 
For the purpose of this brief exposition the inherited types may 
be divided into two major classes, namely 1. those which 
function as nouns and II. those which function as adjectives. 
These are followed by III. Dvandva and IV. Avyayibhava. 
The first class falls into two main divisions according to 
whether the first member is (a) an adjective or noun in apposi­
tion with the second member or (b) a noun standing in such re­
lationship to the second member as would normally be ex­
pressed by a case termination. Conversely the adjectival type 
can conveniently be divided into two classes according to 
whether the final member is adjective or noun. Of the two 
major classes, nominal and adjectival, the former are rare in the 
early language, and this is the case elsewhere in Indo-European. 
On the other hand the various types of adjectival compound 
are abundantly represented, as elsewhere, particularly in Greek. 
We shall see that there is verj good reason for this disparity and 
that it is of significance for understanding how the system 
evolved. 
L A. Compounds in which the two members stand in apposi­
tion to each other are named Karmadharaya by the Indian 
grammarians. The main class consists of an adjective followed 
by a noun. The type is rare in the Sarphitas, but becomes more 
frequent in the later Vedic prose texts. Examples are candra­
mas-
t (bright) moon', purttdmiisa-
t full-moon J, ekavira­
t unique hero ',kr$1Ja~akuni-' raven ',mahiigrilma- ' great host " 
mahiivird-
great hero', mahadhana- ( great wealth', nilotpald­
t 
t blue lotus " rajatapatra- t silver vessel " dak#~lagni-
I southern 
fire', adkarahanu-
lower jaw', trtiyasavana- ' 3rd pressing',
I 
navadava- 'land newly burnt for cultivation', k,r!j1Jasarpa­
, cobra'. Such compounds possess frequently specialised mean­
ings, which would not automatically be expressed by the simple 
combination of the meanings of the adjective and the noun. 
The word kN1Jasakuni literally l black bird ., means more speci­
fically raven'; 
black bird' would be expressed by the un­
I 
t 
compounded noun and adjective. Similarly nilotpald- means not 
merely (a blue lotus', but a particular botanical species 
(Nymphaea cyanea). It is only in the later language that such 
compounds show a tendency to be used as simple equivalents of 
the combination adjective + noun. 
In a smaller class the first member is a noun in a relation of 
apposition to the second member. 
Such are puru~am!gd-

i 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
2II 
• male' antelope', ulitkayatu-
i owl demon', vr§akapi 
r man­
ape', rajar§i- ' royal sage', dhenu§tart i barren cow', uk§avehdt­
an impotent bull '. 
The karmadharaya is represented in other IE languages by 
such examples as Gk. aKp01TOAtS, fL€v6yat.a, aypuifL1T€AoS, Lat. 
angiportus, etc., and the second type can be compared with 
formations like Gk. la:rp6fLaVT's ' physician-seer'. But just as 
in the earliest Sanskrit these formations are rare. This is 
natural in view of the origin of these compounds and their place 
in the grammatical structure of Indo-European in its various 
stages. They are the remains of a time when the adjective, 
when used attributively, took no inflections for gender, number 
and case. Such a state of affairs carne early to be replaced in 
Indo-European by one in which the attributive adjective was 
inflected in agreement with its noun in all cases, genders and 
numbers, but there remained a few expressions which were so 
grown together in usage that they continued as relics of the old 
system. These could then serve as models for the creation of 
new examples of the same type. 
B. Tatpuru~as with an ordinary substantive as their first 
member are in the earliest language somewhat more numerous 
than compounds of the karmadharaya type, but they are still 
distinctly rare in comparison with Bahuvrihis and other adjec­
tival types. They are rara')t in the earliest part of the lfgveda 
and become gradually more important in the succesive stages 
of Vedic literature. Examples are riijaputrd- 'king's son " 
mrtyubdndhu-
companion of death', vispdti-
lord of the
i 
4 
tribe', drttpadd- ' post of wood " hira"(tyarathd- • car of gold " 
C
devakilbi~d-
offence against the gods', indrasenti 'Indra's 
army', camastidhvaryu- ' the priest connected with the cups', 
drugha"(td-
i mace of wood', iiciiryajiiyii 'teacher's wife', 
pur1t~ariijd- ' king of men', ajalomd- ' goat's hair J, asvaviild­
( hair (from the tail) of a horse', udapatrd-
bowl of water'.
r 
The relationship between the two members is rnost frequently 
that expressea by the genitive case, but being very general it 
can in various examples be transcribed by all cases, and the 
Indian grammarians have classified them on these lines: 
Dative. yupadiiru ' wood for a sacrificial post' (yupiiya daru), 
ablative, caurabhaya- • fear of thieves' (caurebhyo bhayam), 
locative griimaviisa-
'dwelling in a village', accusative 
videsagamana {going abroad '. 

212 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
Compounds of which the last member is a verbal action noun 
in -ti form a special class. Such are dhdnasati- 'winning of 
wealth " devdhuti-
r invocation of the gods " somasuti- t pressing 
of soma' and devdhiti- ' ordinance of the gods'. These have 
accent of the first member as opposed to the tatpuru~as above 
and in this respect go with the adjective compounds whose final 
member is a participle in -ta (1/irdjiita-, etc.). They are also 
abundantly formed in the earliest language, a characteristic 
which is usually reserved for adjective compounds. A few 
instances where the final member in -ti has acquired a concrete 
sense are to be classed with the examples above. e.g. devaheti 
, weapon of the gods '. 
The corresponding type appears in other IE languages in such 
examples as Gk. fI./rjTP07Ta:TWP 
mother's father " 7TaTpaO€A4>os
I 
(father's brother', Otl<ooEumhYjs 'master of a house', Lat. 
muscerda 'mouse dung', Goth. jJiudangardi- (king's house', 
O. 
vodotokzl ' watercourse'. 
Besides these there exists in the Vedic language a new type of 
compound in which the first member retains its genitive ending, 
and, most frequently, its accent. These are commonest with 
pdti- as the last member: vdnaspdti-' lord of the wood, tree', 
gniispdti- ' husband of a divine woman', bfhaspdti- ' lord of de­
votion " etc.; with one accent attthasaspati- ' lord of distress J, 
name of an intercalary month. Other examples appear rarely: 
divodasa- ' servant of heaven', riiyaspo§a- ' increase of wealth' ; 
later, g6~pada- 'cow's footprint, small puddle', dasya};putra­
(slave-:girfs son (term of abuse) '. Compare Gk. LltoaKovpoL, 
etc. This is the type of compound an inflected language might 
be expected to form. Its emergence in the Vedic language is to 
be viewed in connection with the comparative rarity of the 
ordinary type. As in Greek, etc., these had come to play only a 
small part in the language, and were in comparison with other 
kinds of compound, unproductive. Later the reverse process 
sets in; the frequency of the true tatpuru$a increases and the 
development of the new inflected type is checked. 
II. Compounds functioning as adjectives may be divided 
into two classes according as to whether the latter member is 
an adjective or noun. 
A. (I) (a) Compounds with verbal adjective as second member. 
In these the first member most frequently stands in the accusa­
tive relationship to the verbal adjective which forms the 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
213 
second member. They may be classified according to the various 
types of stem that appear in the second member. 
Root-stems: havirdd-
eating the oblation', aSvavid- ' know­
t 
ing horses', vrtrahdn- ' slaying enemies'. Roots ill i, u, r may 
not appear as root nouns and add the augment -t: dhanajit­
'conquering wealth', somasut-
'pressing soma', jyoti~kft­
, making light'. Such compounds with root stems have some­
times a passive meaning: manoyuj- 'yoked by the will', 
hrdayavidh- ' pierced to the heart '. The type is familiar in other 
IE languages, d. Gk. f3oU7rA~'J Lat. fidicen, artifex, etc. 
t
Thematic s;"ffix: annadd- 'food-eating', goghnd-
killing 
cows' J devavandd- ' god-praising', karmakara- • workman'. A 
newer type in which the first member takes the accusative (or 
occasionally some other) termination is com!non in connection 
with this suffix: dhanaiijayd-' conquering wealth " purandard­
, destroying cities', talpdayd- ' lying on a bed'. The thematic 
type is familiar in other IE languages: Av. hasidava- ' betray­
ing a friend J, Gk. (Jvp.ocp86pos, opvr6p.os, Lat. causidicus, mag­
nificus, Russ. vodonds ' water-carrier', etc. 
Suffix -ana: keSavdrdhana-' cutting hair', amitraddmbhana­
, deceiving enemies.' j devaydjana- ' worshipping the gods'. 
Suffix -in: 
ukthasa1J'tsin-
'singing h)'lnns', vrataciirin­
, performing a vow', satyaviidin-
speaking the truth J.
t 
Suffix 
~i: pathirdk#- 'protecting the road'. sakobhdri­
C bearing strength 1. 
Suffixes -van and -man: 
somapavan-
(drinking soma' 1 
baladlivan- 'giving strength " 
svaduk~ddman-
(sharing out 
sweet things'. Cf. Gk. 1TOAVO€yp.wv. 
Other suffixes -
ra$tradipsu-
'injuring the kingdom', 
lokakrtnu-
world making', nrPiitf- ( men-protecting'.
l 
Among formations of this kind there is a considerable class 
in which the form of the last nlenlber is modelled on the present 
stem taken by the root in question. Such are stems ending 
in : 
-ya (4th chiss) : punat'manyd-' again thinking of', akr~tapacyd­
# ripening without ploughing 'J asuryampasyd-
not seeing the 
, 
r 
sun. 
-aya (loth class and causatives): anilayd- · not resting " 
janamejayd- ' rousing the people' 1 dharmadharaya- « nlain tain­
ing the law'. Ci. Av. naro vaepaya-. 
-nva : visvaminvd C stimulating all j, dhiya1ftJinvd-, danupinvd-. 

2I4 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
-na: duradabhnd-. kulampund-, sadiiPr'1J,d-. 
Cf. Gk. j.L{a­
Oapvos 7 'TToi\v8aj.LVYjS'. 
Infixed nasal: agnimindhd-, salyakrntd-, govinda-. Cf. Av. 
yimo'kiJranta-. 
Reduplicated formations: sardhaiijaha-, manojighra-, itjiid­
adha-. Cf. A v. azr{rda8a-. 
(b) Compounds with a past participle passive as second 
member differ from these in the syntactical relation of their 
members, and also in having their accent normally on the first 
member. For this reason they may be treated as a separate 
sub-class. They are a very productive type: hdstakrta-' made 
by hand' 7 vfrdjata- {born of a hero 77 devdtta- {given by the 
gods ',prajlipaiisr~ta-
I created by P. " ulklibhihata- ' struck by 
a thunder bolt '; indrotci- ' helped by Indra '. This is an old 
Indo-European type which is also represented in relat~d lan­
guages: Av. ahura-8ata-, Gk. OEoop.r;TOs, {'TT'TT~i\aToS', etc. 
The type of compound instanced under (a) is characterised by 
the fact that the second member is very frequently, in the case 
of some classes almost invariably, a stem that cannot appear in 
independent use. Compounds like goghnd- may be formed at 
will but a simple ghnd- does not exist. The same feature is 
shared by the related languages and goes back to the Indo-Euro­
pean period. The origin of this type of compound goes back to 
an earlier phase of Indo-European with a different and simpler 
structure to that prevailing in the historical period and the 
period immediately preceding it. What in the historical period 
are compounds were to begin with constructions of a type 
which are familiar in languages with a less developed inflection 
than Indo-European. 
The relative participles known in 
Dravidian and certain other linguistic groups are instances 
of this type of construction. In Indo-European the growth 
of inflection led to the disuse of such simple constructions 
but this type of compound, based on them, continued to 
flourish. 
(2) Compounds having as their last member an ordinary 
adjective are comparatively few. 
Such are: tantisubhra­
(shining in body', yajiiddhira- {versed in the sacrifice' , 
srimavipra- ' skilled in Sarna chants', tildmisra- {mixed ",;th 
sesamum '; with case termination of the first member, 
mdderaghu- ' quick in exhilaration ',vidmandpas- t working with 
wisdom '. 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
2 15 
B. (I) Bahuvrihi-. The bahuvrihi or possessive compounds 
contain the same elements and in the same order as the kar­
madharaya and tatpuru~a compounds but differ in meaning in 
that the compound functions as an adjective qualifying some 
other concept. They also differ in accentuation from the 
kannadhnraya and tatpuru:-.;a types, being characterised 
normally by the retention of the accent of the first member of 
the compound. The distinction between the two opposing types 
is illustrated by such eases as riijaputra- ( having kings as sons' 
as opposed to riijaputrd- ' son of a king • and saryatejas- ( having 
the brightness of the sun' as opposed to s'ltryatejds- ( the sun's 
brightness'. The following will serve as typical examples of the 
bahuvrihi type: bahttvriki- ( having much rice' (after which 
the c1ass is named), mayararoman- (having the plumes of a 
peacock " indrasatru- ( whose foe is Indra " ugrdbihu- ' having 
powerful arms', dirghdsmasru-
'long-bearded', jivdputra­
( having living sons' 1 iddhiigni- ' whose fire is kindled', prd­
yatadak#1Ja- ' who has presented sacrificial gift~ " chinndPak~a­
( whose wing is severed " sucddratha- ( having a shining chariot'• 
pdiicii:nguri-
• five-fingered '. mddkujikva-
(honey-tongued', 
ma1;tigrivd-' having a necklace on the neck " piitrahasta- 'having a 
vessel in the hand " vdjrabiiku- ' armed with the vajra " khara­
mukka- ' donkey-faced'. In the Vedic language there are occas­
ional examples with inflectetl first member: krdtvamagha­
'.constituting a reward gained by intelligence', 
asdnni~1(­
, having arrows in the mouth " divtyoni- 'whose origin is in 
heaven '. 
The type is widely distributed in the IE languages. Gk. 
A£VKWAE:VOS • white-armed " Po&8o.KTVAoS I rose-fingered', Lat. 
magnanimus ( great-souled', capricornus ( having the horns of a 
goat', Goth. hrainya-hairts 'pure-hearted" O. 51. cr·inovlasu 
< black-haired'. 
The bahuvrihi likewise originated in the earlier, less inflected 
period of Indo-European, and it remained after the system of 
declining adjective and noun in apposition was developed. 
That development was, as we have seen, unfavourable to the 
growth of a large class of karmadh~raya compounds, since in 
the simple collocations of adjective and noun the inflected 
forms were used. On the other hand the bahuvrihi construc­
tion could not be so simply transformed, since a substitute 
could only be found by clumsy periphrases. Consequently it 
H 

216 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
survived in the more developed inflectional stage in the fonn of 
these compounds. 
Though the latter member of these compounds is always a 
noun, it does, in the case of consonantal stems always have an 
adjectival form, e.g. suyasas-
< of good fame'. From *(a)su 
ydsas-
< good fame' (d. Ritt. assu- ' good ') an adjective, nom. 
sg. suyasas is formed in the same way as yasiis from simple 
ydsas, since the apophony indicates that the accent was origin­
ally on the last syllable of the compound too. The same applies 
to the n-stems: nom. sg, purunama (having many names " 
etc. Adiectival -d is frequently used in the same way as with 
simple nouns: anudrd-' without water', uru1Jasd- ( having a 
broad nose " trivatsd- ' three years old', sarva'l.ledasd- . (sacrifice) 
in which all property is given away'. Other adjectival suffixes 
are frequently appended, e.g. -ka: jivapitrka- ' whose father is 
alive', pU1Jyalak;mika-
'having auspicious marks I; -ya: 
hira1Jyakeiya- ' golden haired " mddhuhastya- ( having sweetness 
in the hand'; -in: mahiihastin- (having a large hand', 
satagvin- ' having a hundred cows " 
(2) Adjectival compounds are formed on the basis of the 
combination preposition +noun. Corresponding to dty dt'{thas 
< beyond distI:ess' there exists the compound dtyaYfihas- ' one 
who is beyond the reach of distress t, Similarly dnuvrata­
: obedient " abhidyu.- ' directed to heaven " upakak~d- ( reach­
ing to the shoulder', urdhvdnabhas- ' being above the clouds', 
parihastd 'something put round the hand, amulet'. These 
compounds frequently take the adjectival suffixes which have 
been noted above in the case of bahuvrihis: iijarasd- 'reaching 
to old age', dpathi- (being in the way', paripanthin- (way­
layer',upatf1Jya- ' lurking in the grass '. 
(3) An archaic class, confined entirely to the Vedic language, 
is composed of a participial first member governing the second 
member. EXaIIlples: vidddvasu- 'winning wealth J 1 bhardd­
vaja-
carrying off prizes',· tardddvef-a- (overcoming hostility " 
mandaydtsakha-
rejoicing friends', The same type is estab­
I 
lished in Old Iranian: Av. va"¥tat ' pi/sana- ' winning battles " 
etc. Sporadically other verbal noun sterns are used in the same 
way: 
Trasddasyu-
(making enemies tremble'. radavasu­
( opening up wealth J, diitivara- {giving choice things'. Similar 
governing compounds are familiar in Greek: t/>epeOtKOr ( carry­
ing his house '. EAK€U{1rE1T'AOS • dragging robes', 
I 

THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
2I7 
Adjective compounds used as adverbs 
Compound adjectives may be used adverbially in the same 
way as simple adjectives, and as such nonnally appear in the 
accusative singular neuter. This is common with bahuvrihis 
and in the classical Iiterature long conglomerations of this 
nature are frequently so used. It is also common with the com­
pounds having a preposition or other indeclinable as first 
member, thus ati111iitram adv. • excessively' from atimiUra- adj. 
, excessive', Such adverbial compounds are considered by the 
Hindu grammarians to be a separate class of compound and they 
are termed avyayfbhiiva-. The reason for this lies in the fact that 
in the later language the~e is a considerable class of such 
adverbs without actual adjectives corresponding to ,them. This 
class is represented by such examples as uparajam {near the 
king', upanadam ' near the river', pratyagni ' facing the fire ' 
and pratinisam {nightly'. A productive class of indeclinables 
is formed by those compounds, which have a relative adverb as 
prior member: yathiikdmam t according to 'wish ',yavaJjivam ' as 
long as one lives " etc. 
III. D'lJantiva Compounds. 
This type has nothing exactly corresponding to it in the re~ 
lated languages and has developed mainly within the historicaj 
period of Sanskrit itself. The earliest type which is common to 
Sanskrit and Avestan consists of two duals, each retaining its 
own accents, which are juxtaposed in such a way that a +b is 
expressed by za + zb: M itni·V dru1Jau 'M. and V. ', dyavii­
Prthivi ' heaven and earth " u~dsa-ndkta ' dawn and night' ; cf. 
Av. pasu vira ' beast and man', gen. pasvd virayd. Sometimes 
elliptic duals may be used in place of this construction: Mitra 
I M. and V. 
f
, pitdra (parents " dydvd ' heaven and earth " 
This represents the oldest state of -affairs. Out of such con­
stnlctions. which are not in the proper sense of the term com­
pounds, the Sanskrit system of dvandva compounds develope9. 
and some of the intermediate stages may be observedin file 
early literature. Thus (I) the form of the nom. ace. dual is 
retained in the first member in cases other than nom. 
ace. : mitrii~vdru~ayo~ instead of mitra..'Vof vdru1Jayol); (2) in 
a small number of instances in the RV., and in a somewhat 
larger number in the later Sarphitas, the first member of such a 

218 
THE FORMATION OF NOUNS 
combination loses its accent: indrapii$1;lott, somarudrdyolz
The final stage appears when the first member appears in it
simple stem form: indraviiya (only example in RV.) vayu
savitfbhyiim, dak~akratii, etc. 
Because the ending of the agent nouns, etc., in -tar in the nom
sg. coincides with that of the first member of the dual dvandva
this form is chosen in dvandva compounds having such a stem
as first member: pitiiputrau f father and son', holiidhvaryu, etc
Plural dvandvas are exceedingly rare in the earliest language
Of the few examples indramarutalz, (voc.) and pitiiputriilz, i fathe
and sons' are modelled, as far as their first member is con
cerned, on the dual dvandvas. An example of the normal type
with simple' stem of first member, appears in a late hymn of th
J!.gveda: ajiivdya(t' sheep and goats'. In the later Vedic litera
ture such examples become more common: 
devamanu~yiib
t gods and men " bhadrapapii?t < good and bad '. In this period
also dvandva compounds with more than two members begin
to appear: prii1}iipiinodane~tt. 
FeminIne nouns are not found employed in the oldest type o
dvandva in the Veda, though such are known from Avestan 
apa urvaire water and crops'. They appear in the later Vedi
f 
period in the fully developed type of compound: jiiyapati < wif
and husband '. 
A few neuter dvandvas of the fully developed type appea
even in the lJ.gveda: satyanrtt!' truth and falsehood', ahoriitriit;.
, days and nights'. There are also a few older types: idhma
barhi~- with two accents and £$tiipurtd- with the first membe
modelled on the old type of masculine dvandva. In the plura
dvandvas dngapdru1Jt-~i (limbs and joints' (two accents) and
ukthasastrtl1}i ' hymns and praises' the form of the first membe
may be interpreted as the old form of the nom. acc. pI. neut.
At an early period there was created a type of neuter dvandva
which functions as a singular collecti~e stem: krtiikrtd-
< wha
has been done and what has not been done " lr1Jodakd- ' gras
and water', kasipupabarha1Jd- 'pillow and bolster'. In the
examples both members are neuters. The same type also
appears early in cases where one member is neuter, whether i
be the last member as in kesasmasru- ' hair and beard ' and in
klomahrdayd- 'lungs and heart ., or the first member as in
ahoriit.-d- ( a day and a night " Sirogrivd- ' head and neck ' and
in yugaAamyd- ' yoke and the attaching pin', Finally the stage

THE Fo.RMATION OF NOUNS 
2I9 
is reached (in the Brahmal)as) when two non-'neuters are com­
bined to form a singular collective dvandva: o~adhi'llanaspati­
• plants and trees " cattdratarakd- ' moon and stars '. u#rakhara­
< camels and asses • 
> 
Adjectival dvandvas are formed by the combination of two 
adjectives applying to the same noun, and such occur from the 
lJ.gveda onwards: nilalohitd- I dark blue and red " tamradhumrci­
'dusky copper-coloured " aru1;tdbabhru- ' red brown', kr~~ta­
sabala- · speckled black ., sito~tta- ' lukewarm ',etc. There are 
parallels to these in other IE languages (e.g. Gk. )V::VK01f'VPpO~. 
AfivKocpaLOS. yAVKV1nKpnS) and it is likely that in contradistinc­
tion to the nominal dvandvas the type is inherited from Indo­
European. 

CHAPTER V 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
§I. ACCENT AND ApOPHONY 
The IE declensional system was characterised by a shift of 
accent from the stem in the strong cases (nom. acc. sg. and du.~ 
nom. pI.) to the termination in the weak cases, that is to say in 
the rnajority of the oblique cases. This shift of accent entaHed 
apophonic changes affecting stem and suffix. The system was 
already in decay in the late IE period, and tending to be replaced 
by a system of fixed accent. In Vedic the shift of accent is best 
maintained in monosyllabic stems, but considerable traces of it 
are found. in the case of other types of stem, both radically 
accented neuters (ydkrt, yaknds) and suffixally accented masc.­
fern. types. 
The three grades of apophony associated with this accent 
shift are clearly seen in the declension of vrtrahdn-: nom. sg. 
vrtrahif, ace. sg. vrtrahd1;tam, gen. sg. vrtraghnds. It is seen also 
1."1 the suffixally accented r- and n-stems of the type pita. 
pitdram, pitre. u,~~a. ;bull', uk~d1Jam, uk$1Jds. Elsewhere it has 
been modified and simplified in various ways. The vrddhi of the 
nom. sg. tends to be extended to the acc. sg. and nom. pl., e.g. 
pJ,t · foot', pifdam, ptidas, as opposed to Gk. 7708a. 7768~S'. The 
accent shift may remain while the vowel gradation is abandoned, 
e.g. dik ' direction ',gen. sg. disas for what must originaHy have 
been *def,ks: dikes. Conversely the accent may be stabilised 
but the vowel gradation retained, e.g. pasumtin 'possessing 
cows', pa§umdntam, pasumdtas. 
The system of accent shift is best preserved in radical con­
sonantal sterns. In these the accent regularly appears on the 
tennination outside the strong cases. On the other hand the 
~ccompanying vowel gradation is only partially preserved. The 
three grades appear in the declension of k$dm- ' earth ': nom. 
duo k$ama \\<;'th vrddhi, IDe. sg. k~dmi with gUl}a, gen. sg. k$mds, 
. jmds, gmds with zero grade of root. Elsewhere the zero grade is 
rare in alternating stems: d. vrtraghnds already mentioned .. 
220 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
221 
havyazthii instr. sg. of havyav.Jiih-
< carrying the oblation " duras 
(once duras RV. 2. 2. 7.) acc. pI. of dviiras (doors'. In other 
stems there is only alternation between vrddhi and gllJ)a, e.g. 
nom. sg. piit · foot ., gen. sg. padas, dpas nom. pI. • water', 
acc. pI. apds, ndsii nom. ace. duo {nostrils', gen. lac nasOs. The 
vrddhi grade is generalised in viic- ' speech I (nom. sg. vlik, gen. 
sg. 'ueicas) as also in Lat. vox, vocis, in contradistinction to the 
gur.la grade in Gk. 00/, Dna. The gUI)a grade is generalised in such 
nouns as k?dp- · night'. in5tr. sg. k~apJ.. spds-
< spy', etc. 
Root nouns having i, 11;, or r as the radical vowel have 
generalised the weak grade in all cases: dik nom. 3g. {direc­
tion " gen. sg. disas, In5tr. pI. digbhis, similarly from fc-' hymn " 
fk, reas, !ftbhis, and so on without exception. \Vith these belong 
root nouns originally ending in H, namely radical stems in -1. 
and -ii, e.g. dht- · thought' {dhts, dh~ya1n, dhiyas) and bhti­
( earth' (bhits, bhlh'am, bhuvds). 
Accent alternation has been abandoned as a general rule in 
the case of those root stems which appear at the end of com­
pounds, e.g. trivft- . threefold', gen. sg. tr£vftas. The older 
alternating system is only preserved in vrtraghnds because the 
vowel of the root had been elided. In the alternating stem 
anacJvd.h- gen. sg. anacJuhas the apophony indicates that there 
was originally a shifting accent which has been replaced by a 
fixed accent. An exception to the general tendency is found in 
t~e various formations in -anc (pratydnc-, etc.) which are 
originally compounds of prepositions with the root of dk~i ' eye'. 
Here the accent appears on the termination in the weakest cases 
(gen. sg. praticds) but it is shifted back in the middle cases "vith 
a corresponding difference of grades (pratydgbhis). 
The movable accent was originally characteristic of the neuter 
nouns formed with the various suffixes classified above. The 
tendency was frOITl the late IE period for this to be given up and 
replaced by a fixed radical accent. Nevertheless there remain in 
Sanskrit, as also in Greek, various survivals from this system. 
The accent shift is usually preserved in the archaic neuters with 
alternating rln stem: ds,k, asnas 
~ blood' I ydk,t, yaknds 
( liver', sdkrt, saknds dung'; likewise in the stems in ijn :
I 
dk#, ak~1Jds eye 'J dsthi, asthnds I bone 'J dddhi, dadhnds I curd '.
I 
Similar terminational accent appears also in iisnds gen. sg. 
(asya- ' mouth ')' likewise in dO~1Jds, yU~1.uis, udnds and si'~1Jas 
(gen. sg. to dds forearm 'J y'll~- ' broth " udaka- ( water " and
f 

222 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
siras / head '). The terminational accent in the oblique cases 
entails in some instances a reduction of the root, e.g. udnds as 
compared with EngL water, etc. It is seen also in gen. sg. usrds 
/ of the dawn' compared with the strong stem vasaro which 
appears in compounds. In two cases fixed accent has been 
applied to nouns of the old rln declension: dhar, dhnas day',
l 
iidhar, {tdhnas ' udder " 
In the masc. and fern. r- and n-stems the accent shift to the 
termination is preserved in the weakest cases where the vowel 
of the suffix is lost: pitii, pitre, cf. Gk. 11aT~p, 11aTpos, murdhii 
, head', gen. mitrdhnds, uk~ii 'bull', uk~1}ds, ct. Gk. ap~v, 
Fap-,]v • lamb " gen. apvoS'. In the middle cases where the nand 
r of the suffix were vocalised on the loss of the gUIJ.a vowel the 
accent is retracted to the suffix: Pitfbhis, murdhdbhis. In cer­
tain cases the apophony indicates that the accent was originally 
of the alternating variety although it has become fixed: svii 
· dog " gen. sunas (original accent in Gk. KVVOS'), yuvd • young 
man " gen. yiinas, maghdvii, maghonas. 
\Vith as-stems traces of this accent shift are exceedingly rare. 
The instr. sg. bhi~o' (bhiyds- / fear') and the gen. sg. u~ds (for 
u~-s-as) show both the terminational accent and the correspond­
ing weak form of suffix and root. Otherwise these stems have 
been normalised. 
This accent was originally characteristic. of the i- and it-stems, 
and traces remain notably in Greek: oC;s 
sheep', gen. oio):, 
yovv • knee', yovvos> oopv' spear ., oovpos. Sanskrit in general 
has stabilised the accent (dvyas, n-uidhvas) though occasionally 
the apophony indicates original accent of fpe termination, e.g. 
in dru~tas «druttds) gen. of daTU wood', The nom. sg. pdsu
t 
nt. and the gen. sg. pasvds (mase. but originally neuter) repre­
sent the original IE inflection, but they no longer belong to­
gether, since the forms classed with pdsu have acquired a 
normal rad~ca1 accent, and a masc. pasus has come into being, 
to which the gen. sg. pasvds is attached. Elsewhere termina­
tional accent appears in a small number of suffixally accented 
nouns which take the gen. sg. termination -as: arts: aryds; 
raj,lis: riiyds; pitus: pitvds. 
The accent shift remains in the case of those participles in 
-ant which are accented on the suffix': nom. sg. addn t eating' : 
instr. sg. adaM; yunjdn. ' joining' : yunjata; sUHvdn ( press­
ing': sUn'l}at4, etc.; but this does not apply to the middle 
11 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
223 
cases where the accent is on tht:: suffix and not the termination. 
These are the main cases where shift of accent appears in de­
clension in Sanskrit. Elsewhere, and these form the majority of 
stems, the accent has been stabilised either on the root or on the 
suffix. Fixed accent on the root becomes the normal accentua­
tion of neuter nouns in Sanskrit: dhanva bow t, dhdnvanas ; 
I 
nilma < name', nilmnas; brtihma ( prayer', brdhmat;as; d1Jthas 
• distress', d1Jthasas; madhu 'honey', mddhvas, mddhunas; 
viiri ' water ',viirit;as. Fixed radical accent is likewise the rule 
in those masculine and feminine nouns which are accented on 
the root: bhrqta' brother', instr, bhrdtra; rilja' king', gen. 
riljnas; bhdvan' being', bhdvatas; goman 'possessing cows', 
g6matas; avis 'sheep', dvyas; patis 
lord " pates, patyus
I 
(husband); krdtus' wisdom', krdtvas; sdtrus' enenlY " sdtros. 
Thematic sterns, both those accented on the root and those 
accented on the suffix, have invariably fixed accent both in San­
skrit and Greek. The same applies to verbal thematic stenlS. 
The evidence is that in Indo-European such stems were char­
acterised by fixed accent from the beginning. 
Fixed suffixal accent in the case of non-thematic stems 
appears in a number of types. It is rare in Sanskrit in the r­
and n-stems, though not uncommon in Greek (1TOtfL~V 1TOf.fL1voS, 
and with vrddhi carried through, QOT~P, QOTfjpOS). Such accent 
only appears in Sanskrit in those n-stems in which the suffixal 
vowel is nOl elided in the weak cases: brahmd. brahmd1Jas. 
On the other hand this type of accentuation has assumed 
great importance in the case of the i- and 'U-stems, where it 
produced a special inflection of the suffixally accented type 
(adjective and agent noun), which was eventually applied to all 
masculine and feminine nouns however accented. Inflection of 
the type PitJ: pitre is found only in the stem sdkhi-' friend', 
nOIIl. sg. sdkha, dat. sg. sdkhye, but there has been a secondary 
shift of accent to the root which n1ust have originally been the 
same in the two cases. Elsewhere in the normal type (agnis, 
agnes) there is fixed radical accent, and this type must be very 
ancient because accent and apophony are in agreement in the 
gen. sg., etc. The accent causes the retention of the gUJ)a grade 
of the suffix in the genitive, dative (agndye) and nom. pI. 
(agndyas) , and the reduction of the gen. sg. termination to -5 
(agne-s). Likewise in the case of u-stems the inflection of the 
type vaytts' wind', gen. sg. vay6s arises from the fixation of 

224 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
the accent on the suffix of suffixally accented agent nouns and 
adjectives. This type of declension eventually ousts the alter­
native type, which was originally exclusively used with neuter 
nouns (mddhvas> pasvds originally neuter) and optionally in the 
agent noun-adjective type (sdkhye with secondary radical 
accent). The decline of the neuter as opposed to the masc.-fern. 
types is largely responsible for this development. 
Fixed accent on the suffix is to be found also in rnasc. and 
fern. stems in -as: nom. rak~!ts, gen. rak$dsas and in the stems 
in -mant and -vant in so far as they are accented on the suffix: 
pasum!i.n, pasumdtas. In the latter case the apophony indicates 
an original shifting accent. It does so also jn the perfect parti­
ciples whose fixed accent must be of secondary origin: cakrviin, 
eakru~as. 
The accent of certain infinitival forms calls for mention since 
it differs frorn any of the types listed so far. This appears in 
certain dative infinitives which are accented on the suffix. This 
is most commonly found in infinitives formed from s-st~ms, e.g. 
fedse ' to 
" eardse 'to move', spurdhdse 'to strive', 
chojdse ' to enjoy'. Some examples are also found from man­
and van-~tems: vidmdne' to know' diivdne ' to give 'J turvdtze 
: to oven~ome '. This accent cannot be original since suffixal 
accent is l)loper to the adjective and agent·noun type, whereas 
the neute: action nouns, to which these infinitives belong, are 
accented on the root. It is also hardly possible that this type of 
accentuatj;Jn should have supplanted a radical accentuation, 
since that has become the normal type, and the reverse would 
be expected. The accent normal to neuter nouns does some­
times occur in these infinitives, rarely in those with suffix -as 
(dyase 'to go ~, dhityase 'to cherish '), more preponderantly 
elsewhere (detmane to give J" dhiirvatte ( to injure J. Since it is
f 
unlikely that this normal type would be supplanted, the in­
finitival accent on the suffix must be explained as a substitu­
tion for older terminational accent (*,case, etc.). The cause of 
this change is not altogether clear but it may be associated with 
the tendency observed elsewhere to avoid final accentuation in 
forms of nlOre than two syllables: cf. trivftas as opposed to 
rcds, and ak§dbhis as opposed to ak§'IJ;4. It may also be due 
partly to infitlence of locative infinitives where the regular 
accent was on the suffix. 
A few action nouns in -as have also acquired suffixal accent, 
Iii 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
225 
notably bhiyds- 'fear " instr. bhiydsa beside older bhf~d (p. 159). 
\Vhen the neuter nouns had substituted fixed radical accent for 
the shift ,of the accent to the suffix in the oblique cases, the only 
type where it normally took place were masculine stems in 
which the vowel of the suffix was elided in these cases: uk~d, 
1tk~1Jds. On this analogy the few remaining neuter stems which 
retained oblique cases with terminational accent received 
suffixal accent in nom. acc, (acc. bhiydsam corresponding to 
bhi~ii like 'uk~drtam to Uk:~~til ; later bh~ydsa is created by stabilis­
ation of the new accent). In this.noun the feminine gender 
results from its changf'd accent. 
Suffixal accent has become nonnal in the majority of the 
neuter nouns in -i;;: arci:;-
flame', gen. sg. arci~as, etc., as
l 
opposed to the rarer type jy6ti~-
light I. 
The anomalous
I 
nature of this accent is clear from the weak grade of the syllable 
on which it is placed, and also from a comparison with the 
related -as and -u~ stems. The same type of accent appears in 
the i-stems of the vrkt- type and in it-stems (originally -in and 
-UH stems). The system here is more complicated inasmuch as 
ihese classes contain both action-noun types (dehi • rampart '. 
land. • body') and agent-noun/adjective types (vrkt- 'she­
wolf " agri1- ' maid '). The accent of the former type is exactly 
parallel to that of arci~-, etc. An exact parallel to the latter 
type is found in the adjectives in -in: 
balt~ balinas. In both 
these adjectival types the suffixal accent is regular, but its 
weak grade is to be explained out of forms in which the accent 
was originally on the suffix (*vrkiytisl *balinas). The weak 
grade associated with the latter forms has been generalised, but 
also the suffixal accent of the nom. acc. where originally the 
strong grade of the suffix must have prevailed. The action 
nouns of the (vrki) i- and it-stems have fallen together with the 
adjective/agent-noun type in accent as in other respects. 
The same kind of development seems to have taken place in 
a number of originally neuter i- and u-stems. This is clearest in 
the case of the stem pa$u- < domestic animal '. A neuter pasu is 
prese~ed in one instance and comparative evidence shows that 
this fonn with its radical accent is original (d. Lat. peeu, Goth. 
lathu, O. Pruss. pecku: IE plllu). The old form of the gen. sg. 
to this, with its. terminational accent is preserved in Sanskrit 
(pasvds), but by the analogy of the mase. stems mentioned 
above this form is the cause of the creation of a new. masculine, 

226 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
nom. sg. pasus. The same seems to have occurred with pitus 
• food', gen. sg. pitvds, since this by its meaning is an action 
noun, and among i~stems with rayis: rayas 'wealth' (for 
*rtiHis: raHyds). Possibly also some masc. n-stems which are 
not of the adjective/agent-noun type arose in this way, e.g. 
miirdhii, gen. sg. murdhnds ' head'. 
§ 2. 
HETEROCLITIC DECLENSION 
The mutual relation of the r- and n:.sterns has been dealt 
with at some length in the section dealing with the iormation of 
nouns, and may be briefly summarised here. The neuter r­
stems that remain in Sanskrit are normally not declined out­
side the nom. ace. sg., n-stems being used in the remaining 
cases: dhar/dhnas' day', ydkrtjyaknds ' liver', etc. This type 
of inflection is found elsewhere in Indo-European, but always, 
outside Hittite, as an archaic survival, and not as a productive 
formation. In Hittite, on the other hand, this type of alterna­
tion is exceedingly common, and appears regularly in the in­
flection of neuters in rjn, and in the compound suffixes -mar, 
war, sar, tar/no It was therefore at an earlier period of Indo­
European much commoner than later, and its decline is due 
partly to the decline of the old neuter types in general, and 
partly to the extension of the n-stem to the nom. acc. sg. This 
system arose too early for it to be possible now to say how pre­
cisely it came into being. It does not however appear that the 
neuter. r-stems were from the beginning incapable of inflection, 
since such examples occur in all languages (Skt. svar/siiras; 
vasarOjusras; Gk. €apj€apo); Hitt. kururjkururas, etc.), and 
there is no reason to believe that this type is not ancient. Nor 
can it be said that the n-suffix is in origin either a case termina­
tion or a formative making an oblique case. It is a suffix in its 
own right, on a par with the others,and it appears like them in 
the nom. acc. sg. in many ancient examples (e.g. Skt. nama 
I name', Lat. nomen, Hitt. laman, etc.). It is therefore dif­
ficult to say how exactly these two stems so often combined to 
form a single paradigm, but this took place in the early period 
of Indo-European, and though the system was beginning to 
become obsolete in the final stages of the parent language, it 
persists as an archaic survival in several of the existing lan­
guages. 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
227 
In the same way the few neuters in ~i substitute an n-stem 
outside the nom. acc. sg.: asthi: asthnds' bone I, etc. Besides 
these the instr. pI. naktdbhis may correspond to an old neuter 
ndkti I night' which has been replaced by a feminine (nom. sg. 
ndktis). In the case of viri {water' the n-suffix is added to 
nistead of being substituted for the i-suffix (gen. sg. viirittas). 
This process appears commonly in neuter u-stems: daru druf.,as, 
mddhu ' honey', mddhunas, etc., and its antiquity is guaranteed 
by similar formations elsewhere: Gk. 8opv, 8oparo:) (*dorw1Jtos. 
with the additional t-suffix characteristic of Greek). In the 
Vedic language this is, only one means of inflecting the neuters 
(the alternatives are _mddhvas and mddhos, the latter an innova­
tion borrowed from the masc.), but it becomes the general rule 
in the classical language. This n-extension in the oblique cases 
is found occasionally with other suffixes: e.g. the as-stem 
siras ' head', gen. sg. sir~ttds, and the ya-stem kanyd. gen. 
kaninam, Av. also gen. sg. kainino. The use of this n is much 
extended in certain cases, e.g. instr. sg. of masc. i- and 
u-stems (agn{na. vayumi); in the gen. pI. it has been intro­
duced in the case of all vocalic stems: dev4.nam, agninam, 
PitftJlim, etc. 
Certain defective neuter n- and m-stems appear in the Veda 
mainly as instrumentals, and have become attached to the 
corresponding man-stems: bhiina, mahnii, pre'IJa, prathina. 
mahina, vari'IJii (bhumdn-
abundance', etc., prathimdn­
I 
· width ',etc.). It has been noted above that it is unnecessary 
in these cases to assume a change of -mn- to -n-. 
An alternative u~/van similar to the rln alternation appears 
in the Vedic declension of dhdnu§- ' bow '. The u~-stem appears 
in the nom. sg., while elsewhere the stem dhdnvan- is used. It 
is probable that the two stems Pdru~- and pdrvan- {joint' were 
originally distributed in the same way. This combination of 
n- and s-stems is found also in the corresponding masculines. 
The voc. sg. of certain van-stems in the Veda is in -vas : ,tavas. 
eva-yavas, vibhavas, matarisvas from rtdvan- • righteous J. etc. 
There are also doublets like tbhvan-, fbhvas;.; 
stkvan-~ sikvas· 
(both meaning' skilled ') in which the two suffixes alternate 
without any apparent rule. This voc. -vas appears also, and 
more regularly, in the stems in -vant, which is a t-extension of 
the van-suffix, and in the parallel stems in -mant: 
,~vas, 
gnavas, patnivas, tuv#mas, bhanumas, suci§mas. In the case of 

228 
THE DE CLENSION OF NOUNS 
these stems the s-forms are more extensively used in Iranian, 
since Avestan has nominatives of this kind attached to stems 
in -vant: amavd (amavanl-). 
On analysis the Sanskrit forms of the nom. sg. are derived 
from this (namasvan, pasuman, etc.). The nominative formed 
from. the vant- and mant-stems would have appeared as °van 
and oman (like Dan in the ant-stems). The nominatives in -van, 
-man are derived from *-vans, -mans (-vii1Jts. mii1Jts) which have 
replaced *-v&s, *-miis by analogical extension of nasalisation to 
the nom. sg. This phenomenon is found elsewhere in Sanskrit 
in s-stems, and since it does not appear in Iranian, it is to be taken 
as a special Indian development. The alternation of nasalised 
forms in the strong cases with forms without nasal in the weak 
cases in such classes as the present participles (addn! addntam, 
adatd, etc.), which is due to the change of the sonant nasal to aJ 
led to the extension of n to the strong cases of other classes 
where the nasal does not originally belong. This is found 
notably in the comparatives in yas (sre..,viin ' better', sreyiitftsam, 
sr(vasas) and in the perfect participles in -vas (vidviln, vid­
vii:1p.sam, vidu;~as). It is found also, in the declension of put}'ts­
, man' : pumdn J pumift}'tsamJ putfLsds. This is a masc. -as-stem, 
but one which in contradistinction to the normalised type 
(rak~as. rak~asam, rak:;dsas) has preserved some archaic features. 
These are (I) the weakening of the radical vowel as a result of 
the accentuation of the suffix, (2) the old terminational accent 
of the ohlique cases as in pitre, uk$1Jds, etc., and (3) the con­
sequent weakening of the suffix in these cases. In addition the 
inflection is complicated by the introduction of the nasal into 
the nom. acc. sg. (replacing *pumlis, ·pumtisam).l There is one 
other example of this nasalisation among the masc. as-stems, 
namely svdvan, nom. sg. of svavas- ' helpful " 
The introduction of -n- into the heterocli:ic nom. sg. of the 
vant- and mant-stems follows this general principle, and it was 
further facilitated by the existence of -n- regularly in the acc. 
sg. which was fonned with the vant-stem. The distribution of 
the two stems corresponds to that of the neuter U$ and van in 
dhdnu$-Jdhdnvan above except that in the masculine the acc.sg. 
1 The mase. pumas- would correspond to a neuter ·peumos- ' pubes' The 
Lat. words pubes, paber, have different suffixes. Since the final root here is 
likely to be that which appears also in Lat. pu-d-or. band m ma.y also be va.ry­
ing suffixal elements, alternatively b in Latin may he for m before 'f in pUbe'f 
as in lubernus. tuber (: tumiJ,,). 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
229 
has a form different from the nom. sg. and this form follows the 
analogy of the majority of cases. 
The vant-suffix is built on the van-suffix and though no nom. sg. 
in -vas is recorded for the latter type of stem, the vocatives in -vas 
are an indication that the nom. sg. may once have been so formed. 
In some stems the suffixes van- and vant- are combined 
heteroclitically. The stem tnaghdvan- (nom. sg. maghdva, gen. 
sg. tnagh6nas uses the vant..stem before terminations beginning 
with a consonant (instr. pI. maghdvadbhis). An instr. 
fkvata 
appears beside the usual stem fkvan- 'praising'. 
stems 
arvan- and qrvant- 'steed' are in terchangeable. The stem 
yuvan-, ytin- makes its neut. sg. Y'll,Vat, and this extended stern 
is the basis of the fern. yuvati-. 
The perfect participle is formed mainly with the stem in 
.vii1JlS-IU~, but before the terminations beginning ,with a con­
sonant, there appears a stem in vat (vidvddbhis instr. pl.). This 
suffix reappears in Greek, where it forms the normal basis of 
the declension (€lSw~'J d8o'ros) and it is attested also in Gothic 
(weitwod-
witness l The comparative evidence shows it to be 
I 
different from the vat (wy,t) which is the weak fonn of the vant­
suffix, since it has no nasal. 
The word for ( path, way J declines with a variety of stems. 
The strong form in the lJ.gveda appears as Twrn. sg. pdnthds, ace. 
sg. pdnthatn, norn. pI. panthas, to which correspond Av~ pa1~td, 
pantt1m. In the weak cases the stern appears as path- (instr. sg. 
pathii, etc.). The relation of these two stems is one of apophony : 
strong form of suffix aH (> a), weak form H. The weak form of 
the suffix, H, aspirates the preceding t~ and this aspiration is 
then extended to the nom. sg., etc. The same development 
occurs in the case of the strong and weak stems maha-, mah.. 
{ greai ' (megeH2-/megH2). In the middle cases of path- an i­
stem is used, which occurs elsewhere (0. S1. ppti, O. Pruss. 
pintis): inscr. pI. pathlbhis, etc. (on the other hand Av. has 
pad:Jbis without -i-). In the same way maha/mah- has a supple­
mentary i-steIn, in this case in the ne\lt. sg. (mdhi; in Av. also 
in the instr. pI. mazibiS). After the lJ.gveda there appears another 
strong stem of path-, an n-stem (ace. sg. ,pdntkalnam, nom, pI. 
pdnthanas). This is ai<:;o ancient since the same formation 
appears in Avestan: pantan:J11t, pantano. The same kind· of 
inflection i5 laid down by the grammarians for rbhuk~-
I n. of a 
divine being' and math- ' churning-stick " 

230 
THE DECLENSION OF NOU~S 
§3. 
THE CASE-TERMINATIONS 
Nominative Singular, 1v[asc. and Fern. 
The nominative 
singular of masculine and feminine nouns is fonned in three 
ways, (I) by vrddhi of the suffix, (2) by the tennination s, 
(3) by the simple stern uncharacterised in any way. The basis 
of the first method has been dealt with at length in the section 
U'A"UIJl~ with the formation of nouns. There it was seen that 
adjecti\'es and agent nouns were formed on the basis of the 
various types of neuter stem by the transference of the accent 
to the suffix, and that for phonetic reasons which are not now 
this led to the vrddhi of the suffix in the nom. sg. Assoc­
iated with this vrddhi there IS a tendency for the final semi­
vowel·of a suffix to be elided: pitti, brahmJ. The vrddhietl type 
of nom. sg. appears regularly in the case of rnase. r-, 11- and s­
stems (data, cf. Gk. 007"~p; brahmti. cf. Gk. 1TOl.fL~V; 
rak~iis, 
sumantis. cf. Gk. ifJ€vS"~, EJJfLEv1}~), rarely in the case of i-stems 
(sdkha). A similar vrddhied nom. sg. originally existed in the 
case of u-stems of this type, but in all cases where such vrddhi 
is preserved it has secondarily acquired the addition of -s :
Skt. dyaus, Av. uzbazau5, Gk. fia(nAE6~ (for -"'Ius), etc. 
The termination -s appears in Sanskrit, which in this respect 
is in close agreement with the related languages, in the mas­
culine a-stems (devds, Lat. deus) in rnasc. and fern. i- and u­
stems, both of the action-noun (matis, kratus, Gk. f3a.aL~, ?TljxvS', 
etc.) and adjectival type (s'ttcis, purus; Gk. tOpts, 7ToAvS. etc.), 
in i-stems of the vrkt-type and it-stems, in consonantal. stems 
(action-noun or agent), including the monosyllabic stems 
originally ending in -H (dhts, bhas). 
I t is clear that there is no common principle uniting these 
various formations, and distinguishing them from those classes 
in which the nom. sg. rnasc. and fern. is formed differently. It 
is also clear that the range of s-nominatives has extended at the 
expense of other types. This has already been observed in the 
case of the vrddhied nominatives in -a1tS. It is also clear that 
the feminines in -i of the vrki class, and those in -u (tanils) have 
acquired their -5 from the radical stems in -i and -17 which else­
where are declined like them. The feminines in -a and those in -i 
of the devt class preserve the uncharacterised nominative which 
was original to the stems in -H. Furthennore it is doubtful 
whether the s-nominative was originally attached to the i- and 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
231 
«-stems, though it must have extended to them at a very early 
period. The reason for this is that the action nouns of these 
classes would be expected, according to the general analogy, to 
have been originally neuters, and this is borne out by the exist­
ence of survivals of the type; on the other hand in the case of 
the agent-noun/adjective types there is evidence of a vrddhied 
treatment parallel to that of the r-', u- and s-stems, and though 
this is rare in the historical period, it can be shown to have been 
much commoner earlier. The probability is that the nominative 
s was originally proper to the adjectival thematic stems, since 
they are definitely a class apart. Its extension to the i- and u­
stems is not difficult to understand, since like the thematic 
stems they are vocalic stems. In this process the morphological 
distinction and agent-noun/adjective appears to have counted 
very little, and the s of the nominative (and with it the distinc­
tion between nom. and acc.) became early attached even to the 
action nouns of these classes. In this way the majority of such 
nouns acquired the masc. or fern. (earlier, common) gender. 
Historically they do not take s in the nom. sg. because they have 
gender, but rather they have acquired gender as a result of 
taking -so In the same way stems in occlusives were from an 
early period characterised by s in the nom. sg., and this regard­
less of whether they were action or agent nouns. In mono­
syllabic stems the s was also added after consonants other than 
occlusives (nasals, Gk. ds, KT€is; H, Skt. dJds, bh'iis). 
The feminines in -a and those in ·i of the devi class have no 
special sign for the nom. sg. To this extent they agree with the 
neuters. The action nouns ending in these suffixes originally 
were neuters, and in the case of this suffix the adjectival type, 
which was specialised as a fern. formation was always less 
clearly distinguished from the action noun type than was the 
case with other suffixes. 
Accusative S£ngular, lYase. and Fern. The accusative singular 
masc.and fern. shows no such variation. The termination 
appears as -m after vocalic stems (dsvam, Lat. equum; agnim, 
Lat. ignem, etc.) and -am after consonantal stems (piidam, 
riijanam, pitaram, etc.). In the latter case Greek has a out of 
1ft (noSa, naT/.pa) and, this is the form which would be expected 
phonetically, but Indo-Iranian substitutes the fuller form 
which has the advantage of greater clarity. In some languages 
(Gk., Celt., Germ.) this final -rn changes to -n, as it also does in 

232 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
the nom. acc. sg. neut. (Gk. At1KOV, 1TESOV) , and it is certainly 
wrong to assume, as is sometirnes done, that the latter is the 
more original form. 
Nom.-Acc. Sg. Neuter. Apart from a-stems neuter nouns have 
no endings in these cases: adhar, Gk. ov8ap; mddhu, Gk.l-d8v ; 
nama, Lat. nomen, Hitt. laman, etc.). In thematic neuters the 
termination in both cases is -m. It has been suggested above 
that the -m of the old neuters of this class was originally· the 
suffix -m (yugdm: yugmd-, etc.) and as ~_ result of these forms 
coinciding with the acc. sg. of thematic adjectival stems, a 
neuter thematic type was developed. 
Instrumental Singular. The instrumental singular shows no 
united formation in Indo-European. Forms corresponding to 
the -a which is the regular ending in Indo-Iranian, appear only 
in certain languages, and there only in certain classes of stem. 
In addition there appear the endings -bhi (Gk. 8€or/x, Arm. 
mardov) and -mi (0. S1. vlukomi, Lith. sunu,mi). The former 
element is that which appears in the instr. pI. in Sanskrit 
(-bhi-s). In Greek it is used indifferently either as singular or 
plural, and further in a wide sense, covering instr. loco and ab!. 
Hittite has a different formation of its own (-et) which is not to 
be reconciled with any of the other forms in Indo-European. 
It appears that the instrumental "vith its various forms is a 
comparatively new case, and consequ~ntly has no common 
form covering the whole of Indo-Euft>pean. 
The Sanskrit form is normally -a, i.e. -aH: padd, pitrd, 
rdjna, etc. But it nlay also appear in the zero grade, -H~ 
notably in the case of feminine i-stems: citti (Av. cisti). uti, 
jU~fi, etc. In Avestan this form is also attested for u-stems : 
mainyu, xratu, etc. It must further be assumed for thematic 
stems (vfka, Av. v'3hrka, etc.), since the acute accent which 
appears elsewhere (Lith. vilku, gera-ju, and d. the Gk. adv. 
~7T(,ax€pcfJ which is interpreted as an old instrumental) speaks 
against contraction (IE therefore wlkwo-H, not wJkwo-oH/eH). 
The quality of the long vowel that developed from this varied 
between -6 (Lith. vilku, OHG. wolJu with U <0) and -e (Goth. 
Ivamme-k, lve, Skt. (adverbs) pascJ, uccd with palatalisation 
indicating -e. This implies an original IE metaphony eHl/oHI' 
Dative Singular. The tennination is -e, Av. -c, Oi, Indo-Ir. 
-ai: pade, pitre, sune, mdnase; Av. b'3rnaite, vise, pi8re, 
paiO'\! 1P-f.Il. -:rr3z~Jyjji, etc. The IE ending -ei IS preserved in 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
233 
Oscan (paterei, regatuTei, leginei) and Phrygian (FUVUKTEt). 
Elsewhere phonetic developments have obscured it (Lat. matTi, 
O. S1. materi, etc.). There has been some dispute about the 
original fDrm of the dative ending, since alternatively the Greek 
infinitives in 
-at have been compared 
(80f-L£vat, 
8oFEVat, 
Sovvat, etc.). But the existence in Greek of certain traces of the 
dative in -ei (AtFELpLAOS), shows that, whatever the explana­
tion of these infinitives, they should be discounted in settling 
the form of the IE dative. 
Abltitive Singular. A special form for the ablative singular, 
which elsewhere has the same form as the gen. sg., is found only 
in the declension of thematic stems: -at (-ad) in vfkiit, etc., 
Lat. lupo(d). This represents the IE state of affairs. In certain 
languages, notably in Italic and the later Avestan, this form is 
extended to other classes (Ose. loutad ( civitate " Lat. magis­
tratud, Av. a8raj, garoij. etc.). In Slavonic this termination 
serves both for the ablative and the genitive of the thematic de­
clension (O. S1. vluka). It is not possible iodetermine whether 
the final consonant was originally· d or t. The vowel was 0 in 
ordinary nominal declension alternating with e in adverbial 
fonus (Lat. jacillumed). In the latter type the termination was 
accented (Skt. pascO-f, sandt). The vowel was of circumflex 
quality (Lith. to; Gk. (dial.) TWOE ' from. here ') indicating con­
traction· (-od <-o-od), and this is reflected by occasional disyl­
labic scansion in the Veda. 
Genitive-Ablative Singular. The termination, which· outside 
the thematic class combines the functions of the ablative and 
the genitive, is -as representing IE -es and -os. l'he difference 
between the two depended on accentuation, -es occurring in 
connection with the original terminational accent, -os in those 
cases (Gk. aWf-LaTos, etc.) where the accent had ·become fixed on 
the root. This distinction is nowhere preserved, since in the 
various languages one or other form is generalised. e.g. -os in 
Gk. (awf-LU7'o~, 1T08o~) and -es (> is) in Latin (corporis, pedis, but 
O. Lat. regus, etc.). In addition there exists a reduced termina­
tion -s which appears in conjunction with adjective and agent 
noun types with accented suffix. This appears in Sanskrit in 
connection with i- and u-stems (agnes, sunos), in Avestan also 
in some ,-stems (pitars). In the i- and u-ster.llS the form has 
spread from the adjectival ty~ to which it properly belongs, 
to the majority of action nouns (mates, Itos). 
Only a few 

234 
THE DECI.E-NSIDN OF NOUNS 
examples remain in the_ Veda of the alternative type (dvyas, 
mddhvas). 
Locative Singular. Three types of locative singular are found 
in Sanskrit, illustrated by the alternative forms of locative of 
the word for eye': ak~dn, ak~dt.ti. ak~~zi. Their chronology 
l 
appears to be in this order. The type akHz! is the latest. 
According to the grammarians the locative of n-stems may be 
in -ani or -ni (riijani. rdjni; sakthdni, sakthni), but in the lan­
guage of the lJgveda the latter type does not appear, and is 
therefore clearly an innuvation. It is due to an analogical 
tendency to put the loco sg. on the same footing as the other 
oblique cases by accenting the termination and weakening the 
suffix. In many of the consonantal stems this tendency had 
already become general in the pre-Vedic period (adati, bhdga­
vati, v£du~i, etc.), but the older type with accent and gUIJ.a of 
suffix is preserved in the an-sterns, in r-stems (svdsari, pitdri), 
to which certain monosyllabic stems can be added: 
k~dmi, 
dydvi (beside div{). 
The oldest form, the locative without ending, appears in n­
stems (dhan, murdhdn, sir~dn; d. Gk. aUv ' always " and in­
fmitives like SOjLev, etc.), and in the vrddhied forms of the i­
and u-stems. It also appears sporadically elsewhere, e.g. in 
parut ' last year' as opposed to Gk. 1Tlpvul" 1Tfpun, a compound 
whose last member (-ut) is the weak form of the wet that appears 
in Hitt. wett-, Gk. Fho,; , year '. In Avestan there appears a 
locative without ending from a root noun man- • mind' in the 
phrase m~n ca daidyiii • and to put in the mind, remember " 
The locative in -i is based on the older locative without end­
ing, to which a suffix or particle -i has been added. This pro­
duces a clearer fonn which tends to oust the earlier form with­
out ending, but the process is not yet complete by the Vedic 
period. To a large extent this form of locative preserves the 
accent andguI}a of the suffix which characterised the form 
without ending, and it is thus sharply differentiated from the 
genitive and dative singular with their accented termination. 
At the sametime analogy has tended to adapt the loco sg. to 
their type, in some cases in the prehistoric period (adati, etc.) 
and in other cases during the history of Sanskrit itself (rifjfti, 
etc.). The suffixal accent of the old locatives without ending is 
parallel to that which has been observed to occur in adverbs 
based on neuter stems (pratdr, etc.). 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
235 
Vocative Singular. The vocative singular consists of the 
simple uninflected stem, and it is therefore a survival from the 
time when the inflection of the noun had not been built up to 
the degree which appears later. In this respect it points to the 
same conclusion as the system of nominal composition, indicat­
ing an early period of IE in which the bare stern could function 
as a word. In thematic stems the vocative is formed simply by 
dropping the -$ which characterises the nominative: vrka, Gk. 
AOKE, Lat. lupe. The various languages agree in having the e­
grade of the suffix in this case instead of the usual 0 (AVKOS', 
etc.). Stems which take vrddhi in the nom. sg. substitute gUJ).a 
in the vocative (svan, pitar as opposed to svd, Pitti, etc.), and 
this characteristic is found also in related languages (Gk. KVOV, 
1TclTEp), This guI)a appears also in i- and u-stems (dgne, st"ino) 
since the formation of adjectival i- and u-stems was originally 
parallel to that of the adjectival r- and n-stems. The feminines 
in -i and -u substitute the short vowels i and u and this is pro­
bably to be regarded as the regular development of -iH and -UH 
when followed by a pause. Compare the similar development 
of -aH to a: in Greek vocatives like vOp,¢a, uv{1dJTa. The vocative 
of the a-stem is anomalous (bale, voc. of bala. ' girl ') and is per­
haps due to the addition of an enclitic particle i (-e for -aH-i). 
The vocative is unaccented in Sanskrit, except when it appears 
at the beginning of a sentence or pada, and in these conditions 
it has a special accent of its own, namely on the first syllable, 
regardless of the normal position of the accent in the word. 
There are traces of this latter type of accentuation elsewhere 
(Gk. 'mi.Tep, a.SEAcPE, as opposed to 7Ta'T~p, dSeAcPos in the nom. 
sg.), but nowhere to the extent that is found in Sanskrit. The 
system cannot be very ancient, otherwise there would not be 
regular gUI)a of the suffix, which is due to the suffixal accentua­
tion which characterises these types nonnally. 
Nominative Plural, M asc. and Fem. The Sanskrit -as (pddas 
l feet ') corresponds to IE -es which is preserved elsewhere (Gk. 
1TOSE"S'). 
The termination always appears in the full grade 
though it is never accented. It is associated with the strong 
stern in stems of varying grades, and this may be either gUl).a 
(pitdras, uk~d1Ja$, agndyas) or vrddhi (dataras, rdjanas). As in 
the accusative singular the latter type is due to extension from 
the nominative singular. 
An s appears in most of the plural cases, e.g. ace. -ns, instr. 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
-bhi?~, daL abl. -bhyas, lac. -suo It is possiblE'" but not certain 
that this s is identical with that of the nom. pI. The IE plural 
system is complicated by two unusual features. On the one 
hand if this s is. the sign of the plural it is distinguished from the 
type found inmost linguistic families by being added after 
instead of appearing before the Case terminations. In the 
second place the terminations of the plural are for the most part 
different from those that appear in the singular and this appears 
to be quite an unusual phenomenon. A further problem is pre­
sented by Hittite. In this language the nominative plural has a 
form of itsown 1 and likewise the accusative (!fumanUs, bumandus 
< all ') but for the gen. dat. there appears normally aform identi­
cal with the gen. sg., and otherwise the inflection is undeveloped. 
It is uncertain to what extent this is due to Hittite innovation, 
but it may be an indication that the plural inflection in IE is a 
later development than the singular. 
Accusative Plural, lvIasc. and Fem. The ending in IE was 
~ns after vocalic stems, -ttS after consonantal stems. This is 
preservedirt Gothic and certain Greek dialects, notably Cretan 
(Gk. lAEVOipovs-; vlVvs, Goth. wuljans, gastins, brojJruns). In 
Sanskrit the accusative plural of masc. vocalic stems (-an, -in; 
-un, -fn) preserves this -s in sandhi (-atJts, etc., before t-). In 
the Vedaits effed is seen also before a vowel (-atlt, f""r). The 
long vowel in Sanskrit is not original but arises in thematic 
stems from the analogy of the nom. pI. (-as with long vowel 
whence acc. -ans for -ans). From this declension the long vowel 
has spread to the stems in 
-u and -r. The ending -tU after con­
sonantal stems becomes regularly -as in Sanskrit as in Greek 
(PadliS,7T08as). The acc. pI. is a weak case in Sanskrit, that is to 
say the termination may be accented and the stem appears in 
its weak form, This is in contradiction with the fact that the 
termination itself appears in the weak grade and it is therefore 
in all probability an innovation. If IE -ns in this case is de­
rived from -ms the form can have arisen by the addition of the 
plural sign -s to the acc. sg. 
The feminine vocalic stems show no trace of n in Sanskrn 
(-as. -is, -us, is). This absence of n is shown to be IE in the case 
of stems in -a by the agreement of Indo-Iranian (Skt. kanyds, 
Av. urvard) and Germanic (Goth. gibos). 
Non-distinction of 
nominative and accusative, which characterises neuters was 
originally characteristic of -a (-aH) stems when these had not 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
237 
become differentiated from the other neuters. It is preserved 
in the a-formation which serves to provide the plural of neuter 
thematic sterns (nom. acc. pI. yugd). The nonnal feminines 
have acquired the plural -s of the non-neuter classes but they 
still retain in the plural the absence of distinction between 
nom. and acc. From the a-stems the type spreads to the fern. 
i-, u,- and r-stems which did not originally in IE have a form 
distinct from that of the corresponding masculines (Gk. 
(dial.) I5FLv!l ( sheep'.). 
IVominat·ive-Accusative Plural Neuter. (1) The neuter plural 
appears still in the Vedic language in some cases undifferen­
tiated from the singular: e.g. in Mhar divydni ' divine udders', 
viSvani vasu t all goods', y6jatta 'Puru (many leagues I, sam 
aranta pdrva the joints came together '. This is a survival
I 
from an early stage when the inflectional system was less de­
veloped. (2) There exists in Iranian, beside this type, a series of 
neuter plurals characterised by vrddhi of the suffix: Av. ayari 
i days', vacd 'words', namq,n 'names'. etc. This type is 
ancient since examples are also quotable from Hittite, e.g. 
widar, pl. of watar ' water'. In Greek on the other hand such 
vrddhied neuter forms appear merely as singulars: vowp, 
7£KJLWP, etc. These may be old plural forms utilised as singulars 
after the type had died out as a plural formation. Sanskrit has 
in the main replaced this type by that which is extended by 
the suffix -i (niimani ' names ') but the Vedic language still re­
tains it (beside the alternative form) in the case of neuter n­
stems (bhfJma 'beings', dha ' days', sir~d ' heads ') in which 
the n of the suffix is elided as elsewhere in connection with 
vrddhi (raja, etc.). (3) The neuter plurals which are made by 
suffixing i to these vrddhied forms appear also in A vest an 
(ndmani" names', sax'll~ni ' teachings', varacdhi ' energies » as 
an alternative to the plurals with 'simple vfddhi. A neuter 
plural suffix -i is found in Hittite (kururi pI. of kurur nt. 
I hostility'), which testifies to its antiquity in Indo-European 
as a method of forming the neuter plural. The i is apparently 
identical with the suffix ~i which appears in the fonnation of 
neuter nouns. Other IE languages have mainly the suffix a or a 
which originates from the thematic stems (Gk. ovop.a.-ra. like 
~vya, etc.). In Vedic the i-form of the plural has been much 
~xtended in comparison with the Indo-Iranian state of affairs 
which can be deduced from the comparison of Avestan. The 

THE 
DECLE~SION OF NOUNS 
formations with simple vrddhi have disappeared in the case of 
most types of stem. In addition the nasal 01 the n- and -nt­
stems (ndmani, ghrtaviinti) has been analogically introduced into 
other types of "'stem, e.g. mdnatftsi ' minds' for munas-i, simi­
larly 
ha'iJi'f!l~i 'ablations J, 
cdk:;171JZ~i 'eyes'i etc. 
A non­
nasalised form remains only in the case of catvari ' four ). The 
process is continued further in the post-B-gvedic period by the 
creation of nasalised i-plurals for consonantal root-stems, e.g. 
Qsatiki from °sak- ' able', °bundhi from °budh- 'understand­
ing '. In addition, on the analogy of the neuter n-stems·like 
niimani there is created a new type of neuter plural for a-, i­
and u-stems: bhf4vaniini 'worlds J J S1lCi11i 'bright J, vasiini 
· riches'. In the Vedic language these forms occur in competi­
tion with the older forms (bhuvana, sueZ, vaslt) , but in the later 
language they are exclusively used. 
Furthermore, on this. 
analogy the later language creates a neut. pI. -t;1Ji for stems in 
-ir-
(4) The inherited neuter plural of thematic stems is in -a 
(yuga, Gk. ,vya, Lat. iuga, Goth. juka, O. Sl. iga). This -a is· 
identical with the suffix -a which in the historical period forms 
feminines. As already pointed out this a (<an) was not origin­
ally distinct from the usual type of neuter suffix. These plurals 
were originally singular neuter collectives, and in Greek they 
retain this character to the extent that they are still construed 
with a singular verb (-Tt1 ~wa TpEXEI.). Jn this function the suffix 
-a retains its primitive characteristic of being indifferent to the 
distinction between nOPlinative and accusative. The variation 
in the IE languages between.a and d appears to be due to dif­
ferent sandhi developments of IE.-aH (-a before vowels or a 
pause, otherwise -a) and it is paralleled by a similar fluctuation 
in the case of feminines in-a. The neuter stems in -i and -u also 
make plurals by lengthening the vowel of the stem, and if these 
forms are not simply made on the analogy of the thematic 
neuters, they can be analysed -i-H and -tl-H with the weak form 
of the suffix added to the stem. In the Vedic language they 
exist side by side with forms undifferentiated from the singular 
and with the innovating type -ini, -l~ni which later becomes the 
rule. 
11 irumental Plural. The ending of the instrumental plural 
",.,s (Avo -bis) contains an element -bhi- which according to the 
evidence of Greek (OEOeP" 
ayElt.1}Qn, leP" vuvePt, EpEfJEUr/>L, etc.} 
was at an earlier period of IE of much vaguer and wider appli­

THE DECLENSION OF XOUNS 
cation, being used both in the singular and the plural, and 
covering the meanings of instrumental, locative and ablative. 
In Indo-Iranian, as opposed to Greek and Armenian (gailov, 
pI. ga£lovlr-': gail ' wolf') this formative appears only in the 
plural, the instrumental singular being formed in quite a 
different manner. The final -5 may be interpreteci as the -s of 
the plural added to this element, or possibly in view of such 
adverbial forms like Gk. AtKPLcpt~ ~ crosswise' and Av. mazibis 
, greatly' may be merely some adverbial suffix (cf. all-cpt: 
dj-t<pt~, etc.), which in view of the regular occurrence of -s in the 
plural led to its being understood as such. As elsewhere Balto­
Slavonic and Germanic have -m- in this case (Lith. sii1tumzs, 
etc.) which it is not possible phonetically to relate to the -bh- of 
the other languages. 
Dative-A blative Plural. Anomalously the ablative which in 
the singular has mainly the same form as,the genitive, has in 
the plural a form identical with that of the dative. The ending 
is -bhyas, Av. byo. 
The western IE languages have a form 
similar to this going back to original-bhos (LaL -bus, Osc.is, ss, 
Veneto -bas, GalIk -,80). It is possible but not certain that this 
-bhos has developed ~ut 'of -bhyos through the sporadic loss of 
post-consonantal -y-, easily understood in a weakly stressed 
termination. The analysis of the form is indicated by the com­
parison of the datives of the personal pronouns. Beside the 
usual forms tttbhyam, asmdbhya1il the Vedic language preserves 
also a form without -nt, whose antiquity is attested by Iranian 
(Av. 1naibyii). The -b.,hyas of the dat.-abl. plural can be inter­
preted as this -bhya followed by the -s which characterises the 
plural. In this way the case would originally be a dative, and 
its use also as ablative can naturally be explained by the fact 
that the -as which comes at the end of the termination is 
similar in form to the -as of the gen.-abl. sg. 
Genitive Plural. The termination of the genitive plural is 
distinguished from the majority of the pluraL cases by the 
absence of s (with the exception of the pronominal forms 
ti~am, tdsam). The termination is -am which is frequently 
scanned as disyllabic in the Veda, and this in conjunction with 
the circumflex accent in Gk. -wv, points to an original contrac­
tion of -o-om. This can only have come about in thematic 
stems, and it must be assumed that the original termination 
-om has elsewhere been replaced by the long contracted -om 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
. which arose in this class. The shorter termination -om has been 
generalized in Slavonic (> if, materu, imenu).,and also probably 
in Latin (hominum), where it appears unnecessary to assume 
that -um has developed out of an earlier form with a long vowel. 
A variant e-grade of this formative appears in Gothic only 
(wulfe, suniwe). The Sanskrit vocalic stems are characterised 
by an -n- inserted .before the termination, and the Avestan de­
clension agrees with this system with the exception of the 
stems in -T. The only agreement elsewhere is in Germanic, in 
the a-stems (OHG. geb8no ' of the gifts ') and it is likely that the 
inserted -n- began in this class and from there spread to the 
other vocalic classes. 
Locative Plural. 
The Sanskrit termination -su (patsu) 
a ppears also in Iranian, Slavonic (-chu < su) and di alectically in 
Lithuanian. In Greek on the other hand the termination is-at 
(Troaal, etc.). 
This variation indicates that the termination is 
analysable into two elementS, on the one hand s + u and on the 
other hand s +i. The s can be identified as the plural s which 
appears in other cases, to which the further elements i and u are 
added in the two types. The -i of Greek is apparently to be 
identified with the -i of the locative singular, and the -ft of the 
other languages in an alternative suffix performing the same 
function. The case would thus originally be formed by the 
addition of plural -$ to the endingless form of the lac. sg. (in 
thematic stems to the lac. sg. in -oi), and the addition of i and u 
is secondary, just as is the addition of -i in the lac. sg. 
J.Vom. Voc. Ace. Dual. This case was Inade by various form­
atives in IE, according to the type of stem. The ending -au, -a 
of Sanskrit was originally, from the evidence of the related lan­
guages, confined to the thematic stems (Gk . .\VleW, Lith. vilku, 
O. Sl. vluka) from which in Sanskrit it has been extended to 
other types of stem (pddau, pitdrau, etc.). In these latter classes 
Greek and Lithuanian have an ending -e (fLTJT£P€, duguse). It 
has been suggested that this termination, elsewhere replaced 
by -au in Sanskrit, is preserved in the dual dvandva miitara­
pitarau ' parents' which the grammarians quote as a northern 
form. The termination is regularly -au in classical Sanskrit, but 
in the Vedic language it varies between ';'au and ii. As a general 
rule -au is used before vowels, becoming -iiv, elsewhere d. 
Some such variation must go back to the IE period, and it is the 
latter form which has been generalised in the related languages. 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
241 
The feminines in -a and the neuters take the termination -i. 
This agreement is another sign of the close relations existing be­
tween ~he feminine a-stems and the neuters. Examples from 
neuter consonantal stems are: vdeasi, cdk~u~i, ntfmni, brhatt. 
In the thematic neuters and the feminines in -a this -i combines 
with the vowel of the stem to form the diphthong -e: yuge, 
singe; dive, sine. This ~i is found also in Old Slavonic, though 
rarely (imeni, telesi), and Slavonic shows the same diphthong in 
0- and a-stems (sell, r(?ce) a form which then spreads to con­
sonantal stems (imenl' two names '). The i- and u-stems make 
the dual by lengthening the vowel of the stem: pdti, suna, and 
with them are to be classed the feminines in -i of the devi type 
in the Vedic declension (du. devi, later devyau). This type is 
ancient, appearing also in Avestan (gairi, mainyu) , Slavonic 
(0. S1. PQti, syny) and Lithuanian (naktt, siimt). 
Instr.Dat. Abl. Dual. The termination that serves for all the 
three cases is -bhyiint, and it contains the same element -bhi­
that occurs in the dat.-abL and instr. pL A corresponding 
-bY9m appears only once in Avestan (brvaJbyttm from brvai­
, brow'). Elsewhere it has -bya and O. Pers. has -biyii, which 
makes it clear that -m is an element secondarily added, as else­
where (d. tubhya, tubhyam, etc.). The Balto-Slavonic languages 
have. as in the plural, -m- instead of -bh- here (0. S1. olima, 
etc.). The termination is ordinarily added to the normal stem, 
but in the earlier language sometimes to the form that serves as 
nom. ace. du., e.g. ak~ibhyam, d. ak~t ' the two eyes' (d. O. 51. 
oCima: oei' the two eyes '). This has become the normal form 
in the case of thematic stems: vfkabhyam, d. vfkd(uL etc. 
Genitive-Locative Dual. The termination commOn to these 
two cases is -os: pados, pitros, etc., which is added to the weak 
form of the stem. Avestan on the other hand has two separate 
terminations, -0 (zastayo) for the locative and -d (nairikayd) for 
the genitive. The ending -0 is derived from -au and is equi­
valent to the Sanskrit ending minus the final -so The genitive 
-d (< -as) is peculiar to A vestan. Sla vonic has a termination ·u 
which could represent either -ou (Av. -0) or -ous (Skt. -os). 
Lithuanian which keeps this inflection only in some adverbial 
forms has both -au and -aus: dvijau. dvejaus 
~ in twos, as a 
pair " cf. Skt. 4vdyos. The -ay- which in Sanskrit appears before 
the termination in a and a·stems has spread from the declension 
of the pronouns and the numeral' two' (tdyos, dvayos). It re.. 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
mains confined to these cases in Slavonic: toju, dvoju, but 
vluku, igu, Yf!ku. 
§ 4. 
THE DECLENSION CLASSES 
The complication of the Sanskrit declension consists not so 
much in the system of terminations thus briefly described, as in 
the combination of these with the various types of stem, and 
the alternation of the stem itself in respect of accent and 
apophony. The classification of the stem types and the de­
clensions based on them falls naturally into five main divisions: 
(I) consonantal stems, (2) stems in -r, (3) stems in i, u, (4) stems 
in ii, i, ii, (5) stems in -a (thematic stems). After the practice of 
the gralnrnar of the classical languages, and also for reasons of 
convenience, the descriptive grammars normally deal with these 
classes in the reverse order to that given here. Since however 
the normal scheme of terminations as described above appears 
most clearly in the consonantal declension, and since the thematic 
declension is the most aberrant from this, having adopted a 
variety of special declensional forms from the pronouns, it is 
more convenient from the point of view of comparative gram­
mar to proceed in this order. 
§s. 
CONSONANTAL STEMS 
The consonantal stems consist of the root stems (pad-, etc.) 
and derivative stems in -n, -nt, -s, etc. The latter fall into two 
classes, neuters and masculine-feminines. The particulars of 
their formation, and the mutual relation of the two classes have 
already been dealt with. The inflection of the neuters and non­
neuters is distinguished only in the nom. and acc. In this re­
spect the consonantal stems differ from the stems in i and u 
(mddhvas: siinos), and also from the practice of certain other 
languages with consonantal stems (Gk. ouBuros, ovo/-Laros, 
neut.: c/>EpOVTOS. 
7TO/,j.LEVOS, masc.). The declension of these 
stems calls for little extra comment. The normal endings are 
added with little modification throughout this declension. The 
special development of Sanskrit phonetics cause some complica­
tion (e.g. vis- {settlement': nom. vit, acc. viSam, instr. pI. 
vi¢bhis, loco pI. (vedic) vik~u) but this aspect of the problem 
belongs more properly to phonetics than to morphology. For 
the rest the complications that occur in this class have already 
been described under the headings of (I) Accent and Apophony 

243 
THE 
DECLE~SION OF NOUNS 
(Piit: 
padds, etc.) and (2) Heteroclitic Declension (iidhar, 
iidhnas, etc.). The strong tendency of Sanskrit to nasalise the 
stem in the strong cases has also been noted (vidvan, vidvatp­
sam, vidu~as). It spreads by analogy from those cases where it 
is historically justified (bhdvan, bhdvantam, bhdvatas, etc.) and 
it is paralleled by a similar development in the neuter plural. 
§6. 
STEMS IN r 
Sing. Nom. Pita, acc. pitdram, diitaram, instr. pitra, dat. Pitre, 
gen.-abl. pitur, loco pitdri, voc. pitar. Du. N.A.V. pitdrau, 
diitarau, I.D. Ab. Pitfbhyiim, G.L. pitros; PI. N. pitdras, 
diitaras, Acc. Pitrn, matrs, I. Pitfbhis, D. Ab. Pitfbhyas, G. 
pitfttam, L. Pitf~u. 
The fact that the stems in r are classed in Sanskrit as vocalic 
steins rather than consonant stems is due to certain develop­
ments of Sanskrit which have tended to enhance their vocalic 
character. This appears particularly in the acc. and gen. plur.. 
forms which are Sanskrit innovations. On the analogy of the 
consonantal stems the acc. plur. would have been pitrds, but 
this is replaced by a new form in -tn, based on the analogy of 
-an, -1:1t, -un. By this process Sanskrit creates a new long vowel 
f which has no phonetic basis among the inherited IE sounds. 
The old type of gen. pl. appears in Av. dug'JdrCfm, etc. In San­
skrit it is preserved occasionally in the Veda, e.g. ndnim 
(: Osc. nerum). gen. pI. of ndr- ' man " and once svdsriim. Else­
where it has been replaced by the innovation -!"Jam, created by 
the same type of analogy on the pattern of -liniim. -i~am. 
-uniim. 
In the vrddhied nom; sing.the r is elided i~ the same way as 
the -n of n-stems(pitd: raja) ~ This elision appears also in 
Iranian (Av. miita,etc.), Baltic (Lith. mott, sesuo) al}d Slavonic 
(0. S1. mati). In other languages the -r of the stem is preserved 
(Gk. p,~TI]P. etc.). The acc. sg. has guI).a of the suffix in most of 
the names of family relationship (matdram, duhitdram l etc.), 
but in svdsr-
< sister', and in the agent nouns hI -tr vrddhi 
appears which has been introduced from the analogy of the 
nom. sg. The same distinction appears in the nom. acc. duo and 
nom. pI. In the weakest cases the old type of inflection, with 
transference of the accent to the termination is normally pre­
served. Elsewhere in IE this type is found in the conservative 
names of relationship (Gk. 7TaTp6S', Tro:rpl, Lat. patris, etc.), be­

244 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
side which there is found an alternative type with gUJ.la of 
suffix (Gk. JJ/T]TEpoi beside fLTJTp6~, d. 7TOtfLEVO~, Osc. paterei, 
O. S1. maieri, d. agndye). Indo-Iranian alone preserves the 
primitive type in the case of the agent nouns in -it. Elsewhere 
this has been replaced by innovating forms with gUI)a or 
vrddhi of suffix in these cases (Gk. 
SOTijpo~, Sci)jopo~, Lat. 
d«tfJf'£s, etc.). In Sanskrit gUI.la of the stem appears in the de­
clension of nar- ' man' (D. ndre, G. naras) as opposed to the 
older type of inflection seen in Greek (avSp6~, avSpL). 
In this respect the Sanskrit (-stems differ markedly from the 
adjectival i- and u-stems which keep the gurya and accent of the 
suffix in the dat. and gen. sg. (agndye, agnes). The difference 
between thE' two classes becomes less when the nature of the 
gen. sg. of (-stems is examined. To agree with the form of the 
dative this would normally have been in -as with accented 
termination, and such forms are in fact found in Iranian (Av. 
braBro, dafJro) as well as in other IE languages (Gk. 7TUTp6~, etc.). 
The form which actually occurs (-ur, -us, -ulz) goes back on the 
evidence of Iranian (Av. nJrJs) to -,rs (*Pitfs). Such a form with 
weak grade of both suffix and termination cannot be original 
and it must therefore be regarded as an innova,tion which has 
replaced something else. There is no way by which it could have 
developed from *pitras if that had been the only form, and its 
origin is therefore to be sought in yet another type of gen. sg. 
which Iranian preserves: nars, zaotars, sastars. This type, with 
which we may compare Lith. mottfs is of exactly the same for­
mation as the gen. sg. of adjectival i- and u-stems (agntf-s). It has 
arisen by the same process, i.e. by the extension of the accent and 
gU~la of suffix proper to adjectival stems to the gen. sg. and since 
it involves a reduction of the termination it must be ancient. In 
Sanskrit and partly in Avestan the -ars has been replaced by -1.5 
(> Skt. -ur). The reason for this is that elsewhere in the weak 
and middle cases the suffix appears in its weak form (pitrd, 
pitfbhis, Pitf~u), and this grade has been analogically extended 
to the genitive singular. 
No forms of the loe. sg. without ending are preserved, though 
such presumably existed at one time. This case always retains 
the gUl)a of the suffix which is proper to it, in contradiction to 
other stems (riijiii, etc.) and the practice of other IE languages 
in nouns of this class (Gk. 1TU-rpt, etc.). 
Of the old neuter nouns in -r such few as remain inflect 
II 

245 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
heteroclitically, and they have lost connection with the masc.­
fern. r- (r-) stems. On the other hand Sanskrit creates a new 
adjectival type of neuter in -r which has no prototype in IE. 
This differs from the masc.-fem. in the nOlIl.-acc. as usual 
(dhiitf, dhiith~i, dhiitfIJi), and also in the weak cases by inserting 
-n- after the style of the neuters in i and u {dhiitr~uj, etc.). It 
is not of frequent use. 
§ 7. 
STEMS IN i AND U 
Sing. N. agnis, s~inus; vari. 1nddhu, Ace. agnim. sunum, 
1. agnina, sununii; gdtyii, dhenva, D. agn dye , sundve; pdtye, 
pasve; vari1}e, mddhune; gdtyai, dhenvai; Ab. G. agnes, 
sun6s; dvyas, mddhvas; variftas, mddhunas; gdtyas, dhenvas, 
L. agnau, sunau; sanD, siinavi, sanuni; gdtyiim, dhenvam; 
V. agne, SanD. 
Du. N .A. agni, suna, 1. D. Ab. agnibhyiim, 
sunubhyiim, G. L. agny6s, S'unv6s; variftDS, mddhunos. PI. N. 
agndyas, sunavas; 
aryds; 
suci(ni) , pur1i(t;,i). 
Ac. agnin, 
suntin; 
dhen'iis; aryds, pasvds, J. agnibhis, sunubhis, 
D. Ab. agnibhyas, sunubhyas, G. agninam, Sitnl~nam, L. agni~u, 
siinu~u. 
The most ancient and fundamental division of these stems is 
between the neuters on the one hand and the masculine­
feminines on the other. The latter two classes were originally 
identical in declension and the distinction between them which 
is observed in Sanskrit is a secondary development. On the 
other hand the distinction between the neuter and masc.-fem. 
types (mddhvas: agnes) which is caused by variation of accent 
goes back to an ancient period of Indo-European. 
The inflection of the neuters was effected by the addition of 
the normal endings, which in the weak cases originally bore the 
accent (Gk. Sovpds; yo'Vvds), and in this respect it dia not in 
principle differ from that of the consonantal stems. This type 
of declension was not originally confined to the neuters (see 
below, sdkhye, etc.), but the special type developed by the masc.­
fern. class as a result of their suffixal' accentuation (agndye, 
agnes) was foreign to them. In Sanskrit the accent has become 
fixed on the root throughout the declension, mddhvas gen. re­
placing *madhvds, as in other neuter stems. A few traces remain. 
The IE declension of the neuter u-stem meaning' domestic 
animal J was of the type peku, pekwes. Corresponding to these 
forms Sanskrit has a neuter pdsu (once in RV.) and a gen. sg. 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
pasvds which directly continue the old type, but pasvds has be­
come the gen. St;. of an analogically created Hom. pasus, while 
corresponding to pdsu there has been created a dat. sg. pdsve by 
the usual levelling process. 
As a result of the stabilising of the accent on the root in the 
normal type of neuters, the only type remaining in which the 
accent normally changed from the stem to the termination in 
declension consisted of those suffixally accented masculines and 
feminines in which the vowel of the suffix was elided in the 
weak cases (11liirdhii: miirdhnds, etc.). The result was that in 
certain cases, where an old neuter noun had preserved the 
terminational accent in the gen. sg., a new suffixally accented 
stem was created on this analogy, and with this change of 
accent was associated a change of gender: pasus masc. for pdsu 
neut. Of the same type is pit/ts: pitvds l food'. 
The number of stems inflecting in this way in the Vedic 
language is very small, and in addition to neuters it includes 
some masc. and fern. nouns: dvis, dvyas · sheep', kratus, 
krdtvas ' intelligence " d. Av. xratus, xra()1i.dj. These may be 
regarded as transferred neuters. Such a development is easily 
understandable in the case of dvi- on account of its animate 
nature. The action nouns in -i and -It were originally, in accord­
ance with their meaning, of the neuter type, but in general they 
have been transferred to the masculine and feminine classes. 
In doing this they have normally adopted the adjectiv<';ll type of 
declension (matis: mates, etc.) but the nl'uter type has re­
mained in a few cases as an indication of their originally neuter 
class. The masculines of this type use sometimes special forms of 
the nom. acc. pluT. (nom. Av. pasvas cattle', 'JrlJZvo ' fingers',
C 
acc. Skt. pasvds) but also those of the normal type (pasdvas, 
pasftn). 
The Vedic declension of the stem rayi-. riiy- is of this type 
(n. rayis: g. riiyas, etc.). It represents earlier *raHi-s,'raHyds. 
It is a transferred neuter of the dvi- type, and the termina­
tional accent of the gen. sg. has effected a change of accent from 
root to suffix in the nom. sg., just as has happened in the case of 
pasu-. Besides this there exists a root stem rii- corresponding to 
Latin res. In the classical declension this is combined with the 
riiy- form of the i-stem. Similar is the declension of nallS, 
navas ' ship' (Gk. vaUS', v1]0") for *naHu-s, *naHvds. In the. 
only place where the nom. sg. occurs in the ~gveda it is pro­

247 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
nounced as a dissyllable: nails (navus) and in this respect it 
can be compared directly with rayis. The long diphthong is a 
later contraction of these vowels in. hiatus. The acc. sg. is an 
innovation like the riiyam which supplants rayim. 
The stem ari- in which two different words have been con­
fused (ari-
pious', *ali- • alien, hostile ') inflects according'to
t 
this type, although adjectival in sense. Since there are found 
elsewhere in IE examples of old neuters being adapted to this 
use without the usual modification of the stem, its character­
istic inflection (gen. sg. aryds, etc.) might be explained by its 
being an old neuter of this type transferred to the masculine. 
If it were originally an adjective it would have to be assumed 
that it inflected originally like sdkhi (1. sdkhyii, D. sdkhye) and 
that from these weak forms the type of inflection characteristic 
of this class has spread to the nom. pI. (aryds like pasvds), On 
the whole the absence of any trace of the strong form of the 
suff!),- makes the first explanation more probable. 
The same doubt exists in the case of pdti-. In the meaning 
• lord' this word follows the normal inflection (type agni-), but 
in the meaning , husband' it forms cases after this style (dat., 
pdtye) , The accent and the -n- of the derivative pdtnt ( wife' 
might be held to indicate an old alternating neuter; on the other 
hand the nom. pI. is always normal and weak cases of this type 
are shown also by the adjectival sdkhi-. 
The stem jdni­
, woman' has a gen. sg. jdnyus with a termination -us which 
appears also in sdkhyus, pdtyus and which is clearly borrowed 
from the nouns of relationship (Pitus, etc.), In all three cases 
the normal gen. ending -as has been replaced. Avestan has 
Janyois, a compromise form replacing *janyas.- This type of 
genitive inflection indicates that the stem is an old neuter 
transferred to the feminine. 
There existed an alternative way of inflecting the neuters of 
this class in IE, by the employment of the heteroclitic n-suffix 
In the few neuter i-stems that remain this n replaces the i­
suffix (dk#, ak~1Jds), so that these stems are in the main re­
moved from this declension. On the other hand the neuter 
stems in -u add this -n- to the stem before the vocalic weak ter­
minations: dat. sg. mddhune, gen.-abl. mddhunas, sanunas, 
dru1Jas, loco mddhuni, viistuni, nom. acc. duo jiinuni ' knees " 
gen. loco duo jiinunos. Similar forms in other languages show 
that this practice is ancient (Gk. gen. sg. YOVU'TOS for *g6nw1]tos, 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
Toch. duo kanwetp, ( knees '). It is probable that originally a 
corresponding extension -r could be added in the nom. acc. sg. 
whence the two types of suffix -ura/una-- in derivative adjectival 
stems. In the early language these endings are, with very rare 
exceptions, used only with neuter nouns. In adjectives the 
neuter is not normally distinguished in form outside the nom.­
acc. In the classical language the n:'forms are the rule for neuter 
substantives, but optional in the case of adjectives. The -n­
has already in the earliest language spread to the instrumental 
singular of the masculines (sununa). 
Examples of this kind of inflection in neuter i-stems are ex­
ceedingly rare (ak$i1;tt f eyes ') and the only common neuter that 
inflects in this way, vtiri 'water', gen. sg. vdri1Jas, does not 
appear in the earliest language. This is to be expected in view 
of the rarity of such stems, the existence of an alternative type 
of heteroclitic declension (dsthifasthnds) , and the fact that the 
adjectival i-stems do not, any more than the corresponding u­
stems, distinguish the neuter in these cases in the early lan­
guage (gen. sg. nt. bhitres). Nevertheless it may be assumed to 
be old from the existence of the alternating suffixes -ira-/ina­
and the fact that this -n- has already in the earliest language 
spread to the instr. sg. of the masculines. 
In the Veda the neuter nouns in -u may as a third alternative 
inflect according to the normal masculine type: gen. sg. 
mddhas, dr6s, snos, etc. This is an innovation which is elim­
inated in tbe classical grammar. 
The neuter type of declension shows three types of loco sg. in 
the u-stems which differ from the normal type of the masculine 
stems (sunau). (I) A locative without ending appears in sana, 
vasto. This type appears also in Iranian (Av. parato, O. Pers. 
Biibirauv, ga8av-a) , and it corresponds to similar formations 
from n-stems (ak$dn), except that the characteristic accentua­
tion of the loe. sg. has been eliminated. In sanavi this fonna­
tion is extended by the addition of locatival-i as has happened 
in a~d1Ji, etc. In the Vedic language this type has been ex­
tended to a small number of masculines (anavi, ddsyavi, etc.). 
(3) The locative may be made on the basis of the stem extended 
by -n--: stinuni, vdstuni. This becomes the regular inflection 
in the classical language. 
The common masc.-fern. type, consisting originally of adjec­
tives and agent nouns, but. at an early period enriched by 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
249 
wholesale transfers of action-nouns from the neuter, was dif­
ferentiated in IE from the.corresponding neuters by its suffixal 
accent: pelu nt. subst. much' (Goth. filu), pleu- adj. much,
j 
t 
many' (Gk. 7TAl€s). On the basis of this adjectival stem there 
could be formed a vrddhied nom. sg., uncharacterised by the 
termination -s, on the same pattern as in the n-, r- and s-stems : 
sdkha ( friend' (stem. sdkhi-) like pita, rJja. In Sanskrit this 
word, in which the accent may be presumed to have been 
secondarily transferred to the root, remains the only example of 
this type of formation from an i-stem. As a general rule the 
forms -is, -im and -us, -um are substituted in the nominative 
and accusative. fom1s which go back to an early period in Indo­
European. The vrddhi which appears in the acc. sg. and nom. 
pL (sdkhiiyam, sdkhiiyas) is as elsewhere (dataram, etc.) an ex­
tension of the form of the nom. sg. GUlfa was originally proper 
to these cases. Some forms of the acc. sg. with gUlfa are pre­
served in Avestan (kavaem, fradaj-fsaom). Sanskrit has no such 
forms but it preserves the regular gul)a in the nom. pI. of the 
ordinary declension (agndyas, sundvas). The accented and 
gu:tIated suffix could also appear in the dat. and gen. sg. 
(agndye, agnes) and this type has become the normal one in" 
Sanskrit for masculines and feminines. Alternatively, on the 
analogy of Pitre, etc., the accent could appear on the termina­
tion in stems of adjectival type, so. that in these cases their 
declension is not distinguished from that of the neuters. 
Apart from the shift of accent this type is preserved in the dat. 
sdkhye; and also in pdtye if this word is of adjectival origin. 
The A vestan declension of haxii < friend i corresponds in general 
to that of sdkha (nom. s. haxa, ace. haxiiim, dat. hase, etc.) thus 
establishing it as Indo-Iranian. In the gen. sg. this stem has 
been influenced by the names of relationship of the r-declension 
(sdkhyus after pitus). The old endingless locative has been re­
placed by one in which the -y- of the dat. sg., etc .• has been 
introduced (sdkhyau). A similar form appears in the case of 
pati- ( husband' (pdtyau). 
Although the vrddhied nom. sg. which appears in sdkhii is 
isolated in Sanskrit, signs are not wanting that it was originally 
more common in the i- and u-stems of the adjectival and agent­
noun type. In Avestan the stem kavi- which has been nor­
malised in Sanskrit still inflects in this way: nom',sg. kava. In 
the acc. sg. t.his word has the original gUlJa (ka'l.'aem. i.e., 

250 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUN'S 
kavayami d. pitdram), as opposed to the vrddhi in Skt. sdkhii­
yam, Av. haxaim. In the gen. sg. in Avestan the guJ).ated suffix 
normally appears, but once apparently it is inflected on the 
analogy of the heteroclitic neuters (k:Jvino, d. viiri~tas). 
A vrddhied nom. sg. in -aus appears in Iranian in the case 
of some u-stems: A v. hi(}iius ' associate " uzbazaus ' with arms 
aloft' (and ·uyra
O
) , O. Pers. dahyaus. These have developed 
from the asigmatic vrddhied nom. sg. by the secondary addition 
of the nom. sg. -so The adjectival nature of this form of termina­
tion emerges clearly from the juxtaposition of uzbiiziiusand baZU5 
, arm' 0 In the acc. sg. we may have the old gUJ).a grade preserved 
(Avo dai1ihaom) or vrddhi extended from the nom. sg. (0. Pers. 
dahyiium, Av. nasiium 'spirit of the corpse '). The contrast 
between ~he acc. sg. pasum 'domestic animal' and fradal­
fsaom 'increasing cattle' illustrates the adjectival nature of 
this kind of inflection. A similar variation appears between 
arstim spear' and darayo . arstaem ( having a long spear'. In
I 
the gen. sg. these stems have either the old type of inflection 
undiffere~tiated from the neuter (uzbazvo). the normal type 
with gU1).a (dai1jhaus), or by later innovation forms with vrddhi 
(nasiivo). 
In Greek the adjectives and agent nouns have separated into 
two types in the case of iu-stems. The adjectives have, as in 
Sanskrit, adopted the endings -us, -um (-vv) in the nom. acc. sg. 
17"01\6S': 
purus) , at the same time preserving the original 
suffixal accent. On the other hand the agent-noun type (f3a­
<1t,A€vS', YOVEVS', ¢OV€vS', etc.), have developed all the basis of 
the old vrddhied nom. sg. to which -s has been secondarily. 
added as in Iranian (-€vS' for -1]05'). The vrddhi is carried 
through the declension as in the case of certain other types of 
stem (f3aat.Afj(F)oS', d. SOTfjpOS). 
To return to Sanskrit there is possibly one example of a 
formation parallel to sdkha: apratii in RV. viii, 32, 16, nd somo 
aprat9 pape (Soma is not drunk without ~compense' (prati-, cf'--1 
Lat. pretium). This is usually interpreted as lac. sg., but as 
non-adjectival compounds with a- are against the normal usage 
of the Vedic language, it is probably better taken as a nom. sg. 
interpreting the compound as a bahuvrihi 
The inflectional type of which A vestan preserves traces in 
examples like uzbazaus is preserved in Skt. dyaus « sky'. This 
is conventionally classed as a diphthongal stem, but, 1S els~ 

I 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
251 
where this classification is unsound. On the one hand the 
normal i- and u-stems are themselves partly diphthongal (agnes~ 
siinos), and on the other hand this word is in part of its inflec­
tion not diphthongal (gen. sg. di-v-as~ cf. madh-v-as). It is an 
adjectival ujeu stem dy-eu- with ,accent and gu:r:m or vrddhi of 
suffix according to the general rule. The addition of -s in the 
nom. sg. is secondary but of IE date (dyaus: ZEUS). In the 
oblique cases of the singular there appears most commonly the 
undifferentiated type with accented termination (divas: Gk. 
Lh&s) but also the special adjectival type with accent and guI)a 
of suffix (dyos: Av. dyaos). With this must be classed gaus 
cow' (dat. gave, gen. gas) whose accent and declension show it 
to have this adjectival suffix (g-6-, i.e. gWHa-eu, cf. Gk. f36UKW). 
It inflects only according to the adjectival type and goes further 
than other ufo-stems in introducing the gUI)a into the cases of 
the plural (instr. g6bhis, etc.). In the acc. sg. the forms dyam, 
gam appear to be from *dyaum, *gaum, with vrddhi from the 
analogy of the nom. sg. and elision of the final element of the 
diphthong before -m. 
The stem vi- ' bird' is an adjectival formation based on an 
old IE neuter *8wi ( egg' (whence with thematic extension Gk. 
cP0v) and the accentuation of the suffix has resulted in the total 
elision.ot the radical vowel (as opposed to Lat. avis). In the RV. 
it has a nom. sg. vis with gUl).a and nom. s. There is no parallel (1;cu,
to this formation. 
An old nominative agna(i) is traceable from the derivative 
Agna)lf ( wife of Agni " and it appears also in the compound 
Agnavi~~ift • Agni and Vi~nu' (d. matapitarqu). 
Similarly 
Manavf' Manu's wife' is based on an old nominative *lvlana'l.i. 
More important than this the vrddhied nominative of the adjec­
tival type is preserved intact in the form that appears in the 
locative singular: agnii(u), sunau. These forms are a special 
adjectival type of the locative without ending, being identical 
in every respect with the forms that originally served as th~ 
nom. sg. In that function they have normally been replaced by 
the termination -is, -u.s, but in their locatival function they 
have been retained. 
The terminations -is, -im, -us, -Win are therefore innovations 
in IE, and this accounts for the association of the accent with 
the weak grade of the suffix (purus). Nevertheless they are of 
considerable antiquity> and they have become the normal type 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
in the various languages (Hitt. sallis' great', altus { good " 
Gk. 1TOA~S"' much " Lith. Upus ( sticky'. Goth kaurus ' heavy', 
etc.). Their origin is to be sought in the fact that in the mas­
culine and feminine i- and u-stems two classes have coalesced. 
To the adjectival class consisting of adjectives proper (puru-, 
etc.) and nouns of adjectival type (s£inu-, etc.) there has been 
added a large class of action nouns (gdti-, setu-, etc.) which were 
transferred at an early period from the neuter class. This in­
volved the adding of the case terminations -5, -m in the nom. 
acc. sg. on the analogy of the thematic stems, thus producing a 
type ending in -is, -im. -us, -um. In the amalgamation of the 
two classes in a common masc.-fern. declension, this type of 
formation in the nom.-acc. is generalised, but in the dat. and 
gen. sg. the formation proper to the adjectival type is general­
ised (gates after agnes, etc.). 
The type of inflection prevalent in i- and «-stems in Sanskrit 
appears also in other IE languages: cf. gen. sg. Goth. anstais, 
sunaus, Lith. naktes, sttnaus, dat. sg. O. S1. synovi. In Hittite 
and Greek the forms of the gen. sg. with non-reduced termina­
tion (Hitt. sallaias, asfawas, Gk. o<ptEoS", ~o'oS") may be regarded 
as innovations replacing this type. 
In the locative singular the -au of the u-stems (siinau) has 
been introduced into the i-stems (agnau). but the Vedic lan­
guage also has agnd (i.e. agnd(i)). The locative without ending 
appears also in other IE languages (Goth. anstai, sunau, O. S1. 
synu, etc.), but it is not possible to determine whether a long or 
short diphthong is represented in these cases. 
The special feminine terminations in the dat., gen.-abl. and 
loco sg. (gdtyiii, -as, -am; dhenvdi, -as, -am) are adapted from 
the i-declension. They are still rare in the RV. but become very 
common in the later pre-classical literature. The grammarians 
allow optionally in the case of feminine nouns either these ter­
minations '(gdtyai, etc.) or the common masc.-fern. terminations 
(gataye, etc.). 
§8. 
STEMS IN ii, i, U 
-d: Sg. N. sena, A. senam, 1. stnayii, D. stniiyai, G. Ab. 
senayas, L. senayam, V. sene; Du. N.A.V. sene, I.D. Abl. 
seniibhyam, G.L. senaY(Js, PI. N.A.V. sends, 1. seniibhis, D. Ab. 
seniibhyas, G. senaniim, L. seniisu. 
-i: (A) Sg. N. vrkis, A. vrkyam, 1. vrkyli, D. vrkye, Ab. G. 

253 
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
vrkyas, Loc. gaurt; Du. N.A.V. vrkya(u), I.D. Ab. vrktbhydm, 
G.L. vrkyos; PI. N.A.V. vrkyas, I. vrkibhis, D. Ab. vrkibhyas, 
G. vrkt1;tiim, L. vrkt~u. 
(B) Sg. N. de'l.tf, A. de'vim, 1. devyd, D. devyai, Ab. G. devyas, 
L. devyiim, V. divi; Du. N.A. devi [devyau], I.D. Ab. devibhyam, 
G.L. devyos; PI. N. devis (devyas], A. devts, 1. devibhis. D. Ab. 
devtbhyas,G. deviniim,  L. devi~u. 
-if: Sg. N. tantes, A. tanvam, I. tanvil, D. tanve, Ab. G. tanvas, 
L. tanvi, V. tanu; D. N.A.V. tanvliu, I.D. Ab. tanabhyiim, G.L. 
tanvos; PI. N.A. tanvils, I. taniibhis, D. Ab. taniibhyas, G. tanii.,. 
nam, L. tanii~u. 
The nouns of these classes have in common an IE suffix -H 
(-aH; -i-H, -U-H> ii, i, ii). With this suffix action nouns could be 
formed which originally did not differ from the usual neuter 
types (d. the neuters in -as, -is, -us), and also adjectives which 
came eventually to be specialised as feminines. The dual type 
of inflection which appears in the i-stems is traceable to the dis­
tinction of these two types, since whereas the vrki type inflects 
according to a system which may appear in both neuter and 
adjectival types, the devi declension contains inflections 
(devyd-s, etc.) of a specifically adjectival nature, in which the 
strong form of the suffix is due to the original adjectival accent. 
The stems of the vrkt type consist of both action nouns (deht 
, rampart') and nouns of adjectival type, masculine and 
feminine (ratht- ' charioteer',. vrkt ' she-wolf '). In the former 
the accent has been shifted to the suffix, where it remains 
throughout the declension, in the same way as has happened in 
the stems in -i$ (havis, havi~as, similarly -iH,' :iHOS). In the 
adjectival class the strong form of the stem (*vrkyd) , whose 
original existence is to be assumed on the basis of the accentua­
tion and of the general system (Pitd, etc.), has been replaced by 
the weak form, a process for which a parallel is to be found in 
the in-stems (balt, baUnas). As a result of these processes} and 
becatlse of the acquisition of feminine gender by action nouns 
with suffix -H, the two classes become completely fused to­
gether in declension. 
The same two types are found among the ii-stems ((I) tanii­
( body tt (2) svasr'ii- ' mother-in-law t) and their fusion has pro­
ceeded in the same way. 
Since the -s of the nom. sg. was originally not characteristic 
of the H-stems, from which it remains absent elsewhere, its 

254 
THE DECLENSION OF ~OUNS 
existence in these two classes must be regarded as an importa­
tion from the root stems in i and it which are declined in the 
same way (dhts, dhiyas, bhiis, bhuvas). For the rest the declen­
sion is of the normal consonantal type calling for little comment. 
The stem and ending are pronounced as separate syllables in 
the Veda (tanuvam, etc.) although written according to the later 
system (tanvam, etc.). The normal type of loco sg. appears in 
camvi, tanvi, etc., the endingless variety in camii, etc. The few 
locatives in -i of the i-stems could either be the result of con­
traction «*iyi <*iHi) or be locatives without ending. In the 
gen. pI. -n- has been introduced on the general analogy of the 
vocalic stems. 
The devi type is the one that norm~lly appears in the feminine 
of non-thematic and some thematic stems (rdjnt, diitri, Prthvf, 
kalyii~lt). It is thus predominantly an adjectival suffix, and 
although the accent of stems of this type has become variable 
in Sanskrit, the suffixal accent which frequently appears may be 
considered to be. the more original type. The strong forms of 
the suffix, which are to be explained by this adjectival accent, 
appear in the dat., abL-gen. and loco sg. In the nom.-acc. the 
weak form of the suffix'appears, so that there exists an alterna­
tion here parallel to that which appears in the i- and u-stems, 
Theoretical considerations indicate that the weak form of the 
nom.-acc. sg. (and of the nom. pI. .following suit) are innova~ 
tions, just as the similar formations in the adjectival i- and u­
stems, and the related languages provide some evidence that 
this is so. This is clearest in the case of the acc. sg. which for 
phonological reasons cannot be original, since these stems were 
originally consonantal and *-iHam could only produce -iyam 
(-yam). 
In Balta-Slavonic and Germanic the strong form 
appears in the acc. sg. (Lith. nesusiq" O. S1. nesusq" Goth. bandja, 
etc.) and there is no reason to believe that these forms are in­
novations.. On the other hand these languages have the weak 
stem in the nom. sg. (Goth. frijondi, Lith. vezanti, O. S1. vezq,sli) a 
fact which indicates that the weak form was earliest established in 
the nom. sg. Greek on the other hand has *-ya in the nom. sg. 
('T1'{)TVLa, q;l.povaa, pia), and this cannot be phonetically equated 
with the i of the other languages since IE -iH- develops into i in 
Gk. as elsewhere. The final -a here as elsewhere (vuJ-Lq;ii, etc.) 
represents IE -all and the short vowel, as opposed to the long 
Ii elsewhere I arises from the pre-vocalic sandhi of this combina­

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
255 
tion. It is clear that the accent of pta is not original since it 
rests on a weakened syllable and it follows that the accent of the 
oblique cases (ptiis) must have originally prevailed in the nom. 
sg. also (*smidH). 
The distinction between the two types of declension of the 
i-stems, which is strictly observed in the Vedic language, is not 
retained in later Sanskrit. The devt inflection is preserved at 
the expense of the vrkf inflection, but it adopts the inflections of 
the latter class in the nom.-acc. duo and nom. pI.: devyau, 
devyas. Among the t"i-sterns inflection of a type parallel to that 
of the devi stems is exceedingly rare in the RV. In the later 
language it becomes the normal type: 
vadhvai, vadhvas, 
vadhvdm, the development running parallel to that of the i­
stems. 
The fusion of the termination and suffix in certain cases 
(devyai, devyas) produces the special feminine terminations 
which are later applied to the feminine i- and u-stems. The loco 
sg. has a special termination -m. This -m is absent in Iranian 
(0. Pers. harauvatiya), which shows that" the loco was originally 
without termination. The secondary addition of -m is paralleled 
elsewhere: Htbhya: 
tUbhyam; instr.-dat.-abl. duo -bhyam: 
Av. -bya. 
The sterns in -a have been influenced in declension by the 
stems in -t. The cases of the singular from the dative onward 
are formed by the addition of -yai, -yas, -yam which have been 
abstracted from the devi declension. This peculiarity is shared 
by Iranian: Av. dat. sg. daenayai, etc. The older IE endings 
are preserved elsewhere: gen. sg. Gk. xwpiis, ~ O. Lat. vias, 
Goth. gibas, etc. 
§9. 
ST EM 
I};-a 
Sg. N. devds, A. devdm, 1. devlna, D. devdya, Ab. devitt, 
G. devdsya, L. devl, V. dlva; Du. N.A.V. deva'lt, LD. Ab!. 
devabhyiim, G.L. devdyos; PI. N. devds, A. devan, I. deva{s, 
D.  Ab. devtfbhyas, G. deviinam, L. devl~u. 
Neuter N.A. yugdm, Du. yuge, PI. yugiini. 
The stems in -a are the most numerous type in the language 
(45 per cent of all nominal stems in the J!.gveda). They are char­
acterised by the absence of any shift of accent in declension, 
and this seems always to have been the case. Thematic stems 
are either masculine or neuter, and these differ in declension only 

2
THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
in the nominative and accusative. This declension contains 
some special features which may be briefly summarised. It has 
been considerably influenced by the pronominal declension. 
In the instr. sg. the termination -ena has been taken from that ~ 
source. The older termination -a still exists in the Vedic lan­
guage, though it is a good deal less common than -ena. In 
Avestan only the ending -a appears. The Indo-Iranian termin­
ation of the dat. sg. was -ai, a contraction of the stem vowel and 
the termination -ai, and this was inherited from Indo-European 
(-0 + ei): Av. haomai, Gk. r'1T7Tcp, etc. To this a postposition a 
might optionally be added as in Av. ahuriii a and in Skt. this 
element has become permanently attached, producing the 
extended termination -aya. The ablative sg. which is distin­
guished from the gen. sg. in this declension alone, is inherited 
directly from IE (0. Lat. -ad, etc.). 
There exists no common IE form of the gen. sg. In Balto­
Slavonic the old abL sg. functions also as gen. sg. and in view 
of the identity qf the two cases elsewhere this could be ancient. 
Italic and Celtic have an ending -i, which is the adjectival suffix 
-i substituted for the thematic' suffix. This i appears in Sanskrit 
in constructions of the type sami-kr ' to make eyen '. In Hitt. 
the gen. sg. of the thematic class is equivalent to the nom. sg. 
There exists in the Veda a small number of compounds like 
rathaspati which possibly contain such a form of gen. sg. A 
form corresponding to the Sanskrit termination appears in 
Greek and Armenian (Gk. OLO, Arm. -oy). A similar formation, 
but without the -y- appears elsewhere: Goth. wUlfis «oeso), 
O. Sl. ceso ' whose'. These terminations may be presumed to 
have originated in the pronolllinal declension, as has happened 
elsewhere. The elements -so and -syo which are thus added to 
the stem appear to be demonstrative pronouns of that form. 
The loco sg. is analysable into the stem vowel and the normal 
termination -i: d. Gk. OtKO£, etc. The nom. pI. -as (a +as) 
appears in a similar form elsewhere (Goth. wul/os, Osc. nuv­
lanus), but in its place an ending -oi, derived from the pronouns 
is also frequent (Gk. AVKO', Lat. lup:r, Lith. vilkal, Toch. B. 
yakwi). The ending -as is in the Vedic language sometimes 
pleonastically extended to -iisas. a feature which is also ob­
served in Iranian (Av. -d?Jho). This innovation is again abol­
ished in classical Sanskrit, but it lives on in some early Pall 
forms (pa1J4itase, etc.). The acc. pI. has acquired its long vowel 

THE DECLENSION OF NOUNS 
257 
from the nom. pI. (original form in Gk. (diaL) AVKOVS-, etc.). 
The gen. pI. has acquired its -n- from other classes, the innova­
tion being common to Indo-Aryan and Iranian (Av. masyanq,m, 
O. Pers. baganiim). The original termination is preserved only 
in the phrase devtffi janma « the race of gods'; d. Av. stavrffm, 
Gk. O,:wv l Lat. deum, etc. 
I 
Two forms of the instr. pl. apRear in the Vedic language, in 
-ais and in -ebhis. In Iranian Avestan has -lUs, O. Persian 
-aibi!. Elsewhere there exist only forms corresponding to -a'is : 
Gk. AVKOtS', Lat. l«Pis, Osc. nuvlanuls, Lith. vilkais. This form 
of the case has'the appearance of being a pluralisation of the 
fonn that appears in the singular as dative. If so it must go 
back to a time when the cases were less differentiated than they 
became later. The ending -ebhis is an Indo-Iranian innovation 
after the pronominal declension. 
The innovation is later 
eliminated in classical Sanskrit, but it is the basis of the Middle 
Indo-Aryan forms of this case (: Pali -ehi, Pkt. -ehi(1Jt)). The 
-e- which appears here is from the form of the pronominal stem 
which appears in most of the cases of the plural (nom. pI. tt, 
etc.). It also appears in the dat.-abl. and lac. pI. of this de­
clension (-ebhyas J -e~~). 

CHAPTER VI 
NUMFRALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
§ 1. 
NUMERALS 
The Sanskrit numerals from 1-1000 are inherited from Indo­
European. They are constructed on the decimal system, the 
numerals 1-10 being the foundation of the whole series. The 
numerals from 1-10 are adjectives, as also 11-19 which are com­
pounded with dasa 'ten '. The higher numbers are properly 
collective nouns, though a tendency to treat them as adjectives 
appears as the language develops. The numbers from 1-4 are 
fully inflected in the three genders; those from 6-10 are 
defective and appear originally to have been uninflected. 
I. Two roots appear as the basis of the numeral I in .~ndo­
European, of which the one (oi-) appears to have had the mean­
ing of ' alone', the other (sem-) that of ' together'. In Sanskrit 
eka- lone' is formed from the first root with the suffix -ka, and 
it is declined according to the pronominal declension. The only 
form exactly corresponding is the Aryan aika- which is found 
in the Hittite documents. Elsewhere different suffixes appear: 
Av. aeva-, Gk. otos ' alone'; Lat. z'inus, O. Ir. din, Goth. ains. 
The root sem- provides this numeral in Greek (£tS', p.ta: *sems, 
*smia) and Tocharian ~A. sas, B. ~eme). This root appears in 
Sanskrit in its reduced form (s1ft-) in sakft lance' (: Av. 
hakJriJj), and in compounds of the type sdmanas- ' of one mind, 
the same mind '. The adjectives sama-, samana- 'same' are 
derived from it. 
2. The numeral dvau (: Gk. Suw, Lat. duo, O. S1. dva, etc.) is 
like the normal dual of an a-stem: N.A. nt. dve (: O. S1. dve), 
LD. Ab. dviibhyam, G.L. dvdyos (: O. S1. dvoju). The uninflected 
thematic stem appears in the Gk. variant Suo. There is an 
alternative stem formed by means of the suffix 
which appears 
in compounds (dviPdd- ' two-footed', Gk. Sl1TOVS, Lat. bipes) 
and in various derivatives (dvittya- ' second " etc.). Beside the 
numeral proper there is a stem ttbhd- ' both' which inflects in 
the same way. The exact nature of its relation to Gk. ap..cpw. 
258 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
259 
Lat. ambo, O. 51. oba, Lith. abu, Goth. bai, Eng!. both, etc., is 
not altogether clear. 
3. The stem tr£- contains a suffix -i which is absent in the 
ordinal tttiya-. It is inflected like a normal adjective in -i (nom. 
pI. trdyas: Gk. 
etc.), except in the gen. pI. where 
trdyalJiim has replaced an earlier trdyam (: Av. Orayq,m, with 
gUI;a from the nom. pI. as opposed to Gk. 'TptwV, etc.). It pre­
serves the alternation of accent in declension: instr. pl. tribhis 
as opposed to vibhis ' with birds '. 
4. This numeral is formed on the basis of a root kWet- which 
seems originally to have nleant something like' angle' (d. Lat. 
triquetrus ( triangular '), whence < square • and from that' four '. 
In the masc. and neut. (catvtiras, catvclri, Lat. quattuor, etc.) the 
stem is formed by means of the suffix -var, with adjectival 
accent and vrddhi in the nominative. In the other cases (acc. 
caturas, etc.) the suffix has the weak form according to the 
general rule. A neuter noun *cdtvar, or its IE prototype, is pre­
supposed by the thematic extension catvara- 'square, cross­
roads). Elsewhere the simple r-suffix may appear (Gk. Dor. 
'TE'TOP€S, Lat. quaterL or the elements of the suffix may be 
reversed (Av. caOru-). 
The. feminine of these two numerals (nom. acc. tisrds, 
cdtasras: Av. tiIro, cata1)ro) is made by means of the suffix -say, 
which elsewhere 
p. 141) shows a tendency to become a 
specifically feminine suffix. In tisrds the -r- of tri- has dis­
appeared through dissimilation. The common form of the nom. 
acc. is in origin accusative. The original forms of the nom. to be 
assumed for IE. *tisores, *kWetesores, are continued in Celtic: ) 
O. Ir. teoir, cetheoir. 
The numerals from 5-10 have a less developed system of in­
flection than the preceding ones. With the exception of the dual 
ending of a~tau {eight', they do not inflect in the nom. acc. 
In the Vedic language they may appear uninflected also in the 
other cases: pdnca k§it£~u {in the five tribes', saptd h6trbhil" 
( with seven priests;, etc. In Greek and Latin the correspond­
ing words are uninflected, also in Germanic when used attribu­
tively. This is the oldest state of affairs. The beginnings" of 
inflection may be put in the late IE period, the uninflected type 
surviving by the side of the new inflected type down to Vedic 
times. 
5. In panca (: Gk 'TdV'TfE, Lat. quinque, etc.)' representing IE 

260 
NUMERALS, FRON DUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
pe1)ktDe, we find an uninflected thematic stem. As such are to be 
assumed, from the evidence of compounds, etc., to have existed 
freely at an early stage of 
this is an interesting archaism. 
The root peyk W - is in all probability that which appears in Engl. 
finger (*pe1)k wro-) and fist (<*p1)ktDsti-, d. O. S1. plJsti (id '). The 
derivative pankti- (: O. S1. p,ti ' five ') means from the J.?gveda 
on, not only 'group of five', but more generally • group, 
series '. 
6. Skt. $a! «*$a!$ <sat$ with assimilation of initial) repre­
sents IE *seks: d. Lat. sex, Gotb. saths, etc. The forms of this 
word in Indo-European are rather complicated, since there also 
exist forms beginning with sw- (Welsh chwech), ks- (Gk. ~1.(jTP'~ 
, in rows of six '. O. S1. sesti ' six '). ksw- (Av. xsva!) and simple 
w- (Arm. ve9, O. Pruss. uschts ' sixth '). The original initial con­
sonant group has been simplified variously in the different lan­
guages. Middle Indo-Aryan cha goes back to an original differ­
ing from the Sanskrit form, and beginning with k§i-. 
~ 
7. The final -a of saptd (: Gk. E7iTa) rep'resents IE -tp, as is 
clear not only from Lat. septem but also from the ordinal 
saptamd-. The agreement between Greek and Sanskrit shows 
that the final accentuation existed already in IE (septtft), but it 
cannot be original since it appears on a reduced syllable. 
S. In a$tau (: Gk. OKT<iJ, Lat. octo. Goth. ahtau, etc.) there 
appears the termination of the dual. The meaning of the stem 
okto- of which this is the dual may be inferred from a related 
i-stem. asti-, which is found in Avestan. This is a measure of 
length meaning the width of four fingers'. from which it may
t 
be inferred that the dual *okto(u) meant originally' two groups 
of four fingers'.· In classical Sanskrit there exists beside this a 
form a$#a with short a from the surrounding numerals. 
g. The -a of n.dva ' nine ~ (: Gk. lv-vl.a) may go back to -"1' 
(d. navamd-, Lat. novem) or possibly -tl (d. Lat. nonus ' ninth '). 
The word has been considered to be related to IE newos • new'. 
which in view of the formation of the preceding numeral is not 
without plausibility. 
10. The primary series closes with ddsa ' ten' (: Gk. 8/K(1. 
Lat. decem, Goth. talhun, etc.) representing IE dtk1p, about the 
etymology of which no likely suggestions exist. 
11-19. These are dvandva compounds of 1-9 with 10: 
dvddaSa ' 12 I, trdyodaSa '13', cdturdasa ' 14 " ~otjasa I 16 ' I 
etc.; d. Gk. 8ck8EKa, Lat. duodecim} etc. The long vowel of 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
261 
tkddasa II • is from dv4dasa. The numeral 19 may alterna­
i 
tively be expressed ekona'l.litttsati ' 20 less I '. 
The tens from 20-90 are feminine substantives and as such 
decline properly in the singular, with the gen. pI. of the things 
enumerated: navatim niivyaniim ' 90 navigable streams " etc. 
But they may also be construed either (1) agreeing in case, but 
not in number, with the noun enumerated, Vi1J'lsatya hdribhiJ; 
, with 20 bay horses " or even (2) adjectivally, agreeing also in 
number with it: pancasadbhir ba1JaiJ; , with 50 arrows'. The 
intervening numerals are constructed like those from 11-19 : 
trdyastri1Jlsat- ( 33 " catu/:t$a~# ( 64 " etc. 
20-50: vi~nsat£-: d. Av. vtsaiti, Gk. €iKOat, Lat. viginti, etc. 
tri1Jtsdt: d. A. Brisq,s, acc. sg. Brisatam, Lat. triginta, etc. 
catvari1J'lsat: cf. Av. ca8warasat,m (acc. sg.), Gk. 'TfTTapcf-
Kovra, Lat. quadraginta, etc. 
paiicasat-: d. Av. pancasat-, Gk. 
7Tf:vr~KOIJTa, Lat. quin­
quaginta, etc. 
The element -sat- which appears in these four numerals is out 
of -k1pt-, which further stands for dktttt-, a reduced form of the 
numeral 10, with the t-suffix that appears in Skt. dasdt- ' de­
cade '. The reduced form belongs properly to the weak cases, 
since Av. Brisqs' 30', andvisqs' 20', show that the strong stem 
(-sant-) was originally used in the nom. sg. This stem was 
originaily neuter and could be inflected as such along with the 
preceding numeral (Gk. T€TTapa-Kovra ' 4 tens " etc.). In San­
skrit the neuter pI. inflection appears in the first member in 
catviiri-Ip-sat and paiica-sdt-. 
Its absence from the second 
member is explained by the fact that this inflection could be 
optionally omitted (d. visviini vdsu, etc., p. 237). The i-stem 
ftir!l,satl- was originally a dual *vi salt 
2 tens'. The vt which
f 
appears here in the sense of ( 2 ' is the normal word in Tocharian 
in place of the usual dvau, etc. (A. wu, we (fern.). B. wi). It tnay 
be identified with the prefix 1Ji- • apart, separate'. The presence 
of the nasal at the end of the first member is unexplained, and 
outside Indo-Aryan it appears only in Oss. inslii f 20 '. 
60-90. ~a§#i, saptaU-, aSiti~ navati-. These are fonned in a 
-r:f..-
manner quite different from the preceding. They are abstract 
or collective nouns formed by means of the suffix -ti, meaning 
primarily' hexad " etc. The primary meaning is retained in the 
similarly fonned pankti-
group of 5 " and O. S1. sests, which
t 
corresponds in fonn to Skt. ~~/I-, means simply • 6'. The 

262 
NUMERALS, PRONOUN S, INDECLIN ABLES 
specialisation of these forms as names of the tens is common to . 
Indo-Aryan and Iranian, d. Av. xsvasti-, haptaiti-, astaiti-, 
navaiti-. The form of the numeral 80 in Sanskrit is an inde­
pendent formation from the root which is not paralleled else­
where but which is obviously ancient. It has been replaced in 
Iranian by a normalIsed forIIi'l>aSedOn aSta. 
100. The origina~ form of satam ·(Av. sat3m, Gk. E-KaTov, Lat. 
centu,m, etc.) was *ktptOm, as is clear from Lith si1ntas. In view 
of this, and in view of the fact that the -sat- in tri1Jtsdt, etc.• 
means ( ten " the IE original is derived from dktptom, a neuter 
collective noun meaning' a decad (of tens) " 
1000. sahdsra- (: Av. hazatJra-) is connected with Gk. xtAWt, 
G
X€{Awr" X€MtOL (*x€aAwl.). and the initial element sa- is identi­
fied with IE stp- ( one, together " 
. 
These two numerals are neuter substantives, but the same 
variations of construction are found as with the tens. The 
numerals above a thousand are purely Indian: ayuta- '10,000', 
lak§>d-
'100,000', prayuta-
'1,000,000', koti- 'IO,OPO,ooo', 
etc. The series is carried to great lengths, particularly among 
10140
the Jains and Buddhists (asa1Jtkhyeya- = 
), but among the 
higher numbers there is little agreement in the names between 
the various texts. 
Ordinals: 
I prathamd-
(Av. frat;nna-) , 2 dvitiya-
(: Av. 
daibitya-, bitya-, O. Pers. duvitiya-j, 3 trttya- (Av. (Jritya-, Lat. 
tertius, etc.), 4 (a) caturtha- (Gk. T€TUprOS', Lith. k~tvirtas, 
etc.). (b) turiya-, turya- (Avo ttlirya-), 5 (a) pakthd- RV. 10,61, I 
(Av. pux8a-, ORG, funfto from p1Jkwt(h)o-: Gk. 1T€fL1T7OS', Lith. 
peiiktas, etc., frompe1Jk wto-) , (b) pancatha-, Kath. (: Gall.pimpetos, 
O. Welsh pimphet), (c) normally pancama- (Pahl. panJum, Oss. 
piinJiim), 6 ~a#ha- (Gk. €K'ros .. Lat. sextus), 7 (a) saptathd-, 
RV. (Av. hapta8a-), (b) normally s:aptama- (Pers. hajtum, Gk. 
€{300/:Los, Lat. septimus, etc.), 8 a§itamd- (Av. ast3ma-), 9 navama­
(Av. naoma-, O. Pers. navama-) , 10 dasama (Av. das3ma, Lat. 
decimus, etc.). 
The simplest type of ordinal is made by adding the accented 
thematic vowel to the numeral in its usual adjectival function: 
saptam-d-, dasam-d. 
From these ordinals the formation is 
further extended to cases where it did not originally belong: 
a~tama-, as opposed to the Inore original Gk. 0,,000S'. Lat. 
octavus; navama- as opposed to Lat. nonus. The suffix -thd, 
i.e. -t-H-a- must have originally arisen through the addition of 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
263 
the accented thematic vowel to a collective or abstract deriva­
tive in -ta, i.e. -taH (*caturta +a> caturtha-). There is no evidence 
of an H outside Indo-Iranian: Gk. 1TEP:1TTOS, etc., are formed on 
the basis of the simple t-stem. 
The first ordinal differs in the various languages (Gk. 1TPW'TOS, 
Lat. primus, Lith. pirmas, etc.). but they agree in deriving it 
from the same root meaning 'in front', and not from the 
corresponding cardinal. The ordinals from 11-19 are thematic 
formations with accentuation of suffix: dvadaSti-, etc., d. Av. 
dvadasa-, etc. The suffix -tama which serves also as a superla­
tive suffix is used to form ordinals from the tens, 100 and 1000 : 
trimsattama-
(Av. Orisastama-, Lat. trice(n)simus) '30th '), 
~a$#tama- • 60th', satatama- ' 100th " sahasratama- ' 1000th ' 
(Av. haza'!Jro . t~ma-). Alternatively there exists for 20-50 the 
type vi1fZsa-, tri1fZsa-, catvari1Jtsa-, pancasa-, to which nothing 
corresponds outside Indo-Aryan. They are formed analogically 
on the pattern of ekadasd-, etc. 
Of adjectival derivatives other than ordinals dvayti- (Gk. 
SOtoS'. O. S1. dvoji) and traya- (0. Sl. trojl), meaning of two 
t 
(three) sorts, parts' are inherited. Sanskrit has created by 
means of the suffix -taya a series ekataya-, cdtu~taya- J etc., used 
in the same seI1:se. Old adverbial derivatives are dvis (Av. bis, 
Gk. Sis. Lat. bis) and tris (Av. Oris, Gk. 'Tpls) • twice, three 
t
times '. I t is not certain whether catuff four times I is the 
simple stem catur used adverbially, or whether it is from 
*catur-$, with the addition of this adverbial -so Av. cafJrus 
• four times' has such an.-s (though the elements of the suffix 
are arranged in different order), but it is not necessary to 
assume its original presence in Lat. quater. Elsewhere this 
meaning is expressed by the use of kftvas (times I: panca 
kftvalt ( 5 times, etc.'. The root of this word appears in the 
compound sakft (once', and in Lith. kartas, O. S1. kratu. 
Other adverbial formations are made by means of the suffixes 
-dha (tridha' in 3 parts) I etcd) and -sas (satasds < in hundreds '),etc. 
§z. 
PRONOUNS 
Personal Pronouns 
1. Sg. N. aham, A. mam, ma, I. maya, D. mahyam, me, 
Ab. mat, G. mama, me; Loc. mtiyi. 
Du. N.A.V. avam. I.D. Ab. avabhyam. G.L. avayos, and 
A.D.G. nau. 

264 
N U M ERA L S, P R Q NO UN S, IN DEC LIN A B L E S 
PI. N. vaydm, A. asmdn, nas, L asmdbhis, D. asmabhyam, 
nas, Ab. asmdt, G. asmdkam, nas, L. asmdsu. 
2. Sg. N. tvam, A. tvdm, tva, L tvdyii, D. t'J.t.bhyam, te, Ab. tvdt. 
G. tava, te, L. tvdyi. 
Du. N.A.V. yuvdm, LD. Ab. yuvdbhyam. G.L. yitvdyos, and 
A.D.G. vam. 
PI. N. yuyam. A. yu~mtin, vas, 1. YU$mdbhis. D. yu~mdbhyam, 
vas, Ab. yu~mdt, G. yu~mdkam, vas, L. yu~mtisu. 
The inflection of the pronouns differs in many respects from 
that of the notins, and this difference is most marked in the 
personal pronouns. (I) These pronouns show no difference of 
gender, which is in accordance with the earlierst IE practice, 
and contrasts with the practice of other language families (e.g. 
Semitic) in which gender is distinguished. Only an isolated 
yu~mtis acc. pI. fern. is quotable from the Vedic texts. (2) The 
distinctions ·of number are expressed by the use of different 
stems. which contain different radical elements. (3) The same 
dis~inction appears in the first person between the nom. sg. 
and the other cases. (4) The terminations of the plural are 
partly identical with those of the singular, and this was much 
more marked in the prehistoric period. 
(5) The individual 
terminations differ widely from those of the noun. 
The nom. sg. ahdm (Av. aZ3m) contains a suffix -am which is 
elsewhere prevalent in the declension of the personal pronouns. 
The fornl is found also in Slavonic (Q. S1. azu with u<-om). 
Elsewhere there appear forms without ending (Lith. es, as) and 
forms terminating in -0 (Gk. eyw. Lat. ego). The latter form was 
originally egoH, and the aspiration in Sanskrit shows that it was 
to this form that the -am has been added (egoH +6m>egH-om). 
The -am of tvdm (Av. twam, tum) is not found outside Indo· 
Iranian and is therefore of more recent origin. The other lan­
guages have tu which also survives in Iranian, and possibly also 
in the Vedic particle tu (d. RV. 8. 13, I4 d tii gahi, pra tu 
drava). In the other cases of the first person there appears a 
stem beginning with m-, before which on the evidence of Greek 
(ep" acc. sg.) and Hittite (ammuk ace. dat. sg.) a vowel has been 
lost in most of the IE languages. On the other hand the pro­
noun of the second person does not differ radically in these 
cases. The base tl which appears elsewhere (0. S1. tt; =Skt. 
tvtim, etc.) may have arisen out of *twe by sporadic loss of -w­
aiter initial t-. The final -m in the acc. sg. forms miim, tvdm 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
265 
(: Av. m~m, 8wf!m) is found outside Indo-Iranian only in 
Slavonic (0. S1. m~, t~). It is an innovation replacing the older 
forms which are preserved only as enclitics: ma, tva (: Av. ma, 
Owa). The relation of these forms with long vowel to the forms 
with short vowel like Gk. Epi., /LE, aI., at is not clear. 
The enclitic forms me: te (: O. Pers. maiy, taiy, Av. mOi, me, 
tOi, te, Gk. /LOt, aOt, l.ith. mi, ti) are forms of stem and contain 
no case ending. As such they are more ancient than the 
accented forms which have evolved a full case system. It is also 
an ancient feature that their use is much wider than that of a 
normal case form. They are used regularly in the sense of 
both genitive and dative, and occasionally even more widely. 
Originally there must have been corresponding accented forms 
with similar wide use. The growth of a full system of in­
flection for the accented personal pronouns has abolished 
these, but the older undeveloped system is preserved in the 
enclitics. 
The lateness of the fully inflected case forms is shown by the 
fact that a number of them have no exact correspondences in 
other IE languages. Such is the case with the instr. sg. maya. 
This is formed on the basis of the stem form preserved in the 
enclitic me. On the other hand the original form of the instr. sg. 
of the second person was tvii, as is shown by the agreement of 
this rare Vedic form with Ay. '8w4. It is replaced by tvtiyii 
formed on the pattern of maya. The same form of stem is the 
basis of the loco sg. mayi. The original loc. sg. of the second 
person is tve which appears in the RV. It is replaced from the 
AV. on by the analogicaltvayi. In the absence of Iranian evid­
ence it is not possible to say anything about the earlier history 
of this case. 
The forms of the abL sg. mat, tvat (: Av. mal. 6waj, d. 0, Lat. 
med, ted) are formed with the same element that appears in the 
declension of thematic stems. A form mdmat, influenced by the 
gen. sg. appears in the RV., and later the extended forms 
mattas., tvaUds, formed with the ablatival suffix -tas, conie to be 
frequently used. 
The forms of the dat. sg. are mahyam, 
tubhyam. but tubhya is attested in the RV., and both mdAya 
and tubhya are frequently required by the metre. These are the 
earliest forms and the -m is a secondary addition of Sanskrit, as 
elsewhere. The -m is absent in Iranian: Av. maibya, maibyo, 
taibyii, taibyo.. The final element d found in Indo-Iranian is 

266 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, IN DECLIN ABLES 
absent elsewhere (Lat. mihi, tibi, Umbr. mehe, tefe, O. S1. tebl. 
O. Pruss. tebbei) , and it is therefore to be regarded as a post­
position which has become attached to the original case fonn. 
The h «gh) in Skt. mahyam) is shown to be original as opposed 
to the -b- in the Avestan form, because it appears also in Italic. 
The -u- of tubhyam is peculiar to Sanskrit: all the other lan­
guages have forms derived from original te-. The gen. sg. lava 
(: Av. lava) representing IE *e4wo is an uninflected thematic 
adjectival stem, and therefore an isolated survival of archaic 
IE usage. Elsewhere this stem is found inflected as a full 
adjective: Gk. T€OS-, Lat. tuus. On this analogy mama may be 
explained as a substitute for *ama, the initial m- being intro­
duced from the rest of the paradigm. This *dma would corre­
spond to the stem of Gk. EP.OS- ' my , in the same way as tava to 
TEaS. Such an IE form of gen. sg. is represented in Armenian 
im. The gen. sg. in Iranian (Av. mana, O. Pers. mana) which 
corresponds exactly to that of Slavonic (0. SI. mene) is a dif­
ferent fonnation, containing an n-suffix which in Germanic is 
attached to the. diphthongal base (Goth. meina). 
The nom. pI. vaydm (: Av. vaem) contains the same additional 
element -am that appears in the nom. sg. It points to an original 
IE wei which appears in Gothic with the secondary addition of 
the plural-s (weis, d. also Hitt. we!). This -s appears also in the 
nom. pI. of the second person in Av. yu!, Goth. jus, Lith. jus. 
A second formyuzJm exists in Avestan with the addition of the 
common pronominal termination -am. In Sanskrit yuyam the 
.-am is added to the stem without -s,with the intervention of a 
-y- taken from vaydm. 
The cases of the plural from the accusative on are made from 
the bases asma- and yu~md- to which corespond exactly Gk. 
(Aeol.) afLfLE and VfLJ-L€. The as- of the first person is for ttS­
( = Goth. uns) which is explained as the weak grade of the form 
of the pronoun which is used as an enclitic, nas. It is possible 
that in yu~md- the initial y has been secondarily introduced 
from the nom. pl., and that an original*us-cwas in the same way 
the weak form of vas. The stem extension resembles that in the 
masc.· sg. of the demonstrative pronouns (tdsmat, etc.). These 
bases originally:took the inflections of the singular, and the 
introduction of the plural termination is of comparatively 
recent origin. The old state of affairs is still preserved in the 
dative and ablative: asmdbhyam (: Av. ahmaibya), yu~md-

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
267 
bhyam (: Av. yusmaibya); asmdt (: A v. ahmaJ), yu~mdt (: A v. 
yusmal, xsmal). 
For the accusative the simple uninflected base was originally 
used as in the Greek forms quoted' above and in Avestan ~hmii, 
ahma. The introduction of the termination -an is an innovation 
of Sanskrit. The original (singular) ending of the instr. pI. is 
preserved in. Av. xsma, and also in Vedic in a few compounds, 
like yu~ma-datta- ' given by you'. The long -a- of asmabhis, 
yzwmiibhis is derived from this form of instrumental, and from 
here it has been introduced into the lac. pI. : asmasu;yu~masu. 
The forms of the gen. pL,'asmakam, yu~makam (: Av. ahmak;;m, 
O. Pers. amaxam; Av. yusmak;;m) are based on the adjectival 
stems asmaka- and yu~miika- which still function as such in the 
RV. The original form, which still occurs occasionally in the 
Vedic language, was the uninflected stem as iIi tava, and the-m 
as elsewhere is a later addition. 
An earlier form of the lo.y;ative, asme, YU$me appears in the 
Vedic texts, with the pecuharity that it can be used also as 
dative and genitive. This archaic characteristic of combining 
the meanings of several cases indicates that the forms are 
ancient, though nothing exactly parallel is quotable elsewhere. 
Only one form of enclitic appears in the plural, nas, vas, 
which serves as acc. dat. gen. In A vest an the corresponding 
na, no, v~, Va, serve only as dat.-gen. while for the acc. there 
appear forms with a long vowel, nd, va. These correspond in 
form to Lat. nos, vas and O. S1. ny, try. 
In classical Sanskrit three case-forms are distinguished in the 
dual of the personal pronouns, as elsewhere. In the Vedic 
language more numerous distinctions are found. The nomina­
tive iivam, yuvdm are distinguished from the accusative avam, 
yuvtim. The ablative forms dvdt and yuvdt appear. A separate 
instrumental is attested by compounds of the type yuva-datta­
t given by you two'. The uninflected adjectival stem yuviiku is 
found functioning as gen. duo In Avestan there exists a gen. duo 
yavak'Jm more closely parallel to the forms of the plural. The 
forms of the dative and locative, yuvdbhyam, yuv6s are replaced 
by more regularised forms in the classical language: y'ttvii­
bhyam, yuvdyos. 
The nom. duo yuvdm is formed from the same radical element 
as the nom. pI. The unextended form is seen in Lith. ju-du 
• you two'. For the first person a nom. duo vdm is attested once 

268 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
in the RV. (6. 55. r). This corresponds to Av. va. the -m being 
obviously a secondary addition of Sanskrit. Av. va corresponds 
exactly to O. 51. vi, and from these forms Goth. wi-t and Lith. 
ve-du differ in having a short vowel. All these forms contain 
the same radical element as the nom. pI. A form corresponding 
to aviim is found only in A v. ~:Jdvii (acc.), and there is nothing 
similar in the rest of IE. The most plausible explanation of this 
formation peculiar to Indo-Iranian is that a dual a of the pro­
nominal stem a- has been prefixed to the original va, va (IE 
we. we). 
The enclitic forms of the dual, whose usage corresponds to 
that of the plural enclitics, are nau, viim. Foons corresponding 
to nau appear in Av. na (gen.), O. Sl. na (acc.) and Gk. vw (nom. 
acc.). It is clear, particularly from Greek, that this formation 
was not originally confined to enclitic use. A form of the 
second person without -m a.ppears once in the RV. (4. 41. 2), and 
a comparison with Av. va (acc.) shows this form to be original. 
In O. S1. the corresponding form va is an accented form used as 
both nOl11. and acc. 
There existed in IE a reflexive pronoun which inflected after 
the fashion of the personal pronouns (Lat. se, sibi, etc.). The 
initial varied. between sv- and s- in the same way as that of the 
second personal pronoun. There are some remnants of this in­
flection in Avestan (dat. sg. hvav8ya, i.e. *hvawya), but it does 
not remain in Sanskrit. The stem sva- {self' is used in com­
pounds (s'LIa-yuj- ' yoking oneself " etc.), in the adverbial svatas 
'from oneself I, and in certain derivatives (svatvd-, etc.). 
Apart fronl these cases the stem svd- is a possessive adjective 
corresponding to Lat. suus, etc. There is also an indeclinable 
svaydm' self 'J which is formed by adding the usual pronominal 
increment -am to a base *svai- (sve-, cf. me, te). As an enclitic 
this base appears with initial s- in Av. hoi, he, se, O. Pers. saiYJ 
functioning' in the same way as me, teo It has been thought that 
this enclitic pronoun is represented in Pkt. se, but the latter is 
more likely to be of secondary origin. The Vedic enclitic sim 
(acc.) appears to be radically related to this group, though 
differing widely in formation. In Iranian there are correspond­
ing forins of the dual (Av. hi) and plural (Av. his, O. Pers. sis). 
The old possessive adjectives based on the first and second 
personal pronouns (d. Lat. meu.s, tuus, etc.) have been lost in 
Sanskrit, although they are preserved in Iranian (Av. ma- ' my ff 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
269 
8wa- • thy'). It is pointed out above how the stern of such 
adjectives is adapted as a gen. sg. In their place there are some 
fresh creations of Sanskrit, eog. mdmakd-. tdvakd- with vrddhi, 
based on the gen. sg.; 
mdmakina~Jetc.; madiya, tvadiya-, 
asmadiya-, yu~madiya-, based on the compositional stern; 
matka- ( mine " etc. 
Substitution of some honorific term for the singular of the 
second personal pronoun is a characteristic shared by Sanskrit 
with many languages. To some extent the plural serves this 
purpose, as in English, etc. (yuyam me guravab • you are my 
teacher J), but the normal substitute is bhaviin (stem bhavant-) 
• your honour' with the third person singular of the verb. The 
word is an irregular contraction of bhdgavdn 'the fortunate, 
blessed one " which is itself used in this way. The vocative 
bhos (<bhagavas) which is still further contracted, preserves the 
old Vedic form of the vocative. 
Substitutes for the old, reflexive pronoun are provided by 
the nouns tarta- ( body' and iitmdn- ' soul '. The former is so 
used in the Vedic language (sara upake tanvam dddhana?J 
, placing himself near the sun ') and the usage is paralleled in 
Avestan. It disappears in this usage in the classical language, 
but derivatives of it appear in later dialects of the North-West 
(N.W. Prakrit tanuvaka- J tanuvaga-
one's own I, Torwali tanu
i 
• id ',etc.). The classical alternative iitman- appears also in the 
RV., and supersedes the other word from the early prose 
onwards. 
Demonstrative, Interrogative and Relative Pronouns 
Sg. N. m. sa-s, f. sa, n. tdd, A. m. tam, f. t4m, n. tad, I. m. n. 
tina, f. tayii; D. m. n. tdsmai, f. tdsyai. Ab.- m. n. tasmiit, 
f. tasyas, G. m. n. tasya, f. tasyiis. L. m. n. tasmin, f. tdsyam. 
Du. N.A. m: ta·u, f. n. U, I.D. Ab. m. f. n. tiibhyam, G.L. 
m.  f. n. tdyos. 
PI. N. m. te, f. tas, n. tii, tdni, A. m. tiin, f. eiis, n. tii, tt1.ni, 
1.  m. n. tais, ttbh'';s, f. tiibhis, D. Ab. m. n.Ubhyas, f. t4bhyas, 
G. m. n. U~am, f. tdsam, L..m. n. te~u> f. tasu. 
Those demonstrative, interrogative and relative pronouns 
whose stem ends in the thematic vowel inflect according to the 
above pattern. The masculine and neuter pronouns inflect 
partly in agreement with the nominal a-sterns and the feminines 
partly in agreement with the a-stems. In addition they have 

270 
NUMERALS, PRONOUN S, INDECLIN ABLES 
forms of inflection which are not shared by the nominal stems. 
These are· as follows : 
The nom. sg. ill the pronouns sa, e~a and sya appear without 
final -s when followed by a word beginning with a consonant: 
sa dadarsa he saw 'i but so 'bravit ( he said', puru~a e~a!t ( this
t 
man '. Forms without the nominative -s appear also in the 
corresponding Gk. 0, Goth. sa. 
The nom. acc. sg. nt. ends in dlt: tdt (: Avo tal, Gk. TO <*tod, 
Lat. is-Iud), etdt (: Av. aetal)' tydt, ydt (: Av. yaJ, Gk. 07-T'), kdt 
RV. (: Av. kaJ, Lat. quod), tvat, enat. The Sanskrit sandhi does 
not allow any decision as to whether the original consonant is 
-d or -t, but it is clear that the final consonant was originally -d 
both from the evidence of other languages (Lat. quod, Goth. 
pat-a) and from forms in Sanskrit where a further suffix is added 
,to this stern: tadii. idam, etc. 
The instr. sg. masc. nt. is in the classical language identical 
in noun and pronoun, In the Vedic language the noun has also  
the termination 
which is not used in the pronoun with the  
exception of et;a (classical enena) and the adverbial ana (lhus "  
It is clear that-ena is the termination prop~r to',the pronoun  
and that this has been transferred to' the noun. The form is  
based on the diphthongal stem (ke-, etc,) which elsewhere is  
. confined to plural use. The -n- appears to be of the same nature  
as the -n- which appears in the instr. sg. of masc. and neut. i­ 
and u-stems. As opposed to classical -ena, the Vedic language 
has both.-ena,and -e.nii, due to different developments in sandhi 
of final :'aH (> -a before vowel). 
No forms corresponding 
exactly to these are found • outside Indo-Aryan. In Iranian 
, there are some forms with the intrusive -n-, but they are forme~ 
on the. ordinary thematic, not on the diphthongal stem: Av~ 
kana, O. Pers. tyana, avana. The instr. sg. fern. (taya, etc.) is 
likewise based on the diphthongal stern, without the -n-. It has 
likewise been adopted by the nominal declension (senaya). 
In the dat. abl.loc. sg. the stem of the pronoun is enlarged by 
an element -sm(a)-. This element is fairly widespread in IE : 
Umbra esmei pusme, Goth. imma, pamma (-mm- <-sm-), O. Pruss. 
stesmu. etc. It is not altogether clear whether the simple -m­
which appears in o. Sl. tomu, etc., is a development out of this 
or stands for an originally variant form. If -'Sm- only is original 
it could perhaps be connected with the root of samd-, so that 
tdsmai, for instance, would mean originally • to that same '. 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
271 
The dat. sg. preserves the old termination of the thematic 
stems, which in the noun has been replaced by the extended 
-aya. The -in which forms the termination of the loco sg. 
appears nowhere else. In Iranian there are forms with simple -i: 
Av. ahmt, kahmi, cahmi, yahmf. These forms are clearly more 
original, and the -n of Sanskrit must be regarded as a secondary 
addition, whatever its origin. There is also absence of nasalis a­
tion in some of the middle IA forms: Pa. tamhi, Pkt. tar}'tsi, as 
opposed to Pkt. tassi1Jt. These may be connected directly with. 
the Iranian forms, and they point to a dialect variant *tasmi, 
etc., in Old IndD-Aryan, existing beside tdsmin, etc., adopted by 
the literary language. 
In the dat. gen. ab!. loco sg. fern. an element -sy- appears 
before the termination. This is found also in Iranian (Av. ahyai, 
aiyhai, ai1Jhd, etc:) and i~ Old Prussian (dat. sg. stessiei, gen. sg. 
stessias). In Germanic there appears in these cases simple -s­
(Goth. dat. sg. pizai, gen. sg. pizos). The most plausible explan­
ation of these forms is that they are based on the gen. sg. tasya, 
etc., which were originally common to both genders, the fem­
inine being eventually discriminated by the addition of the 
termination -as., From this starting the rest of the cases 
could easily be formed on the analogy of the noun. 
The terminations of the dual are the same as those of the 
noun. In the gen.-Ioc. this is due to the transference of the pro­
nominal forms to the noun, as can be seen from the opposition 
of two types of formation" in Slavonic (vluku, toju). A few 
forms with simple -os appear in the Vedic language (avos, 
enos) . 
The nom. pI. masc. is formed by the diphthongal stem: te, 
ke, etc. Similarly in .other IE languages: Gk. Tot, Goth. pai, 
Lith. tie, O. SI. ti, etc. 
~ince in O. Lat. quoi (gen. quoius, dat. 
quoiei) we find such aforrn of stem used in the singular, and 
since in Sanskrit it appearS in certain cases outside the plural 
(instr. sg. ttf-n-a, fern. tdy-a, gen. loco duo tay-os), it must be 
assumed that this form of ,stem was not originally exclusively 
plural, and that it gradually be{;am~ specialised as such. The 
form of stem that appears.in tbel1Pro. pI. forms the basis of the 
other cases (ttbhis, etc.) wit;h th&exception of(tl;1e ace. pI. which 
is in all probability borro~edfr6II!J~lnoniinal declension. In 
the RV. the only forms of t~e instr.-pl. that occur are of the type 
tebhis, and the nominal dedension shows a tendency to borrow 

272 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
this type. Later the pronominal form of the case is not only 
excluded from the noun, but also in the pronoun it is replaced 
by the nominal form (tats). The only exception is the stem a­
which preserves the old form of instrumental in the later lan­
guage ,(ebhis: A v. aeibis). 
In tbe -gen. pI. both in the masc.-neut. and in the feminine an 
-s- appears between the stem and the termination. The same 
-s- appears elsewhere: mase. Av. aestfm, O. Pers. availam, 
O. 51. tlchft, O. Pruss. steison; fern. Av. d1)hrrm, Gk. 7'<iwv, Lat. 
istarum, Ose. eizazun-c. Allowing fo~ the fact that in Germanic 
(AS. Dara) and Slavonic (tlchu) the masculine forms have re­
placed the feminine in this case, the -s- forms are clearly more 
widespread in the feminine than in the masculine (e.g. Gk. 7"ii.wv 
but 7"wv). This may well indicate that the formation is more 
original in the feminine, and if so the -s- WQuld be the -3 of the 
nom. pI. tas, to which the gen. pI. termination is added. Apart 
from the gen. pI. the inflection of the feminine does not differ 
from that of the nouns in the plural. 
The thematic pronominal stems that appear in Sanskrit are 
sd/td- 'that; he, she , it'. e~dfetd- {this', sydftyd- 'that', 
ena- ' him, her, it " ama- ' this', avd- ' that', tva-
r one, one ... 
the other 1, kd- 'who, which? " yd- 'who (relative) " sama­
I any, every " simti~ , self', nema-
I a certain " a-, ana- and imd­
• this'. 
The stems sd- and td-
combine together to make one 
paradigm, and they are divided so that sa~ appears in the'nom. 
sg. masc. and fern., and td- elsewhere. In this respect Sanskrit 
is in agreement with Iranian (Av. hal h{). hil, tal, etc.). Greek 
(0, ~, 7"6, etc.) and Germanic (Goth. sa, so, pata, etc.). This con­
tinues the IE state of affairs, and wher~ t- appears in these two 
cases (Lith. tas, ta, O. SI. tu, ta) it is an innovation. The absence 
of the s-termination in the nom. sg. nlasc. was also an original 
characteristic of this pronoun. In Sanskrit the pronoun has this 
termination ~(sa!z.) when it appears at the end of a sentence, and 
in sandhi before vowels it is treated as if it were sds (sa aha. 
so 'dya). Greek also has a form os (he " which appears pre­
dominantly at the end of a clause, which suggests that this 
variant form of the nonl. sg. goes back to the IE period. For 
the rest of the paradigm ta- follows the regular form of the de­
clension of these pronouns, with the possible exception of RV. 
sdsminl IDe. sg. Since however the meaning of this in some 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
273 
contexts appears to be the same, one ~, it should perhaps be
I 
connected with the IE root sem- • one', rather than with <this 
pronoun. 
The stems e~d-/etd- and sydjtyd- alternate in the same way as 
sajta-. The former of these is compounded e-, which is theay­
of the aydm-pronoun, and the above stem sa/ta-. The combina­
tion appears also in A vest an (nom. sg. masc. aesa, allo, fern. 
aesa, nt. attal) but not elsewhere in IE. The pronoun sydjtyd· 
appears mainly in the RV. There are a small number of 
occurrences in the later prec1assicalliterature, and even in early 
Pali texts (Jat. iyamhi, tyiisu,), but it is not used in the classical 
language, although it is recognised by the grammarians. Out­
side Indo-Aryan the only corresponding forms are O. PeTS. 
hyajtya-, used as a relative pronoun in place of Skt. Av. yd-. 
The interrogative pronoun kd- ' who? • is declined regularly 
according to the pronominal declension with the exception of 
the noni. acc. sg. nt. kIm, beside which the RV. has also kdt 
(: Av. kal, Lat. quod, Goth. Iva) formed .regularly from the a­
stern. In Indo-European there existed both an a-stem (Skt. 
ka-s, Av. ko, Lith. kas, Goth. lvas, etc.) and an i-stem (Gk. ,rt~, 
Lat. quis, Hitt. kwiS).. Indo-Iranian had likewise both forms of 
stem, and this state of affairs is continued in Iranian : A v. nom. 
sg. CiS, acc. sg. cim nom. pI. cayo, etc. The tendency in Sanskrit 
has been to eliminate this form of the pronoun. An isolated 
interrogative kis is quoted once from the RV., elsewhere this 
form only occurs in the combinations na-kis and md.-kis ' no 
one' (: A v. nae-cis, mel-cis). A particle kim of the same forma­
tion as im, sim, which occurs in combinations like nd-kim, 
md.-kim (d. Av. nat-cim, ma-lim) also belongs here. The only 
ki- form which maintains itself in the regular paradigm is nom. 
ace. sg. nt. kim. This form does not correspond to that found in 
other IE languages, which has the normal pronominal -d of 
the neuter (Hitt. kwit, Lat. quid,< Av. lil, etc.). This form is 
preserved in Sanskrit in the enclitic particle cit (kdscit ' any­
body'), from which the existence of an interrogative *cid may 
be inferred at an earlier stage of the language. How the final 
-m should be explained is not quite clear, but the existence of 
the Avestan particle elm would seem to indicate that it is at 
least of Indo-Iranian date, and further connections with the 
Latin adverbial termination in inter-im, olim, and of Skt. ki'lftcit 
v:ith Arm. in-c C something' have been suggested. The restora­

274 
NUMERALS, PRONOUN S, INDECLIN ABLES 
tion, by analogy, of the k- before the palatalising vowel is a 
common feature of Sanskrit in contradistinction to early Iran­
ian. It has also taken place in certain of the thematic stems 
which originally contained the vowel e, e.g. gen. sg. kdsya, 
Av. lahya, Gk. 'reo, O. 51. leso. 
There is a variety of adjectival and adverbial derivatives 
from this pronoun based on the three stems ka-, ki- and ku-. 
ka-: katara- 'which of two' (: Av. katara-, Gk. lI'o'r€POS, 
Goth. Jvapar), katamd- ( which of many' (: Av. katama-) , kdti 
, how many' (: Av. laiii, Lat. quot), kathii, kathdm, (how' (: Av. 
kaOa) kadti {when' (: Av. kadii, kaoa), karhi ' when '. 
ki- :ktvant- ( how much' (: Av. cvant-) kiyant- ( id '. 
ku-: kii in kiicit ( everywhere' 1 kuv-it particle of interroga­
tion (: Av. ku ( where '), kva ' where', kuha ' id' (: Av. kudii, 
0.51. kude) , kittra' id " kittas (whence '. 
The relative pronoun yd- is paralleled in Iranian (Avo ya-) 
Greek (os) and Phrygian (ios), and in various derivatives else· 
where. Its declension is of the normal pronominal type (yas, 
ya, ydd, etc.) and calls for no further comment. Among the 
various derivatives from it mention may be made of yatard­
, which of two' (: Av. yatara-) , ydti ' how many', yiivant- ' how 
big J 
(: Av. yavant-), ydthii (how' (: Av. yaOa), yatra · where 1 
(: Av. yaOra), yada {when' (: Av. yada), yddi · if' (Av. yeoi. 
yeioi, O. Pers. yadiy). 
The enclitic pronoun ena- ' him, her, it ' is used only in the 
acc. of all numbers, in the instrumental singular, and in the gen. 
loco duo In other cases unaccented forms of the ayan-I, pronoun 
are used with the same syntactical function (asya, asmai, etc.). 
No pronoun which can be compared with this is found in Old 
Iranian, nor in the rest of IE, but possibly M. Pers. en, Mod. 
Pers. fn go back to the same source. 
The pronominal stem avd.. is nearly extinct already in the 
Vedic language, being confined to three occurrences in the gen. 
loco duo (avos). In Iranian on the other hand it remained in 
common use (Av. O. Pers. ava-) and a corresponding pronoun is 
found also in Slavonic (0. S1. ovit). 
The unaccented pronoun tva- · a certain one, many a one' 
(when repeated lone ... another ') occurs in the Veda but is 
absent from the later language. Outside Indo-Aryan it is pos­
sible to compare Av. 8wal, nt. sg. used adverbially (as also is Skt. 
tvat). Avestan has also a pronoun hvo ( he ., which suggests that 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
275 
there was originally an alternating stem *svaftva- after the 
fashion of syaftya-. 
The pronoun dma- (this one' appears only in one ritual 
phrase. Elsewhere the stem appears only in the O. Pers. adverb 
amata • from there " and possibly in the Vedic adverb amil ' at 
home '. 
. 
The Vedic pronoun ttema- ' a certain one, many a one I is 
used in much the same sense as the pronoun tva- f and may be 
combined with it in phrases like nema u tva aha' one or the 
other said '. It is the stem of Skt. nema- ' half', Av. naema­
, half, side I used adjectivally, ' he, they on the one side'. 
r 
The unaccented sama- ' any. every' is likewise confined to 
the earliest language. I t corresponds to A v. hama- ' every '. 
Goth. sums ' a certain one', and it is u1timately derived from 
the IE root sem- ( one '. An adverb samaha' somewhere, some­
how' is derived from it. 
The pronoun simd- ' oneself 't which is also confined to the 
Vedic language, has nothing exactly corresponding to it outside 
Sanskrit. In structure it can be compared to the pronominal 
stem imd-, simd- having the same relation to sim, for instance, 
as imd- to im. 
The stems a-, and- and ima form part of the ayam declension, 
and are treated below. 
This form of declension is followed by a variety of adjectival 
stems. consisting partly of pronominal derivatives, and partly 
of certain other adjectives. The full pronominal declension 
with nom. acc. sg. nt. in -at is taken by anya- ' other' (anydt, 
d. Gk. aAAo, Lat. aliud) and such pronominal derivatives as 
katara-, katama-, yatard-, yatamd-, and itara- (other '. Pro­
nominal inflection, but with nom. acc. sg. nt. In -am is taken by 
such stems as viSva- ' all • (nom. pI. masc. viSve, gen. pI. masc. 
neut. viSve~am. etc.: Av. vispeJ vispaesfjm), sarva- ' all ' (Indo­
Aryan development on the analogy of vfSva-). eka- ' one' (d. 
Av. aevahmal, etc., from ae:pa- ( one l 
Other adjectives which 
show declension of this type are certain comparatives and 
superlatives such as ddhara~. adhamd-, dniara-, dntama-, dpara-, 
apamd- and the like, and a few other adjectives such as parva­
'prior, east', ddk~i1Ja • right, south 1 and ubhdya- (of both 
kinds'. In this latter class there is considerable fluctuation of 
usage; in some cases pronominal inflection is optional, and in 
others pronominal inflection only occurs in specific senses. 

276 
NUMERALS, PRONOUN S, INDECLINABLES 
The Pronouns aydm and asau 
Paradigms: 
(I) Sg. N. rn. aydm, f. iydm, n. idam, A. m. imam, f. imam, 
nt. idam, 1. m. n. anifna, f. andya, D. m. n. asmai, f. asyat, 
Ab. m. n. asmat, t asyiis, G. m. n. asyd, f. asyas, L. m. n. asmin, 
f. asydm. 
Du. N.A. m. imau, f. n. imtf, LD. Ab. abhyam, GL. andyos. 
PI. N. m. imtf, f. imds, n. imiini, A. m. iman, f. imds, n. imdni, 
I. m. n. ebhis, f. abhfs, D. Ab. m. n. ebhyds, f. iibhyds, G. m. n. 
e~;1m, f. iisam, L. m. n. e~u, f. iisU. 
(2) Sg. N. m. f. asau, n. adds, A. m. amum, f. amam, n. adds, 
1. m. n. amU1U.l, f. amuya, D. m. n. amU§11tai, f. amu~yai, Ab. 
m. n. amu$miit, f. amu~yas, G. m. n. amu~ya, f. amu$yas, L. m. 
n. amu~min, f. amu$yam. 
Du. N.A. ama, I.D. Ab. amabhyam, GL. amuyos. 
Pl. N. rn. ami, f. am-as, n. amani, A. m. amdn, f. am-as, n. 
amdni, 1. rn. n. amtbhis, f. amabhis, D. Ab. m. n. amibhvas, f. amt"i­
bhyas, G. m. n. amt~am, f. ama$am, L. m. n. ami~uJf. a~u~u. 
These two pronouns rna y be classed together as being in 
many ways aberrant from the normal pronominal declension. 
The ayam pronoun is distinguished by the number of different 
stems that combine to form the paradigm. The fundamental 
stems are ay-(e-}/i and a-. The nom. sg. masc. aydm (: Av. 
aem) is made by the addition of the common pronominal -am 
(d. ahdm, etc.) to the gUI;1ated form of the first stem. The nom. 
sg. fern. iydm (Av. im for *iymz, O. Pers. iyam both rnasc. and 
fern.) is a similar extension of f- <i-H. In the same way the 
nom. acc. sg. nt. is an extension of id (: Lat. id) which remains 
in use as a particle. Latin has the same extension in idem' the 
same', with a specialised sense that is absent in Sanskrit. The 
same extension applied to an acc. sg. rnasc. *im (Gk. tV' av.rov, 
Lat. im < eum ') has produced imam (: Av. im,m, O. Pers. 
imam), from which a new stem ima- is abstracted and extended 
to the acc. sg. fern. imam (: Av. imq,m, O. Pers. imam), nom. acc. 
duo rnasc. imau (: Av. imaL fern. nt. ime, nom. pI. rnase. imi 
(: Av. ime, O. Pers. imaiy). acc. pI. masc. iman (: Av. itn9), 
nom. acc. pI. fern. imiis (Av. imd(s), O. Pers. ima} nt. imd(ni) 
(Av. ima). The stem is occasionally extended to other cases in 
the Vedic (but never in the classical) language: imasya, 
imasmai; similarly in Iranian (Av. nom. acc. sg. nt. imaJ, 

NUMERALS. PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
277 
O. Pers. gen. pI. imaisiim) , Middle Indo-Aryan (Pa. imassa, 
etc.), and in Buddhisttand other incorrect forms of Sanskrit 
(ime~u, etc.). 
The stem a- appears in the D.G. Ab. L. sg., in accordance 
with Avestan (ahmiii, ahmaJ, ahyii/ahe, ahmi, fern. ahyai, etc.) 
with the normal corresponding forms in the instr. pI. etc. 
(ebhis: Av. aeibjs; fern. abhis, : Ay. «bis, etc.). In the Vedic 
language the instr. sg. appears as enil, fern. ayil, and the gen. loco 
duo as ay6s. These are (allowing for the alternation -a/a in kena, 
etc., as opposed to enil) the normal thematic endings, and the 
stem therefore is a-a On the other hand in the classical language 
these are replaced by anena, anaya, anayos. In Avestan there 
is an instr. sg. an4, fonned like kana, etc., from the stem a-, and 
corresponding to it there is a Vedic adverb anti • therefore'. It 
seems that the stem ana-, on which the above Sanskrit forms 
and the Av.- instr. pI. aniiil are made, originated in this form 
anti. On the other hand there is in Slavonic a pronoun onu 
which can be compared. It is possible that the Slavonic pro­
noun has arisen by the generalisation of a stem which arose in 
the same way as Indo-Iranian ana-. 
. There is a difference of accentuation between this pronoun 
and the corresponding forms of the normal pronominal declen­
sion (asya as opposed to ttisya, etc.), which is apparently due to 
a generalisation of the final accentuation of ayam. As an 
anaphoric pronoun (asmai • to him " etc.) the cases of the a­
stern are unaccented. 
A variety of adverbial forms are made, on the basis of the 
pronominal stems a- and i-: dtra' there' (: A v. aOr4) , atas 
• from there " ida (: Av. ioa), idanim now', ihd • here' (Av.
f 
ida, ioa, O. Pers. ida), itthdm ' thus " etc. 
The only part of the asau pronoun for which anything corre­
sponding can be found in another language is the nom. sg. asau. 
Corresponding to this Iranian has Av. hau, O. Pers. hauv, but 
in the other cases it uses the stem ava-, which has become 
almost extinct in Sanskrit. The most likely explanation of 
·sau is that it consists of the pronouns, sa, sa and a particle -au 
indicating distance. In the saIne way the acc. amum may be 
explained as replacing am-u, with a variant grade of the same 
particle. The am- would originally be the acc. sg. of the pro­
nominal stem a-, the specific sense of the pronoun (' that over 
there .)' being provided by the added element -u. Once this is 

278 
NUMERALS J 
PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
interpreted as a stem, and the acc. sg. termination added it 
naturally forms the basis of a fully inflected pronoun declined 
on the analogy of the other pronominal stems. If it had been 
an older stem with suffix -u, inflection after the style of the u­
stems would be expected. The fact that in. contradistinction to 
all other u-stems it inflects~ccotding to the thematic type (in 
its pronominal variety) indicates that it is a late creation 
peculiar to Sanskrit which has arisen in some such way as 
described above. 
The Sanskrit nom. sg. masc. fern. has an initial a- which is 
absent from Iranian hau. It is clear that this has arisen from 
the analogy of the amu-stem, and that Iranian hau, represent­
ing Indo-Ir. *sau is the more original form. The nom. acc. sg. 
nt. adas is a form for which no analogy appears elsewhere. The 
most likely interpretation of this form is that it was reaily ado 
misinterpreted as being for adas in those sandhi contexts where 
-as becomes -0. In support of this explanation one instance of 
ado before initial p- can be cited from the RV. The nom. pl. 
amt and the remaining cases based on this stem are -not easy 
to explain. It is suggested, but without any degree of .certainty 
that an analogical diphthongal form amui was created corre­
sponding to the diphthongal plural stems of the thematic pro­
nouns (U <tai <toi, etc.) and that since this combination was 
new and unfamiliar (inherited u + i becoming vi-), it was un­
stable and became changed to -t. 
§3. 
INDECLINABLES 
Some of the oldest types of adverb have been mentioned 
already in connection with the formation of nominal stems. It 
was observed that adverbs of the type pratar t ea,rly , are formed 
by means of suffixes that were orifYinally used in the formation 
of neuter stems. Adverbs of this type have most commonly 
accent on the suffix which also appears in the endingless 
locatives, with which they are identical in formation. There is 
also a type with radical accent (anti, etc.) having the form of an 
unaltered neuter stem. The following is a list of adverbs of 
these types arranged according to suffix : 
Neuter stems without suffix: yugapad 'simultaneously', 
iinu~ak ' in order '. 
-ar: avar· down ' I punar (again I. -tar: pratar • early " 
sanutdr away, apart I, antar inside'; -lur: sanitur' away,
I 
t 

N'GMERAL5, PRONOUN 5, IN DECLIN ABLES 
279 
apart'; -var: sasvar t secretly'; -ur: mlthur suddenly t 
;
r 
-i: sami 
half' (usually in compounds, d. Gk. 
~JL'--' Lat.
r 
semi-), pari around '; -ti: anti {near' J prdti ( opposite, to­
r 
wards J; -u: mithu falsely " mak~t/, { immediately' (d. Lat,
I 
mox), 1ntthu t suddenly' (d. Av. m'JrJZUO-
short " Gk. fipaxvs),
r 
anu#hu {at once'; -as: mithas' falsely', hyds yesterday'
t 
(: Gk. X8fS, Lat. hert with additional suffix), svds (tomor­
row' (as opposed to r-stem in Av. 
S1~r-
• morning '), avas 
• down " adhas id', prayas ' generally', sadyds, sadivas {to­
day, immediately', Urds ' across " paras' beyond " purds ( be­
fore'; -is: avis 'openly', bahis {outside'; -us: anyedytts 
( on the following day', pradus • forth to view'; -at: dravdt 
< quickly', draltyat 'stoutly J 
(RV. once), i$at 'a little'; 
-it: 
pradak~i~lit 'so as to keep something to the right', 
cikitvit; -ad: smat, sumdt 'with' (: Av. mal); -k: jy6k' for 
a long time' (d. Lat. diii). 
A number of adverbs functioning as verbal prefixes have the 
form of uninflected thematic stems, namely dva {down', dpa 
, away from' (: Gk. a1To), upa ' up to, near' (: Gk. V1TO' under '), 
and prd ( fprth ' (Gk. 1Tp6, etc.). Since the thematic suffix was 
originally Jsed for the formation of adjectives, words of this 
type may be regarded as fossilized adjectival stems without in­
flection which have acquired the function of prepositions and 
verbal prefixes. 
The above adverbs are formed on the same lines as the corre­
sponding nominal stems. Other adverbs contain specifically 
adverbial suffixes. The more important of these are as follows : 
-tas: This suffix makes adverbs which have in general an 
ablatival sense: itds ( from here', tdtas ( from there', anydtas 
· from another place', dak~itJatds ' from the right, on the right', 
hrttas • from the heart i, etc. In some, cases such forms function 
like forms of the ablative case: sarvato bhayat ( from all fear', 
kutas cid ddad agatya ' coming from some district or other'. 
It has already been pointed out that this formation may be 
explained as deriving from the gen.-ab!. of old i-stems. \Vhen 
simple i-formations became rare forms of the type dak~i1;lat-ds 
were reinterpreted as dak$i~la-tds, etc., and a new adverbial 
suffix created. Corresponding formations appear in other IE 
languages: Av. x~'atjj , of oneself', aiwito ( around " O. Pers. 
haca paruviyata ( from of old " amata ' from there', Gk. lK'T6~ 
, outside " Lat. funditus, caelitus, etc. 
K 

280 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
-tat: This formation which arises from a contamination of 
the above with the ablative termination -at appears in such 
adverbs as udaktiit 'from above', prliktiit (from in front' 1 
adhastat ' (from) below', purastat ' from or in the front J and 
the like. There are no parallels in other languages. 
-tra: With this suffix are formed adverbs with a locatival 
sense from noun sterns (in the Veda only) and from pro­
nominal stems: devatr&' among the gods', pur'U~atrii ' among 
men', sayutrti on a couch', dak$ittatrJ ' on the right side " 
I 
alra ' here', tatra ' there', llutra ' where', etc. The forms (com­
pare those in -las) are occasionally used as substitutes for the 
locative case: hasta ii. dak:;ittatrti ' in the right hand I. Similar 
formations in Iranian are Av. va1JhaOra at the place of dwell­
I 
ing I, iOra 
here', aOrJ 'there', ku8ra 'where', etc. 
As
l 
already indicated these adverbs are based on the extinct class 
of neuters in -tar (*sayutar l couch " *vasatar ' dwelling-place '), 
of which they are instrumentals, with the locatival sense which 
instru~ental forms always have when used adverbially. The 
fluctuation between d and a is due to variant treatment in 
sandhi of final -a <aH, of which examples are noted elsewhere. 
-tha, -tham: The suffix -tha forms adverbs of manner: 
rtuthif 'regularly', pratnathii 'as of old I, visvathii" in every 
way', anydtha 'otherwise I, tdtkii 'so', katM 'how', itthii 
, thus', etc. More rarely -tham appears in the same sense : 
kathdm ' how', ittham ( thus'. A similar formative appears only 
in Iranian: Av. kaOa, kuOa ' how', ava8a 'thus I, hamaOa ' in 
the same way'. etc. 
-dii, -diinim, -di: The suffix -dii in kadd I when I I ta4a ' then '. 
ida now', sarvada always} contains clearly as its first ele­
I 
r 
ment the -d of the neuter pronouns (tad, etc.). Similar forma­
tions appear in Iranian (Av. kaoa, taoa, etc.), and Lithuanian 
(kada, tada; visada ' always '). These forms may be extended 
by the addition of an element -nim of obscure origin: idiinim. 
tatUnim; viSvaddnim 
always'. The same pronominal -d
I 
appears in the -di of yadi t if' (: O. Pers. yadiy, Av. yeioi). 
-dha: This suffix meaning in so many parts:l appears in 
I 
such words as tridha triply " caturdha t four fold " katidka I in
r 
how many parts.', bahudha t in many ways', visvddha t in every 
way~} bahirdhd outside', mitradhd in a friendly manner '.
t 
t 
The -dha is not in origin suffixal, but the root dna forming a 
compound with the previous member (cf. tridh4tu" consisting 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
281 
of 3 parts' beside trfdhii), but it has come to function exactly 
like a suffix. 
-dha, -ha: A suffix -dha appears occasionally, e.g. Vedic 
sadha- · with' (in certain compounds; usually it is weakened fo 
-ha: sahd' with '). The same suffix with the same weakening 
appears in ihd ' here' (Pa. idha, Av. ioa) , kitha (where' (Av. 
kuda, O. S1. kude) , visvdha ( always' (0. Sl. viside ' everywhere ') 
and'samaha ' in some way or other'. 
-sas: This suffix makes distributive adverbs from numerals 
and other words: dvisas' in twos, two by two', satasds ' by 
hundreds', sahasrasas 'in thousands', sre1;tiSas 'in rows', 
devasds ( to each of the gods " etc.; d. Av. navaso ( in nines '. 
The corresponding suffix in Greek is-Kas, in £K&~ , by oneself ' 
and civ8paKos' man by man'. The ultimate analysis of this 
clement is not certain. 
-rki: kdrki 'when?'. tarhi 'then'; etarki 'now', yarhi 
, where (reI.) " amurhi ' there '. The first element of this double 
suffix appears independently in various IE languages to make 
adverbial derivatives from pronominal stems: Lat. cur' why', 
Goth. par' there', Lith. kUT ( where', visur ' everywhere',etc. 
The second element is best explained as a weakening of -dki 
(d. -ha above) and this -dhi may be compared with the -8t. 
which appears in Greek in such words as 7T08, ( where'. 'T08" 
( there'. 
Adverbially Used Case Forms. It has been pointed out that a 
large number of the adverbs dealt with above are, in their 
ultimate analysis, case forms of nominal stems, e.g. the simple 
neuter stem which elsewhere functions as nom. acc.·· sg. nt. 
(jatu), endingless locative (prataT) , instrumental (sayutrd). In 
principle such adverbs are formed in the same way as those 
below, but the stems on which they are based no longer exist 
apart from the adverbs concerned. The following list consists 
of adverbs formed from stems which are used also as substan~ 
tives or adjectives. 
The most common case form used in the making of adjectives 
is the nom.-acc. sg. nt. By this means adverbs are formed, 
occasionally from nouns, copiously from adjectives, including 
all compounds which are adjectives. Typical examples are 
puru (abundantly', urtl (widely', mdhi 'greatly', bhayas 
• more, again ', rdkas ' secretly', nyak ( downwards', nama (by 
name " sukham < happily', bdlavat' strongly " dh,~t'u C boldly'. 

282 
~UMERALS. PRO:-;OUNS, INDECLINABLES 
satydm ' truly', nttyam continually'. cirdm • for a long time',
I 
sadaram 'respectfully', niiniiratham 
on different chariots',
I 
pradiina-purvam • accompanied by a gift'. Those compounds 
which have a preposition as their first member are classed by 
the grammarians as avyaytbhiiva. Such are pratyagni t towards the 
fire', anu~vadham • by one's own will " pratidofidm ' towards 
evening', and the like. 
Adverbs meaning 'like -' are formed by means of the 
suffix -vat in its nom. acc. sg. nt. form, the accent being on the 
suffix (as opposed to bdlavat, etc.): manu$vdt 'like Manu " 
pura1Javdt • as of old " etc. 
The acc. sg. is occasionally so used in the case of masculine 
and feminine nouns: kiimam ( at will, if you will " ndktam • by 
night', vasam ' freely, as one wills'. The feminine accusative 
functions adverbially in certain cases where the suffixes -tara 
and· -lama are added to adverbs :uccaistariim (higher', 
sanaistariim ( more gradually', etc. These suffixes are allowed 
by the grammarians to be added even to finite verbs-sfdate­
taram, etc., thoqgh no trace of such usage appears in the earlier· 
language. From the adverbial accusative there develops a 
special form of gerund in -am: abhikrilma1.n fuhoti ( approach­
ing (the fire) he offers', viparyilsam avagahati ( he buries it up­
side down '. These formations are common in the Briihma1Jas, 
but rare earlier. In the later language only a repeated variety 
is used: 
madhukarii1Ja1Jl-
kva1Jitani srava1Jt-srava1Jl- pariba­
bhrama t constantly hearing the humming of bees he wandered 
.about '. 
The adverbial use of the instrumental may be illustrated by 
such examples as sdhasii 'suddenly', dnjasa 'suddenly', 
di~tyii ' fortunately', ase~e1Ja ' completely', dak$i1:tena ( to the 
south " sdnakais slowly', uccais ' on high " nicais < below'.
t 
A number of adverbial instrumentals in -a have a locative 
rather than an instrumental se!1se: diva' by day', dO$a < in the 
evening;, etc. Shift of accent sometimes characterises the 
form as an adverb: so in diva, madhya «in the middle', 
dak#n4 
to the right'. In the Vedic language there occur 
adverbs in -ayd such as naktaya ( by night', rtaya • in the right 
way ., sumnayd .' piously', svapnayl.. «in a dream '. A vestan 
has similar formations, angrayii • evilly', asaya < rightly', etc. 
These have the appearance of instrumental singulars of fem­
inine ii-stems, but no such ii-stems occur. Possibly they have 
I 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, IXDECLI~ ABLES 
283 
developed out of the locative singular with postposition -a of 
the type O. Pers. dastayii ' in the hand '. On the other hand a 
similar formation appears (also confined to the Vedic language) 
in connection with stems in -u: raghuyci' quickly', dhrJ~tuyd 
, boldly', etc.; d. Av. iisllya ' quickly·'. A satisfactory explan­
ation to account for both types is difficult to find. 
Examples of other cases used adverbially are: dat. (rare) 
apariiya' for the future', ciriiya ' for long', ahniiya ' presently'; 
abl. pasciit ' behind', siikJiit ' evidently', saniit ' from of old' 
(with changed accent), adhariit ' below'; gen. (rare) aktos ' by 
night', vastos ' by day'; loco dlire ' afar', rdhasi ' secretly', 
sthiine ' suitably', sapadi ' immediately'. 
Miscellaneous Adverbs and Particles. 
In addition to the 
adverbs classified above, mention may be made of the follow­
ing. The particle eva' only' is possibly to be identified with the 
stem of that form of the word for one which appears in Iranian 
and Greek (Av. aeva-, Gk. olos-), and evam ' so ' is probably the 
neut. sg. of the same word. Of the particles of comparison iva 
, like' appears to be based on the pronominal base i- and its 
formation may be compared with that of the stem ava-. In the 
Vedic language a particle na, homophonous with the negative 
particle is used in this sense: gaur6 na t!~itaJ:z, piba ' drink like a 
thirsty bison', etc. A comparable form elsewhere appears 
only as an enclitic particle in certain combinations: Av. 
yaBana, riBand, Lat. quidne. This enclitic may be seen also in 
Skt. cana (kdscana ' anybody'). 
The negativena is a common IE base: d. Av. na-, O. Sl. ne, 
Lith. ne, Lat. ne-, Goth. ni, etc. As the first member of com­
pounds it appears in a weakened form, a- ( <tz-), before vowels 
an-; similarly Av. O. Pers. a-, an-, Gk. a-, av-, Lat. in-, Ir. an-, 
Goth. un-. 
The adverbs nu, na, niinam ' now' belong to a family well 
represented in Indo-European: Av. nu, nuram, Mod. Pers: nun, 
Oss. nur, O. 51. nyne, Lith. nu, Gk. vv, vvv, vvv, Lat. nun-c, 
Eng1. now, etc. The radical element is that which appears in 
the adjective nava- 'new'. Formed directly on the adverb 
Sanskrit has nutana-, natna- ' new, belonging to the present 
time'. From a comparison of Greek it appears that the form 
niinam is to be analysed nun-am, and that it contains the same 
strengthening affix which was frequently met with in the pro­
nominal formations. The njralternation between Skt. nunam 

284 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
and Av. nur~m is of the same origin as that of the nominal 
formations· (d. Gk. vEapos: vEaVtas, etc.). 
The adverb nOna' variously' (the Veda has also an extended 
form nanandm) is of unknown derivation. 
The conjunction ca ' and' (Av. ca, Gk. TE, Lat. que, Goth. 
-hfis enclitic, as, in all the languages. The same applies to va 
(or', d. Lat. ve. A non-enclitic in the former sense is uta / and, 
also' (Av. O. Pers. uta' and '). 
Of miscellaneous particles of asseveration, etc., mention may 
be made of atigd • verily' hdnta (expressive of incitement), 
klla ' forsooth " khalu 'indeed " tu (but '. hi ' for' (Av. zi) r 
gha, ha ' indeed' (the latter a weakened form of the former; d. 
O. S1. Ie), viii' verily', 'Oovd ' id ' (with two accents that have 
not been explained), 11, aha, sma, bhala. The particle sma used 
in conjunction with a present tense gives it an imperfect value. 
In the later language particles are less frequent than in the 
earlier, and those that remain tend to lose their significance" 
and serve in poetry simply as devices for filling out the metre_ 
A few interjections may be merely listed: ti, ha, ahaha, he, 
ayi. aye, aho,'. bat, bata, dhik. Some noun and adjective forms 
have acquired this function; re, are (voc. of arf.-
enemy;), bhos
t 
(for bhavas, voc. of bhavant- • your honour '), ka#am 'woe is 
me ! " svasti hail! " su~!hu, siidhu • good, excellent! " etc.
t 
Prepositions and Post positions 
In contradistinction to other IE languages Sanskrit has not 
a developed series of prepositions. Furthermore those adverbial 
formations which are used to define more closely' the case­
relationship are normally placed after the noun used in this 
case, and not before it as in other IE languages. In comparison 
with the Vedic language later Sanskrit is noticeably poorer in 
words of this type, so that the distinction between it and the 
usual type of IE language is partly due to regression. On the 
other hand the system as it appears in the Vedic language. with 
freer order and looser connection of such words with the nouns 
they govern, is clearly more primitive than that found in Greek~ 
Latin, et~., and is closer to the IE beginnings of the develop­
ment of the prepositional system. 
Of the' words SO used. in the Veda the most important class,. 
as elsewhere, consists of those words which are also used as 
verbal prefixes (see below). The majority of these can be so 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLIN ABLES 
285 
used, but ud. ni, para, pra, ava and vi are exceptions. Their 
use, mainly postpositional, may be illustrated by a few 
examples: 
ati: yo devo mdrtyiin ati ( the god who is beyond mortals'. 
ddhi: Prthivyiim ddhy o~adhib ( the plants upon the earth '. 
api : yti apdm api vrate ' who are in the domain of the waters'. 
dnu: mdm'a cittdm dnu cittebhir eta' follow after my mind 
with your minds', 
abhi: yiilt .pradiSo abhi s'ilryo vicd$!e ' what quarters the sun 
iooks abroad to '. 
ii: martye~u d ' among mortals'.  
<upa: amilr yii upa silrye ' those who ·are near the sun '.  
pari: 
himdvatas pari' born from the Himalaya '.  
prati: dbodhy agnilt prdty iiyatim u~iisam ' Agni has been  
awakened to meet the approaching dawn " 
sam: Ie sumatibhilJ sam pdtnibhir nd vf~a1Jo nasimahi may
t 
we be united with thy favours as males with their spouses '. 
The use of the last one is rare, and in its place the radically 
related saha commonly appears as a postposition with the in­
strumental in the earlier and later language. Of the other 
words listed above the only ones so used in the later language 
are anu, prati and a. The first two are used as postpositions, the 
latter as a preposition with the ablative meaning , up to " a 
samudriit ' up to the ocean " 
In addition a variety of adverbs, both the old inherited type 
and the newer adverbially used case-forms, are used to define 
more closely the relation expressed by a case affix or in con­
junction with it to express a relation which cannot be expressed 
by a case-termination alone. Such are : 
With accusative: tirds ( through', antdr, antarii. ( between', 
avaretza ( below'. pdre1)a ' beyond " uttaretta ' to the north of " 
dak§i1:una ' to the south of', nik~a ' near'; e.g. ye 'varettd.. 
dityam, ye pare1Jddityam ( those who are below the sun, those 
whd are beyond the sun '. ddk$i1}ena vedim ' to the south of the 
altar', nika§a Yamunam ' close to the Jumna '. 
With instrumental: Mainly words meaning 
with', e.g.
I 
saha (above), siikdm, sardhdm, samdm, samdya, sardtham1 but 
also vina • without' which follows the analogy of the words of 
contrasting meaning. 
The dative is the only case which is not used in conjunction 
with words of prepositional character. Nevertheless1 as noted 

286 
NUMERALS, PRO~OUNS, INDECLI)J'ABLES 
above, the form of the dative of a-sterns (-aya) can only be ex­
plained by the inc<?rporation of what was originally an inde­
pendent postposition. 
\Vith ablative: bah is ' outside of ' purds ' in front of " avds, 
adhds ' below', purii ' before', pards f beyond'. vinii ' without' 
(also instrumental), arviik 
this side of', pasco't 'behind',
f 
ftrdhvdm ' above', rli ' without', etc. 
\Vith genitive: mostly case-forms of nouns or adjectives 
which take this case by virtue 6f retaining their nominal char­
acter. Such are agre · in front of " abhyase, samipe 'near " 
arthe, krte ' for the sake of " madhye ' in the midst of '. Words 
of more purely adverbial character 'used with the genitive are 
ttpari ' above " pardstat ' beyond' J purastiit · before', etc. 
With locative: antdr, antarii · inside', sdca ' with'. 
Verbal Prefixes. A widespread feature of Indo-European is 
the compounding of verbs with prepositional prefixes. It is 
normally the same words which appear in use as the common 
prepositions which are compounded with the verbs. In San­
skrit, it has been noted, the 'system of prepositions (or post­
positions) used in conjunction with nouns is much less developed 
than in the related languages. On the other hand the use of the 
same class of words as verbal prefixes is as fully developed in 
Sanskrit as in the other IE languages. 
The common prefixes so used are as follows: dti' across, 
beyond' (Av. aiti,. O. Pers. aNy; Gk. €"'t. also, still>, Lat. et 
, and' which are used differently), ddhi 'above, on, on to' 
(Av. aid;;;, aiSi, O. Pers. adiy) dnu ' after, along, towards' (Av. 
anu, O. Pers. anuv; Gk. avct. with variant suffix), antar ' with­
in ' (Av. antar~, O. Pers. antar, Lat. inter), apa ' away, from' 
(Av. O. Pers. apa, Gk. d:lrO, Lat. ab; Hitt. appa back, be­
I 
hind '), dpi ' unto, upon J (Av. aipi, O. Pers. apiy, Gk. ~1Tl; in 
Sanskrit used rarely in this way but mostly as a conjunction 
, also " cf. ·Gk. £"'" Lat. et above), abhi • to, towards, against; 
(Av. aiwi, O. Pers. abiy, O. S1. obu, obi, Lat. ob). dva down,
I 
off 1 (Av. O. Pers. ava, O. Pruss. au-, O. Sl. U-, Lat. au-), if • to, 
up to. at ' (Av. O. Pers. a), ud • up, forth, out • (Av. US-, UZ-, 
O. Pers. ud-, Ir. ud-, od-, Goth.ut • out '), upa 'to, toward, 
near' (Av. upa, O. Pers. upd, Gk. imo,Goth. ttf), ni ' down' 
(Av. ni-; O. Pers. niy-), nis < out, foith ' (Av. ni!-), para • forth, 
away' (0. Pers. paret). pari'around ' (Avo pairi, O.J?ers. pariy, 
Gk. 1TEpt), pra • forward, forth' (Av. O. Pers. fra- O. S1. pro, 

NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
287 
Lith. pra, Gk. 1TPO, Lat. pro-) ;prati {against, back, in return ' 
(Gk. 1Tplrrl., 1TPOTt, 'lTpos, O. S1. protimt, etc.), vi' apart, asunder, 
away' (Av. O. Pers. vi-; d. Toch. wi 'two', etc., above, 
p. 260), sam' together, with' (Av. O. Pers. ham-, O. S1. SQ, SU, 
Lith. s¥-, su). 
These are the regular and normal prefixes. In addition there 
are a few of more restricted application. In the Veda acchil ' to, 
towards' is fairly common, but it dies out later. Others occur, 
in the Veda and later, only in connection with a restricted 
number of roots: avis' forth to sight, in view' (with bht7, as 
and kr), pradus 'id' (with the same roots), tirds (through, 
across, out of sight' (with kr, dha, bhil) puras ' in front' (with 
kr, dha, i and a few others. 
More than one prefix can be combined with a verb (as in 
Greek, etc.). Combinations of two are common, of three, not 
unusual, ·but more than three are very rarely found. There are 
no particular rules as to the order in which they may appear, 
but the prefix a is practically never separated from the verb. 
All these prefixes were to begin with' independent adverbs. 
In the language of the Veda they partly retain this character 
and it is only in the later language that they become insepar­
ably combined with the verbal stem. A similar difference is to 
be observed between Homeric and later Greek, which makes it 
clear that the development of the full system of verbal com­
position is largely a parallel development in the various lan­
guages. 
In the Veda, a prefix most frequently stands immediately 
before the verb (d gamat ' may he come ') but it may be separ­
ated from it by another word (it tva visantu ' may they enter 
thee ') and it may even follow the verb (1ndro gil avr1Jod dpa 
, Indra disclosed the cows '). vVhatever its position, in a prin­
cipal clause the preposition is regularly accented, and the verb, 
according to the general rule, is unaccented. \Vhen two pre­
fixes are used both are accented normally in the RV. (upa pra 
yahi (come forth here ') a fact which emphasises their status as 
independent words. But besides this there is a systerrl, showing 
the transition to a closer form of union, according to which the 
second only of two prefixes is accented when they imrnediately 
precede the verb: 
dthdsta1J~ viparetana ( then scatter ye away 
to your home'. In subordinate clauses the process of composi­
tion has preceded further, the preposition generally appearing 

288 
NUMERALS, PRONOUNS, INDECLINABLES 
compounded, and since the verb in these cases is accented, the 
prefix is without accent: e.g. ydd ... ni~tdatha[t , when ye two 
sit down'. Even here, however, it may appear separate from 
the verb and accented (vi yo mame rdjasi who measured out
I 
the two spaces '), while occasionally it is treated as a separate 
word and accented even when it immediately precedes the 
verb: ya ifhutim pari veda ndmobhi[t 
who fully knows the 
t 
offering with devotion '. 
In the preclassical prose texts the prefix is still to some extent 
separated from. the verb, but on a much more limited scale. By 
the classical period its independence is totally lost, and except 
for the few that continue to function as postpositions, the verbal 
prefixes have ceased to exist as independent words. 
In combination with the nominal derivatives of verbal root 
the verbal prefixes appear fully compounded from the begin­
ning: 
adhiviisd-
'garment', dpaciti-
'retribution' (Gk. 
a7T6nO'tS'). abhidruh- ' treacherous " avapiina- ( drinking place • ; 
uddyana-
rising (of the sun) '. upasruti ( overhearing '. nidhi­
t 
• deposit, treasure', nirdyarta-
'going out'; prabhairgin­
l crushing', etc. In such cases the general rule is that the prefix 
loses its accent in favour of the second member of the compound 
but in some cases it is regularly accented, namely (1) in com­
bination with the past passive participle, pdreta- « gone forth " 
antdrhita- ' concealed " dvapanna-
l fallen down ',etc.; (2) with 
the verbal action nouns in -ti, dpaciti, etc. In both these cases 
there is agreement in the matter of accent between Sanskrit 
and Greek (u7T6f3A7j70S', a.v&fJA7jU1s, etc.); (3) with the infinitival 
forms based on the lu-suffix: sd'l'{thartum «to collect', api. 
dhiitave «to cover up '; dvagantos ( of descending'. 

r  
~ 
CHA PTER VII. 
THE VERB 
§I. THE VERBAL ROOT 
The roots of the Sanskrit language as enumerated by the Hindu 
grammarians comprise a list of some two thousand. Something 
like half of these are not attested in actual use, and since it is 
unlikely that many of them will ever turn up they may for all 
practical purposes be neglected. Of the rest a considerable 
number may be dismissed as being either reduplications 
(didhi-), stem forms (urtl-u-) , denominatives (arth-, etc.) or in 
some other respect not primitive. When allowance is made for 
these there remain somewhat over eight hundred roots, which 
form the basis not only of the verbal system, but also the larger 
part of the inherited nominal stems of the language. 
Chiefly owing to its antiquity the Sanskrit language is more 
readily analysable, and its roots more easily separable from 
accretionary elements than is the case with any other IE lan­
guage. This is because the suffixes with which the present and 
aorist stems are formed, are normally kept out of the other 
forms of the finite verb, and from nominal derivatives: sun6ti 
• presses out': perf. su~iiva, su~umd, fut. s6~yati, part. pass. 
sutd-. Nevertheless even Sanskrit is not wanting in cases where 
suffixes whose primary function is the formation of the present 
stem, have become permanently attached to the root, and con­
sequently appear throughout the conjugation of the verb. For 
instance from the present---p,cchdti < asks', formed with the IE 
suffix -ske- an extended root Prch-fprach- is made which appears 
in the perf. paprdccha and elsewhere. Similarly Latin has 
posco, poposci «Prksko). The simpler form of the root appears 
in Lat. precem (acc. sg.), procus and in Skt. prasnd- ' question J. 
The root k~1Ju- ' to sharpen? contains the nu-suffix which else­
where forms the fifth present class. From a number of presents 
in which this suffix enlarged by the thematic vowel appears, 
extended root forms ending in -nv develop: p'inv-' to fatten '. 
pres. ptnvati, perf. 2 duo pipinvtithus (beside simple root pi­
289 

290 
THE VERB 
inpdyate, etc.). Similar extended roots are inv- ' to send ' (: i-) 
and jinv- 'to quicken' (: ji-). From present stems in -va a 
number of roots ending in -v are created: jiv- ' to live' I pres. 
jivati (: simple root in gaya- ' livelihood. belongings')' dhiirv­
, to injure ' (: dhvr-), tiirv- ' to overcome ' (: tr-) and bharv- ' to 
chew' for which no simpler form exists. 
Accretion5 of this type are of comparatively recent origin, 
and it is quite clear how they have arisen from particular stem 
forms that are current in the verbal conjugation. Besides them 
there exists another class of extended roots, of much more 
ancient date, containing accretions whose functions it is for the 
most part no longer possible to discern. ihese elements are 
fairly easily recognisable, either through the coexistence of a 
simpler form of the root, or by the existence of synonymous 
roots which differ only in the final element. They are identical 
with the individual suffixes which have been enumerated in 
treating of the formation of nouns, and may conveniently be 
enumerated in the same order: 
-ar/r: dhar- (dhr-) , to hold • (i.e. dh-ar-, d. dhii-), s'Var- ' to 
sound ' (: cf. svan- ' id ' with alternating -n). 
-an: k;;an- 'to wound' (: sas- 'to cut': Gk. KT€LVW for 
*ksten.'Vo has compound suffix -ten- alternating with -ter- in 
KTl.pe; . v€Kpol) , svan- ' to sound ' 
above), khan- 'to dig' 
(i.e. kH -an.. : d. kha- without n-suffix, likewise akhu- 'mole' 
and akhara- masc. (hole' with alternating r). 
-«sis: tras-' to fear', Gk. TPI.W (: Lat. tremo), bhyas- ' to 
fear' (: bhi- ' id '), gras- ( to devour' (gr- ' to swallow'), dhvas­
t to scatter J (dhu- ' to shake '), sru~- ' to hear', O. S1. slysati, 
Tach. klyos-, etc. (: normally sru- 'id I. Gk. KAv-, etc.), 
nak~- 'to attain' (: as-, nas-
< id '), uks- 'to sprinkle' (: Gk. 
uypos 
< wet " etc.). nik~- 'to 
' (: O. S1. vu-nlzQ 'id '), 
bhak~- ' to partake of, eat' (: bha/- ( to divide, share '), mik$- ' to 
mix J 
(: misra- 'mixed '), tnrk$- ' to rub' (: "qj- ' wipe " Gk. 
op.OpyvVp.L, etc.). rak~- 'to protect " Gk. aAl.gw ' to ward off' 
(: Gk. aAaAK€[V ' id " AS. ealgian 'to protect'); vak~-' ta in­
crease', Gk. algw (: Lat. augeo' id ',etc.,) has-' to go forth J (: hii­
, id '). In contrast with most of the extensions the suffix splays 
a considerable part in the conjugation of the verb, and this no 
doubt accounts for the comparative frequency of such forms. 
-am: dram- ' to run " Gk. €Opup.ov (: dra-, Gk. OLOpaO"KW; 
dru- •id '), gam- ' to go " Goth. qiman, etc. (: ga- ' id " Gk. Eflii. ; 

I  
THE VERB  
291 
Gk. f3alllw, Lat. venia from g"'-en-), kffam- . to endure j, by meta­
thesis for *zgham-, d. Pasto zyam3l { id • (: sagh- ' to be equal 
to, endure '), bhram·- ' to revolve, wander 1 
bhur- ' to be in
(: 
uneasy motion '.). 
-i: jri-, jrayati, 'to move', jrayasand- (extending}: jar­
, to move '. If. zar- ' id '; k:)i-. k~dyati ' to rule', as opposed to 
k~atrd- ' sovereignty' and Gk. Kia0r-Ut ' possess'; 
srdyati 
, to lean " Gk. KALVW, etc. (:Lith. atsi!talti ' to lean against', 
Russ. klon ' inclination ',etc.). Alternative forms of root appear 
in the conjugation of svi-, sii- ' to s\vell " si ( 
, S(l-
' to 
bind'. and si-, sa- ' to sharpen'. It has not in these cases 
become completely incorporated, but it shows a tendency in the 
direction. 
-u: sru-
to hear': the unextended form of the root
f 
appears in the Skt. present, Sr-1Jo-ti; elsewhere the ufo, which 
appears as part of the suffixal complex in this form, is per­
manently attached to the root. Other examples are dru- ' to 
run' (: dram-. drii- above) and sru- ' to flow' (sar- ' to move, 
fiow 'f
• c . san't"
-
flver '). 
f  
f
-aH/H: gii-
to go' (: gam- above) I yii- ' to go' (: i-
id ') I 
pSii-
to devour " Gk. ~ww 'chew · (: bhas- ' to devour'), drii­
f 
, to run; (: dram-. etc.), mna- ' to note' (: man-
to think '),
C 
trii-
• to rescue' (: tr- 'to cross '), pyii- 'to swell (udder)' 
(: pi- ' id '). pi- (Piy-) , to abuse t (i.e. Pi-H-: pis- in pisuna­
, malicious, tale-bearing', Gk. 1Tt,1<pOS, etc.). A series of roots 
belonging to the ninth class contain this enlargement. The 
simple form of the root appears in the present tense, where 
the aH/H suffix is separated from if by the intervening n-suffix 
with which it is combined: e.g. PrtJO,ti ' fills I for pJ-n-t!H-ti as 
opposed to purtJd- •full) for pj-H-no-. Similar cases are ju-
I to 
be swift' (junati, jiUd-), pu- 'to purify I (punati, putd-), str­
f to strew' (stn~titiJ stir1Jti-) and so on. The enlargement tends 
to be introduced into the present tense. so that from mi- • to 
damage' for instance there appear both minati and minati. In 
some cases the root appears only with the enlargement in the 
I
present tense, e.g. bhri1J,ati, Av. brinanti 
cut' and kri1)dti 
• buys ,. though in the latter case the metre of the ljgveda in­
dicates a  pronunciation krl1Jati. 
-t: krt-
to cut' (: Gk. KtTtpW) , c-it- ' to perceive I (ci- lid ') ; 
f 
in combination with i, mrit-
f to fall in pieces' (mf- ' to crush ., 
mJd- • id '), svit- 'to be bright I 
(: suc- 'to gleam') subh­

292 
THE VERB 
, to be bright '), with u, dyut- ' to shine • (di- in dina- ' day', 
etc.). 
f
-th (i.e. t-H-): prath- 'to extend' (: Hitt. pallJis 
wide " 
Lat. planus, etc.), vyath- · to be unsteady' (vij- ' to tremble'. 
vip-
id '), snath- ' to pierce' (: simple root in siSna- ' organ of 
t 
generation ., cf. Gk. K€V7'tfW 'pierce' with gUI)a of root and 
simple t-suffix); similarly srath-
to loosen', grath- · to tie',
t 
ffJith- • to alternate • (mi- · to exchange '). 
-d: k~ad-
t to divide' (: sas- · to cut " cf. k~an- above), chid- . 
• to cut', Lat. scindo, etc. (: cf. cha-, chi- • id '), rud- • to weep " 
Lat. rudo, AS. reotan, e.tc. (: ru- ' to cry', O. S1. rjuv(!. etc.), 
mrd- • to rub, crush' (: mf- ' to crush 'L pitf- • to press '( <*pi¥J­
:pi~ 'to crush'); in combination with n, syand-
to flow'
f 
(: sic- ( to pour " Toch. sik-, etc.), krand:., kland-
to cry out "
t 
cf. Gk. Ktf;\aoo~ f cry, shout' (: Gk. Ka;\lw ' call " etc.). 
-dh: mrdh- · to neglect, be careless', cf. Gk. fLaA8aKOS soft',
I 
etc. (: Gk. ap.aAos I soft " etc.), edh-' to prosper', cf. Av. azdya­
· thriving, fatness', Gk. Eu8Aos • good '(: IE es- in Gk. €Us 
· good " Hitt. assu-, Skt. su-), sPrdh- ' to contend " Av·. spar,d-, 
cf. Goth. spaurds · race-course' (: spr- • to win " sPrh- • to be 
eager', Gk. u7TtfpX0p,aL, etc.); combined with u-suffix, k~udh­
{ to be hungry' (: Hitt. kast-, Toch A. kast, B. kest. with gU:Q.a 
of root and dental suffix whose exact nature cannot be speci­
fied). 
-p: dip-' to shine '(: cf. di-, dyut- above), mlup- • (sun) to 
set' (: mruc-, mluc- ' id '), rip-, lip- ' to smear' (: li- • to cleave 
to', Lat. lino, etc.). rup-. ' to break', Lat. rumpo (: ru- · to 
break', Lat. ruo; ruj- · to break '), vip- ' to tremble' (: cf. 
vyath-, vij- above), svap- 'to sleep', AS. swejan (: Gk . .:i18w 
, id' <seu-d) . 
-bh: subh- ' to be bright· (: suc-
to gleam', etc.. above)
I 
stubh- ' to praise' (: stu- · id '). 
-c: mlttc-
to set' (: mlup-), yac- ' to ask' (: Av. yas- with
t 
different enlargement). ruc- • to shine' {rusant ( bright '), sic­
t to pour ' (: syand- above). 
-j: tarj-
to threaten' {d. tras-, etc., above, Lat. terreo},
t 
yuj- · to join ' (; yu- ' id '), ruj- ' to break " vij- · to tremble' 
(rup, viP-). 
-h: sPrh- 'to be eager' (: sPrdh-, etc., above), druh- 'to 
injure.' (: dhru- lid '). 
The identity of these elements with the suffixes enumerated 

THE VERB 
293 
in dealing with the formation of nouns is evident, and it is in 
accordance with the fact that nominal and verbal stems are 
,formed fundamentally on the same principles. The enlargements 
of the verbal roots are simply incorporated suffixes, and do not 
require, as is sometimes considered, a separate morphological 
classification. All the IE consonants and semivowels can appear 
in this function, just as they can in the formation of nouns. In 
the latter case those so used with any frequency are, as has 
been seen, necessarily limited in number. In the case of the 
enlargements the distribution is more even, and with the ex­
ception of sand H, which had a considerable part to play in the 
IE conjugation, the common nominal suffixes do not appear 
correspondingly frequently as enlargements. The suffixes n 
and r, for instance, which are of very great importance in 
nominal stem formation, appear only rarely as enlargements. 
This would suggest that, on the whole, the enlargements of the 
verbal root reflect a comparatively early stage of IE stem­
formation, that is to say a period when the emphasis on a com­
paratively few suffixes out of the large number available had 
not developed to the extent with which we are familiar later. 
It is also clear that the growing clarity of the distinction between 
verb and noun, which evolved in the later pre-history of Indo­
European, tended to prevent the incorporation of such suffixes 
(e.g. rand n) which were felt as predominantly nominal. 
In their gUl).a grade such roots may appear in two forms, on 
the one hand that which appears in cet- < perceive " sec- < pour " 
rod- ' weep" etc., and on the other hand that which is seen in 
tras- ' fear', ~ad- ' divide', 5ro- ' hear', etc. That is to say, 
either the root or the enlargement may have the gUl).a, but, in 
accordance with the principles of IE apophony, it is not pos­
sible that both should have it. The difference between the two 
types of gUJ)a form is without any significance as far as the 
meaning of the roots is concerned, or their conjugation. It is 
only in connection with nominal stems that this kind of dis­
tinction is significant. There it provides the distinction between' 
neuter action nouns and adjectives or agent-nouns. Since these 
roots were originally stems, and in the early period, when noun 
and verb were less clearly distinguished, as much nominal as 
verbal, it is reasonable to assume that the distinction in form 
between the two types of extended root, was originaijy the 
same as that which is fundamental in the formation of nounS. 

294 
THE VERB 
That is to say a root form *tres- (Skt. trdsati) would originally 
be a nominal stem meaning , fearing, one who fears', and the 
alternative form *tirs- (Lat. terreo) would be a stem meaning 
, fear '. 
In these cases when the ultimate root has been reached by 
analysis it is seen never to consist of more than two consonants 
and the gUJ).a vowel (ter-, etc.), or if the root begins with a 
vowel J of this vowel and a following consonan t (ed-, es-). The 
number of roots which can be so reduced is sufficiently great to 
justify the extension of this principle to other roots of three 
consonants, even where shorter or variant forms are not pre­
served. There is 1ittle reason to doubt that the third consonant 
of all roots which have it is to be regarded as an incorporated 
suffix. 
§ 2. 
SYSTEM OF THE FINITE VERB 
Voice. The Sanskrit verb contains two voices, Active and 
Middle, which are distinguished by means of two sets of per­
sonal terminations throughout the conjugation. The difference 
in meaning between the two is expressed by the names given to 
them by the Sanskrit grammarians, parasmai padam ' a word 
for another' and atmane padam 'a word for oneself'. The 
middle is used when the subject is in some way or other specially 
implicated in the result of the action; when this is not so the 
active is used. For instance katam karoti ' he makes a mat' 
would be used of the workman ~mployed in the trade' of mat­
making who makE:s a mat for another, while the middle katam 
kurute would be used of one who makes a mat for his own use. 
The same distinction is seen between pacati ' (the cook) cooks I 
and pacate ' he cooks (a meal for himself) and between yajati
I 
, (the priest) sacrifices (on behalf of another) , and yajate ' (the 
householder) sacrifices (on behalf of himself) '. 
Again the 
special sense of the nliddle is seen in those cases where the direct 
object of the verb is a member of one's own body: nakhiini 
nikrntate ' he cuts his nails', dato dhavate ' he cleans his teeth'. 
In another class of roots there appears a distinction of a different 
nature, that between transitive (active) and intransitive 
(middle): drtflhati 'makes firm', dr1JZhate 'becomes firm', 
vardhati 'increases, makes bigger " vardhate ' increases (intr.), 
becomes bigger', vahati ' (chariot) carries (man) I, vahate ' (man) 
rides (in chariot)', From this the development is not far to the 

THE VERB 
295 
distinction between active and passive, and the use of the middle 
to express a passi vesense becomes common in the perfect and 
the future, which possess no other means of expressing the 
passive. One sense that the middle does not normally express is 
that of a direct reflexive, which is expressed by means of the 
accusative atmanam I self'. Not all verbs are capable of appear .. 
ing in both voices. Some are used only in the active, e.g. ad­
I to eat " as- ' to be', k;;udh-
to be hungry', bhuj- ' to bend " 
I 
sarp- • to creep', etc.; others only in the middle, e.g., as-
to
t 
sit'. k~am-
I to endure', labh- 'to receive', vas-
I to wear 
(clothes) " sac- t to accompany'. Occasionally a different voice 
appears in different tenses of the same verb, the most usual 
alternation being that of active perfect and middle present: 
vartate: vavarta. 
The distinction between active and middle is inherited from 
Indo-European (d. the equation sacate, Gk. 
E7PE'TUt, Lat. 
sequitur), and outside Indo-Iranian the language which shows 
the greatest similarity to Sanskrit in form and usage is Greek. 
In later Indo-Aryan the distinction dies out, and this is re­
flected in the Epic and other less correct forms of Sanskrit. 
Tense. The Sanskrit verb has four tense stems: Present, 
Future, Aorist and Perfect. The present stem forms the basis 
of a preterite, the so-called Imperfect, in addition to the present 
tense. In the same way there.is formed a preterite of the future 
which functions as a conditional. In the Vedic language a form 
of preterite is formed on the basis of the perfect stem. These 
pluperfect forms are rare even in the earlier language, and dis­
appear later. The aorist stem forms only a preterite. 
The clearest division to be found in this somewhat compli­
cated system is that between the perfect on the one hand and 
the other three systems on the other. The perfect is distin­
guished from the other tenses not only in stem-formation, but 
also in the fact that it possesses a special series of personal 
endings. Between the perfect and the rest of the conjugation 
we have clearly the most ancient and fundamental division in 
the Indo-European system. On the other hand when we 
examine the future and the aorist in their relation to the present 
system it is clear that they are in origin only special modifi<;.a­
tions of the same type of formation. The future for instance is 
only one subdivision of the class of present stems in ya in which 
are included the verbs of the foprth class and the various types 

THE VERB 
of denominative. The close relation between the aorist and 
present systems is seen by the fact that certain types of aorist 
stem are identical in form with certain types of present stem. 
This is so with the root aorist (dkar, etc.) which is formed like 
the imperfect of the root class (dhan, etc.), and the a-aorist 
(druhat, etc.) which resembles the imperfect of the sixth class 
(atudat, etc.). The aorist or imperfect character of these two 
types of formation is determined not by the form itself but by 
the existence or non-existence of a present from the same stem. 
In other cases there is evidence for the one time existence of 
presents from those forms of stem which in Sanskrit are used 
exclusively as aorists. Thus corresponding to the reduplicated 
aorist djijanat, Avestanhas a present zizananti 'they give 
birth '. Even in the case of the s-aorist, which is most clearly 
marked off from the present system, the existence of presents 
like Av. naismi ( I insult' demonstrates that such formations 
were not always exclusively aoristic. 
The r.elation of the present-imperfect on the one hand, and 
the aorist on the other, can be discussed only in view of the 
meaning of the three tenses. In Sanskrit this is not at a1l com­
plicated. The present indicates simply present time, and the 
imperfect past time in contradistinction to this, no more and no 
less: hanti' he slays " ahan ' he slew', etc. There exists no 
trace of an ' imperfect' sense in the Sanskrit tense of that name, 
and such a sense, if it is needed, is expressed by the present 
tense with the addition of the particle sma. The aorist in contra­
distinction to the imperfect expresses a special kind of past 
time, inasmuch as it is used for describing an action which has 
just recently been completed: Wi asau siiryo agat ' yonder sun 
has risen " etc. 
This clear distinction of meaning between the aorist and 
present stem is found only in the case of the indicative, in these 
two kinds of preterite. There exist also various moods-in­
junctive, subjunctive, imperative and optative-and also par­
ticiples, active and middle, which may-be formed alternatively 
from the present or aorist stems. But in all these latter types 
of formation no serious distinction of meaning can be found in 
the Vedic language between those formed from the present and 
those fOmIed from the aorist steml e.g. karat subj. ( he will do ' 
does not differ in any demonstrable sense TrOlr kr1)tivat 
id ' 
t 
from the present stem. 

THE VERB 
297 
The absence of distinction· of meaning in all these types of 
formation between the present and aorist stem, in contradis­
tinction to the clear distinction between the two types of pre­
terite, points to the conclusion that it was specifically in these 
preterite forms that the aorist developed as a special gram­
matical category. It appears that originally Indo-European 
distinguished in the indicative simply between present and pre­
terite, the forms of which could be made from a wide variety of 
stems. This state of affairs is continued in Hittite, which shows 
no sign of ever having had a tenSJ corresponding to the aorist 
of other languages. The next stage of development is the evolu· 
tion of a double set of preterite forms. one with a correspond­
ing present (imperfect) and one detached from the present tense 
(aorist) and having a special sense. This stage is represen ted in 
Indo-Iranian. In Greek the distinction between the present 
and aorist systems is carried further, and applied to moods, 
participles and infinitives derived from the two stems. The two 
stems in all formations express different modes of action, 
namely punctual (aorist) and durative (present). Consequently 
the preterite of the present acquires an ' imperfect' sense which 
is absent from it in Hittitf; and in the corresponding formations 
in Sanskrit. 
The perfect is independent in . formation from the presentj 
aorist system, and is also characteriSed by the possession of a 
special series of personal endings. It appears to be one of the 
more ancient IE verbal formations, and to bear some relation to 
the conjugation of the Hittite verbs in -hi. In that language 
there are two conjugations- of verbs, one making the 1st person 
singular in -mi (like Skt. dsmi, etc.) and the other in -lJi. The 
relation between the two is not at all that which exists between 
the present and perfect in other IE la,nguages, but the endings 
of the -lJi conjugation are comparable in some ways to the per­
fect endings of Sanskrit, Greek, etc., so that while the detailed 
relation of the two formations remains obscure, there is general 
agreement that some definite connection exists between them. 
The fundamental meaning of the perfect, as it emerges from 
a compa~son of Sanskrit and Greek, and is confirmed by the  
. evidence of the other IE languages, is that of state as opposed  
to process which is expressed by the present: e.g. bibhaya I he  
is afraid ' as opposed to bhayate he becomes afraid '; cikel,a 
I 
f he is aware of, knows J: cetati-'he becomes aware of, notices' ; 

THE VERB 
tasthau 'stands J (permanently): ti#hati' takes his stand', 
etc. Closely related is the meaning of continuous action seen in 
such examples as: nd sriimyanti na vi muiicanti ete vdyo nd 
paptult ' They do not become weary or stop, they fly (continu­
ally) like birds'. The perfect is thus in origin a special kind of 
present tense, not a preterite form, and in such cases it is 
normally to be translated by the English present. Its develop­
ment to a preterite takes place in two stages, both of which are 
represented in the Vedic language. The first stage is the de­
velopment of a sense which is rendered in translation by the 
English perfect. Since a state is normally the result of a pre­
ceding process, it was natural that the perfect should be used 
to express the fact that such an action had already taken 
As examples of this use we may quote: yat sim itgas cak!mit tdt 
S14 mr!atu whatever sin we have committed, let him fA,..'O""{;'P
4 
that " and ydthii. jaghdntha dhr~ata pura cid eva jahi satrum 
asm4kam indra f as thou hast boldly slain (enemies) in the past, 
so slay our foe now, 0 Indra'. The difference in 
be­
tween this use .of the perfect and the aorist remains clear, be­
cause the aorist is confined to those actions which have taken 
place in the immediate past, while the perfect indicates comple­
tion of the action regardless of the precise time. The final 
takes place when the preterital sense acquired by the perfect in 
contexts like these becomes the predominant sense, with the 
result that the perfect becomes a tense of narrative with a 
meaning that does not differ materially from that of the imper­
fect. The last usage has already become quite common in the 
l.J.gveda: dhan dhim dnv apds tatarda, (Indra) slew the dragon,
I 
he penetrated to the waters'. The same usage has developed 
widely in other sections of Indo-European, notably in Italic, 
Celtic and Germanic. 
The pluperfect, the augmented preterite of the perfect, is rare 
even in the l.J.gveda. and it quickly dies out. It appears to have 
no specific meaning proper to itself, being used as a rule in 
sense of the imperfect (narrative), occasionally in ihat of the 
aorist. 
Mood. Five moods are enumerated in Sanskrit grammar; the 
Injunctive, the Imperative, the Subjunctive, the Optative and 
the Precative. In the older language modal forms may be made 
from all three types of stem, present. aorist and perfect, without 
any apparent difference of meaning. In the classical language 

THE VERB 
299 
injunctive forms are confined to the aorist stern, imperative and 
optative forms to the present stem, while the subjunctive, 
except for such forms of it as are incorporated in the impera­
tive, dies out. The precative is in the later language connected 
with the root aorist in the active and with the i~-aorist in the 
middle. Earlier, while confined to the aorist it appears assoc­
iated with a greater nunlber of forms. 
Inju.nctive. The so-called injunctive is not strictly speaking 
a separate morphological category at all. In form the injunc­
tives are unaugmented aorists and imperfects: dhat, VTtJak, 
etc., but forms of this nature may also be used as simple pre­
terites of the indicative, in the same way as the augmented 
forms. Comparative study of the languages makes it clear that 
the augment was originally an optional prefix in the formation 
of these preterites, and that the unaugmented forms are the 
most ancient. The fact that these forms can also be used in an 
, injunctive' sense, that is to say as futures, imperatives and in 
the expression of a wish, takes us back to an extraordinarily 
primitive state of the language when owing to the undeveloped 
nature of the verbal system one form had perforce to serve in 
many meanings. 
The three main meanings of the injunctive may be briefly 
illustrated by a few examples: (r) as future: k6 no mahya 
dditaye punar dat who will give us back to the great Aditi I,
t 
indrasya nu vi"1:ya~ti pra vocam ' I will now proclaim the manly 
deeds of Indra '; (2) as imperative: gdrbham adhii!z. deposit
I 
the embryo " pari tve~dsya durmatir maht gat (let the great 
malevolence of the impetuous one a void us '. \Vhere special. 
forms of the imperative do not exist, in the 2nd person plural, 
etc., the injunctive remains the only way of expressing the 
imperative, and such forms are incorporated into the impera­
tive system. The injunctive is used exclusively with ma to 
express prohibitions: mil ga!z. ( do not go " etc. This construc­
tion remains in the classical language where it is the only type 
of injunctive (except for those forms incorporated in the im­
perative) which continues to exist; (3) in the expression of a 
wish: agnfm hinvanr;u no dhiyas tina je$ma dhdnam-dhanam 
t let our prayers urge Agni; may we continually win wealth 
through him J. 
Imperative. The imperative possesses distinct forms only in 
a certain number of persons and. numbers, namely in the 2. 3. 

300 
THE VERB 
singular and 3. plural. Of these the forms of the 3. sing. and 
plur. have originally evolved from injunctive forms by the 
addition to such forms of a particle -u: vahatu from vahat +u. 
The forms of the 2. 3. dual and 2. plural are unaltered injunc­
tive forms. The forms of the first person in the later language 
are subjunctives which have been incorporated in the impera­
tive system; they do not belong to this system in the earlier 
language. The imperative expresses commands just as the in­
junctive may do, but it is not used in the other senses which the 
injunctive has. It is also used more commonly in this sense 
than the injunctive. 
Subjunctive. Morphologically the subjunctive arises by the 
evolution of a particular kind of injunctive. It is natural there­
fore that its sphere of meaning should correspond in general to 
that of the injunctive. Like the injunctive the subjunctive may 
be used (1) simply in a future sense: pra nu vaca s'ltte~'u viim 
- I will now praise you two at the libations " uvcisa ,,.~a ucchiic 
ca nu ' Dawn ha.sshone forth (in the past) and she will shine 
forth now'; (2) equivalent to an imperative; J viim vahantu. 
... dS'lJti(t, pibiitho asmt mddhiini · let your horses bring you here 
and drink ye draughts of mead with us '; (3) in the expression 
of a wish; pari 1JO he1a tJaTU1Jasya vrjya(t, urutJt na {ndTa",. 
kr1Javad u lokdm 'may the wrath of Varuna avoid us, may 
Indra procure for us a wide space '. While the sphere of the 
subjunctive coincides with that of the injunctive, there is a 
difference of emphasis inasmuch as the future meaning is much 
more prominent in the case of the subjunctive. The subjunc­
tive is, in fact, the normal means of expressing the future in the 
Vedic language. There are also certain important syntactical 
differences between the use of the two moods. The injunctive 
for instance is alone used to express prohibitions in connection 
with md. Another important difference is that the injunctive is. 
rarely used in subordinate clauses (relative, conditional, etc.). 
On the other hand the use of the SUbjunctive is very widely 
developed in this connection, and even more distinctively so in 
the related languages, whence the name of the nlOod. 
Optative. The optative differs from the moods so far de­
scribed in that it is formed on the basis of a special stem formed 
by the suffix yali. Its original meaning appears to have been 
the expression of a wish (from which its name is derived) and 
this meaning is well preserved in Sanskrit: vaydm syama patayo 

THE VERB 
30 ! 
rayituim < may we be lords of riches'. From this there arises a 
potential meaning (the mood is sometimes so called) which from 
the testimony of the various languages was already well estab­
lished in the Indo-European period: ydd agne syd:m·ahdm tvdm, 
tvdm va gha syii ahdm. syu~ Ie satyii iha§(~alz" , if, Agni, I were 
you or you were me, then your prayers would come true'. A 
usage widely developed in Sanskrit is that of the prescriptive 
optative, which appears largely in law books and similar texts: 
siif!lvatsarikam aptais ca rii~triid aharayed balim, , he should have 
the annual tax collected fronl the kingdom by suitable officials' . 
Precative. The precative is formed on the basis of the 
optative stem by the addition of s to the optative suffix, pro­
ducing the combination yiis/i~. Its use is in all cases confined to 
the expression of a wish: bJulgo me. agne sakhye nd mrdhya/J 
, may my good fortune, 0 Agni, not relax in (thy) friendship '; yo 
no dve~# ddharalz, sds padi#a ' may he who hates us fall down'. 
§3. THE VERBAL STEM 
The foregoing analysis of the root shows how from the 
earliest period the verb could be built optionally on the root 
itself, or the root already provided with suffixes. These suffixes 
are in all cases identifiable with the corresponding suffixes 
which appear in the formation of nouns. In these formations 
of the oldest type the suffixes are completely incorporated and 
new, fuller roots are created. Besides these suffixes there exists 
a series used only to form the present stenl but excluded from 
the other verbal fonnations. These are likewise identifiable 
with corresponding nominal suffixes, e.g. dhr~1Jo/u of the fifth 
class. from dhr~- ' to be bold " with the adjectival stem dhr$1)u­
• bold '. The general structure of nominal and verbal stems 
runs closely parallel. Both may be based either on the simple 
root or on the root provided with suffix. The suffixes may be 
simple or compound and the compound suffixes arise always by 
the· addition of one suffix to another. The formations are 
divided into non-thematic and thematic classes, the latter in 
both cases progressively increasing in importance. Verbal 
stems may be accented on the root or the suffix, e.g. in the case 
of non-thematic stems vdmiti. je$ma as opposed to S!1Joti, 
Pr1J4ti, and in the case of thematic stems, bhdvati as opposed to 
tuddti. The fact that such accentual difference corresponds to 
no difference of meaning in the verbal system. but clearly does 

302 
THE VERB 
so in the nominal system, may be held to indicate that these 
sterns are primarily nominal in origin. 
In the classical language the present stem of a verb is nor­
mally made according to one only of the ten different types. 
In the Vedic language greater latitude is observable. While in 
general the distribution of the roots arrlOng the ten present < 
classes corresponds to that of the later language, a large number 
of roots is found which form their present tense according to 
two, three, or even more different types. Such cases are illus­
trated by kr~- ' to plough , I kar~ati, VI kr~dti; jf- ' to grow 
old " I jdrati, IV jtryati; dii-' to divide " II dati, IV dydti; 
dhu- 'to shake', V dhunoti, VI dhuvdti; Pf- 'to fill', III 
pipdrti, IX Pnl,dti; bhi-' to fear 1 J I bhdyate, III bibheti; rdh­
, to prosper', IV fdhyali, V rdhnoti, VII subj. r1}ddhat; tf-' to 
cross, overcome', I tarati, III ptc. titrat-, VI tirati, VIII tarute. 
To a large extent this variation of stem is not associated with 
any difference of meaning, but sometimes the difference be­
tween transitive and intransitive is connected with the use of 
alternative stems; jdvate' hastens, is quick t; jundti ' speeds, 
urges on '. tdpati ' heats', tdpyati ' becomes hot ',pdcati ' cooks, 
ripens (trans.) ',pacyate ' becomes ripe J. In particular an intran­
sitive sense tends to be associated with stems of the fourth class. 
.. 
It is clear from the comparative study of the IE languages 
that this variability of stem formation was even greater in the 
prehistoric period. 
A vestan shows in some respects even 
greater variety than the language of the Veda. Furthermore 
the discrepancies in stem formation between the various IE 
languages (Skt. rit;tdkti: Gk. A£l7TW, etc., etc.) shows that in the 
earlier IE period the greatest freedom prevailed in the formation 
of present stems. In all this variety of stem formations no 
inherent difference of meaning was attached to the various 
types, just as in Sanskrit the ten present classes are equivalent 
in functiori. At the same time there arose early in Indo-Euro­
pean a tendency for certain of these formations to acquire a 
special meaning and function. The suffix -sco- for instance 
acquired an inchoative meaning which is represented in a variety 
of languages. In Hittite formations in -nu- (corresponding to 
the Skt. fifth class) acquired a special function as causatives, a 
development which is not shown by the other languages. In 
Sanskrit those present formations which acquired a special 
meaning became the foundation of what is called secondary 

303 
THE VERB 
conjugation, namely causatives with stems in -dya, desidera­
tives with reduplicated stems in sa, intensives with strong re­
duplication and radical stem or stem in ya. These were origin­
ally conjugated in the present system only and it is a special 
. 
:..  
development of Sanskrit which allows them to be inflected in 
other parts of the verbal system. \\Tith these must be classified 
the passive which is a special development of the fourth class 
and which arises from a tendency of stems of that class to 
specialise as intransitives. 
§4. 
ACCENT AND ApOPHONY OF VERBAL STEMS 
, 
By a rule peculiar to Sanskrit, the like of which is not trace­
able in other IE languages, the verb is unaccented in an inde· 
pendent clause, 
at the beginning of such a clause and 
under certain special conditions; it retains its accent in de­
pendent clauses. \\Then accented the verbal stem has an un­
changeable accent in the case of thematic formations, which in 
this respect agree entirely with the nomin;;tl thematic formations. 
In the non-thematic formations the accent varies between stem 
and personal ending, and this variation corresponds to a varia- . 
..  tion between the gUI)a (occasionally vrddhi) grade of the stem 
and the zero grade. The general rule is that in the indicative 
the stem has the accent and the gUI).a grade in the three persons 
of the singular active. and that in the dual and plural of the 
active and in the whole of the middle the accent is on the termin­
ation and the stem appears in its weak form: 
dve~# f hates', 
3 pl. dvi~dnti. 3 sg. mid. dvi;;tt, yundkti t joins " 3 pI. yunjdnti, 
3 sg. mid. yunktt. 'Exceptions to the rule (e.g. in the s-aorist) 
are comparatively rare. This old IE system appears also in 
other languages (e.g. Gk. elp.f. tp.ev), though nowhere so clearly 
and consistently as in Sanskrit. 
§s. AUGMENT AND REDUPLICATION 
In addition to a large variety of suffixation Indo-European 
made use of two types of prefixation in the formation of tense 
stems, Augment and Reduplication. 
The augment (IE e-, Skt. a-) is prefixed to the various pre­
terites (imperfect, aorist, pluperfect, conditional) to indicate 
past time. It is found in Indo-Iranian (Skt. dhharat) , Greek 
(;cpEpe), Armenian (ehey), and Phrygian (eou4£S' ( constructed 'L 
but it is absent in the rest oLIndo-European. It is thus an 

THE VERB 
important feature in connection with the dialectal divisions of 
Indo-European, since it is clearly of late origin, and has estab­
lished itself over only part of the IE linguistic area, among 
dialects which for other reasons also may be held to have been 
contiguous. Even where it established itself it existed origin­
ally only as an optional formation, augmented and unaugmented 
forms being optionally used. The unaugmented forms were of 
course alone used in an injunctive sense, but they could be also 
used as preterites just like the augmented forms. The co­
existence of augmented and unaugmented preterites is a char­
acteristic both of the earliest Greek and the earliest Sanskrit. It 
is only in the later stage of both languages that the augment 
ceases to be optional and becomes obligatory. In Iranian the 
augment is regularly used in Old Persian, but only rarely in 
Avestan, where the unaugmented type of preterite has mainly 
prevailed. In the early stage of Middle Indo-Aryan, which still 
preserves an old preterite made up of imperfect and aorist 
fOnTIs, the old Vedic freedom of usage is maintained, but the 
unaugmented instead of the augmented forms become the most 
common. 
The augment seems in origin to have been a separate word, 
namely a particle emeaning < there, then ' which came to be 
compounded with the verb. It invariably bears the acute 
accent whenever the verb is accented. When the verb is com­
pounded with a preposition. it always appears between the 
preposition and the verb:· samdbharat, etc., and likewise in 
Greek. An irregular sandhi appears when it is combined With a 
root beginning with i, u or r (a£Cchat' wished " aurttot' covered' 
ardhnot ' thrived' from icchdti, urttoti, rdhnoti, with vrddhi in­
stead of the expected gUl).a, and this indicates that up to a late 
period it was pronounced as a separate syllable with hiatus 
(aicchat, etc.). On the other hand its coalescence with initial a 
(IE e, a, 0) appears to be ancient, judging by parallels between 
Greek and Sanskrit (Skt. .tis 'was I I Gk. Dor. "'~ I Skt. iijat 
< drove I, Gk. Dor. ay€). Before roots beginning with v, y, n 
'and r the augment may appear as long ain the Vedic language 
(iivrttak, ayunak, etc.). The reason for this is not very clear but 
a parallel phenomenon in the case of initial v- is found in Greek 
(Hom. ~-[FJE:107], Att. Tjon). 
Reduplication consists nonnally of the repetition of the 
initial consonant of a root with a vowel which ,may or may not 

I 
~ 
as follows : 
(1) Reduplication with the vowel a (IE e) : dadhliti t places" 
tatana ( stretched " d. Gk. yEyOJ!~, Lat. pepigi, etc. 
(2) Reduplication with long a: jagarti, jaglira ( is awake ',. 
d. Gk. 81'J8€xa:ra.t. ' they welcome " etc. 
(3) Reduplication with the vowel i when that is not the vowel 
of the root: ti§1hati t stands', didrk~ate ' desires to see I, d. Gk. 
THE VERB 
305 
be the same as the radical vowel. It appears in one class of 
present (the third class), in the reduplicated aorist, in the per­
fect, in the desiderative and in the intensive. The main varieti"es 
which will be detailed below under the separate formations are 
? 
'{a'Tl}fLt., ylyvOfLQ.t, Lat. sisto, etc. 
(4) Similar reduplication with long i: djijanat,' gave birth 
to '. d. Av. zizan:Jnti. 
(5) Reduplication with weak form of vowel of roots in 
diphthongs: 
juh6ti 
sacrifices ., bibhtda 'split', d. Lat.
4 
pupugi, scicidi. 
(6) Intensive reduplication with gut;l<:L vowel of such roots 
and similar reduplication with repeated final r, n, etc.: neniktt 
, washes " dtdi:jfe points out " 'l'drvrtati ' they turn (continu­
I 
ally) J; d. Av. nafniiaiti, daedoist, etc. This involves the com­
plete repetition of' roots containing only two consonants: 
n6nava ' roars mightily J, janghanti ' smites violently'. 
(7) Such intensive reduplication with i suffixed to the re­
duplicating syllable: bhdribharti 3 sg., bhdr'ibhrati 3 pI. This 
type alternates with one in which the t is suffixed after the 
root : j6haviti calls loudly " etc.
I 
(8) Initial a may be reduplicated producing a (asa ' was ') or 
some more complicated process may appear. 
In the case of roots beginning with two consonants the first 
is reduplicated with the exception of the combination s +- occlu­
sive: susrtlva (heard', d. Av. susruma, Gk. KI.KAuT*r, siSriye 
• rested on " d. G k. I(I.KA,'Ta.r., sasmd:ra • remembered " sasnau 
· bathed' I etc. When the root begins with the group s +occlu­
sive, the occlusive is repeated in Sanskrit: tl$!hati' stands', 
caskdnda ' sprung' 1 pasparsa ' touched '. On the other hand, 
s (> h) ,appears in the reduplicating syllable in such cases both 
in Iranian and Greek. The same type of reduplication appears 
also in Lat. sisto and in Celtic (Ir. -sescaind from skinnim ( jump 
out " cf. Skt. skand-). Yet other varieties of reduplication in 
the case of these groups appear (a) in Lat. perfects of the type 

306 
THE VERB 
steli, scicidi, spopondi, which preserve the consonant group in 
the reduplicative syllable but simplify it in the root, (b) in 
Gothic where the full group appears in both root and reduplica­
tion: skaiskaij; (skaidan ' cut '). In view of this variety it is 
unlikely that there was any universally consistent usage in the 
IE period. 
Certain sound changes have affected the reduplicated forms 
in Sanskrit. By the rule which prevents a suc~ession of two 
aspirated consonants, a non-aspirate is substituted in reduplica­
tion for an aspirate: dddhati, etc. In the case of h <IE gh the 
non-aspirated form appears as j : jahara. Since a in a redupli­
cating syllable was originally e, the old velar series is palatalised 
before it: cakiira. jagiima, jaghana. 
The same treatment 
appears regularly when the vowel of the reduplicating syllable 
is i (cikir~ati) and it is applied analogically in the case of u : 
cukopa. 
§ 6. 
PERSON AL TERMIN ATIONS 
Sanskrit, like the parent Indo-Europeah, has two sets of 
personal terminations, one for the active and one for the middle 
voice. These two sets embrace further subdivisions which 
appear in different parts of the verbal conjugation. In the 
present-aorist system the so-called primary endings appear in 
the present and future, while a different series, the secondary 
endings, appear in the imperfect, aorist and optative. The sub­
junctive has optionally either. The perfect endings, where they 
differ from the above, do so more fundamentally than the 
primary and secondary endings differ from each other. The 
imperative has special endings only in the 2 singular and in the 
3 singular and plural. The subjunctive has a separate termina­
tion in the I singUlar, which is old, and some special middle 
endings which are an Indian innovation. The primary, secondary 
and perfect endings are listed in the following table: 1 
A. Primary  
Active 
Middle  
s. 
d. 
pI. 
s. 
d. 
pI. 
I 
m'J 
vas 
mas 
e 
vahe 
mahe 
2 
S~ 
thas 
tha 
se 
lithe 
dhve 
ti 
tas 
anti 
te 
lite 
ante, ate 
3 
1 For table of imperative and subjunctive endings see under the respective 
sections. 

307 
THE VERB 
B. Secondary 
,  
I 
am,m 
va 
ma 
i, a 
vahi 
mahi 
2 
s 
tam 
fa 
thas 
atham 
dhvam 
3 
tam 
an, ur 
ta 
{Ueim 
anta, ata, 
ran 
C. Perfect 
I 
a 
va 
ma 
e 
vake 
ntahe 
2 
tha 
athus 
a 
se 
athe 
dhve 
3 
a 
atus 
ur 
e 
ate 
re 
A ctive Terminations: 
I Sing. P. Skt. dsmi ( I am J, Gk. eLj.Lt, Lith. esmi, Hitt. 
esmi; emi I go " Gk. E£j.Lt, ddddmi' I give'; Gk. stSWj.Lt, etc.
t 
This ending was originally confined to the non-thematic 
classes, and a different ending -0 (-OR) appeared in the thematic 
classes: Gk. rfJ€PW, Lat. fero, Goth. baira. Some such forms are 
preserved in Iranian (Av. spasyd: Lat. specio), but usually in 
Iranian, and always in Sanskrit, mi fron1 the non-thematic 
verbs is added to the older form: Skt. bharcimi, Av. banlmi. 
S. dbharam, Gk. lrP€pov, dgam, Gk. l{31}v, syiim ' sirn J, O. Lat. 
siem. 
Non-thematic verbs have the fuller ending -am, asam ' I 
was " O. Pers. aham, as opposed to Gk. a <'Ill in Hom. 'ia. 
A 
similar difference between the two languages was observed in 
the case of the acc. sg. of non-thematic stems. Pf. Skt. vida, 
Gk. olSa; daddrsa, Gk. OEOOpKU. 
Sbj. The Vedic language 
has either ii or ani, brava ' I will speak', bhara1;li • I will bear'. 
In the classical language, where these formations have entered 
the imperative system, only the fuller ending ani is used. The 
ending -ii is identical with the -0 which in other languages 
appears in the present indicative of thematic verbs as well as in 
the subjunctive: Gk. ayw, <pEpw, etc. The extension -ni appears 
only in Indo-Iranian and is of uncertain origin. 
2 Sing. 
P. 
t you go', Lith. eisi, bharasi ' you bear' I 
Av. barahi; ct. O. Russ. velisi ( you command " Hitt. iyasi 
, you do '. 
S. asthas, Gk. €a-rTJ~, dbharas, Gk. €<P€P€~' bhdres 
Gk. cP€POts, Goth. bairais., Pi. vittha, G!.c olaBa, Goth. waist, 
dadatha, Av. dadiiBa. Impv. ihi ' go ' «*idhi), Av. idi, Gk. 'tB,; 
jahi ( slay' (han-) , Av. Jaioi, viddhi 'know', Gk. 'taB,. 
In 
thematic verbs the sirnple stem serves as the second person 
singular of the imperative: bhara, Gk. ¢Ep£, Goth. bai1': Lat. 
lege, etc. 

308 
THE VERB 
3 Sing. 
P. asti, Lith. esti, Gk. Ean, Hitt. eSzi,. 
hdnti 'slays), A v. jainti, Bitt. kuenzi; bhL:'Yati, A v. baraiti, 
O. S1. berell (beside bereNt). 
S. dbharat, syiit, d. Av. baral, Gk. 
(with loss of -t) €CP£pE, CPEpOL, Lat. erat, sf! (0. Lat. sied) , etc. 
Pf. daddrsa, Gk. OEOOpK£. 
Impv. ast1f, Hitt. dtu, dtu 
let him 
i 
go', bharaiu) O. Pers. baratu. 
An alternative ending -tod 
appears in Greek and Latin (EaTw, esto(d)). Forms 
ing to this are found in Sanskrit, e.g. vittat ( Gk. iaTw) but 
they are used for both the second and third persons, and for all 
numbers. 
A different kind of inflection in the primary endings of the 
2, 3 
appears in Gk. thematic verbs: 2 uynS' , 3 aya. A 
"",ith Lith. vedi take: you tqke ' shows that the s
i 
is a later addition, and that the two persons. were 
identical. They contain no personal terminations, 
only an 
i indicating present time. 
Such an i, un­
associated with a personal ending, is found in Hittite verbs of 
the 
class: aki' dies', dii£ ' takes'. Sanskrit has inpovated 
here by 
the endings of the mi-conjugation, just as in 
the I 
but in this case the innovation is more widely shared 
by other IE languages, Lat. agis, agit, Goth. bairis, bairijJ, etc. 
I Plur. P. (a) imds' we go " bhdriimas ( we bear', d. Gk. Dar. 
CP€POp..€f;, Lat. imus, ferimus, O. S1. dantu, nesemu, etc., 
(b) smdsi ' we are " O. Pers. an~ahi, bhdriimasi, A v. bariirnahi, 
d. O. Ir. ammi < sumus', bermai, bermi ' we bear '. 
S. and 
Pf. dbhariima, syil1na, Av. hyiimii, vidrnd ' we know', Goth. 
witurn. Forms with long vowel which appear in the Vedic lan­
guage, particularly in the perfect (vidma, etc.) appear to be 
ancient, and not merely metrical lengthening, on account of the 
occurrence of similar formations in other languages: Lith. 
sukame-s (reflexive), Goth. bciiraima opt. (out of Orne or °rno). 
The variations between IE-mes and -mas were due to dif­
ferences of accentuation, like the similar phenomenon in the 
genitive singular: originally *imes but *bhtromos. The alterna­
tive ending -?nasi appears in the Vedic language beside mas 1 but 
it is disused in the classical language. In Iranian the correspond­
ing mahi has come to be exclusively used as the primary ending. 
In Greek there is an alternative termination -p..EV, used both as 
a primary and secondary ending. It was customary to regard 
the final-v of this form as ephelcystic, and to equate the Gk. 
ending with the Skt. secondary ending, but it is now clear from 

THE VERB 
30 9 
Hittite that this is not so. 
The Hittite terminations are: 
P. weni, meni (with i appended as in Ski. masi). S. wen, men. 
The variety with w- is related to the dual endings of other IE 
languages; the forms with m- appear after 14 (arnummeni ' we 
bring • 
i etc.) and the secondary form -men corresponds exactly 
with the Greek ending. In Indo-Iranian this fonn of ending is 
traceable in Khotanese: hamamane ( we may become' (sub). 
mid.). 
2 Plur. P. (a) bhdratha, d. Av. xsayaf)ii, (b) vddathana ( you 
speak '. S. (a) dbharata (impf.), bhdrata (impv.), d. Gk. cp€perE, 
Lat. Jerte (impv.), Goth. bairijJ, O. S1. berete, (b) djahdtana' you 
abandoned', hantana ' slay' (impv.), d. Hitt. kuenten pret. and 
impv. (kuen- 'slay'). 
Pf. cakrd (kr- 'to do i), vidd. 
The 
primary endings with aspiration (-tha <tHe) do not appear out­
side Indo-Iranian. 
The other languages have nQrmally one 
form which serves as both primary and secondary ending, and 
this corresponds to the secondary ending of Indo-Iranian. 
Hittite has evolved a distinction between primary and secondary 
ending here in quite a different way (P. teni i S. ten). The longer 
fonns were analysed as tha-na and ta-na, the na being regarded 
as an appended particle, and the whole form as a Sanskrit 
innovation. In view of Hitt. -ten we should analyse rather 
-tan-a of which tan corresponds exactly to Hitt. -ten, and the 
. a is simply a thematic enlargement such as is found elsewhere in 
the formation of words. The perfect fonn is properly without 
termination and nothing like it is found outside Indo-Iranian. 
3 Plur. P. bhdranti, Gk. Dor. CPEpOVTf., sdnti, Gk. Dor. EVTl, 
Lat. sunt, Goth. sind, O. S1. sQti (beside SQtu) , Hitt. asanzi; 
ghndnti ' they slay', Hitt. kunanzi; dddati' they give', cf. Gk. 
(Delph.) Ka8EuT5.KaTt, (Hom.) AEAoYXau,. S. (a) dbharan, Av. 
bar;;}n, Gk. Erpf:POV; (b) ddadur (jmpf.), ddkur (aor.), syur (opt.). 
Cf. Av. iidar'J ' they made', kyar;;} 
they might be " Jamyiir'Js
I 
, they might come', Hitt. wekir ' they wished'. ekuer 
they
t 
drank', Pf. asur t they were', ct. Av. iitlhara, cikitur' they are 
aware of " d. Av. lik6itar'Js. 
Irnpv. bhdrantu, d. Ritt. iyandu. 
The full form of the ending varied between -anti and -enti 
according to accentuation, like the variation between -mes and 
-mas in the I plur. Also due to accent is the weakening to 
-t}ti> ati which appears in Sanskrit and Greek. A corresponding 
weak form of the secondary ending, -at <t}t, appears in Iranian: 
Av. dadaJ. Jig'Jr'JZal. 
In such cases Sanskrit always has the 
I 

310 
THE VERB 
alternative ending -ur. The secondary ending was originally 
-ant which has been reduced to -an by the' normal cause of 
phonetic development in Sanskrit as in most of the related 
languages (Gk. -ov <~OVT, etc.). 
The alternative secondary ending -ur appears in the imperfect 
of the reduplicating class (ddadur) J in the imperfect of root 
stems ending in -Ii (dyur: ytiti · goes ') J in non-thematic aorist 
stems and in the perfect. Outside Indo-Iranian r-endings of the 
3 pluL appear in Hittite, Latin (dixere) and Tocharian (katkar 
, they arose', mrasar < they forgot'). In Iranian this r may be 
enlarged by an additional element s (cikoit'Jras, etc.). The form 
of the Sanskrit ending shows that it also originally contained 
this enlargement, since -ur has developed out of -rs here in the 
same way as it has done in pittir<*pitfs. Of the various types 
of r-formation which Iranian preserves, one has been generalised 
in Sanskrit at the expense of the rest. 
I Dual. P. bhdravas, d. Goth. bairos «*bherowes), svds' we 
two are'. The corresponding ending in Iranian is an extended 
-vahi (cf. masi beside mas): Av. usvahi • we 1\\'0 wish '; a 
form -vasi after the style of masi does not ap'pear in Skt. 
S. and Pf.; impf. dbhariiva, opt. bhdreva, pf. vidvd, d. Av. Jvava 
'we two lived' J Lith. pret. sukova, -vo-s, O. S1. pres jesvl, 
vezevl, AoI. vezovl, Goth. opt. bindaiwa. As in the I pluL only 
Indo-Iranian distinguishes between primary and secondary 
terminations. The variation between the long and short vowel 
(Skt. va: S1. vi) was noticed also in the plural. The firSt person 
of the dual is found only in Indo-Iranian, Balta-Slavonic and 
Germanic. Hittite contains a termination which is related to 
these forms, P. weni, S. wen, but it is used as a plural side by 
side with the rarer -meniJmen. The most satisfactory explana­
tion of this is that there existed originally in IE parallel forma­
tions beginning with w or m which were optionally used as 
I pluL ending. Hittite has preserved this state of affairs but 
restricted the use of the men- termination to stems in 1t. The 
above-mentioned languages have kept both types of ending but 
specialised as duals the w-variety. About the remaining IE 
languages it is not possible to say anything owing to lack of 
evidence. 
2,3 Dual. P. 2 bhdrathas, 3 bhdratas, d. Av. yliidya8o, barato­
Goth. bairats. In Avestan no 2 dual is found; the terminations 
to and -80 are used promiscuously as endings, of the 3 dual, the 

THE VERB 
311 
two forms having been confused. The Gothic form is used only 
for the 2 dual. S. 2 dbharatam, Gk. fcrl.PETOV, 3 dbharatiim, Gk. 
E~pI.TrJV. Pf. 2 cakrdthur, 3 cakrdtur, ct. Av. yaetatar~. 
With the primary terminations of the 2, 3 dual it is possible 
to compare the -tis ( <-ies) of Lat. legitis, etc., which is used as 
2 plur. As in the first person the dual endings seem to have 
arisen by the specialisation in dual usage of a variant forrn of 
the plural ending. It is also noteworthy that the variation 
between t and th serves quite a different purpose in the two 
numbers, to distinguish 2 from 3 in the dual, and to distinguish 
primary from secondary in the. plural. Secondaty adaptation 
in both cases would account for this difference. The 3 dual is 
not of independent origin but merely a variant in form of the 
2 dual. The same form may appear for both as in the Gk. 
primary ending (crl.PETOV). In Balta-Slavonic there appears an 
ending in -iawhich in Lithuanian appears only in the second 
person (sukata, sukato-s) in Slavonic in both (0. 51. 2, 3 vezeta). 
I t corresponds to the secondary ending of the third person. in 
Sanskrit (-tam: Gk. -T7]V, Dor. -Tav) to which -m is a secondary 
addition. The perfect endings are an Indo-Iranian creation 
with -ur (Ir. ar) introduced from the 3 plur. 
Middle Endings 
I Sing. P. bruve' I speak ',. Av. -mruye, yaje ' I worship', 
Av. yaze. A different formation with -m- as in the active of 
mi-verbs appears in Greek: crl.pofLo.L, etc. S. non-thematic, 
dduh1: ' I milked J, akri ' I have done " Av. aoJi (aog- ' to say'), 
manghi Skt. (d)ma·~si (man- ' to think', s-aor.). 
Thematic 
stems have -e as in the primary system, dbhave, etc. Greek has 
a quite different ending: 1,pt;p6fL'tJv, Dor. °llaV. Pf. susr'uvi, Av. 
susruye with same ending as primary system. Sbj. md1ftsai, 
Av. manghiii, ydjai. Av. yazai. Opt. tanviyd, Av. tanuya. 
2 Sing. P. bhdrase, ct. Av. parasahe 'you ask', Gk. t/JI.pEa, 
cf>I.PrJ, Goth. bairaza; datst! i you give', Gk. 8fooau(,. S. dkrthiis, 
ddhatthas, etc. In contradistinction to Sanskrit, Iranian and 
Greek both agree in having forms representing IE -so: Av. 
~zaya?Jha, Gk. 1t/JI.p€o, lc/>ipov. These bear the same relation to 
the primary ending -sai as the 3 sing. secondary -to to primary 
-tai. Pf. same as primary, ririk~e, dadh#tf, cf. Gk. AiA£t~o." 
o£oooo.l., Impv. bhdrasva, Av. bara?Juha. 
3 Sing. P. bhdrate, Gk. cfo/.p€To.l., Goth. bairada, 4ste 
sits',
I 
L 

312 
THE VERB 
Gk. ~O"Ta.. : In the Vedic language there occur some forms with­
out the -t-, the termination being identical with that of the first 
person 'as in the perfect: duhe, sdye, Sr1Jve, etc. In view of the 
Hittite tniddle formations of the third person of the type esa, 
kisa (d. aduha below), this type must be regarded as ancient 
and not as an importation from the perfect system. S. dbharata, 
Gk. €r/>lPETO, opt. bhdreta, Gk. r/>lpotTo. The -ta which appears 
in Hittite as primary ending arta (stands up ',. kitta (lies' 
beside artart', kittari) is equivalent to the Sanskrit secondary 
ending. Rare forms without t corresponding to the presents 
duke, etc., are aisa and aduha (is- ' to rule " duh- ' to milk '), 
d. Hitt. primary esu, kisa, etc. Pf. dadhe, cakre. etc. On the 
other hand Gk. has -t- as in the present, OlOOTat, etc. Impv. 
bhdratiim, dhattiim, d. Av. viJrnyatffm. This form and the 
corresponding plural antam!atiim are without parallel outside 
Indo-Iranian. A form without -1-, corresponding to the indica­
tive endings P. -e, S. -a, appears occasionally in the Veda: 
duhiim. 
1 Plur. P. Pf. ydjiimahe, Av. yazamaide, brumdhe · we say', 
Av. mrt7maide, cakrmdhe, etc. S. dbhariimahi. d. Av. varmtaidi 
(var- ' to choose '), etc. Sanskrit -h- is from -dh·, as in the im­
perative -hi, etc., the original Indo-Iranian terminations being 
*-madhai and -madhi. Closely related to these forms but differ­
ing in the matter of the final vowel is Gk. -J-LdJa <*medha. 
which serves as both primary and secondary ending: r/>epo­
J-LE8a, lr/>EpoJ-LEOa. Greek has also a fuller ending -p,ea8a. with 
whieh Hitt. -wasta is to be compared, there being the same 
alternation of m and w as appears in the active (men/wen). 
2 Plur. P. Pf. bhdradhve, dadidhve, d. Av. mgr~ng3d·uye 
(marak- ' to destroy'). S. dbharadhvam, d. Av. diirayaowl1m, 
etc. The Greek ending -aO.. (primary and secondary) may be 
related presuming it is out of -zdhwe, and more closely the dual 
ending -a(Jov «zdhwom) the dual use of which is, as elsewhere, a 
secondary adaptation. The Hittite termination, primary duma 
(palf!Jasduma ' you protect '), S. dumat is more obviously con~ 
neeted, -dl,{,m-· being the weak grade corresponding to -dhvam. 
3 Plur. P. (a) bhdrante, Gk. cplpOVTaf., tisate ' they sit', Gk. 
Hom. ijaT(u «*estJtai); (b) sere' they lie '. Av. soire, saere, 
duhre, sunvire, with the same endings as the perfect. A combin­
ation of a and b appears in sbate, duhrate. S. (a) dbharanta. 
Gk. l~€POVTO, iisata (they sat'. Gk. Hom. 1jaTo; (b) Three 

THE VERB  
313 
varieties of ,-ending appear: (1) -ra: dduhra, (2) .."an: 
dduhran, aseran, opt. iisiran, bhdreran, (.3) -ram: asasrgram, 
cf. Av. vaoziram (vaz-
to carry '). The types (2) and (3) are
I 
clearly enlargements of type (I) which must be regarded as 
most original. By combination of (a) and (b) arise the termina­
tions -ranta and -rata: dvavrtranta (vrt- • to turn '), bhdrerata. 
Outside the optatives in -eran, -iran, the r-endings are compara­
tively rare and archaic formations in the Vedic language .beside 
the normal nt-formations. They are almost completely dis­
carded in the classical language. It will be observed that the r 
is identical with the r which appears in the third plural of the 
active, and it is the elements added to it which characterise the 
terminations as middle (-e in duhre, etc., -a in aduhra). Pf. Ex... 
elusively r-endings: duduhre, cakrire, etc., d. Av. caxrare 
(variant -arai which does not occur in Skt., d. Av. -ara active 
which is likewise missing in Skt.). 
I Dual. P. Pf. bhdravahe, cakrvdhe, S. abharavahi. Avestan 
has only -vaidi: dvaidi (dav-, i.e. du-vaidi). The Hitt. plural 
ending -wasta has formally the same relationship to Indo­
I rani an -vadhi as G k. -J.L€o8a to -madhi. 
2, 3 Dual. P. PI. thematic 2 bhdrethe, caretke, cf. Av. 3 dual 
carDi8e, 3 bharete, d. Av. visaete: non-thematic 2 bruvfithe, 
mamniithe, 3 bruvdte, mamntite. 
S. thematic 2 dbharetham, 
3 dbha,etam. d. Av. Jasaetmt (with short vowel of termination 
as opposed to long vowel in Sanskrit); non-thematic 2 asru­
viithiim (sru-
to hear '). 3 asruviitiim, Av. asrviitam. The
f 
variation between Iranian -tam and Skt. -tiim in the third 
person corresponds to a similar difference in the active (Av. 
jasat:nn, Skt. agacchatiim). No corresponding endings appear 
outside Indo-Iranian. The Greek terminations, P. 2, 3 -u8ov. 
S. 2 -uOov, 3 -u8"f}vare connected with the second plural of the 
middle. On the other hand the Indo-Iranian forms are con­
nected with the corresponding active terminations of the dual. 
The same variation between th and t appears between the two 
persons in the primary endings, and in the middle this is intro­
. duced also into the secondary endings.  The final -e of the 
primary endings is the same -e characterising the midd1e which 
appears throughout the primary system. The influence of this 
-e of the middle is responsible for the substitution of e for the a 
of thematic stems (dbhavetam as opposed to active tibhavatiim; 
Av. jasattam beside Jasat'IJm). Non-thematic verbs are distin­

THE VERB 
guished by an a of the middle ending, but examples like Av. 
dazde 3 duo pi. and Skt. cikethe indicate that this is an innova­
tion. It can only have come from formations of roots in alike 
dadathe, dadate where the ii is originally part of the root as in 
2 sg. daddtha (beside dadithd) and 2 pI. dddhiitana (beside 
dhattana). 
§7. 
STRUCTURE AND ORIGIN OF THE 
TERMINATIONAL SYSTEM 
A comparison of the primary and secondary endings shows 
that from the historical point of view they are incorrectly 
named. It is the secondary' endings that are primary. and
I 
vice versa. The relation of the series -m, -s, -t. -an(t) with the 
primary -mi, -si, -ti, -anti can only be explained by the assump­
tion that in the latter series a particle -i indicating present time 
has been secondarily added. In the same way in the imperative 
endings -tu, -anlu, a particle- -u is added to the same basic ter­
minations. This is made clear, among other things, by the fact 
that these same elements -i and -it may appear by themselves 
in formations that have no personal termination, e.g. in Gk. 
cplPft (cp€P€ + L). Hitt. sakki knows' and in Hittite imperatives
I 
of the -lJi class: aku, diiu (ak- ' to die', da- • to take '). This 
addition of -i to -t, etc., implies an earlier period when secondary 
terminations alone existed; the primary • system, and there­
l 
fore the present tense is formed on the basis of the' secondary' 
system of the preterites. The unaugmented preterite and the 
• injunctive' form the primary basis of the IE present-aorist 
system. 
It does not seem that the distinction between primary and 
secondary terminations was fully worked out in the IE period. 
For instance in the I plur. and in the 2 plur. Greek makes no 
distinction (P. S. -/.t€V), and this indifference is shared by other 
languages (0. S1. nesemu, nesomu,. Goth. bit!tig,m, witum, 
-budum). The distinction appears in Hittite and Indo-Iranian, 
but it is effected by quite different me~ns. In Hittite -weni, 
-meni beside -wen, -men is clearly a private innovation modelled 
on the three persons of the present and the 3 plue. In Indo~ 
Iranian the distinction is effected by the choice of two different 
forms of the suffix (mas/ma, similarly duo vas/va) and there is no 
evidence to show that this variation was connected with the 
distinction between secondary and primary in the IE period. 

THE VERB 
315 
Possibly -ma was originally the perfect ending in view of the 
frequency of final -a in forms of that tense (vida, vettha, veda, 
2 pI. vidd). The innovation Skt. -masi, Av. -mahi, Av. -vahi 
resembles the Hittite development, but it is quite independent, 
and expresses no such distinction (P. mas and masi as opposed 
to Hitt. P. -meni, -u'eni, S. men/wen). Hittite treats the 2 pI. in 
the same way (tel1)teni) and here again Sanskrit expresses the 
difference in quite a different way (-taJtha). In all other lan­
guages the distinction does not exist. Apart from lack of sup­
port from other languages, the fact that the distinction be­
tween t andth is used in the related dual endings for a totally~ 
different purpose (2 -thas, 3 -tas) makes it altogether unlikely 
that the difference between the two forms of suffix was from 
the 
connected with the distinction between primary 
and secondary ending. 
! 
In the middle the priority of the secondary endings is no less 
clear. The primary endings all terminate rin Me, and the com­
parative evidence shows that the extension of this -e to all the 
primary persons of the middle is a special Indo-Iranian de­
velopment. In Greek, which is closest to Indo-Iranian in its 
verbal inflection, a corresponding -at is found only in the three 
persons of the singular and in the 3 plural. Elsewhere (-a8ov, 
-jL£8a, .;.a8£) the endings are not characterised by this element, 
the same ending functioning as both primary and secondary. 
It is certain that in this respect Greek represents the more 
original state of affairs, and that in Sanskrit -make and -dhve 
(and the same applies to the dual endings) are new formations 
on the basis of mahi and dhvam which originally functioned 
indifferently as primary and secondary endings. Comparison 
between Sanskrit and Hittite confirms this. Hittite differs from 
Sanskrit more than Greek does, and it shares with Italic, Celtic 
and Tocharian an element r in the middle endings which Greek 
and Sanskrit agree in ignoring. Nevertheless there exist forms 
in the two languages which can be directly compared, and these 
are invariably secondary endings in Sanskrit: Hitt. 3 sg. pro 
arta: d. Skt. dkrta; 3 pI. aranta: Skt. aranta; 3 sg. esa: cf. 
Skt. dduha; 2 pI. paIJIJasduma: d. Skt. dbharadhvam. The 
Hittite terminations all belong to the present (primary) 
system, as opposed to the identical forms in Sanskrit which 
belong to the secondary system. 
The formation of the middle endings, as is clear from a survey 

316 
THE VERB 
of the Sanskrit forms, is remarkably heterogeneous, and its 
study is made more complicated by the existence in Indo­
European of two distinct types, one (Hittite, Italic, Celtic, 
Tocharian) which makes extensive use of an element r in its 
formation, and another (Indo-Iranian, Greek, Germanic) which 
ignores this element. At the same time there is a nucleus of 
fonns, as instanced above, which 'bridge the gap between the 
two types. Among the oldest forms we can observe several 
types. (I) In the 3rd person a thematic variation of the same 
suffix serves as the middle ending: dkar(t) : dkrta; dbharan(t) : 
dbharanta; duhur: dduhra. (2) In the 1st person dual and 
plural the middle ending is formed by the addition of particles 
(Skt. -hi <*dhi, Gk. en <*dha) to a form of the active ending. 
The Greek alternation -p.f!8a/-p.€a8a, which contains as its first 
element two variant forms of the active ending (d. Skt. -mas 
and -ma), makes this quite clear. Hitt. -wasta, wtthlhe -'lI)- that 
elsewhere appears in the dual, but in Hitt. in the plural, is 
naturally to be explained in the same way as Gk. -p,£u8a. 
)3) In the 2nd plur. an ending which is quite different from the 
active eriding is used. The 2nd sg. -thiis is likewise' quite dif­
ferent from the active -s but it is clearly connected with the 
perfect active ending -tha. The final s may be explained as a 
secondary addition, since -s characterises the 2nd person else­
where. The relation between *-thii and -tha is apparently the 
same as that between ma and ma (IE me/me) of the 1st person 
plural. 
The simplest form of the 1st person middle termination in 
Hittite is -!Ja (zaMJiyab!Ja) which occurs rarely beside the more 
usual -lJari, lja!Jari. This ending is represented in Sanskrit in 
the 1St person middle of the optative (bhtiveya). Elsewhere 
there is a secondary ending -i (dduhi, dkri) for which there are 
no parallels outside Indo-Iranian (Av. aoJi, m"jnghi). 
I t is clear from the agreements between Sanskrit and Hittite 
that the oldest nucleus of middle endings is common IE pro­
perty. Further developments based on this show remarkable 
divergence, since Hittite shares with Italic, Celtic and Tocharian 
an element r which is not known to Sanskrit and Greek. In 
Hitt. this r, which appears with the addition of the primary -i 
of the present, is optional, e.g. 3 sg: arta and artari, 3 pI. aranta 
and 4'fantari. It is clear that it must have been in the same 
way optional in Indo-European, and that in the further course 

THE VERB 
317 
of development it became established as a necessary element in 
Italo-Celtic and Tocharian, and on the other hand went out of 
use in that dialectal area of Indo-European from which Indo­
Iranian and Greek derive. 
The primary middle endings of Sanskrit arise in the first 
place, as in the active, from the addition of -i to the secondary 
endings: bhdrata +i> bhdrate. Corresponding to the -e, Greek 
has -a,. This vocalism is most simply explained as due to the 
ending of the 1st person (-Ha+i>ai) from which it spread by 
analogy to the other persons. In Sanskrit this final -e appears 
in all the primary forms, but its presence in the dual and in the 
first and second persons of the plural is due entirely to analogy, 
and these are to be regarded as the latest parts of the system. 
The active endings of the perfect are in the singular identical 
with the oldest forms of the middle endings: (I) -Ha> a, vida, 
d. bhdveya; (2) -tha, cf. -thii-s, Hitt. -ta; (3) -a (IE -e), veda, 
cf. aduha, Hitt. esa. That this is no accident is clear from the 
frequent cases in which active perf~cts with intransitive sense 
appear by the side of middle forms in the other tenses, e.g. Skt. 
vdrtate: vavdrta, Gk. ytyvoILat: YEyova, etc. Originally, it 
seems, the perfect had no distinction of the two voices, and both 
in form and sense it was closer to the middle than to the active. 
The development of separate middle forms may be regarded as a 
late Indo-European feature. In Sanskrit these perfect termina­
tions are identical with those of the present, and these, as already 
observed, are later formations than the corresponding secondary 
endings. 
As to the nature of the personal endings it is q}lite clear that 
they have nothing to do with the corresponding personal pro­
nouns. The theory that these endings are of the nature of 
suffixed pronouns has often enough been put forward in the 
course of IE studies, but concrete evidence in the form of de­
tailed comparisons is lacking. It is possible to find an -m- in 
the ending of the I sg., and a t in the 3 sg., which are letters 
that occur in the corresponding pronouns (ace. sg. mil: ta-), 
but beyond this there is practically nothing. Since no theory 
can, he based on the comparison of one or two single letters, the 
attempt at explaining the personal endings as suffixed pronouns 
has to be abandoned. When this is done, and the terminations 
are analysed in such detail as 'the comparative evidence will 
permit, it becomes clear that the elements of which the system 

3IB 
THE VERB 
is constructed are in the main identical with the suffixes of 
derivation which are met with in the formation of nouns. This 
is clearly so in the purely thematic formations which have no 
ending in the proper sense: 2 sg. impv. dja, 3 sg. impf. mid. 
dduha, 2 pI. pf. vidd. Such formations are in no way to be dis­
tinguished from ordinary thematic nominal stems. The same 
correspondence is generally seen between the ending of the 
3 pI. (Skt. -an(t)janti, IE -entf-ont) and the suffix which forms 
present participles (Skt. bhdrant-, Lat. ferens). In addition it 
has been pointed out that the relation of the two kinds of ending 
in the 3 pl., the above and that consisting of or containing an 
element r, is reminiscent of the alternation found in nominal 
stems between rand nlnt: Gk. ilSwp, ilSaTos, etc. Elsewhere 
too there are features about the verbal terminations which 
recall those of the nominal suffixes. There appears to exist the 
same relation between the terminations of the active and middle 
of the 3 sg. ((d)kar(t), (d)k,rta) as is found in the nominal suffixes 
in krt-: krtd-. The suffix of the 2 pI. contains also a -ta which 
may be equated with the corresponding nominal suffix (bhdrata. 
d. the nominal stem bharatd-). In Indo-Iranian alone there 
exists a variant ending -tha which functions as primary ending. 
It is probably no coincidence that Indo-Iranian is also the only 
branch which shows a suffix -tha beside -ta in the formation of 
nouns (yajdtha- ' worship': yajatd- ' to be worshipped '). 
The behaviour of the suffix of the I pI. is in several ways 
reminiscent of the corresponding nominal sufhx. In the first 
place the coexistence of two forms, one beginning with wand 
one with m, which is seen in Hittite.. is matched by a similar 
duality in the infinitival forms containing the same elements: 
tiyawar, tiyawanzi; tarnummar, tarnummanzi. In Sanskrit the 
suffixes -vant and -mant are found in the same way side by side 
with similar function. Another similarity between the verbal 
and nominal forms is seen in the variation of the latter part of 
the suffix: IE wen!wes, men/nus. 
This is paralleled by the 
variations in nominal dec1ension, e.g. in the vocatives rtavas) 
patnivas, 
tuvi~mas from the stems rttivan-, patnivant- and 
tuvi~mant-. 
Correspondences of this kind make clear the original nature 
of a considerable section of the verbal terminations. By some 
process of adaptation, the course of which it is not now possible 
to follow, certain nominal formations became associated with 

THE VERB 
31 9 
particular persons aI1dnumbers, and at least a fair proportion 
of the existing personal terminations came into being in this 
way. 
§8. THE TEN PRESENT 
s 
The roots of the Sanskrit language are arranged by the Hindu 
grammarians in ten classes, according to the way in which they 
form the present system. and named after a verb taken as 
typical of its class. The order in which these classes are placed 
corresponds to no discoverable grammq.tical principle, and for 
convenience olexposition it needs to be rearranged. The verbs 
are divided into two major types, (a) non-thematic (classes 2, 3. 
r-
5, 7. 8, 9) and (b) thematic (classes I. 4. 6, 10). 
A. ..:Von-thematic Presents 
Root Class (Second or ad- class) 
Paradigm: 
(dvi~-' to hate l 
Present, Active, S. I dve$mi, 2 dvek$1;, 3 dvt~!i. D. I dvi~vds. 
2 dvi~thds. 3 dvi~tds, P. I d'vi~mds, 2 dvi:;!hd. 3 dvi~dnti. 
Middle, S. I dvi~i. 2 dvik$e, 3 dvi~te, D. I dvi~vdhe, 2dvi~athe, 
3 dvi~iite, P. I dvi~mdhe, 2 dvi¢q.hve, 3 dvi~dte. 
Imperfect, Active, S. I ddve$am, 2 ddvet. 3 ddvet. D. ddvi~va, 
2 ddv#!am, 3 ddvi~tiim, P. Iddvi§ma. 2 ddvi:;!a, 3 ddvi$(lIn. 
Middle, S. I ddv'i$i. 2 ddvi$thiis, 2 
ddvi~ta. D. I ddvi§vahi, 
2 
ddvi~iithiim, 3 
ddv4~iitiim, P. I 
ddvi~mahi, 2 ddvi¢¢hvam, 
3 ddvi~ata. 
Inflection of this type in Sanskrit is made from nearly 130 
roots. In most other IE languages it has largely died out, its 
place being taken by thematic formations. Consequently direct 
comparisons with forms of other languages are confined to a 
few common roots: dsti' is " Gk. Eon, Lat. est, etc.; emi' I 
go " imds ' we go " Gk. ElfLt, iP.EV, Lith. eimi, etc. ; dUi, eats .,
I 
Lat. est, Russ. jest'; dste' sits', Gk. ~O''Ta,; sete' lies', Gk. 
KEt'Tllt, Hitt. kitta, kittari. Hittite is the only language beside 
Sanskrit in which this type of formation is well preserved, 
and here further parallels are available: hdn.ti' he slays', 
ghndnti ' they slay', Hitt. kuenzi, kunanzi; va~ti i he wishes' 
(vas-) Hit!. wekzi (Gk. only pte. £KWV); sdsti' sleeps', Hitt. 
!e!;:i, 
Beside the regular endings given above there exists a variant 

320 
THE VERB 
type: active, 3 pL impf. cak~ur, duhur; middle, 3 sg. pres. iSe, 
cite, duhe, bruve. sdye, vidl, 3 pl. duhri, sere; duhrate, strate; 
impf. 3 sg. aiSa, aduha, 3 pI. aduhra; aduhran, aseran; aserata; 
impv. 3 sg. duhtim, vidam, sayiim, 3 pI. duhram; duhratam, 
seratam. These forms (for which see above, § 6) are confined to 
the Vedic language with the exception of the root si-
< to lie ' 
which preserves such inflection in the classical language (3 pI. 
strate). This series is important because it shows that there 
were originally two types of conjugation in the case of root 
stems, corresponding to the Hittite -mi and -&i conjugations. 
Sanskrit has generalised the mi- type in the active, but in the 
middle the Vedic language preserves these traces of the old 
dual system. 
\Vith certain exceptions the normal system of accent and 
apophony prevails in this class, that is to say the root has 
accent and gUl)a in the three persons of the active, while else­
where it appears in its weak form and the accent is on the 
termination: hdnti: ghndnti; vasmi: usmdsi; dsmi: smds. 
etc. Roots in -u followed by endings beginning with a con­
sonant, takevrddhi instead of gUI)a in the strong forms: 
f 
"
statUi, 
yattti < joins '; also certain others, e.g. miir~1i 
, rubs'; 3 pI. mrjdnti. A number of roots retain accent and 
gUI).a throughout for reasons which are not clear: e.g. sete 
, lies', vdste ' wears clothes'. Certain roots with long vowels 
where this applies, e.g. iiste 
sits J 1 
i~te rules' have perhaps
I 
t 
been adapted from the perfect system (as- originally perfect 
stem of as- ' to be '). In the Vedic language the strong form of 
the root is optional in the 2 pI.: pres. nethd, impv. stota. impf. 
dbravita. The weak form of the 3 pI. mid. termination (dvi~dte 
as opposed to dvi~dnti) indicates original final accent which is 
preserved ocassionally in the Veda: duhati, rihate. The root 
sas- has the weak termination also in the active (sdsati 3 pI.) 
which accords with its radical accent. 
The conjugation of this class is complicated by changes due 
to internal sandhi. As this is a matter of phonology rather than 
morphology, a few examples will suffice: duh- 'to milk'. 
doh .+ 
dhok~i I doh +ti> dogdhi ; lih4 • to lick '> leh +ti> lerJhi; 
sas- +dhi> sadhi. Analogy is responsible for the 3 sg. impf. 
asCit (instead of *asas <*asast) and in the same way for dlef. 
Different formations are occasionally substituted where the 
operation of phonetic laws would leave a form too short or 

THE VERB 
321 
obscure: 3 sg. impf. adat with thematic vowel from ad- f to eat ' 
iisft With -i- beside Vedic as from as-
to be '. 
t 
Some of the roots of this class contain enlargements, e.g. tra­
'to save, protect', sii-s- 'to command' J v-as- 'to clothe J, 
which means that originally they did not belong to the root 
class. Such roots tend to be irregular in the matter of accent 
and apophony. Some reduplicated formations have come to be 
classed here, e.g. jak~- (r) 'to laugh' (has-) , (2) 'to eat' 
(ghas-) which retains some features of reduplicated inflection 
(3 pI. act. jdk~ati), and ni1ft.s- ' to touch closely, kiss' (nas-) ; 
likewise certain Jntensive formations which are treated as roots 
by the grammarians: jiigarti·' is awake', daridrati 'runs 
about, is poor I, dideti ' shines '. 
Here are classified certain roots making a stem by means of 
the suffix i, namely, in the classical language, rud- ( to weep " 
svap- ' to sleep J, an- ' to breathe', svas-
I to breathe • and jak~­
· to eat' : 3 sg. pres. roditi, svapiti, etc. Further examples are 
found in the Vedic language: vdmiti' vomits', jani~va 'be 
born'. vdsi~1.}a wear', snathihi ' smash', stanihi ( roar', and
I 
the M.Bh. has socimi. This formation corresponds to the Latin 
3rd conjugation verbs of the type capio (capis, capit ... cap­
t"unt). Like the other non-thematic classes it shows changes in 
accent -and apophony (1 pI. r-udimas) , but it had originally 
nothing to do with the root class, being an independent forma­
tion. But it is a formation which from the earliest period of the 
language is on the way to obsolescence. Most of the forms 
quoted are isolated and not parts of complete paradigms. 
Even in the most stable group which the classical language 
preserves, the i-suffix.is absent before endings beginning with a 
vowel (3 pI. ruddnti) and in the 2 and 3 sg. impf. it is replaced 
either by long f (dnit), or by a thematic formation (Jnat). The 
type has ceased to form a full separate class, and by interpreting 
the suffix as the union vowel i (if), and attaching it to the root 
class, the grammarians were able to account for most of its 
characteristics. 
A suffix i' appears in the conjugation of bru- ' to speak' J but 
only in the strong forms before terminations beginning with a 
consonant (brdviti, dbravit; 
dbra'/)am~ bruvdnti). In the corre­
sponding Avestan verb it does not appear at all: 3 sg. mraoiti, 
impf. mraoj. The suffix has importance elsewhere in the forma­
tion of verbal stems, namely in Latin (audire) and Slavonic 

322 
THE VERB 
(0. S1. supitu ' sleeps' mluvitu ( mutters '). Like the short i 
above it is obsolescent in Sanskrit, and in addition to bru- only 
a few roots are found to take it in the Vedic language: amiti 
(am- ( to injure ')' taviti (tu- ( to be strong '), sami$va (sam- • to 
labour '). 
The Reduplicating Class (3rd or hu- class) 
Paradigm: (hu-
to sacrifice '). 
I 
Present, Active, S. I juh6mi, 2 ftf,h6$i, 3 juh6ti, D. I juhuvds, 
2 juhuthas, 3 juhutas, P. I juhumds, 2 juhutha, 3 jUhvati. 
Middle, S. I jukve, 2 juhu$e, 3 jUhutt, D. 1 juhuvdhe, 2 juh­
vathe, 3 juhviite, P. 1 juhumake, 2 juhudhve, 3 fuhvate. 
Imperfect, Active, S. I djuhavam, 2 djuhos, 3 djuhot, D. I dju­
huva, 2 ajuhutam, 3 djuhutiim, P. I djuhuma, 2 djuhula, 3 aju­
havur. 
Middle, S. I djuhvi, 2 djuhuthas, 3 djuhula, D. 1 djuhuvahi, 
2 djuhvatham, 3 djuhvaliim, P. I djuhumahi, 2 djuhudhvam, 
3 dfuhvata. 
Forms according to this class are made from some 50 roots 
all told, but only from 16 in the classical language. The forma­
tion is well represented also in Greek: 7TL(fL)7TA7JP.', 7Tt(p..)7TAap.f:V 
I 
l
I, we fill " Skt. piparmi, piPrmas ; da7Tt¢>pavuL to introduce', 
d. Skt. bibharmi, bibhrmds; 
St8Wf-LL, Skt. dddami; 
TlfJ7Jf-LL, 
Skt. dddhiimi; tarr;fLf., Skt. ti#hami (transferred to thematic 
class). Elsewhere it has become comparatively rare. 
The vowel of reduplication corresponds to the radical vowel 
in the case of roots containing the vowels i and u: cikeii' ob­
serves', jihreti ( is ashamed ' J vive?ti 1 is active', bibhiti ( fears' J 
ninikta 2 pL impv. ' wash' ; yuyoti' separates'. In other roots 
it is sometimes i and sometimes a. 
(a) jigharti 
sprinkles', piparti 'fills', bibhdrti 'bears' I
l 
jigiiti 'goes', mimati 'bellows', sisati 'sharpens', 
si~akti 
, cleaves to ' (saj-). 
(b) dddiiti 'gives', dddhdti 
places', jahati leaves', bdbh­
I 
l 
I
asti ' eats " vavartti 'turns', sasasti 'sleeps', sascati 
they 
accompany J. 
. 
This is in contradistinction to Greek which has almost 
exclusively -i- in the reduplicating syllable. 
The accent of verbs of this class is somewhat unstable. It 
may appear on the root in the strong forms (juhoti, etc.) which 
is in accordance with the gUI)a of the root, or in the case of 

THE VERB 
323 
certain verbs on the reduplication (dddhiiti, etc.). The latter 
type is most prevalent in the Vedic language, appearing often 
when the later language has radical accent (btbharti: bibhdrti). 
Greek has also accent of the reduplication (olowf.L~,etc.), but 
the apophony indicates that radical accent must be original in 
the three persons of the singular active. On the other hand 
,  
accent of the reduplication appears to be ancient in the 3 pI.  
active, where both root and ending appear in weakened form:  
dddati, sdscati .. In the weak forms the normal accentuation of  
the terminations is found, with the exception that the accent  
is thrown back on to the reduplicating syllable when the ter­ 
mination begins with a vowel (juhve, bibhre, etc.). This de­ 
velops in the post-Vedic period (V. juhve) from the analogy of  
the 3rd person pluraL 
The weakening of the radical vowel results in samprasaraI).a 
in the case of vyac- (viviktds) and hvar- (juhurthiis), and in loss 
of syllable in sac- and bhas- (3 pI. sdscati, bapsati). Roots in 
long ii are treated variously. In the commonest, dii"' and dhii-, 
the root is fully reduced and the vowel elided: dadvds, dadmds ; 
dadhvds, dadhmds, etc. In the case of other roots this type is 
superseded by one in which the vowel 
or more usually -i- is 
inserted between the reduced form of the root and the termina­
tion. The short appears in some forms from the root hii-
to 
t 
leave': jah-i-mas, jahihi, etc. This reduplicated formation 
may be compared to the type svapiti of the root class. Normally 
however the vowel is long: sis-i-hi (sii- ' to sharpen ')' mimite 
(ma- ' to measure '), rarithiis (ra- ' to bestow'), etc. The pre­
valence of the long vowel is due to rhythmical reasons, and the 
suffixal i balances the a of the root in such a way that the two 
have acquired the appearance of being the strong and weak 
forms of the root. 
The nfl- and u- Classes (Fifth and Eighth, su- and tan- classes) 
Present, Active, S. I sunomi. 2 sun6#, 3 sunoti. D. I sunuvas, 
etc. . .. P. 3 sunvanti, Middle, S. I sunve, 2 
sunu~e.. ,. 
P. 3 sunvdte. 
Imperfect, Active, S. I asunavam, 2 tisunos, 3 tisunot, D. I 
asu.nuva. . .. P. 3 dsunvan, Middle, S. I dsunvi, 2 tisunuthas, 
3 tisunuta, D. I dsunuvahi . ... P. 3 dsunvata. 
About 50 roots make presents according to this class. 
Typical examples are: rttoti 
rises' (d. Gk.opvvp.t), stT1Jott"
I 
· strews' (d. Gk. aTOpvVjLt), k~i1J6ti ' destroys' (d. Gk. rpO{.vw, 

THE VERB 
r/J/Jtvv(Jw) minoti 'harms, lessens I (d. Lat. minuo), dhunoti 
I 
I
shakes' (d. Gk. (Jfjvw ' rage '), trPtJoti is satisfied " rdhnoti 
, thrives', apnoti 'reaches,· obta:ins I, asnoti 'obtains', etc. 
This suffix, which is compounded of nand u, appears also in the 
formation of nouns, frequently from the same roots, e.g. 
dh!$1Ju- 'bold' beside dhr$1J.oti ' i:; bold'. In a series of roots 
the alternative suffix nii (ninth class) appears side by side 
with nojnu: 
V!1Joti': 
vr1Jati; 
st!1;uiti: 
sl!1;UUi; 
k~i1Joti: 
k$i1J,dti. 
A simple suffix tt, without the 11" often appears in related 
formations: !1Joti, cf. Gk. opovw; st.r1Joti, d. Goth. straujan; 
vr1Joti 'covers', d. vdrutra-; 
dhr$1Joti 'is bold', cf Gk. 
8paavs; dabhn6ti ' injures, deceives', d. ddbhuta-
I (that cannot 
be hurt, divine) wonderful' ; jinoti' enlivens', d. jivd- ' alive' ; 
sadhn6ti ' accomplishes " d. siidhu- 'straight, good', Tne same 
relation exists between k$urd- 'razor' and k~1Jduti ' sharpens', 
which the complete incorporation of the suffix has 
to be 
transferred to the root class. In sru- ' to hear' (parte. srutd-, 
Gk. KAV'ros, etc.) this u has been incorporated in 
every­
where except in the present tense (S!1Joti: IE *kJ-n-eu-ti). In 
Iranian, by later substitution it appears even here (Av. sttru­
naoiti). 
Verbal classes corresponding to this appear in Greek (opVVP-t 
etc.) and Hittite, where the formation has developed a special 
causative sense (arnummi, etc.), but in neither case is the old 
apophony seen in Sanskrit preserved intact. Elsewhere forma­
tions of this type have been replaced by thematic formations 
(Ir. ro cluinethar ' hears '; etc.). Thematic formations based on 
this suffix are found: pinvati' fattens I (d. pinute, Av. pinaoiti), 
invati ' drives, attacks • (d. in6ti), hfnvati ' impels J (d. hi n6h) 
jinvati ' enlivens' (d. jinoti). 
In accent and apophony this class conforms to the normal 
type, with the usual Vedic irregularities, e.g. strong form of suffix 
in 2 pI. (dk!1Jota(na)) and final accentuation of 3 pI. middle 
(k!1JvaU, Vr1Jvate, etc.). Concerning the .form of the endings it 
may be noted that the tt of the suffix may optionally be omitted 
in the I duo and pI. (sunvds, sunmds; this starts of course in the 
I du.), and that before vocalic terminations -nuv- appears in­
stead of -nv- after roots ending in a consonant (saknuvdnti ( they 
are able '). The terminations -e of the 3 sg. middle (.5!'t've is
I 
heard J J sunve ' is pressed ') and -re of the 3 pI. (s!1J.vire, sunviri 

I 
THE VERB 
325 
etc.) appear sporadically in the Veda, the latter being always 
associated with the union vowel -1:-. This union vowel is found 
also in Vedic snlVi~e 2 sg. middle. 
Under the eighth class are classified certain roots formed by 
the simple suffix olu instead of nolnu. These consist of a 
number of roots temlinating .in n: 
tan~ 'to stretch " 3 sg. 
tanati, similarly san6ti ' wins' (d. Gk. o..vvp..1. ( achieve '), vanoli 
, wins ., manuM ' thinks ., k~a1J6ti ' wounds', and the root kr­
· to do ': 3 sg. karoti. There is some uncertainty in interpreting 
the forms from the roots in -n, since it is po:;;sible to argue that 
here the suffix is really no/nu before which a stands for tt appear­
ing in the reduced form of the root (ttz.-neu-ti). On the whole it 
seems preferable to adopt the simpler theory, and evidence for 
it maybe seen in the existence of Vedic tarute which appears to 
be exactly parallel to manuM. 
The other important root classed here, namely kr- •to do J 
(karoti, kurute) also presents tl problem because both the Vedic 
language and Iranian agree in inflecting it as a nu-verb (V. 
kntoti, kr1Jute, Av. karanaoiti, O. Pers. akunavam<akrnavam). 
This might suggest that the classical forms are' prakritisms " 
but this is rendered implausible by the fact that a phonetic 
development of r1J to arlur is wholly anomalous in Middle Indo­
Aryan.(d. tf1Ja- ' grass 
td1Ja-, ti1Ja, etc., and Pkt. kU1Jaf, from 
the Vedic form of the verb). The formation must therefore be 
regarded as a genuine and ancient dialect variant formed, like 
tarute, 'with the simple suffix u, which also appears in the Vedic 
noun karu1Ja- nt. ' action '. The weak form of the root presents 
some complication since normally either compJete reduction 
(kr-) or restoration of gul)a as in tar'ute might be expected. 
Since suffixal II which produces the combination -ur- in the 
weak grade elsewhere (gttru-, etc.) is here out of the question, 
the only theory that remains to explain the form of the weak 
grade is the assumption that the root originally began with a 
labio-velar. The form kur- may then be classed with those sur­
vivals where this labial element is found to function as a vowel 
(Gk. y1)V~t Hitt. kunanzi, etc., see p. 74). As to the etymology 
it seems that the IE root kwel- diverged in Indo-Iranian, con­
sequent on the second palatalisation, to produce two roots, on 
the one hand an intransitive car- ' to move, go " and on the 
other hand a transitive k,- ' to do, make '. 
The u of the suffix of this verb is always omitted in those 

326 
THE VERB 
cases where such omission is optional in the nu-verbs (kurmds, 
etc.). It is also omitted in the active of the optative: kuryam 
as opposed to kurvfyd. These may be radical formations incor­
porated in this conjugation. 
The nci- Class (Ninth or krf- class) 
Present, Active, S. I krfttami, 2 krf1)iisi, 3 kritz,oti, D. I krftz,f­
vd$, 2 kri1)fthas, 3 krf1)itds, P. I krftz,fmds, 2 krireithd, 3 kri1Jdnti. 
Middle, P. I krf1)e, 2 kri1)f~e, 3 kritlite, D. I kri1)ivdhe, 2 kri1)­
lthe, 3 krittate, P. I krf1)fmdhe, 2 kri1)fdhve, 3 kri1)dte. 
Imperfect. Active, S. I dkri1)cim, 2 dkri1)cis, 3 dkri1)iit, D. I 
dkritz,iva, 2 dkri1)itam, 3 dkri1)itam, P. I dkritJima, 2 dkri1)ita, 
3 dkri1)an. 
Middle, S. I dkri1)i, 2 dkri1)ithiis, 3 dkri1)ita, D. I dkri1)fvahi, 
2 dkri1Jiithtim, 3 dkri1)citiim, P. I dkri1Jimahi, 2 dkri1Jidhvam, 
3 dkri1)ata. 
Some fifty roots all told make presents according to this class. 
Typical examples are: krf1Jati' buys' (d. If. crenaid) , lindti 
, sticks, adheres to ' (d. If. lenaid ' id '), s,,1;uiti ' smashes' (d. 
Ir. ara' chrinat 3 pI. 
collapse '), jinati ' inflicts lc)ss " mrtttit-i
t 
, crushes " PrttBti ' fills " etc. 
The suffix is compounded of nand ii (-aH";')' and these ele­
ments often appear separately in related· formations. Then 
which appears in i~1Jtiti appears in connection with other ele­
ments in i§a1Jat and i~at}ydti. The a-suffix without n appears in 
a number of parallel fonnations in -ciya-: grbhdydti, mathiiydti, 
skabhiiydti beside grbh1)dti, etc. The a is often partially incor­
porated in the roots, e.g. in jyii- • to inflict loss' and pra- 'to 
fill ' beside the presents jinitti, PrIJdti; d. the same process, 
though more-cornplete, in sru-Jsro beside Srttoti. Vlith the addi­
tion of the weak form of the suffix roots in i, u and r become 
roots in f, U, and f. This is how they are normally given and 
how they normally appear outside the present system: pritd­
· pleased " pi:ita- ' purified ' (: punati), purt;d- ' full ' (: Prttati). 
In the tens~. there are two kinds of treatment: (a) the unex­
tended form of the root appears before -nii.-, e.g. jindti, punati, 
mr1)O,ti; .(b) the extended fOrIn of the root is introduced even 
into this formation. e.g. prittdli, bhrit}ati, a process which is 
found only in the case of roots in i. The root vlf-
< to press 
down 1 makes both types and Pali has kit,tiiti • buys 1 (corre­
sponding to the Celtic form) as opposed to Skt. krittiiti. 

THE VERB 
327 
The alternation between the strong fonn of the suffix -nil· 
with -ni- in the weak cases is not found outside Sanskrit. In 
Greek there is alternation between long and short vowel, 
OUlLvl1f.LL, oalLvalLEv. In Avestan complete loss of it in the weak 
grade, which is the regular Indo-Iranian phonetic develop­
ment, is found: 3 sg. mid. v~r;}nte, °st;}r;}nte. In Sanskrit this 
type is replaced by one containing an extra suffix -i-, in a way 
similar to that observed in the third class, e.g. Vr1JiU having the 
same relation to Av. v'ar'fJnte as Skt. mimfU, etc., to datU. This i 
is only introduced before the consonantal tenninations; before 
vowels the simple reduced form of the suffix is found: jandte, 
d. A. zanaite. 
Nasal-infixing Class (Seventh, rudh- class) 
Present, Active, S. I J'undjmi, 2 yundk$i, 3 yundkti, D. I 
yuiijvds, 2 yunkthds, 3 yunktds, P. I yunjmds, 2 yunkthd, 3 yun­
jdnti. 
Middle, S. Iyunje, 2yunk§e, etc.... P. 2yungdhvt, 3yufljdte. 
Imperfect, Active, S. I dyunajam, 2 dyunak, 3 dyunak, 
D.  I ayunjva, etc. . .. P. 3 dyunjan. 
Middle, S. I dyunji, 2 dyunktnas, etc.... P. 3 dyunjata. 
About thirty roots inflect in this manner. Common examples 
are: ri~ldkti' leaves I (La,t. linqfto), chid- ( cut " chinatti (Lat. 
scindo) , bhid-
split', 
bhina~i (Lat. jindo), pi$-
'crush·',
l 
pi1Ja~# (Lat. pinso), aiij- ' anoint " andkti (Lat. ungual, bhuj-, 
bhundkti benefits', bhuitktt ' enjoys' (Lat. fungor).
I 
In most languages outside Indo-Iranian the strong forms 
have been replaced by the weak forms, and the whole type 
transferred to the thematic class. The same tendency is seen in 
Skt. vinddti finds as opposed to Av. vinasti, all..,d in the later 
history of Indo-Aryan such forms completely replace the 
older type (Pa. yunjati, etc.). In Hittite the corresponding 
class has a double nasal infix and no apophony, e.g. !Jarn,ink­
, to destroy '; both these features are special developments of 
Hittite, out of the regular "IE type which Sanskrit preserves. 
This type appears superficially to be different from the two 
preceding types, the present stem being made by infixation in­
stead of suffixation. Ultimately they are not really different, 
since in most of the roots of this class, the final consonant can 
be interpreted as anextension, that is to say originally a suffix 
which in course of time has become incorporated in the root. 

THE VERB 
Beside the root yuj- < to join' for instance there is also a simpl
root yu- (yduti) with the same meaning. Evidence of the sam
kind is available in the case of a number of roots: e.g. chid- ( 
cut JJ d. chydti' cuts'J chitd- {cut' ; ric- {to leave " riruikti, d
rit;iiti ' lets flow'; trd- ( to pierce», t!1}dtti, cf. tf1J·a- ' grass
Engl. thorn; krt- 'to spin" k!1Jeitti, ct. Lat. colus 'distaff
In such cases the analysis of the forms of this class is the sam
as of those of the other two nasal classes: 5 kJ-n-ew-ti (S!1Jo
9 pJ-n-tI-I-ti (Pntiiti), 7 yu-n-eg-ti (yundkti). 
At the same time not all forms can be explained in this wa
e.g. andkti ' anoints'. Once the infixing class was establishe
through the incorporation of the second suffix, it attracted
certain number of other roots which did not belong to th
original nucleus. 
B. Thematic Presents 
Radically Accented Class (First or bhu- class) 
Present, Active, S. I bhdvami, 2 bhdvasi, 3 bhdvati, D. I bh
vavas, '2 bhdvathas, 3 bhdvatas, P. I bhdvamas, 2 bhdvath
3 bhdvanti. 
Middle, S. I bhdve, 2 bhdvase, 3 bhdvate, D. I bhdvdvah
2 bhavethe, 3 bhdvete, P. I bhdvamahe, 2 bhdvadhve, 3 bhdvante
Imperfect, Active, S. I dbhavam, 2 dbhavas, 3 dbhavat, D.
dbhavava, 2 dbhavatam, 3 dbhavatam, P. I dbhaviima, 2 dbhavat
3 dbhavan. 
Middle, S. I dbhave, 2 dbhavathas, 3 dbhavata, D, I dbhavavah
2 dbhavethiim, 3 dbhavetam, P. I dbhaviimahi, 2 dbhavadhvam
3 dbhavanta. 
This is the commonest of all the present classes in Sanskr
being formed by nearly half of the verbal roots in the languag
The predominance of thematic formations is paralleled in th
nominal stems, and it recurs in other IE languages. Dire
equations between Sanskrit and other languages, attesting I
forms, are commoner in this class than anywhere. Exampl
are: pldvate, prdvate 'floats', Gk. 7TA€(F)w; srdvati' flow
Gk. peEL; svanati' sounds', O. Lat. sonit; stdnati' roar
Gk. aT€VEL; bhdrati 'bears', Gk. ¢EPW, Lat. lero, Goth. bairi
If. berid, O. S1. berel-it; carati ' goes 'J Gk. 7TEAojLaL, Lat. col
b6dhati 'understands' J Gk. 7TEV()OjLat.; j6$ate 'enjoys', G
YEVOjLaL ' taste J, Goth. kiusiP , tests, chooses '; r6dhati, r6h
, grows', Goth. liudip; 
6~ati 'bums', Gk. €Vw, Lat. ur

THE VERB 
329 
vartate 
turns', Lat. vertitur; pdrdate 
breaks wind', Gk.
l 
l 
n€pOE'TU£; sdrpati 'creeps', Gk. €p1Tt:(., Lat. serpit; ydsati 
· seethes', Gk. '€w; vdhati carries ., Gk. Pamph. FEXW, Lat.
I 
vehit, O. S1. vezetu; vdsati' dwells', Goth. wisip is'; ndsate
I 
• resorts to', Gk. VEOp..UI. 'return'. Goth. ganisip · is saved' ; 
mdjjati ( plunges I, Lat: mergit; trdsati ( trembles " Gk. 'TPEW; 
pdtati flies " Gk. 1Tf.Top..at.; sthdgati ' covers " Gk. OT/Yft, Lat.
t 
tegit; sdcate 'associates with', Gk. E1TETat / follows', Lat. 
sequitur ' id '; ddhati' burns', Lith. degu; pdcati · cooks ., 
Lat. coquit, O. 51. pecetu; tdk:;ati' (carpenter) joins, constructs; 
hews', Lat. texit ' weaves'; hdvate ' calls' > A v. zavaiti, O. S1. 
zovetu; 
djati' drives', Gk. aY€t, Lat. agit, Ir. ad' aig ; 
dnati 'breathes' (beside dniti). Goth. uzanip 'breathes out, 
expires " 
The majority of roots conform to the normal type, the stem 
consisting of the accented and gUI)ated root followed by the 
th~matic voweL In a small number of verbs vrddhi instead of 
gUl)a is found: bddhate 'repels', bhrdjate 'shines', dhiivati 
, runs' (Gk. 8/w with ~a grade), kriimati 'strides' (beside 
middkkrdmate). iicamati s$,s'. The class is augmented by a
i 
number of varied thematic formattHns with accent on the root or 
first syllable which did not originally belong here: . e.g. (1) a 
form with infixed nasal, itJ.Hdati ' blames' (d. nid- ' contempt, 
insult " Gk. DVELOOS) ; formations of this type are commoner in 
the sixth class; (z)forms with a suffix -va: jtvati • lives '. 
tiirvati' overcomes 'J etc.; in such cases it can be seen from the 
apophony that the initial accent is not original; (3) stems con­
taining the IE inchoative suffix -skeJsko- (> ccha-) with second­
ary radical accent: 
gacchati' goes> (d. Gk. j3aaKE, impv.) 
ydcchati 'holds'; 
(4) 
reduplicated thematic formations: 
ti~!hati · stands' (sthii-), d. Lat. sistit, pibati 'drinks' (pa·), If. 
ibid, jighrati 'smells' (gltrii-) ; in sidati ' sits', Lat. sido (IE sizd­
from sed-) the normal phonetic development would have given 
if, in Sanskrit, but d appears here through the influence of other 
parts of the conjugation. 
Suffixally Accented Class (Sixth or tud- class) 
This and the following two classes are conjugated in exactly 
the same way as the preceding. The sixth class is fairly com­
mon, something like ISO roots being conjugated in this way. 
Typical examples: rttjdti 'breaks'$ visdti • enters', tuddti 

330 
THE VERB 
f 
f
, pushes:, disati 
points out J J 
mrsdti 
strokes J. sprsdti 
( touches J, suvdti drives " kirdti ( scatters J. srjdti lets go '. 
i 
r 
In contrast to Sanskrit this type is rare in most of the IE lan­
guages, because the Ipreceding class has become normal for 
thematic verbs. In Greek this type of stem is found usually 
only in aoristic use, where its contrasts in apophony with the 
normal thematic presents, cP€vyw: €cpvyov. In such presents of 
this type as can be found the accent has been transferred to the 
root (yAvrpw). 
A fairly common sub-class here is formed by roots taking an 
infixed nasal: siiicdti' sprinkles', muficdti releases " vinddti
i 
I finds " krntdti 'cuts' I lumpdti 'breaks', limpdti (smears'. 
Some are obvious transfers from the seventh class, e.g. unddti, 
yunjdti beside undtti, yundkti, and it is possible that the whole 
series arose in this way. 
The accented suffix -cchd- (IE -ske-) appears in icchdti 
• wishes ) 
J ucchdti ' shines J I rcchdti ' goes 1 (roots i~-. vas-, r). 
In Prcchdti i asks I (Lat. postil) it has been incorporated into the 
root (pf. paprdccha), but the unextended root appears occasion­
ally in nominal 'derivatives : prasnd-' question'. 
Ya- Class (Fourth or div- class) 
The fourth class contains some 130 roots which form their 
present by means of the suffix ya: e.g. kupyati is angry " 
i 
krudhyati ' id }, tlt:;yati ' is pleased', yudhyati ' fights J I vidhyati 
, pierces' (vyadh-). dtvyati ' plays I, hf~yati ' rejoices' J tdpyate 
, is hot', pdsyati ' sees " ndhyati ' ties'. This suffix is also used 
in the formation of denominative verbs, and the form of the 
passive differs from the middle of this class only in 
having suffixal accent. 
The formation is found in Hittite 
(wemiezzi 'finds " 
za~~iezi 
fights ') and Greek (p.atvera{.
f 
(is mad', d. Skt. mdnyate 
thinks', {3atvw, a';[sw J etc.}.
t 
In Latin on the other hand non-thematic stems in -i appear 
instead of this type (cuPio, cupit as opposed to Skt. kupyati). 
In Sanskrit the existence of a present stcinyati 'thunders' 
(0. S1. stenje) beside the non-thematic stanihi illustrates how 
the formation may arise by the thematic enlargement of an 
i-stem in the same way as in nominal stems (Okravio: kravya-, 
etc.). The apophony of the majority of forms indicates 
original suffixal accent, such as is found in the passive. On the 
other hand there are certain forms with vrddhied root, e.g. 

THE VERB 
331 
mddyati 
becomes intoxicated', sriimyati 
becomes tired',
l 
t 
which must have had radical accent from the beginning, which 
makes it appear that there were originally two types combined 
in this class. 
Certain roots in a which belong here. e.g. ga-' to sing • (gdyati), 
glii-
to be weary' (gliiyati), trii- ' to save' (trdyate) and dhyii­
I 
I to think' (dhydyati), are by the grammarians attached to the 
first class by the wholly unnecessary assumption of roots of the 
form giii-, etc. Since the roots ,are certainly to be set up as gii-, 
etc., these presents must be attached to this class, in which their 
form and accent are regular. 
There are a number of roots in a which lose this vowel before 
the accented suffix -yd-: da-' to bind J (d-ydti), cha-
to cut J
r 
(chydti), sa..,· t"to sharpen' (sydti) and sii-
to bind' (sydti: d.
I 
Hitt. islJijla- (bind '). They retain what must have been, as 
noted ahove, the original accent of this class, because the com­
plete reJluction of the radical syllable made impossible any 
shift of accent to the root.' 
Th§ Tenth Class (cur- class) 
The suffix is -dya-. This has normally been specialised in the 
formation of causative verbs, but it is not exclusively used for 
this purpose, and a nucleus of fOruiS remain which belong to the 
primary rather than the secondary conjugation. In the lan­
guage of the Veda there is a fairly clear distinction between 
presents inaya which do not have strengthening of the root 
. (guI,la or: vrddhi) in which a causative sense is usually absent, 
and those in which it is so strengthened which are normally 
causative. Examples of the former are: citdya-' notice, ob­
serve', i~dya- 'flourish', turaya- (hasten, sp8ed', dyutdya­
( shine', rucdya- ' id '. subhdya- ' be splendid ), mrtf,dya- ' par­
don " sPrhdya- 'desire', patdya- 'fly about '. Here belong 
originally such presents as hvdyati ' calls', svdyati ' swells • and 
dh-dyati • sucks', which the grammarians have attached to 
the first class by the assumption of the root forms svi-, hve-, 
dhe-. 
In the classical language the verbs classified here are more 
miscellaneous and they include a variety of formations of de~' 
nominative or. causative origin: 
e.g. kamdyate • desires " 
cordyati ' steals', chdddyati ' covers', avalokayati ( looks upon'. 
dU§dyati • spoils', bhii~dyati ' adorns '. tiitf,dyati ' beats " etc. 

332 
THE VERB 
§9. THE FUTURE 
The stem of the future is formed by means of the suffix -sya-, 
or, with connecting vowel -i-, -i~ya- aqded to the gUQated root, 
and it is inflected in precisely the same way as the thematic 
presents: dasyati 
he \\-'ill give', dhok~ydti < he will milk',
I 
bhavi~ydti ' he will be " kari~ydti l he will do ',etc. There are no 
simple rules by which the distribution of the two forms can be 
stated. In Iranian there exists a corresponding formation in 
-sya- (Av. vax.rya ( I will say'), but none corresponding to -i~ya-. 
The same formation appears in Lithuanian: duosiu 
I will
I 
give', On the other hand the Greek future (o#,dgw, etc.) 
appears to be based on a simple so-stem. In the early period of 
the Sanskrit language the future tense is comparatively rare, as 
it is in the Avesta, the sense of the future being most usually 
expressed by the subj~nctive, but it rapidly becomes more 
common. 
The future is a specialised type of present stem and it belongs 
with the various denominative formations in -y«-. It is capable 
of forming a preterite in the same way as the present stems 
proper. This fonnation functions as a conditional: yad evam 
navak~yo murdha te vyapati~yat ' If you had not spoken in this 
way, your head would have fallen off '. Only one example of 
the conditional is found in the lJ.gveda and it is never very com­
mon during any period of the language. 
In addition to the ordinary future Sanskrit created a. second 
or periphrastic future based on the agent nouns in -tar. In the 
third person the nom. sg., duo and pI. of such nouns functions as 
the second future without any addition: kartii, kartiirau, 
kartaras. In the first and second persons forms of the verb 
. to be J are added to the nom. sg. of agent noun, in the dual and 
plural as well as in the singular: kartiismi, kartasi; karttisvas; 
ltartiismas: The function of the second future is to express the 
future in connection with some specified time: sv6 vra~/ii ( it 
will rain tomorrow t, etc. This type of future first begin::t to 
appear in the BrahmaQa period and its use continues later, 
t 
though it is never anything like as common as the first future. 
There was created also a corresponding middle, which, however, 
is exceedingly rare, since it appears to have been current in the 
Jiving 
for only a very limited period. The special 
middle forms, which exist only for the first and second persons, 

THE VERB 
333 
are as follows: S. I karM,he. 2 kartdse, D. I karttisvahe, 2 kartli­
sathe, P. I kartdsmahe, 2 kart!J.dhve. 
§ 10. 
THE AORIST 
The aorist is formed by seven different types of stem which 
fall clearly into two classes, non-sigmatic and sigmatk:. Of the 
non-sigmatic types the root aorist (ddhiit) and the a-aor. 
(druhat) do not differ in their formation from the imperfects of 
the corresponding present classes (dydt, atudat). It has been 
pointed out that the two types of preterite, imperfect and 
aorist, have arisen by specialisation out of a system \vith un­
differentiated preterite, and the continued existence of forms 
common to the two remains as an indication of this. The 
difference in function depends on whether a corresponding 
present exists or not. The reduplicating aorist is less. closely 
connected with corresponding present stems and it has under­
gone special developments of its own, but it cannot be separated 
in origin from the reduplicating type of present. On the other 
hand the various aorist s-stems are formations which are con­
fined to this use, with the rarest exceptions (Av. naismi is a 
present from an s-aor. stem.) 
The Root-Aorist 
The root-aorist is abundantly represented in the Vedic lan­
guage. The apophony differs from that which is regular in the 
imperfect in that gm)a of the root appears normally in all the 
persons of the active with the exception of the third person 
plural. The normal weak form of the root appears in the 
middle. Typical forms are: S. I asravam, agam, dkaram, 
2 dgiis, dsres, akar (for dkars) , 3 dsrot, asthat, dkar (for dkart, d. 
Av.cor:?j), D.2 agiitam, dbhiUam 3 dkartam, ddhiitiim, P. I dkarma, 
ddama, dhema, 2 dkarta, dgclta, dhetana, 3 (a) dkran, dk~an 
(ghas-), dgman, (b) ddhur, dsthur, dkramur. 
Middle: S. 
I dkri, dyuji, 2 dkrthiis, agathiis, ayukthiis, 
3 dkrta, dmata (man-). dyukta, D. I ganvahi (gam-), P. I dgan­
mahi, dmanmahi (\-vith strong form of root), ayujmahi, dhumahi, 
2 acidhvam l ayugdhvam, 3 (a) akrata, dgmata, (b) ddrsran, 
abudhran, (c) dd,rSram, dbudhram. 
The root aorist of the root bhu- (which is conjugated only in 
the active) is anomalous in having the weak grade throughout; 
dbhuvam, dbhus, dbhut, ... dbhiita, dbhuvan. 

334 
THE VERB 
Certain root aorists are attested as Indo-European by such 
correspondences as Skt. asthat, Gk. Et:rr1J; 
agat, Gk. EfJ'YJ; 
agamam, dgan, dgata, etc., d. Arm. ekn 3 sg., Gk. {3a:rr/v 3 duo ; 
3 sg. Iuid. ak~ata, Gk. EKTaTo; impv. k~idhi ' destroy J J d. Gk. 
lcpOl,TO, 
,pOlJL£vo~. The anomalous form of the root aorist of 
bhu- reappears in Greek, 3 sg. l,pii, etc. Occasionally what 
appears as root aorist in one language appears as imperfect in 
another, shoWlng that the distribution of these radical stems 
between the two tenses was not completely settled in the IE 
period: Skt. dhata 3 sg. mid. impf., ct. Gk. a7TEcparo: &'1TtfJaVf.V 
(aor.); k~iti' dwells'. Gk. KTtJLEVOS (aorist stem) 
conversely
J 
Skt. dvrta, aor. compared with Lat. vult, present. 
The Greek aorists of roots in long vowel that belong here show 
the weak form of the root in the plural of the active (;8of't:v, 
;OEJLEV) which is in contradistinction to Sanskrit (ddiima, 
ddhama), but, since it conforms to the general pattern of verbal 
apophony, doubtless more original. The weak forms that 
appear in the middle (;8070, lOtTO) are in accordance with the 
Sanskrit practice, but in the case of roots in a Sanskrit has, in 
accordance with its common practice, introduced the union 
vowel -i- into the middle forms to help out the conjugation: 
a-dh-i-thas, adhita; aditkas, adita; asthithiis, asthita, asthiran. 
In some cases the union vowel appears as i (d. -i- in the present, 
brav-i-ti and elsewhere): a-dh-i-mahi, adimahi (da- 'to cut '), 
a-s-i-ta (sa- ' to sharpen '). It seems necessary also to assume 
such an -i- after such roots, in this case after the strong forms, 
in the optatives (active) of the root aorist: dheyam. deyam, 
stheyama, etc. (staH-i-ya-, etc.), otherwise the roots should 
appear with a (as yiiyam, etc., of the present). 
The ,phonetic tendencies which brought about the reduction 
of final consonant groups in the earliest Indo-Aryan strongly 
affected the, 2 and 3 sg. active of the root aorist, producing 
forms whiCh ceased to be grammaticaHy clear and unambiguous: 
e.g. akar, or in the appropriate sandhis, akaJJ, etc.; a'na# for 
-nas +sand -nas +t; aghas 2 and 3 sg.; skan for skand-t, etc. 
In addition when the root terminates with an occlusive and the 
termination begins with one (abhakta, etc.) it is not possible to 
tell from the form itself the difference between root aorist and 
s-aorist, 'on account of the elision of s in such position. In the 
post-Vedic period the root aorist undergoes a rapid decline, and 
there is little doubt that this phonetic mutilation and the con­

THE VERB 
335 
sequent ambiguities were largely responsible for the develop­
ment. All that remains of the root aorist in the classical lan­
guage is the active inflection of certain roots in a (ddat, etc.) 
and of bhu- (dbhut). 
In addition there are certain forms of the 2 and 3 middle of 
the root aorist (where the root terminates in a short vowel 
according to the grammarians) which in the later history of the 
language became heteroclitically attached to the s-aorist, e.g. 
we find 2 sg. avrthas and 3 sg. dvrta forming part of the same 
paradigm with I sg. dvr~i and 3 pI. dvr~ata, etc. In the same 
way the middl~ forms quoted above from the roots da-, dha-, 
sthii- with connecting vowel -i- are combined with -i~- aorist 
forms to produce a series like sg. I 
a-sth-i~-i. 2 d-sth-£-thiis, 
J asthila. 
The a- Aorist 
The form and conjugation of the a-aorist agrees with the 
imperfect accented a-class: dsicam, (isicas, dsicat, etc., d. 
dtudam, dludas, dtudat, etc. The stems agree in apophony, and 
also in accent, in the comparatively rare instances where the 
unaugmented aorist forms bear the accent: S. 
I 
ruhdm, 
2 vidas, 3 dhr~dt, vidat, P. 3 dhvasdn, viddn. trpan; regularly in 
the participle trPdnt- dhndnt-, sltcant-, etc., middle, sucdmana-, 
etc. 
Correspondences with other languages attest the IE date of a 
number of such formations: dllidat, Gk. raov, info [of/iv, Arm. 
egit; drsan, Gk. lOpG.KOV; dricat, d. Gk. EAt,1TOV, Arm. elik' ; 
budhanta, ct. Gk. £1TJJ80VTO. At the same time there is some­
times disagreement between languages in the assignment of a 
form to imperfect or aorist: Skt. ddasat imp£.: Gk. ;aG.KOV 
aor.; Skt. dbhujat impf.: Gk. E~VY€ aor. The suffixal accent 
is retained in Greek in participles and infinitives (AL1TWV, '\'1TE:tV). 
In addition to the regular type there are a number of a-aorists 
in Sanskrit whose form agrees rather with imperfects of the 
first class rather than of the sixth class since they have gUl)a of 
root: e.g. dsakam, asanam, asaram, dkaras, dgamat, alanat, 
asadat. This is the normal form of the a-aorist for roots can· 
sisting of two consonants and the thematic voweL Further­
more where accent occurs these forms are accented like sterns 
of the first present class. Examples of this are kdras, sdnat, 
sarat, darsam (= the Gk. present stem O'PKOfLUt), gdman, 

THE VERB 
sddatam. sddatam, and the participles sddant-, sdnant (these have 
also contaminated the regular type above to some extent, so 
that forms accented like ruhat occur occasionally). 
A number of the stems listed here are probably thematisa­
tions of root aorists, and not ancient. For instance the a-aorist 
dgamat appears later in the history of the language than the 
root aorist agan. On the other hand some are clearly old (e.g. 
asadat), and since the type appears also in Greek (€ylV€TO, 
yl.v€u8at) it must be referred to Indo-European. 
The a-aorist has attracted a number of reduplicated forms 
which did not originally belong to it, namely dpaptat (pat- ( to 
fall '), dvocat (for avat'c-, vac- ' to speak ') and, with what in the 
perfect becomes a substitute for reduplication, nesat (nas-
« to 
perish f). 
Reduplicated A arist 
Active, S. I dfijanam, 2 ajijanas, 3 afijanat . ... P. 3 djijanan. 
Middle, S. I djijane, 2 djrjanathris, 3 ajf}anata . ... P. 3 djfjan­
anta. The typical reduplicating vowel of this is i but the redup­
lication is subject to the following modifications: (1) If 'the 
root begins with two consonants short i is employed in redup­
lication: acik§ipat, apisprsat. (2) If the root vowel is u the 
reduplicating vowel is tt, or u under the same circumstances: 
abitbudhat, acukrudhat. 
If the root is a heavy syllable two 
processes are found: (a) the root is unaltered and the redupli­
cation is short: 
adidfk~am, abubhft~am; where the radical 
vowel is a followed 
two consonants or long ri the reduplicat­
ing vowel is a: adadak~am, adadluivam; (b) in order to pre­
serve the rhythm favoured in this aorist heavy roots may be 
weakened: avivasam (vris-), aC£J~radat (krand-). It is in accord­
ance with this principle that roots appear either with gUI)a or 
in the weak form: ajijanat but avi-qdhat. Verbs which make a 
causative stem in -iip- substitute 
in the reduplicated 
aorist: 
ati~!hiPat (sthiipayati). 
(4) Roots beginning with a 
vowel are found either to repeat the whole root (amamat) or, 
later, to repeat the last consonant with i (arpipat). 
In the Vedic language there are a number of non-thematic 
forms attached to the reduplicated aorist: ajigar, asisnat, 
didhar, etc. These represent an alternative type of the redup­
licated aorist which was early abandoned owing to the preval­
ence of the thematic type. 

337 
t 
THE VERB 
The reduplicated aorist stands out from the other forms of 
aorist because it is attached not to the simple verb but to the 
causative; djijanat is the aorist of janayati, dvivrdhat of 
vardhdyati and so forth. Such an aorist is therefore made from 
all roots which have causatives, in addition to their normal 
aorists. This arrangement is essentially a development of Indo­
Aryan, though its roots go back to Indo-Iranian. The other IE 
languages have nothing which can strictly be compared. In 
form the stem of the reduplicated aorist is related to the re­
duplicating present (bibharti), and more closely to the thematic 
variety of the s'ame (U,#h«ti; Gk. ytyvop,al,; Lat. gignit, sistit) 
but it has developed features of its own, namely the length of 
the reduplication and the gm)a of the root in certain forms 
(afijanat). The transitive sense which is observable in some of 
the> related stems with this type of reduplication (Lat. gignit. 
etc.) has been generalised and eventually developed into a full 
I
• 
causative. 
Related Iranian forms provide some ipteresting information 
about the history of this formation, because it has also present 
stems formed in the same way: zizan~nti 3 pl., etc. (also non­
thematic zizanti 3 sg., d. the Skt. type ajigar). From this it is 
possible to conclude that originally this was a type of stem 
forming both present and preterite in the manner of the various 
formations of the present system. The aorist, it has been 
observed, came about by the specialisation of certain preterite 
formations, and this is a case in point. To begin with we may 
assume two pairs *jijanati: djijanat and jandyati: djanayat 
having essentially the same sense. In the further development 
jandyati comes to be exclusively used in the present and 
djijanat originally simple preterite ( imperfectj becomes when 
isolated integrated into the aorist system. 
There are a few roots in the classical language which take this 
aorist as part of their primary conjugation, e.g. asisriyat and 
adudruvat from sri- ' to resort' and dru- ' to run ~. There are 
further examples in the Veda (e.g. dci!kradat from krand- ' to 
roar ') and also some non··thematic forms which are made exactly 
like imperfects of the reduplicating class: asi.sret, ddudrot. 
Certain reduplicated stems which became attached to the a-aorist 
have already been mentioned. These continue the IE usage 
which had reduplicated aorists in primary function and none 
that were specifically causative: ct. Gk. i71€cPJlOV; f.K€Klt.ero, etc. 

338 
THE VERB 
The s- Aorist 
Active, S. I 
dnai~am, 2 
dnal~ls, 3 dnai~t, D. I dnai§va, 
2 dnai~tam, 3 dnai~!iim, P. I dnai~ma, 2 dnai~ta, 3 dnai~ur. 
Middle, S. I dne~i, 2 dne~!hiis, 3 ane$ta, D. I dne~vahi, 2 dne­
§athiim, 3 dne~iitiim, P. I dne~mahi, 2 dnerjhvam, 3 dne$ata. 
The s-aorist stem differs from other verbal stems in having 
the vrddhi grade throughout the active, in the dual and plural 
as well as in the singular. In the middle roots with medial 
vowel i, U, r appear in the weak form (acchitsi, drutsi, dsrk~i) ; 
also roots in final r (dkni) and in the Veda certain roots with 
final nasal, e.g. dgasmahi from gam- and masiya opt. I sg. from 
man- (d. Av. m"3hmaidi). Elsewhere there is gU1).a. The sub­
junctive takes gUIJa in both active and middle (sto$iini, etc.) and 
this is extended to certain injunctive forms (je$ma). 
Before terminations beginning with occlusive when the root 
ends in such the s of this aorist is elided according to the usual 
phonetic rule: araudh-s-ta becomes arauddha, etc. This leads 
to some confusion between this aorist and the root aorist, but 
this is largely eliminated in the post-Vedic period by the disuse 
of the root aorist except in connection with very few roots. 
Phonetic decay also strongly affected the 2 and 3 sg. active, 
with the result that both the tense sign s and the terminations 
frequently disappear: abhiir for abhiir-s-t and abhiir-s-s, simi­
larly araik, asvait, etc. In the post-Vedic period these incon­
venient and ambiguous forms are abandoned and their place is 
taken by new formations taking the connecting vowel -i-: 
dnai~it, acchaitsit, etc. 
The s-aorist and the other forms of sigmatic aorist are sharply 
distinguished from the other classes of aorist in that there are no 
present-imperfect stems formed in the same way. There are 
indeed in the Veda certain isolated forms of the present made in 
this way (stu$i, hi~e, krJe) as well as some anomalous formations 
containing s which cannot be referred to the s-aorist stem 
(i arease, riijase. ii gr'f;i$e, p.uni~e) but these have the appear­
ance of being tentative formations which never developed very 
far rather than relics of an earlier system. 
The s-aOllst is found in Greek (E'€vga, ;S€tga, etc.) and 
Slavonic (visit, sluchi"t, etc,). 
In Latin s-aorist forms have 
coalesced with perfect forms to make one tense (perf. dfxi, 
dl~xi, etc.). In Irish injunctive and SUbjunctive forms of the 

339 
r 
THE VERB 
s-aorist are retained (the s-subjunctive). No trace of it appears 
in Gennanic. Radical vrddhi is attested for the vowel e by 
Latin and Slavonic 
vexi, O. S1. visit: Skt. dvak$am from 
vah-); for roots in diphthongs there is no clear evidence. In 
Hittite there is no s-aorist any more than any other kind of 
aorist, but there are certain preterite forms in the 2 and 3 
singular which have final -l: 2 sg. da-a-as ' you took '. t«nta-a-s 
l you put in " da-i! (you placed', pa-is ' you gave'; 3 sg. 
da-a-as < he took " da-a-i! ( he placed " ag-ga-as ( he died " etc. 
These forms consist of the verbal stem enlarged by the suffix -s 
and have no personal ending proper, and beside them there are 
forms to which the personal terminations have 
secondarily 
added: 2 sg. da-is-ta beside da-is, 3 sg. 1ta-is-ta ' lead 1 beside 
na-i-is. These forms are compared to the s-aorist of other IE 
languages, but it seems unlikely that they are simply remains 
of a fully developed IE s-aorist system. In the first place we 
have seen reason to believe that the aorist in general has arisen 
by specialisation out of an undifferentiated preterite, and in this 
respect Hittite should represent an earlier state of affairs. 
Furthermore there is some agreement between Hittite and 
Tocharian on this point, since the latter 
has also a 
certain type of 
using an s-stem in the 3 sg.: A. priikiis, 
B. preksa < he asked', and this coincidence does not seem to be 
fortuitous. 
these considerations in mind we may per­
haps rather 
the IE s-aorist to be a post-Hittite forma­
tion based on the extension to the whole 
of an s-
suffix which was originally restricted to the 
of certain 
persons (notably the 3 sg.) of one class of verbs. 
The i$-Aorist 
Active; S. I dpiivt'$am, 2 dpavis, 3 dpavIt, D. I dpavi$va . ... 
PI. 3 dpiivi$W; :\1iddle S. I 
dPavi~i, etc. . .. P. 3 dPavi~ata. 
This aorist has in the active vrddhi of the root if it terminates 
in a vowel (dpavi{iam, dtiiri$am, dsiiyi$am) and gUl)a in the case 
of medial i, 'U, r (droci~am, etc.). Both types occur from roots 
with medial a: dkan£~am; dvadhit. In the middle the root has 
normally gUl.1a, but occasional forms with weak root occur: 
nudi~thiis, (opt.) ruci~iya beside roci$fya, gmi;>iya, idhi$imahi. 
Just as the s-aorist is founded on certain s-stems which 
functioned as :tInite verbal forms, so the i$- aorist is formed on 
stems in the compound suffix -i-s, d. aroci~ta beside rod~-

340 
THE VERB 
, light', To judge by the small number of such forms in Iranian 
(xs1t3viSa ' I will satisfy', C:JviSf ' I expect ') it was not to begin 
with very frequent, but it became more common in Indo-Ary::m 
in accordance with the tendency that is observable everywhere 
with se~ forms of the verb. Several different but closely related 
types of formation have come to be associated with the i~­
aorist. (r) The suffix -i:;- (as opposed to -i~- with short -i-) is 
used in the case of the root grabh- ' to seize': 
agrabhi~1na. 
(2) Non-sigmatic formations in -i- (compare abruvit, etc., of the 
present system) appear: agrabhim, avadhim, agrhitiim, agrhitho.s. 
The normal 2 and 3 sg. of the i~-aorist is adapted from this 
formation, since -is-s and -is-t cannot phonetically produce -i's 
and -it. (3) Some preterite stems in short -i- (compare presents of 
the type vamiti) have been incorporated in this aorist: atarima, 
avadiran, biidhithiis, avild, etc. 
The isolated and anomalous vanu~anta of the RV. is interest­
ing because it is formed on the bases of an -u~- stem in the same 
way as this aorist is founded on -i~- sterns, but unlike the i~­
aorist it has never developed to form a system. 
The aorist forms sthe§a1n, sthe~ur, de~ma, jne$am, khye$am. 
etc., from roots in a are best interpreted as regular i~-aorist 
forms (staH-is-, etc.). There are corresponding middle forms with 
weak root as in the examples quoted above: asth-i§-i, asthi$ata, 
etc. With these are associated certain non-sigmatic forms which 
were mentioned in connection with the root aorist: asth-i-ta, 
etc. 
T he si~- Aorist 
This aorist, which is inflected exactly like the preceding 
(dyo.si~am, dyiisis, dyo.sit, etc.) arises from a mixture of the two 
preceqing. It is an innovation of Indo-Aryan, unknown to 
Iranian, and in the RV. it can be quoted only from two roots 
, sing', yo. ( go '). More examples are found later but it is 
never very common. In the classical language it is allowed to 
be made, in the active only, from roots in a and nam- · bow J, 
yam-
hold', ram- ' be content'. 
The sa- Aorist 
The sa- aorist has the normal thematic inflection and the 
weak root. The accent on unaugmented forms, when it occurs, is 
on the suffix (dhuk$dn) which is in accordance with the apo­
phony. It is made only from roots containing a medial vowel 
I 

THE VERB 
341 
i, u, r and a final consonant which combines with the s of the 
suffix to produce -k~- t.g. ddik~at. dmrk~at, amrk~anta, avrk$am, 
aduk~ilt. later adhuk~at from dis-
point " mrs-
I touch " mrj­
f 
I wipe t, vrh- ( tear J, duh- ( milk ': It is rare in RV. (examples 
from 7 roots), which may suggest that it is an innovation, 
though from Iranian (0. Pers. niyapisam ( I wrote down ') it 
appears to be of at least Indo-Iranian date. Nothing that can be 
exactly compared is found in the other IE languages. 
The Passive Aorist in -i 
There exists a passive aorist in -i, used only in the 3rd person 
singular, which is independent of any of the foregoing aorist 
stems: djiiayi ( was known', dda1'si was seen', etc. Unaug­
t 
mented forms (which appear in both indicative and injunctive 
use) are always accenteci· on the root syllable: s1'iivi, piidi, etc. 
Roots having i, u, r as medial vowel appear in the gUJ.).a grade 
(aceti, dbodhi, asarji); elsewhere there is normally vrddhi 
(dgami, dkiiri, dstiivi, asrayi), more rarely gul)a (ajani, avadhi). 
The formation is taken by some 40 roots in the RV., to which 
others are added later. It appears also in Iranian (Av. sravi, 
O. Pers. adariy = Skt. sriivi, ddhari), but not elsewhere in Indo­
European. 
Neglecting the augment, which was a secondary and optional 
addition to preterite formations in Indo-European, it is clear 
that these forms are nothing more than old neuter i-stems, 
without any termination, which have been adapted to the ver­
bal conjugation. 
§ II. THE PERFECT 
Active, S. I cakdra, cakiira, 2 cakdrtha, 3 cakiira, D. I cakrvd, 
2 cakrathur, 3 cakratur, P. I cakrma, 2 eakra, 3 cakrur. 
Middle, S. I eak,e, 2 eakr$e, 3 eakre, D. I cakrvdhe, 2 cakrdthe, 
3 cakriite, P. I cakrmdhe, 2 cakrdhvt, 3 cakrire. 
The perfect is formed from the root stem but this is char­
acterised by (I) reduplication and (2) a special series of endings. 
The general principles of reduplication hav~ already been de­
tailed (§ 5). Of the types there enumerated the one adopted for 
the perfect is that which uses the vowel a (IE e) in the reduplica­
ting syllable, with the proviso that in Sanskrit (as opposed to 
Greek, etc.) i and u are substituted before roots which contain 
such a vo~el (tatdna = pipe~a, bubhoja). Special features of the 

342 
THE VERB 
perfect reduplication, in addition to those mentioned above are 
as follows: (I) There is a class of roots in the Veda which re­
duplicate with a long vowel: diidhara, jiigD.ra, miimrje, pipliya, 
tuttiva. This is mainly intensive reduplication, but in some cases 
the a of the normal reduplication has coalesced with an element 
elsewhere lost before the beginning of the root, e.g. in the per­
fects of g1- { to awake' and mrj- ' to wipe'; d, Gk. J.ytdpw, 
0IUJpYVVp.,L. (2) Two roots in u reduplicate with a instead of the 
usualu and in both this is associated with irregular weak form 
of root in the singular active. babhuva, sasi"iva from bhu- ( to 
be ' and s'u- ' to give birth', (3) Roots beginning with a nor­
mally have a- (a + a) in the perfect, e.g., ada, asa from ad- ' to 
eat' and as-
to be '. A different type appears in the perfect
t 
of aiij- 'to anoint' and as- • to attain' (variant root forms 
atJZs-, nas-) where an n which forms part of the root is repeated 
in the reduplication: ananja, anaje; 
alld1Jt.~a, anase (d. Ir. 
i-an-aic 'he came '). This spreads by analogy to other roots 
including a number beginning with ,-: andrca, anlet from !c- or 
arc- to praise. (4) Roots beginning with i or u reduplicate with 
these vowels which in the strong forms of the active are pre­
fixed to the gm:la grade of the roots with intervening -y- and -v­
and in the weak grade coalesce with the radical vowels to form 
.. and tt: 
i:;i~a,i~i. uVGca, ilee from £f.- • to seek · anduc- ' to 
be accustomed', (5) A similar type of reduplication appears in 
the case of one root beginning with ya- and a number beginning 
with va- which reduplicate with i and 1t. These coalesce with i­
and ll- in the weak forms of the root to produce i and ii: 
iyiija, ije from yaj- 'to sacrifice' (weak form ij- in pass. 
ijydte, etc.), 'Uviica, fice from vac- ' to speak' (weak form 1IC- in 
ucydte, uktd-, etc.); similar forms from vap- 'sow', vad­
, speak', vas- 'dwell J and vah- ' carry'. (6) Roots having a 
medial a before a single consonan t, andbeginning with a consonan t 
that is unchanged in reduplication have the normal reduplica­
tion only in the strong forms: tatana, papiita from tan- ' stretch' 
and pat- ' fall ';' the weak forms of the perfect are made by 
substituting -e- for the a of the root: tene, temAr, peee, pecur .. 
This is an innovation of Sanskrit which is by no means complete 
in the Vedic period; the more original forms which occur are 
V. paptima, tatne, mamnate, etc. The type originated in certain 
roots which acquired such form through normal phonetic 
development, notably sad-
I to sit I where sedur stands regularly 

THE VERB 
343 
for earlier *sazdur (d. Av. hazdyiiJ pt. opt.) and roots beginning 
\\lith y- (yemttr for *yaymur). (7) The root vid- ' know' has no 
reduplication, and this is in accordance with the related lan­
guages: Skt. vida, Gk. olBa, Goth. wait, etc. There are a few 
other sporadic cases of unreduplicated perfect forms in the 
Veda, e.g. tak§athur, tak§ur, skambhathur, skambhur, and three 
perfect participles formed without reduplication: 
diisvas­
, pious " miif,hvds- ' liberal ' and sahvds- / overpowering '. 
In apophony the perfect follows the normal type of verbal 
inflection, that is to say the strong form of the root appears in 
the three singular persons of the active, the weak form else­
where. Normally the strong grade is gUI)a (vavarta, ciketa, 
bubodha) but wherever in the strong stem medial a appears be­
fore a single consonant (I sg. act. tatdpa, bibhdya, cakara. etc.) 
vrddhi is substituted in the 3rd person sg., and in the later lan­
guage optionally in the Jst: tatapa, bibhdya, cakiira, etc. This 
feature does not appear outside Indo-Iranian; the majority of 
the languages show gUI)a only, and by general agreement the 
o-grade of the root: Gk. ylyov£, etc. Original o-grade is 
~ttested also by Sanskrit. since certain roots which have under­
gone the second palatalisation retain the original guttural in 
these perfect forms: ciktiya, ciktfta, jigaya# jaghtina from ci­
t 
t
gather " cit-
observe " ji- ' conquer' and han- • slay'. 
The weak forms of the root are the normal ones that result 
from the loss of the gUI)a vowel: cakre,jaghnt!,jagmur, bubudhe, 
etc. Roots in Ii lose this vowel altogether in the weak forms as 
generally (da-dh-ur), but before consonantal endings invariably 
insert the union vowel i (dadh-i-re) in contradistinction to the 
t
present. SamprasaraI)a appears in such roots as vyadh-
to 
pierce J and svap- • to sleep' (vividhuy} su~upur; their redupli.:. 
cating vowel goes with this form). In some roots having nasal 
in the strong form the weak form is marked by the absence of 
this nasal: cakradt! from krand-
to roar'. On weak stems of
I 
the type ten- see above. 
For the personal terminations see § 6. There are not· many 
compli:cations. Instead of the normal endings roots in a ter­
minate in -au in the I and 3 sg. of the active: dadau, dadhau, 
tasthiiu, jajfiiiu from dli- ( to give J, dhii- • to place " sthii- • to 
stand ',jfiii- ( to know' (for IE *dedoH-u, etc~. with vrddhi be­
fore laryngeal). The final u- element, which appears here in 
place of a personal termination, is found also in Latin, incor-
M 

THE VERB
344 
porated into certain perfect forms: novit (knew', d. Skt.
JaJnau; plevit (filled', d. paprau. 
A feature of the perfect conjugation is the frequency with
which the connecting vowel -i- appears before the terminations
that begin with a consonant: 2 sg. bub6dhitha, I duo bubudhivd, 
I pI. bubudhimd, ... 3 pI. mid. bubudhiri. etc. In the later lan­
guage the -re of the 3 pI. mid. has it always. Before other con­
sonantal endings except the 2 sg, act. it is taken by the vast
majority of verbs. In the 2 sg. act. the ani? forms allowed are
more numerous, and a number of roots take optionally either
form, e.g. ninitha, nindyitha. Roots in a have this option, but
when taking -£- they appear in the weak form and the accent is 
transferred to the ending: daddtha, dadithd. In the Veda the 
use of the union vowel is less extensive than in the classical
language. As a general rule it appears after roots ending in a 
consonant provided the last syllable of the stem is a heavy one: 
vividitha,l~cimd. paptimd, etc., as opposed to tatdntha, yuyujmd,
etc. I t ~s also taken by roots in -a (dadimd, dadhimd) but the
type dadithd of the 2 sg. is unknown to the early usage. In
Iranian the use 'of the auxiliary vowel is exceedingly rare which
makes it dear that in the main its employment in the perfect
(as elsewhere in the verbal system) is an innovation of Indo­
Aryan. 
The perfect tense is widely represented in Indo-European, 
having been dropped only in Armenian and Balto-Slavonic. 
Perfects common to Sanskrit and other languages may be
illustrated by such examples as the following: jajdna (jan- ( to
beget '): Gk. rJrOV€; daddrsa (drs- ' to see '): Gk. OJOOpKE ;
cicchida. cicchide (chid- (to split ') : Lat. scicidf, Goth. ska{,skaip ;
didisa, didise (dis- (to point out '): Gk. 8J8€f.Xa, OEOE(/y~aL, 
Goth. ga-taih; rireca, ririee (ric- ' to leave '). Gk. AJAot1Ta, Lat. 
liquf, Goth. lailv; nineja, ninije (nij- 'to wash '), Ir. -nenaig; 
tutdda, tutudur (tud- 'to push '), Lat. tutudi, Goth. staistaut; 
vavdrta (vrt- ' to turn '). Lat. vorti) vertf, Goth. warp; dadhdr~a 
(dhr~~ C to be bold '), Goth. ga-dars; jaghJna (han- ' to slay'),
Ir. I sg. -gegon, 3 sg. -gegoin. 
In some languages, notably Latin and Germanic, 'the redupli­
cation is not an essential part of the perfect formation. It
occurs with certain roots and is absent in the case of others. 
This corresponds more nearly to the original state of affairs in
IE. The reduplication was, to begin with, no more an essential 
'\ 

345 
THE VERB 
part of the perfect formation than was the augment of the aorist 
and imperfect. Its generalisation in Greek and Indo-Iranian is 
one of the many isoglosses that unite those two branches 
v.rithin the IE family. Even they preserve in vida ( knows' the 
older type of non-reduplicating perfect. 
Here, as elsewhere, Hittite shows greater divergence from 
the normal IE type. Hittite has no perfect, but a special type 
of present conjugation, the fJi- conjugation, which has been 
compared with, and has certain features in common with, the 
normal IE perfect. A t the same time the gap is not easy to 
bridge, since we have on the one hand a special tense with a 
sense of its own (state, result) which is made by most roots in 
a,ddition to the present tense, and on the other hand a variant 
form of the present taken by certain roots. It is probable that 
in this matter Hittite is the major innovator, but it is not pos­
sible simply to derive the Hitt. bi-conjugation from a syste~n 
corresponding to the IE perfect, because there are outside 
Hittite also certain prescnt formations which go with it: 
notably (1) Skt. formations of the type dduha enumerated 
above, (2) the Gk. conjugation of thematic verbs (Alyw, AlYELs, 
>.IYH). 
The perfect in Sanskrit and Greek conjugates in both active 
and middle. There is reason to believe that this is a secondary 
aITangem~t. In Sanskrit the middle endings of the perfect are 
in the main obvious imitations of the present, ill marked con­
trast to the active endings which differ so markedly from those 
of the present. Furthermore it has already been pointed out 
that an active perfect not infrequently corresponds to a middle 
present, and that the endings of the active are more closely 
related to certain middle endings fhan to other active endings. 
All these indications lead us to believe that the existence of two 
voices in the perfect is of later origin than in other parts of the 
verbal system. 
The evidence also points to the conclusion tl1at the perfect 
did not to begin with have a corresponding preterite. Such 
forms of this kind as exist in several languages are to be classed 
as independent innovations. This applies both to Sanskrit and 
to Greek, and to a greater extent in the former, since while 
Greek did eventually develop a pluperfect with a meaning of its 
own, the forms classified as such in Sanskrit are in the main 
isolated and unstable formations which appear in the Vedic 

THE VERB 
language but are not used later. Such are sg. I ajagrabham, 
3 djagan, duo 2 amumuktam, pl. 3 dbibhayur, mid. pI. 3 ajag­
miran. The distinction between these forms and the imperfect 
of the reduplicating class is not very clearly to be drawn. 
Their sense is normally that of simple preterites. 
§ I2. 
IN}eNCTIVE AND SUBJUNCTIVE 
The so-called injunctive is no separate morphological cate­
gory, but the term is applied to those unaugmented forms of the 
imperfect or aorist which are used with the force of sUbjunctive 
or imperative (§ 2). In the RV. the augmentless fO.rms are more 
than half as common as the augmented and they may appear in­
differently in preterite or injunctive use. Such forms occur 
from both imperfect and aorist stems, IIlore frequently from the 
latter. In the later Atharvaveda the proportion of such forms 
occurring is noticeably less t and of those that do occur a greater 
part are formed from the aorist stem. Jn post-Vedic Sanskrit 
the injunctive disappears except in one construction. Prohibi­
tions continue ,to be expressed by the use of mii in connection 
with unaugmented aorist forms: ma bhai~ilz, •do not be afraid', 
ma galz, , do not go " etc. 
The subjunctive stem is formed by the addition of the vowel 
a to the indicative tense stem. the gUl)ated form of such a stem 
being employed if it exists: d6ha-. juhdva-, yundja-, etc., from 
the tense stems d6h-, Iuho-, yundj-. This a combines with the a 
of thematic stems to form long ii: bhdva-, tudd-, ucyd-. The 
inflection of the subjunctive from non-thematic verbal sterns is 
illustrated by the following paradigms: 
Active, S. I dyani, dyii, 2 dyasi, ciyas, 3 dyati. dyat, D. I ayiiva, 
2 dyathas, 3 ayatas, p, I dyii1na, 2 dyatha, 3 dyan. 
Middle, S. I iisai, 2 iisase, lisasai, 3 lisate, asiitai, D. I asavahai. 
tisavahc, 2 tisaithe, 3 asaite, P. I iisamahai. lisiimahe, 2 tisadhve. 
Jsadhvai, 3 iisantc, asanta, iisantai. 
It will be observed that the endings of the subjunctive are 
partly secondary and partly primary. In I du., I pI. and 3 pI. of 
the active secondary endings are employed; in 2 and 3 duo and 
2 pI. primary endings; in 2 and 3 sg. either primary or secondary 
endings are used. In the middle forms with secondary endings 
are rare, appearing normally only in the 3 pI. 
The I sg. active has a special ending of its own, -lini, beside 
which in the earlier language simple -a appears which is to be 

THE VERB 
347 
compared to the -0 which appears in Greek in the subjunctive 
as well as in the active of the I sg. of thematic verbs (ayw). The 
I sg. middle ending -ai arises from the contraction of the a of 
the sUbjunctive stem with the -e of the termination. This -ai is 
then extended to other parts of the middle inflection and such 
eventually become the normal forms. This type of termination 
is preceded by the vowel aeven in subj unctives of non-thematic 
verbs. 
The conjugation of sUbjunctives from thematic stems is the 
same as the above but based on a stem in a arising from the 
combination of the a of the tense stem and the subjunctive a : 
Active, S. I bhdviini, 2 bhdvasi, bhdvas, 3 bhdvati, bhdviit, 
D. I bhdviiva, 2 bhdvathas, 3 bhdviitas, P. I bhdviima, 2 bhdviitha, 
3  bhavan. 
Middle, S. I bhdvai, 2 bhdvase, bhdvasai, 3 bhdvate, bhdviitai, 
D. I bhdvdvahai, 2 bhdvaithe, 3 bhdvaite, P. I bhdviimahai, 
2 bhdvadhvai J 3 bhdviintai. 
The subjunctive can be formed in the Vedic language from all 
three tense stems, present, aorist and perfect. This variety of 
formation is not matched by any variety of meaning, e.g. 
Sr1Jdvat, sravat and s'Usravat all mean < he will hear' or r let him 
hear J and no sort of difference related to the tense stem appears 
between them. Aorist subjunctives are commonest from the 
root aorist (karat, gamat, yamat, varat; karati, j6~ati, bhtfdati, 
etc.) and from the s-aorist (je~at, ne~at, matsat; ne§-ati, par~ati, 
etc.); none are found from the sa-aorist. Examples of sub­
junctives from the perfect stem are jaghdnat, jujo~at, paspdrsat ; 
jujo~atz"J diddati, bubodhati, etc. 
The subjunctive remained in use during the later Vedic 
period (BrahmaI.1as and Upani~ads), but, apart from the first 
persons which were incorporated in the imperative, it is extinct 
in the c1assicallanguage. 
A subjunctive corresponding in form and meaning to that of 
Sanskrit appears in Greek. Here the primary endings are ex­
clusively used and the forms with long vowel associated with 
thematic stems have become predominant. The quality of this 
vowel (where Sanskrit has ti) varies in accordance with the 
variation in the indicative (aYW/LEV, a')'1]T€). Some old short 
vowel subjunctives are preserved as futures (;SO/-Lo.t, 7TtO/Lo.t) and 
the simplest explanation of the s-future is that it is the sub­
junctive of the s-aorist. The Latin future erit corresponds to 
"  

THE VERB 
the Skt. subjunctive dsat(i) and both Italic and Celtic have 
forms deriving from the s-aorist subjunctive (Lat. faxo, Osc. 
deivast, Ir. I sg. -tias, 3 pI. -tiassat from tiagu · go '). These two 
groups have also an a-subjunctive which does not appear in 
Greek or Sanskrit. 
The subjunctive is absent over a considerable part of Indo­
European, and has the appearance of being a comparatively 
late formation. It can be plausibly explained as having grown 
out of the injunctive, certain forms of which" developed into 
an independent system. The hesitation between primary and 
secondary endings in Sanskrit represents a transition from an 
earlier system in which the endings were secondary (as in the 
injunctive) and a new one in which primary endings are applied 
as being more appropriate to its predominantly future meaning. 
This transition has been completed in Greek. Of the short and 
long vowel subjunctives the former is the earlier and more 
original. The addition of the thematic suffix to a stem already 
. provided with such is without parallel elsewhere in IE stem 
formation, and its presence here is due to the analogy which 
created bhavii-, 
having the same relation to bhava- as asa­
to as-, The short vowel subjunctives with secondary endings 
(kdrat, gdmat) have a form which cannot in itself be distinguished 
from injunctives (augmeptless preterites) of thematic stems. 
That they are subjunctives depends not on the nature of the 
stern itself, since such stems are commonly used in the forma­
tion of present/imperfects, but in their relation to other forms 
in the system. The absence of any distiactive formative in the 
most original type of SUbjunctive is a clear indication of its 
secondary origin. 
§ I3. THE IMPERATIVE 
Active, S. I bhdviini, dyiini, 2 bhava, ihi, 3 bhdvatu, etu~ 
D. I bhdviiva, dyiiva, 2 bhdvatam, itdm, 3 bhdvatiim, 
itdm~ 
P. I bhdviima, dyiima, 2 bhdvata, ita, 3 bhdvantu, yantu. 
Middle, S. I bhdva( dsai, 2 bhavasva, dssva, 3 bhdvatiim. 
Jstiim, D. I bhdviivahai, aSiivahai, 2 bhavethiim, iisiitham, 3 
bhdvetiim, aSiitiim, P. 1 bhdviimahai, asiimahai, 2 bhdvadhvam1" 
addhvam,3 bhdvantiim, asatiim. 
This paradigm is composite. The first .. persons in the three 
numbers are properly subjunctive forms. Injunctive forms are 
employed in 2 and 3 duo and 2 pI. Specific imperative forms 

349 
THE VERB 
occur in 2 sg. and 3 sg. and pI. In the 2 sg. the stem of thematic 
verbs functions as imperative without any addition in Sanskrit 
as in the related languages: bhdra, Av. bara, Gk. cPEPE, Arm. 
ber, Goth. bair, Ir. beir ; Prcchd ' ask', Lat. posce ; dja ( drive', 
Gk. aYE, Lat. age, etc. With non-thematic verbs the ending is 
-hi, originally -dhi: £hi' go', Av. £di, Gk. 'tOL. The original-dhi 
appears in Sanskrit after consonantal stems (viddhi ' know', 
Gk. tuElL, dugdhi 'milk', etc.) and occasionally elsewhere, 
edhi for *azdhi (d. Av. zdi) from as- ' to be ',jtthudhi from hu­
, to sacrifice'. The Veda has further examples: sr1Judhi' hear', 
gadhi ' go " vrdhi ' cover '. 
The forms of the 3 sg. and pl. are made by the addition of a 
particle -u to the secondary endings: bhdvat-u, etc. Corre­
sponding forms occur in Hittite: 3 sg. estu: Skt. dstu, kuendu, 
Skt. hdntu; 3 pI. asandu, Skt. sdntu; kunandu, Skt. ghndntu, 
etc. In the lti-verbs which have no t-ending in the 3 sg. present, 
this element 1,(, appears alone in the 3 sg. impv.: aku, aru from 
ak- · to die " ar- · to arrive " 3 sg. pres. ak£, ari. 
In the middle the termination of the 2 sg. is -sva. A corre­
sponding formation is found only. in Iranian: bara1juha, Skt. 
bhdrasva; karasva, Skt. k,njvd, etc. This -sva is considered to be 
the stem of the reflexive pronoun. The 3 sg. and pI. are made by 
the addition of -am to the secondary endings and here too 
corresponding forms are found only in Iranian, varnyatqm, 
xraos;}ntCfm. The few verbs which have inflections without t in 
the 3 sg. active (e.g. duhe, dduha) keep this feature in the 3 sg. 
impv. : duham, sayam. In the 3 pI. they have -ram with r as in 
the indicative: duhram, d. 3 pI. mid. duhre.' Compromise 
forms are duhratam and seratam. 
Beside the normal endings above there appears, particularly 
in the earlier language an ending -tat. This is indifferent to the 
distinction between active and middle and it appears most 
freq uen tly used as 2 sg.: brutat ' say " dhattiU ' put', dhiivatat 
, run " vittat ' know', etc. It may also be used for other persons 
and numbers: I sg. jagrtiid ahdm ' let me keep awake '. 3 sg. 
rdja murdhanam vi patayatat 4 let the king cause his head to fall 
off " 2 pI. apa[z, ... deve~u nab- sukfto brutat ' 0 waters, announce 
us to the gods as well-doers'. In the later language the use as 
3 sg. tends to preponderate, but the total of examples as com­
pared with the earlier language is small. 
This fonn of imperative appears also in Greek (as 3 sg.) and 

350 
THE VERB 
in Latin (as 2, 3 sg.): ia'Tw let him know'. Skt. vittdt, S6'Tw,
I 
i'Tw. Ea'TW, etc.; Lat. vehito, Skt. vdhatiit, poscito, habeto, esto. 
etc., O. Lat. est6d, etc., d. Osc. likitud, estud. 
In the Veda there are certain 2 sg. forms in -si with impera­
I
tive value: dhdk# 
burn " ydk~i I worship', Pdr~i I cross'.
prdsi I fill " sr6$i I hear ',etc. The termination is identical with
that of the 2 sg. indic. pres., but these imperatives are quite
clearly distinguished because the presents are differently
formed (ddhasi, sr;;6~i, etc.). One corresponding form is quoted
from A vestan: d6iSi' show' from daes-. 
In the classical language the imperative forms are from the
present stem. In the Vedic language imperatives may be made
from all three stems, present, aorist and perfect. and, as in the
case of the other moods, no difference of meaning appears be­
tween them. Examples of aorist imperatives are: krdhl, 
srudhi, gahi, gantu, yuk~vd; sada. sana, sadatu; 
vocatiit, 
vocatu; of perfect imperatives, cikiddhi, mumugdhl, sasiidhi, 
dide#u, vavrtsva. It should be noted that imperatives are not
normally made from the s-aorist. There are a few formations
such as 2 sg. ne~a. 3 sg. ne~atu and 3 sg. mid. riisatiim which are
all thematic formations and therefore cannot properly be
attached to the s-aorist. 
§ 14. 
OPTATIVE AND PRECATIVE 
Non-thematic : 
Active, S. I duhyiim, 2 duhytis, 3 duhydt, D. I duhydva,. 
:2 dukyatam, 3 dl,thyiitam, P. I duhyilma, 2 duhytita, 3 dukyur. 
Middle, S. I duhiyd, 2 duh1:thas, 3 duhitd, D. I d'UhivdhiJ> 
2 duhiydtham, 3 duhfyiitam, P. I dukimdhi, 2 duhidhvdm, 
3 duhirdn. 
Thematic: 
Active, S. I bhdveyam, 2 bhdves, 3 bhdvet, D. I bhdvema,.
2 bhdvetam', 3 bhdvetiim, P. I bhdvema, 2 bhtiveta, 3 bhdveyur. 
Middle, S. I bhdveya, :2 bhdvethas, 3 bhdveta, D. I bhdvevahi.
2 bhdveyathlim, 3 bhdveyatam, P. I bhdvemahi, 2 bhdvedhvam:, 
3 bhdveran. 
The non-thematic inflection of the optative differs in apo.. 
phony from the usual system. The'strong form of the suffix is
not confined to the three singular persons of the active, but
extended to all the active with the exception of the 3 pI. That

I 
,  
t 
THE VERB 
351 
this is an innovation is clear from Latin which preserves two 
grades in the case of the verb ' to be ': O. Lat. siem, siet for 
later sim, sit beside simus. A similar extension of the strong 
forms was observed in the case of roots in -a: I pI. pres. yiimas 
, we go " aor. ddhiima we placed'. In the thematic classes the 
t 
diphthongal stem of the optative (bhdres, bhdret, etc. = Gk. 
<p£POtS, <p£POt, Goth. bairais, bairai) is formed by contraction 
of the thematic suffix and the weak form of the optative suffix 
(o+i). 
The terminations of the optative are mainly the normal 
secondary terminations. The I sg. middle has a special ending 
which has been ~oticed (§ 6), and the -ran of the 3 pI. appears in 
a minority of preterite forms (dduhran, etc.). The anomalous 
Vedic 3 sg. duhiydt (after which 3 pI. duhiydn) seems to be based 
on *duhiyd formed without -t- afte r the fashion of the indicative 
(duhlt dduha). 
In the classical language the optative is formed from the 
present stem. In the Vedic language it is formed from all three 
sterns, present, aorist and perfect, and, as with the subjunctive, 
no difference of meaning is attached to this difference of forma­
tion. 
Root aorist optatives are fairly common: 
asydm, 
rdhyam, gamyiis, hhi"lyiit, middle asiya, etc. They are rarer in the 
a-aorist and reduplicated aorist. From the sigmatic aorists 
optatives are formed only in the middle and the 2 and 3 sg. take 
invariably the precative s; masiya (man- ( to think '), ma'11Z­
si~thtis, ma1?1.,si~ta, gmi~ya, jani~~ta\yiisi~i~thiis, etc. The perfect 
optative is common: jagamyiim, riricyiim, vavrtyas, ninIyiit, 
papatyiit, vavrtiya, cak~amithiis, jagrasita, etc. 
The oldest type of optative is that attached to root stems, 
present or aorist. Here the suffix is attached to the root in the 
same way as in the various present stems, and the normal 
secondary endings are added to it: gam-ya-m like kri-1Jii-m. This 
stem developed on its own lines on account of the special 
meaning which became associated with it. The main develop­
ments which produced the optative in its final form were (I) the 
incorporation of the optative in the present system (asnuydt 
replacing asytit, etc.) and (2) the creation of optative forms to 
thematic stems by combining with them the weak form of the 
optative suffix. The first process is still incomplete in the Veda. 
On this theory the optative was to begin with a quite inde­
pendent stem and its association with the various tense stems 

352 
THE VERB 
secondary. The perfect optatives should be regarded from the 
same point of view. Reduplication in early IE was a feature 
liable to turn up in many parts of the verbal system, and on the 
other hand though it came to be especially associated with the 
perfect it was not to begin with an essential feature of that 
system. Bearing this in mind it is clear that a reduplicated 
optative is not in its origin connected with the perfect system. 
We have an optative stem (gamya-m) originally independent of 
the tense sterns, and beside it a reduplicated optative stem 
(jagamya-m) originally equally independent. \Vith the incorpcr­
ation of the optative into the various tense stems these redup­
licated optatives became formally attached to the perfect, but. 
in meaning they never acquired any of the characteristics of the 
perfect. The dying out in the later language of all forms of the 
optative except those belonging to the present system, resulted 
naturally from the absence of any distinction of meaning be­
tween the different forms. 
The forms of the Precative in the classical language are as 
follows: 
Active, S. 1: bhuylisam, 2 bhuyiis, 3 bhuyiit, D. I bhuydsva 
2 bhuytistam, 3 bhuyiistam, P. I bhuyJsma, 2 bhuyiista, 3 bhii­
.L 
yasur. 
Middle, S. I bhavi$iyd, 2 bhavi~i$thtisJ 3 bhavi$i$Jd, D. I bhavi­
$ivdhi, 2 bhavi$iytistham, 3 bhavi$tytistam, P. I bhavi$imdhi, 
2 bhavi$icf,hvdm, 3 bhavi:;irdn. 
' 
The active forms are always made directly from the root by 
the addition of the optative suffix extended by s. The older 
form ofthe 3 sg. act. was bhuytis, which is preserved in the Vedic 
ianguage. The middle forms are formed from the stem of the 
sigmatic aorist, and the precative s is absent in the first persons 
and in the 3 pI. The precative is the only modal form from a 
non-present stem retained by the classical language. 
The use of the precative is not common in the classicallan~ 
guage and knowledge of its inflection is based on the statements 
of the grammarians. In the pre-classical language most of the 
active forms as given by the grammarians are attested with the 
exception that th~ older form of the 3 sg. is used. In the middle 
there is no distinction in the Veda between optative and preca­
tive. The optative of the sigmatic aorist invariably inserts the 
precative s in the 2 and 3 sg. and this s is employed nowhere 
elSe in the conjugation. Such optative forms with precative s are 

353 
THE VERB 
occasionally formed in the Veda from other stems: root-aorist, 
padf~!d, muci~ta, a-aorist, vide$#a, reduplicated aorist, riri~f~ta, 
perfect, siisahf~thas. 
! 
In the ]Jg?1eda, as opposed to the later Vedic literature, very 
nearly the same state of affairs prevails in the active. Precative 
forms from the root aorist are numerous in the 2 sg. (which 
cannot in this case be distinguished from the ordinary optative) 
and in the 3 sg. In the 3 sg. no non-precative forms are re­
corded. Outside these two persons there occur only I sg.. 
bhityasam and I pI. kriyiisma (once each). Otherwise forms in 
-yii only appear outside the 2 and 3 sg. It is clear that the two 
first person precatives are innovations of the later RV. period 
and that in the original inflection s was proper only to the 2 and 
3 sg., and there always used, as in'the middle. The inflection 
may therefore be compared to that of the Hittite verbs men­
tioned above (§ 10, S. I tarnabun, 2 tarnal, 3 tarnal, P. I tar­
m-lmen, 2 tarnatin, 3 tarnir) in which s functions as the common 
termination of the 2, 3 sg. but does not appear in the other 
persons. In its earliest form the Sanskrit precative, which is 
not to be distinguished from the optative of the root aorist, or in 
the middle from that of the sigmatic aorist, preserves this 
ancient characteristic of one class of secondary endings. On 
the other hand, in the rest of the conjugation, the optative has 
adopted the normal secondary endings in these two persons. 
The precative is thus one of the most archaic formations in 
Sanskrit grammar. 
, 
§ IS. 
SECONDARY CONJUGATION 
t 
Under secondary conjugation are classified certain forms of 
present stem which differ from the ordinary series of present 
stems because (I) they have acquired a special meaning and 
(2) they are normally taken by roots in addition to their 
ordinary presents. The four types of secondary conjugation are 
(1) passive, (2) intensive, (3) causative and (4) desiderative. 
They are all essentially present formations, and with certain 
exceptions their inflection in other systems consists of more or 
less sporadic innovations. 
I. The Passive 
The formation of the passive is Closely connected with that 
of the fourth present class. It differs from the middle of that 

THE VERB
354 
class only in the position of the accent. In the passive this is on 
the suffix yd whereas in the fourth class it is on the root: 
mdnyate f thinks', but badhydte ( is bound '. This distinction is 
secondary since roots in the fourth class appear in their weak 
form (i~yati, i~yate) and this indicates original suffixal accent, 
Furthermore there are a few old intransitives (not passives) 
which are suffixally accented: mriydte (dies', dhriyate •is stead­
fast'. There is also fluctuation of accent in some passive and 
in transi tive forms, mucyate and mucydte ( is released " k$iyate 
and k$iydte (is destroyed', jiyate and jiydte (suffers loss', 
pdcyate and pacydte (is cooked '. 
The passive in this form is found also in Iranian (Av. kir­
yeinte = kriyante) , but not elsewhere. It is an Indo-Iranian 
innovation based on the fourth present class, and its origin was 
due to the frequency of intransitive verbs in that class, par­
ticularly with middle inflection : jdyate is born " pdcyate ' be­
C 
comes ripe, cooked', tdpyate (becomes hot', etc. Since a 
number of these verbs had differently formed transitive presents 
beside them (tapati heats J, etc.) they could easily form the 
t 
nucleus from which the passive system developed. Differentia­
tion was made by the retention in the passive of the old accent, 
for which in the fourth class presents radical accent has been 
substituted. The examples above in which there is variation 
of accent are mainly old intransitives which have been adopted 
as passives (mucyate ' gets loose', etc.). The middle inflection 
is universal in Sanskrit (except for some late and incorrect Epic 
forms, drsyati is seen " etc.), but active forms are not uncom­
f 
mon in Iranian: A v. bairyeiti ' is carried', O. Pers. (jahyiimahy 
, we are called 'J etc. Probably to begin with the usage was 
uncertain and the exclusive use of the middle later generalised 
in Indo-Aryan. 
The passive is inflected only in the present system. In the 
perfect and future the middle voice frequently functions as 
passive: cakre {was done', kari~ydte ' will be done'. In the 
aorist there is a passive 3 sg. of independent formation (dkari) 
which has already been described. 
In the inlmediate pre-­
classical period there was a tendency, which did not go very far, 
to extend this by adding other forms. N one are found in the 
Vedic literature, but the grammarians lay down, for roots ending 
in vowels and grak-, drs-, han-, special passive aorist forms based 
on the above, e.g. I sg. ddayi~i, 3 pI. dniiyi~ata, etc.: 3 sg. 
II 

THE VERB 
355 
ddiiyi, dnayi. This type of stem was further extended to the 
future: I sg. diiyi~ye, 3 sg. ghiini~yate. etc. Such forms occur 
very rarely in classical Sanskrit, and they are all learned forma­
tions taken from the grammar. 
In addition to finite verbal forms the passive meaning could 
be expressed by the passive participles in -ta and the future 
passive participle in -tavya. In the later history of Indo-Aryan, 
in the Prakrit period, all forms of active preterite were lost, and 
their place was taken by passive constructions with the participle 
in -tao This process is reflected in the later Sanskrit literature; 
the usual construction becomes maya briihmmJo dr;>{alz, {the 
brahman was seen by me • instead of aham brahma~'lam apasyam 
{ I saw the brahman'. Associated-with this is the increasing use 
of the impersonal passive: iha sthtyatiim ' stay here' (lit. 'let 
it be stayed here '), tena bhavitavyam ' it must be him ., etc. 
This type of later Sanskrit is largely Prakrit in disguise. By 
such devices the wealth of the PaniQ.ean verbal morphology can 
be mostly ignored, and this simplified Sanskrit was understand­
ably popular. 
II.  The Intensive 
The intensive is a form of present stem which expresses 
intensification or repetition of the sense expressed by the root. 
It is of common occurrence in the Vedic language, being 
attested from over go roots. In the dassicallanguage, though 
allowed by the grammarians to be made from every root, it is of 
infrequent occurrence. The stem consists of the root preceded 
by strong reduplication. In the case of roots containing i or u 
this reduplication has the corresponding gUlJa vowel: 3 sg. act. 
nenekti, vevetti, mid. nenikU, dedi~te (nij-
wash' J vid- ' know',
i 
dis- ( point out ') ; 3 sg. act. j6haviti, n6naviti, I pI. nonumas 
(hu- ' call " nu- ' roar '). Where the vowel is a the correspond­
ing long vowel appears in the reduplication: 3 sg. cakasiti, 
piipatiti, 3 pI. nanadati (kas- 'appear " pat- 'fall', nad- (roar '). 
When roots contain or terminate in r (l) or a nasal, this con­
sonant is repeated in reduplication: I sg. carkarmi, 2 sg. dar­
dar~i, 3 sg. janghanti. calealiti, (with dissimilation) alarti, 3 mid. 
nannate (kf-' to commemorate ',df-' to split ',han- < slay', cal­
I move', ar- 'rise, go '. nam- ' bend '). As an alternative re­
duplication with long a is sometimes used with roots of this 
form: }agarti I is awake', etc. An i is frequently inserted be­

356 
THE VERB 
tween the strong reduplication and the root: 3 sg. vartvarti. 
kanikranti, ganiganti. 3 pI. davidyutati, bharibhrati (vrt- ' turn '. 
krand- ' shout', gam- ' go " dyut- ' shine', bhr- ' carry '). The 
apophony of the root follows the usual system; it is strong in 
the three persons of the active, elsewhere weak: 3 sg" act. 
nenekti, pI. nenijati, 3 sg. mid. neniktt. When:r is inserted 
after the root in the singular active, the root only has gU~la 
where this does not produce a long syllable: j6haviti but 
veviditi. The accent is on the reduplication in the strong forms 
and in the 3 pI; (vevetti, vevidati) ; elsewhere on the terminations 
according to the classical grammar (vevidmds, etc.), but the 
Vedic usage fluctuates: 3 sg. mid. nenikte, etc., beside tetikte, 
etc. 
The terminations are the normal ones (with -ati in the 3 pI. 
as in the reduplicating class). A common feature is the'use of 
the connecting vowel i. This was observed also in the root class 
(brdviti, etc.), but it is much inore common in the intensive: 
johaviti, tartariti, dardariti, etc. It is never used when ,the same 
-kind of i appears after the reduplication. It is employed in the 
three singular persons and once in the dual (tartarithas). In the 
3 sg. mid. the ending -e occurs about as frequently as the ending 
-te: cekite, j6guve, yoyuve, etc. The 2 and 3 sg. of the imperfect 
suffer the usual phonetic mutilation: 
ddardar for 
2 sg. 
*ddardar-s and 3* ddardar-t, etc. 
The connecting vowel -i-.' 
appears in the imperfect in the 3 sg. (djohavit) and once in the 
3 duo (dvavasftam). The termination of the 3 pI. act. is -ur as in 
the reduplicating class: djohavur. 
. 
The intensive forms sUbjunctives commonly, but almost ex­
clusively with secondary endings. The root has gUQa only when 
this does not make a long vowel: 3 sg. janghanat, bobhavat; 
carkr$at. davidyutat. Imperatives are not uncommon: 
2 sg. 
dardrhi, carkrdhi, 3 sg.veve$!u, dadhartu, 2 pI. jagrtd; with -tat, 
2 sg. carkrtiit, jagrtiit. There are a few forms with the auxiliary 
vowel i: janghanihi,johavUu. The optative is exceedingly rare 
(vevi~yat A V.). 
There exist a few intensives with perfect inflections. These 
are not perfects to the above, but an alternative type of present, 
in accordance with the old sense of the perfect. Such are 
davidhava. nonava, dodriiva. Zelaya with the ordinary meaning 
of the intensive present. 
There exists a second type of intensive formation which re-' 

357 
THE VERB 
duplicates in the same way as the above. but forms its stem by 
the addition of the accented -yd- suffix and inflects exclusively 
in the nJiddle: ma rmrjy ate, dedipydte, dodhuydte, etc. (mrj­
, wipe " dfp- • shine " dhii- ' shake '). This is rare in the Vedic 
language~ but in the classical language it is commoner than the 
basic type. 
Intensive formations corresponding to the Sanskrit basic type 
were common in Old Iranian: d. Av. zaozaomi, carakaramahi, 
(opt.) dardairyal, daedoist, (thematic) naenizaiti. corresponding 
to the Sanskrit intensive bases johav-, carkar-, dardar-, dedis 
and nenij-. Though not recorded outside Indo-Iranian the 
formation is evidently ancient in Indo-European. The fact that 
it does not appear elsewhere is due to the general abandonment 
of non-thematic verbal inflection in the majority of IE lan­
guages. 
In contradistinction the second type of intensive 
formation (dedipydte), though rare in early Sanskrit, has 
parallels elsewhere, particularly in Greek: 7Top4>6pw' be in un­
easy motion' (Skt. bhur-), 1Tu,.,,4>a{vw ' shine brightly " oapoJ.:TrTW 
t tear asunder " ,."ap,."alpw ' glitter', etc. 
III.  The Causative 
The causative is the most productive of the secondary con­
jugations from the early period onwards. The stem is formed 
by the addition of the suffix -dya- to the root, which normally 
appears in its strengthened form, and it is identical with the 
stem of the tenth class of verbs. There are a considerable 
number of verbal formations in -dya-, particularly ih the early 
language which have no causative function. Some have a fre­
quentative sense (patdyati ' flies about' I etc.) which from the 
comparative evidence is ancient (Gk. 1ToT'o,."at,). The causative 
is only one of the uses attached to the dya- stem, but in course of 
time it becomes the predominant one. There is in the earlier 
language a distinction between causativeswitl). strengthened 
root and non.:..causatives with weak root: dyutdya-, rucdya­
· shine': dyotdya-,rocdya- (illuminate', etc.; similarly be­
tween gUlja and vrddhi in patdya- '.fly about'. patdya-
cause 
to fall'.· The distinction is not absolute since there are forma­
tions vlith weak root having a causative sense (drrtthdya- ' make 
firm ') and conversely formations with strengthened root having 
anon-causative sense (tniiddya- ( get intoxicated '). In the later 
language the bulk of the non-causative forms die out, and what 
I 

THE VERB 
remain are combined with formations of a more denominative 
character to form the tenth present class. 
In the causative the root always has gU1).a where this produces 
a long syllable: tarpdyati, vardhdyati, kalpdyati, bodhdyati, 
cetdyati from trP- ( to be satisfied', vrdh-
to increase', klP-
I to
I 
arrange " budh- ( to be aware' and cit- · to observe', Roots 
which in their strong form insert a nasal have this in associa­
tion with gUJ).a in the causative: manddyati 'gladdens" 
sra1J'lsdyati ( causes to fall' I etc. \Vhere the gUl)a fonn produces 
a short syllable (kar-, etc.) vrddhi is most commonly employed 
in the causatives: kiirdyati' causes to do " trasdyati i terrifies', 
nasdyati (destroys', cyavdyati • causes to fall I, etc. But a 
number of such roots retain gUT,la: gamdyati ' causes to go " 
tvardyati ( makes to hasten '. namdyati causes to bend', etc,
t 
The non-strengthened form of the root appears normally only 
with roots that have no other form (githdyati from guh- 'to 
conceal '), only rarely elsewhere (girdyati, sphurdyati). 
In 
d-u?dyati ( spoils I (intI. du~yati, sb. do~a-) the long vowel serves 
as a substitute for the normal strengthening. The anomalous 
purdyati ( fills' is influenced by the form of the past· participle 
passive (pur1;d-). 
Roots in a commonly insert -p- before the causative suffix: 
dapdyati, sthapdyati, miipdyati, etc., from da- ' to give', sthii­
• to stand>, ma- ' to measure', etc. This -p- is an old suffix or 
enlargement which is known from comparative evidence to have 
been associated with certain of such roots (Lith. stapytis to
f 
stand still '), and it has been extended to the whole class in the 
causative. It is further applied to the root r- (arpdyati) and to 
a number of roots in -i: adhyiipayati from adhi + i · to study', 
etc. In ropdyati plants ' (r~h- ' to grow') it replaces the final 
t 
consonant of the root. In Middle Indo-Aryan the popularity of 
this form of causative grew until it replaced the normal kind. 
A number of such Prakritic formations appear in later Sanskrit 
(kri¢apayati • causes to play t t jiviipayati ' causes to live '. etc.). 
There are a few other miscellaneous insertions before the 
causative suffix, namely -1-: piilayati < protects' (Pii-), -n- in 
pri1;ayati ' pleases ' (pri-, pri1Jati), -s- in bhi~ayate ' frightens " 
-t- in ghatayati I has slain' (han-). 
Formations outside the present system are n1ade more com­
monly from the causative than from the other forms of second­
ary conjugation. The future (vardhayi~yati, etc.) appears only 

359 
I  
THE VERB 
very rarely in the S-gveda, but later is regularly made. For the 
aorist, as already observed, the reduplicated aorist has been 
adapted to serve for the causative. Besides this a few sporadic 
i§-aorist forms occur in the early language (aviidayi~!hiis, etc.). 
For the perfect the periphrastic form is used: gamayii1J1 cakara, 
gamayiim iisa. The passive is made by suffixing the passive yd 
directly to the form of the root as it appears in the causative: 
kiirydte, sthiipydte, etc. (simple passive kriydte, sthiydte). 
Nominal forms from the causative are: participle in -td; 
kiiritd-, gerundive, karayitavya-, kiirya-, kiirmy/iya-, infinitive, 
karayitum, gerund, kiirayitvii. The suffix of the gerund in -ya 
is added directly to the root when this is strengthened in the 
causative (-kiiryaL otherwise to the ay of the causative suffix 
(-gamayya) . 
The present formations in -aya are closely related to the 
nominal i-stems (roci-/rocay-: rocdyati). The causative stem 
consists of a thematic enlargement of this suffix, of a type which 
occurs, though very rarely, in the nominal formations. The 
formation, since it contains a series of gUl).a vowels, is not likely 
to be very ancient in Indo-European, but it occurs fairly 
widely: Gk. TP01T£W, O'TPOq,£W (TpE1TW, O'TP£4>w) , Lat. spondeo 
(: 'Gk. U1TEV8w), moneo, Goth. nasjan, drausjan (ga-nisan, 
driusan) , etc. The me:;ming is frequentative, as usually in 
Greek, or causative. The latte.r meaning is normal in Germanic 
(nasjan 
to save " ga-nisan to be saved') and in Slavonic.
I 
I 
,\Vhere Verner's law operates Germanic confirms the position of 
the accent on the suffix, as in Sanskrit: wairpan: frawardjan. 
It has also participial forms corresponding to the Sanskrit 
participles in -itd (frawardi ps) which are thus shown to be 
ancient. In Slavonic there is a series of causatives with vrddhi 
as in Sanskrit, and this is one of the special features which con­
nects the two families with Indo-European: O. S1. saditi to 
plant', d. Skt. saddyati 
makes to sit, settles', slaviti 'to
I 
praise I I cf. Skt. sravdyati ( makes to hear, be heard'. 
IV. The Desiderative 
The" desiderative stem is formed by means of the suffix -sa 
associated with reduplication. The vowel of the reduplicating 
syllable is normally i but u is employed when that vowel occurs 
in the root: bibhitsati, Utrpsati, but yuyutsati (bhid-
to split',
I 
trP- ' be satisfied ',yudh- ' to fight '). Long i occurs in a very 
I 

THE VERB 
few cases: mimiit{tsate' investigates' (man- ' to think '). 
The 
accent rests always on the reduplication. 
The root appears norma.1ly in its weak form, but a final i and 
u are lengthened: jigi~ati • desires to conquer' (ji-), juhu~ati 
, desires to sacrifice I (hu-). Final r of a root becomes ir or ur 
before the desiderative -sa: 
cikir~ati ( desires to do ',titir~ati 
( desires to cross' 1 muml~r$ati I is about to die'. This is phon­
etica!ly justifiable only in the case of roots in -f, i.e. those 
originally having final H (tf-, tar(H)-: 
titir~ati) and from these 
it is extended to the rest. 
A number of roots form an abbreviated stem in the desidera­
tive in which the reduplication and the root are contracted into 
one syllable. An example is dipsati from dabh- ' to injure'. 
Corresponding to this Av. has diwzaidyai (inL), and from a 
comparison of the two an Indo-Iranian stem dibiha- emerges. 
This represents a simplification of the original consonant group 
which occurred when the vowel of the root was elided in its 
w~ak form, i.e. di-dbh-sa-, a regularly formed desiderative. In 
the same way sik~a- and sik~a- appear from sak- and sah-, later 
dhtk~a-, ripsa-, lipsa-, etc. (dah-, rabh-, labh-); to these are 
added ipsa- and irtsa- from roots beginning with, a vowel (aP­
, to obtain " rdh-
to prosper '). The roots dii and dhri make
I 
respectively ditsa- and dhitsa- in which the ii of the root has 
regularly disappeared in the weak form (di-d-sa-, di-dh-sa-). 
The roots van- ' to win ' and san- ( to gain ' make the desider­
ative stems vivasa- and si~asa- with a out of -~H- as in other 
derivatives. 
Roots in ii, apart from those mentioned above, gtnerally keep 
the strong form in the desiderative: yiyasa-, pipiisa-, from ya­
· to go ',pa-
t to drink '. This, like the other forms with strong 
root below, is a Sanskrit innovation, as is clear from the pre­
servation of ancient stems like ditsa- and the existence of Vedic 
pi-p-f-Ja- beside piprisa. Anomalous strong forms appear from 
certain roots terminating in a nasal: jighat{tsa-, jigii:YJfsa- (be­
side jigami~a-) from han-, gam-. When the desiderative suffix 
appears as £~a with the union vowel a final i, U, t of a root 
necessarily and a medial it U, r optionally appear in the gUQa 
grade: sisayi~a-, ninarti~a-, etc., but also rurudi~a-. These and 
similar forms are laid down by the grammarians, but they, do 
not occur in the earlier language. 
Like other verbal formations the desiderative sa may be aug­

THE VERB 
361 
mented by the union vowel i and appear as -i~a-. In the early 
language there occurs only didh-i-~a- (dha-, beside dhitsa-) ; also 
i in certain cases where this enlargement has produced what is in 
practice an alternative form of the root (pipi~a-, jihi~a-). The 
numerous classical formations in i$a (which have normally gUI).a 
of root as noted above) are complete innovations. 
From the desiderative there are made, though not in the 
earliest language: a future in i$ya: 
titik~i$ye, an i~- aorist, 
acikir#$am and a periphrastic perfect, ipsam cakara/asa. 
Nominal derivatives from the desiderative stem occur earlier; 
the most common are an adjective in -u (titik~u-) and an abstract 
noun in Ii (mimli1;nsd). 
In most desiderative stems the meaning (' wish to do some­
thing'Y is straightforward and clear, though sometimes it is 
rather · to be about to do something '(mumur~ati). In the case 
of a few roots the desiderative stem has developed a special 
meaning: cikitsa-' cure " jugupsa- · despise', titik~a- ( endure " 
bibhatsa- (badh-) • abhor " mimii1Jtsa- • in vestiga te " 
§usru~a­
· obey'. 
The antiquity of the desiderative in Indo-European is attested 
by the reduced forms (ditsa-, dipsa-) which have been affected 
by the old apophony. Nevertheless it is not widely represented, 
a fact which must be due to loss in the individual languages. 
The only branch of Indo-European outside Indo-Iranian where 
a comparable formation occurs is Celtic. Since there are no 
close relations between these two members of the family this is 
itself an indication that the formation is' ancient. The Celtic 
formation to be compared is the Old Irish reduplicated s-future : 
1 sg. -ninus <*ninikso (nigid (washes', cf. Skt.. nij-, des. 
ninik~ati), 2 sg. ~riris (con-rig' binds j), 3 pI. lilsit from ligid 
• licks' (Skt. lih-, des. lilik~ati). 
§ 16. 
DENOMINATIVE VERBS 
Denominative verbs are those that are formed o,n the basis of 
a noun stem. Ultimately, as already observed, all verbal stems 
are not to be distinguished from the corresponding noun stems, 
but they have acquired independence. 
The denominative 
proper is a formation by which verbal stems continue to be 
made from the nouns existing in the language. The suffix 
employed in making denominatives js accented-yd-, the same 
suffix which forms one of the llrimary verbal classes (dtvyati). 

THE VERB 
The only difference is that the denominatives preserve the 
original accent of the suffix which in the primaty verbs has been 
replaced by radical accent. The denominative is of IE origin 
and among the other languages it is particularly well repre­
sented in Greek: 7€Kf'alpw ' determine' (for -aryo from the 
') , 8 
'h t' , 
I '  
,
I
neu.t 
noun 
7£Kf'ap 
EX a~pw 
a e ,OJ)of'UWW 
name, 
O'UAm~'w 
trumpet' 
(a(f,\m,y~), K7JpVaaW (proclaim' (KfjpVf),
f 
etc., etc. Similar formations in other languages are Lat. 
custodia, finio (Ctlstos, finis), Goth. glitrnunjan 'glitter', 
lauhatjan 'shine " etc. They are also common in Hittite, 
which gives a greater antiquity to the denominative formation 
than might otherwise have been expected: irmaliya-' to be 
ill' (irmalas ' ill '), kusaniya- ' hire' (kusan' pay'), lamniya. 
, to name' (laman' name', d. Gk. ovof'ulvw), etc. 
Denominatives in -yd- are formed from all the various 
nominal stems and they may conveniently be classified accord­
ingly. 
Stems in r: vadharydti' hurls a weapon', cf. vddhar ' weapon'. 
This type of nominal stem is practically obsolete, and the result 
is that there are a number of such denominatives where the 
corresponding nouns-stem has been lost: sratharydti' becomes 
loose', saparydti attends to, worships', ratliarydti ' rides in a 
f 
chariot', 
adhvarydti 
'performs 
a 
sacrifice' I 
vithuryati 
, staggers '. 
Stems in n: Denominatives formed from n-stems are 
krpaVydti 'solicits I. turavydti 'is speedy', damanydti 'sub­
dues', bhura1Jydti ' is active', sara1Jydti ' hastens', dhi~a1Jydti 
, pays attention', ruva1Jydti 'roars I, huvanydti.' calls', etc. 
This type is based on the old neutM:cnistems, likewise mainly 
extinct, and corresponding nominal stems are either non­
existent or take the form of thematic derivatives: krpa1Jd--, 
turd1Ja-, etc. 
Stems in s: These are well preserved and denominatives are 
frequent: 
apasydti {is active' t 
namasydti 
reverences',
t 
canasydti t is pleased', manasydti < is mindful of ',etc. In some 
cases the corresponding s-stem is not preserved, e.g. irasyati 4 is 
jealous', dasasydti ' renders service to '. In other cases -asya- is 
extended to become an independent suffix, wIth a desiderative 
meaning: v!$asydti t desires the male " stanasydti t desires the 
breast'. From the compound stems # and u~ are formed 
avi§ydti • is eager 'to help' (the identity of this form with the 

THE VERB 
363 
future in .i~ya~ should be noticed), taru~ydti ' strives to over­
come', etc. 
Rare examples of denominatives formed from stems in 
occlusive appear in bhi§ajydti ( acts the physician' and (from a 
stem not otherwise preserved) 
i~udhydti 
< implores' (Av. 
isuidya-). 
It will be observed from the examples quoted above that the 
denominatives in yd are normally from the neuter consonantal 
stems. Denominatives from the masculine (agent-noun) stems 
are rare: e.g. vr~at.Jydti acts like a male '. A few such for­
l 
mations are based on the nominative singulars: riijaydte ' is 
kingly', vT~iiydte ' acts like a bull', svamiydti ( treats as master'. 
Stems in i and i: janiydti ( seeks a wife' (jdni-), tavi~ydte I is 
strong' (tdvi~i). The form with long i is usually extended to 
stems in short i (kaviydti ( acts like a wiseman " sakhiydti ( de­
sires friendship " aratiydti is inimical ') I but such .forms are 
I 
shortened in the pada text. The suffix -iya- develops to some 
extent independently, with a desiderative sense, and is applied 
to other than i-stems: putriydti (desires, a son " mii1ftsiydti 
( craves flesh " etc. 
Stems i1J u and it: Here also the long form of the suffix is 
applied to both types of stem, though short u is restored in the 
pada text: riuydti' is straight' I vasuydti ' desires wealth', etc. 
In some cases there is no noun-stem and -uya- functions as an 
independent verbal suffix: 
asuydti 
< grumbles', ankttydti 
I 
I
moves crookedly', stabhiiydti stands firm '. 
Stems in a: Prtaniiydti < fights', ducchunaydte < desires mis­
chief', maniiydte 'is well disposed '. Denoniinatives from a­
stems are an ancient IE type. though more frequently elsewhere 
formed without the addition of ya: Hitt. newa!J!Jun 'I re­
newed " Lat. novare, Gk. VEav. This type is found in Sanskrit 
only when ii is incorporated in the root (trtIti). otherwise the 
-ya- denominative is used. The suffix -aya- early became an 
independent suffix, and there a're a number of roots which in­
flect in this way without there being any corresponding a­
nouns: 
mathaydti • stirs '. srathiiydti (loosens', 
mu~aydti 
f steals', etc. These stems commonly alternate with stems of 
the ninth cla~s: mathndti, srathntIti, mu~rtati, etc. As a result 
of the close association of the two types the denominative yd i~ 
sometimes appended to ninth class sterns: hrrtiiyd-, hrrtiyd .. 
be angry', 
I 

I 
THE VERB 
In the Vedic language the denominative in -aya- is commonly 
extended beyond its proper field and it is used to form denomin­
atives from thematic stems beside the regular forms in -aydti : 
aghaydti ' plans mischief', asvaydti ' seeks for horses', priyiiydte 
• holds dear'. 
Thematic Stems: amitraydti ( acts like an enemy', devaydti 
cultivates the gods, is pious', vasnaydti I bargains', etc. This 
is the latest type of denominative formation. The addition of a 
further suffix to a final thematic suffix is against the principles 
of IE stem formation. It appears here in the denominative 
purely by analogy, de'va-yd-ti, etc.. being created after the 
pattern of brahma~l-yd-ti, etc. The resulting stem is similar to 
the causative, differing only in accent, but the origin and 
analysis are quite different. On the one hand we have an i-stem 
with thematic extension (analyse vardhdy-a-) , on the other hand 
a thematic stem with the mechanical and analogical addition of 
the denominative 
(analyse deva-yd-). The similarity of the 
two forms gave 
to some confusion, and there are sterns, 
apparently denominative in origin which have the causative 
accent: 
arthdyate . desires " mantrdyate 'takes council', 
mrgdyate 'hunts', etc. These are normally classified in the 
tenth present class. 
In the later classical language most of the old denominatives. 
made from consonant stems disappear. The thematic type re­
mains living and takes two forms: (r) in the active the normal 
-ayati is used, kalu~ayati ' makes turbid', taru~tayati ' rejuven­
ates', (z) in the middle, with intransitive sense, -iiyate is used, 
kal'll$ayate ' becomes turbid-';- taruttliyate ' is rejuvenated'. It 
was noted above that the -aya-stenl, properly a derivative from 
the nominal a-stern, was commonly used in the Veda to make 
denorninatives from thematic stems, with the result that there 
are two alternative formations. In the later development of the 
language those two are specialised in different uses as just stated. 
Forms outside the present system from denominative stems 
occur with the utmost rarity. There are a few isolated £$­
aorist (avr$iiyi$ata) and future forms 
(ka1Jrjf~yi~yati). Parti­
'ciples in -ta (kanrjuy.£td-, etc.) are somewhat more frequent. In 
theVedic language abstract nouns in Ii (vasuyJ) and adjectives 
in -u (vasttyu-) I made like the similar formations from the de­
siderative stem, are common, but the type in general dies out 
later. 

THE VERB 
365 
§ I7. 
INFINITIVES 
The difference between Vedic and classical Sanskrit is no­
where more marked than in the infinitive. The classical lan­
guage has only one form of infinitive, in tum, which is added to 
the gUl)ated root (kdrtum), and which, like other verbal forma­
tives may be provided with the connecting vowel i (bhdvitum). 
In the Vedic language this formation is exceedingly rare, but 
there exists a whole series of other forms classed as infinitives; 
which do not survive in the later language. These Vedic infini­
tives consist of a variety of verbal action nouns inflected in 
various cases, namely: 
(i) Accusative, from root stems and stems in -tu : pratiram' to 
prolong', datum' to give'. The former may be compared with 
the Oscan-Umbrian infinitives in -om/um: Umbr. erom, Ose. 
ezum 'to be', Osc. edum (to eat', etc. The latter, which 
eventually becomes the sole form of infinitive, has parallels in 
the Latin supine (datum) and in Balto-Slavonic (Lith. det11:, 
O. 51. dlta ' to place '). 
(ii) Dative, much the most frequent type. These infinitives 
are made from root stems (drse ' to see " bhuje ' to enjoy'), 
from stems in -as (dyase ( to go '. arhdse ' to be worthy of '), 
from stems in -i (drsdye ' to see ., yudhdye ( to fight '), from 
stems in -ti (vitdye ' to enjoy', siitdye ' to ",in '). from stems in 
-tu (etave ' to go " yd~!ave ' to sacrifice ') from stems in -tava 
(etavai 'to go '), from stems in dhya (duhddhyai 'to milk '~ 
sdhadhyai 'to overcome '), from stems in man (ddmane < to 
give ') and van (diivdne ' to give '). Of these the infinitive in 
-tavai is remarkable in having a double accent (a phenomenon 
which has not been explained), and in always being followed by 
the particle u (etavil u). This infinitive, and the one in -dhya·j 
are also distinguished in being formed frorn stems which are not 
otherwise in active use, and also in preserving the older form 
of the dative singular which has been replaced by -aya in the 
declension of nouns. 
(iii) A blative-Genitive, from root stems and stems in -tu: 
avapddas • falling down " samprcas ' coming in contact '; etos 
• going', nidhiitos ' putting down '. 
(iv) Locative, from root stems (sa1Jtcak~i 'on beholding '), 
stems in -san-
(ne$d~i (to lead '), in -tar -
(vi)dhartdri (to 
support (bestow) " sotari ( in the pressing'. 

THE VERB 
The Vedic language (with Old Iranian) represents most accur­
ately the state of affairs in Indo-European. Tlle infinitive as an 
independent category is not yet fully developed. The forms 
classed as infinitives are various cases of verbal action nouns, in 
which as a general rule the case has its normal force : 
Ace. vd~ti arabham ' he desires to begin, wants a beginning'. 
Dat. iivis tanva'f}'t kntu~e drsi kam ' you reveal your body for 
seeing " 
Abl. sa i'f}'t mahi1JZ dhunim itor aram1Jat ' he stopped the great 
river from flowing'. 
A curious feature of the Vedic language is that the noun 
which is logically the object of the infinitive is placed in the 
same case as the infinitive, so that for instance' to see the sun' 
is expressed drsdye saryaya, lit. for seeing, for the sun'; simi­
l 
larly, with abl9,tive, tradhvam kartdd avapadal;t , save us from 
falling into a pit', lit. 'save us from a pit, from falling down '. 
In the normal usage of the Vedic irifinitive there is not a 
great deal to distinguish it from an ordinary verbal noun in­
flected in an oblique case. One of the few things that places 
these formations in a special category is the fact that the 
majority of verbal noun stems which appear in this usage are 
not otherwise used, nor in other cases. Taking the neuter s­
stems as an example, there are many regular nouns so formed 
(ydsas fame " etc.), but there are in addition a large number
I 
which appear only in the dative case, in this infinitival use. 
Many such dative infinitives are also distinguished formally, 
since they are given an accent (jivdse) which is different from 
that of the neuter nouns. The infinitives in the Veda which are 
most removed from ordinary nominal formation are those 
formed from stems which are no longer used in the formation of 
ordinary nouns. Such are the dative infinitives in -dhyai and 
the comparatively rare locative formations in -sani and -tari. 
Another feature differentiating infinitive from verbal noun, one 
only partially developed in the Vedic language, is that it 
governs the accusative like a verb instead of the genitive like a 
verbal noun, e.g. mdhi davane 
to give something big' as
I 
opposed to gotrdsya diivane ' for the giving of a herd J. 
In the classicallariguage where tpe infinitive in -tum has re­
placed all others, the infinitive has become 'quite independent 
of the nominal formation. It also takes over the sense of the 
dative infinitive (avasthatutJt sthiinantaram cintaya 
think
t 

367 
THE VERB 
of another place to stay in ') so that its original force as the 
accusative of a verbal noun is obscured. In one respect it re· 
tains a trace of its nominal origin, because it can be compounded, 
like a noun-stem, with kama- and manas : ya~#ukama- {desirous 
of sacrificing I, vaktumanas-
minded to speak '. 
f 
The Sanskrit infinitive, in its final form, is much less 
developed and integrated into the verbal system than the 
infinitives of Latin and Greek. The latter languages have 
developed special forms for various tenses (esse, fuisse) and for 
the voices (agerc, agi), by a process of adaptation which took 
place independently in the two languages. Nothing of this kind 
appears in Sanskrit. There are in the Veda a few forms where 
the infinitive appears attached to special tense-stems (pu:;ydse 
f 
f
to flourish " gr1Ji~dni f to praise', -Prccham to ask'; from 
the perfect vavrdhddhyai to strengthen '), but these tentative
f 
formations carne to nothing. The system by which the infini­
t 
tive is formed only from the root prevailed, and the syntactical 
~ 
use of the infinitive is correspondingly. wide. In particular it 
has to function not only as active and middle indiscriminately, 
but also, when the context demands it, as passive: kart-um 
arabdhalt ' began to be made ',etc. This usage is particularly 
frequent with the passive forms of sak-: kartuYft na sakyate 
f cannot be done " etc. 
§ 18. 
ACTIVE AND MIDDLE PARTICIPLES 
Like the infinitives these participles are in origin purely 
nominal forms and as such have been treated in the chapters 
concerning the formation and declension of nouns. They be­
long to the verb inasmuch as they have become integrated into 
the verbal system. This integration goes further than in the 
case of the infinitive in Sanskrit (though not as far as in Greek), 
and the process started earlier. The various participles are 
attached to particular tense stems, and they are divided, like 
the finite verb, into active and middle. 
The active participle in -ant- is in Classical Sanskrit entirely, 
and in the Vedic language mainly, formed from the present 
stems of the verb. In the Vedic language there is a small 
number of such participles which are attached to the root 
aorist stem (krdnt-, gmdnt- from kr-
do " gam-
go') and to
t 
I 
the a-aorist stem (trPdnt-, vrdhdnt- from trP-
be satisfied' and
I 
vrdh.. 'grow'). This association is mainly superficial, since such 

THE VERB 
formations are not different from typical adjective formations 
with accented suffix added straight to the root. Before their 
integration into the verbal system the -ant- formations were 
ordinary adjectives (of which some examples remain, bthant­
, tall', etc.), and the original type, derived straight from the 
root and having the adjectival accent, is preserved in these 
aorist participles. 
The adaptation of ant- adjectives to make participles began 
early, since there are ant- participles also in Hittite. But at the 
time of the separation of Hittite the ant- participle had not 
settled down into its final role since in that language the ant­
participles are used in a passive sense, as opposed to the active 
sense in the rest of Indo-European. The specialisation of the 
formation ill ant as an active participle was followed by its 
transference to the present system. The radical formations 
were replaced by formations made from the various types of 
present stem (krant- by kr1Jvant-, etc.). In the Veda this process 
is almost complete and the number of aorist participles is 
already small. By the classical period the process is complete. 
In Greek the same process began but ended differently, since 
there the appearance of present participles (cP€VYWII) beside the 
older aoristic (Le. suffixally accented type) </>vywv led to the 
evolution of a twofold system in which these two types of 
participle, like the moods associated with the two tenses~ 
express different kinds of action (punctual and durative). 
Greek has further extended the formation of thjs participle to 
the s-aorist stem, where it is to all intents and purposes non­
existent in Sanskrit, as it was in Indo-European. 
The association of the active participle with the present 
system had the result that its accent (originally on the final, as 
an adjective) came to correspond to that of the verbal stem to 
which it was attached. It appears on the suffix in the case of 
the suffixally accented thematic class (tudant-) and in non­
thematic verbs (duhtint-, sntvant-, etc.). On the other hand the 
radically accented thematic verbs keep this accent in the parti­
ciple: bhdvant-, etc. The reduplicating verbs have accent on 
the reduplicating syllable associated with weak foml of the 
participial suffix even in the strong cases: nom. sg. blbhrat, 
acc. sg. bibhratam. 
The fonnation and morphology of the active perfect parti­
ciple in -vaslu~ have already been detailed. The existence of a 

THE VERB  
369 
Separate participle for the perfect is in accordance with the 
view already recorded that the difference between present/ 
aorist and perfect is the most original division in the verba] 
tense system. The perfect participle has the perfect sense (as 
opposed to the aorist participle which has no aorist sense, and 
as opposed to the moods of the perfect), cakrvds- ',one who has 
done'. etc. The accent is on the participial suffix and the per­
fect stem appears in its weak form. The union vowel i (tenivas, 
etc.) appears under much the same conditions asin the rest of 
the perfect. 
In the middle the participle used is in -amana for thematic 
verbs (bhdvamana-, visamana-, cintdyamana-) and in -ana for 
non-thematic verbs (duhand-, sunviina-, yuiijiind-, etc. ; accent 
final except in the 3rd class and intensives: fuhviina-, cikitiina-, 
etc.). The adaptation of these formations as participles is pro­
t  
bably later than that of the active participles in -ant, since com­
parable forms are not widely spread in Indo-European. Corre­
sponding to -amana- Iranian has -amna-'and Greek -6p.€vos, the 
actual forms varying in each case. No other IE languages have 
such participles, and where similar formations appear (Lat. 
alumnus, etc.) they are purely nominal. The participle in -ana 
is found only in Iado-Iranian, and only rare 'formations in the 
nominal derivation can be compared to it elsewhere (Lat. 
coli'mus, etc.). The middle usage of the participle is through 
adaptation, and it is certainly much later than the existence of 
middle forms in the finite verb. How the adaptation came about 
is no longer clear, since there is nothing about the related men­
formations of the noun that is connected with the middle, and 
in particular the Greek infinitives in -p.ev (at), which have also 
become part of the verbal morphology, have an active, not a 
middle sense. 
What was said above about the integration of the active 
participle into the present system applies also to the middle 
participle. Like other derivatives based on the simple n-suffix 
and the compound men-suffix these were originally made from 
the root, and after their adaptation as participles the present 
stem came to be used instead. In the classical language the 
aorist formations (drsiind-, vrdhiind-, sucdmiina-) which incor­
porate what remains of the old radical formations are replaced 
in favour of the present tense. In contradistinction to the 
active there is no special participial suffix for the perfect in the 

370 
THE-
VERB 
middle and the form -ana of the non-thematic verbs is used: 
cakriit;d-, jajfUind-, etc. This is in accordance with the fact, 
noted before, that the middle is later in the perfect than in the 
present-aorist system. 
§ 19. THE PAST PARTICIPLE PASSIVE 
This participle is most commonly made by the addition of the 
suffix -ta to the weak form of the root (syutd- • heard', etc.), and 
like other verbal derivatives it frequently employs the auxiliary 
vowel -i- (patitd-
fallen " etc.). The meaning is passive except 
i 
in the case of intransitive verbs (gatd-' gone ',etc.). The forma­
tion is ancient in Indo-European as is clear both from the fact 
that it appears in large proportion of the languages, and be­
cause it is subject to the old IE apophony. At the same time it 
does not appear to go back to the period when Hittite separated, 
since in that language the passive participle is expressed differ­
ently, by the suffix -ant. In contradistinction to the active and 
middle participles it is not associated with particular tense 
stems but formed directly from the root both in Sanskrit and 
other IE languages. 
A minority 'of roots form their past passive participle in nd 
instead of -td. This is particularly the case with roots in -f 
i
(kiY~ld-
scattered', giY'IJ d (swallowed'), roots in -i (k~i~~d­
, wasted away'), roots in -d (bhinnd- ' broken', chinnd- ' cut ') 
and it is found in a number of roots in -j (bhugnd- -< bent', 
bhagnd-
broken '). Very occasionally other suffixes are so
I 
used, notably paJwd- 'cooked, ripe'. The details of these 
formations have been systematically treated in the section 
dealing with the formation of nouns, and need not be repeated 
here. 
The importance of the past participle passive increases in the 
later language, and still more so in Prakrit, on account of the 
change that took place from active to passive construction. It 
becomes customary in later time to express past actions not by 
active preterites but by the past passive participle associated 
with the instrumental: sa maya dr:J#ah he (was) seen by me J
4 
for • I saw him '. This resulted in middle Indo-Aryan in the 
elimination of the old preterites, and in modern Indo-Aryan all 
the tenses expressing the preterite are based on the old past 
participle passive. 
.
----­

THE VERB 
371 
The past partiCiple passive could be extended by the addition 
of the possessive suffix -vant: krtdvant-
< one who has some­
thing (or things) done " and this naturally assumes the func­
tions of an active past participle. This is a creation of Indo­
Aryan and the first purely participial formation of this character 
appears in the Atharva-veda: asitiivaty dtithau 'one's guest 
having eaten'. Later the participle in tavant (-navant- when 
roots take -na in this participle) comes to be used independently, 
the copula being understood, in place of an active preterite : 
na mii1Jt kascid dr~taviin no one has seen (saw) me '. In the
r 
classical language this is the common usage and it forms another 
alternative to the use of the preterite tenses in addition to the 
passive construction mentioned above. 
§ 20. 
GERUNDIVES OR FUTURE PASSIVE PARTICIPLES 
Classical Sanskrit has three verbal adjectives of identical 
function and having the sense of the Latin gerundive: kiirya-, 
kartavya-, kara~tfya- ( to be done, faciendus '. Of these the first 
is the only one to be found in the lJgveda, where it is common. 
The suffix is normally to be pronounced -iya. Formations of 
this kind are found with all three grades of root: guhya-
to
I 
be hidden ' I dve~ya- ' to be hated " viicya- ' to be said '. Final 
a of a root coalesces with the suffix to produce -eya: deya­
I to be given'. Roots in i, u, ! commonly take the augment -t­
before this suffix: srutya-' to be heard'. The accent is 
normally on the root, but there are some exceptions: bhavyd-, 
iidya-. 
The formation in -tavya first appears in the A tharvaveda 
(janitavya- ' to be born', hir!1sitavya- ' to be injured '). It be­
comes commoner in the period of the Brahmar;as, and in the 
classical language it is freely formed from all roots. The accent 
of the above two'examples is the only type that occurs in 
accented texts. The grammarians allow also acute accent of the 
penultimate. In origin the formation is a secondary adjectival 
derivative from the action nouns in -tu. 
The gerundive in -aniya (a secondary adjectival derivative 
from the verbal nouns in -ana) is likewise first recorded in the 
Atharvaveda (upafivantya). It remains rare in the Brahmal)as, 
but is common in the c1assicallanguagel though not as frequent 
as the type in -tavya. 

372 
THE VERB 
In addition to the three types of gerundive that appear in the 
classical language there are several formations in the same 
function that appear only in the'Veda : 
(i) in -tva (normally pronounced as two syllables, -tuva) with 
accen t and gut:la of root: kartva-' to be done '. jetva-, nantva-; 
t'dktva-, etc. 
(ii) in -en~va (~eniya-): dtsenya, yudhtnya, vdrc1;lya, etc. 
(iii) in -ayya (trisyllabic): panliyya- ' to be praised, praise­
worthy', dak~iiyya-, sraviiyya-, etc. 
§21. 
GERU~D 01\ INDECLIl'ABLE PARTICIPLE 
This form of participle was analysed above as being a kind of 
adverbially used action noun. The type of participle is not 
familiar elsewhere in Indo-European and although the form is 
explicable through the normal IE processes of stem formation, 
its adoption in this particular syntactic use is in the main a 
development of Indo-Aryan. 
In the classical language the gerund is formed by means of 
the suffix -It)a when the verba] root is uncompounded by pre­
position, otherwise by the suffix -ya. In the ~gveda the latter 
suffix is in the majority of instances long (-ya) and this no doubt 
is the more original form, the suffix -ya making verbal abstracts 
being used adverbially in the same way as -tvii.. Other instances 
have been noted of final -a (-aH) appearing as short a due to 
special circumstances of sentence sandhi (atra, etc,). 
Beside -tva the f!.gveda also has a form -tvd)'a which appears to 
be a contamination of the two alternative forms just mentioned. 
It also has a form in -tvi (hit7Ji ( having left " etc.) terminating 
in the suffix -i, which is used in the same conditions as the -tva 
form and is commoner than it. This t1)t- form though absent in 
Sanskrit, is continued in certain Middle Indo-Aryan dialects of 
the North-\Vest and West, and was clearly a local dialectal 
feature. of Old Indo-Aryan. 
Extended gerund forrr~s in -tvanam and -tvinam are mentioned 
as Vedic by the grammarians but examples of them have not 
been found in the extant literature. Middle Indo-Aryan has a 
common gerund in -Utna (gantll.na) which appears to contain 
the same elements as -tvanam, but with different apophony. 
The accusative of verbal action nouns in -a is used adverbially 
in constructions that resemble the gerund: imifny dngii1ti 

373 
THE VERB 
vyatydsam sete • he lies down changing the position ot'these 
limbs '. etc. This usage does not occur in the earliest literature 
(RV., A V.), but it is common in the pre-classical prose. In the 
later classical prose it is comparatively rare, being used chiefly 
where the form is repeated: darsam-darsam' continually see­
ing '. sravam-sravam ' continually hearing'. 

CHAPTER VIII 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
§ 1. 
NON-ARYAN INFLUENCE ON SANSKIRT 
In the preceding chapters the history and development of the 
Sanskrit language has been described, from its remote Indo­
European beginnings until it received final and definite form in 
India. The process was one of continual linguistic change, and 
when Sanskrit was artificially stabilised by the grammarians, 
this process was continued in the popular speech to produce first 
the Middle Indo-Aryan languages and finally the Modern Indo­
Aryan languages. So far we have dealt only with developments 
that affected the inherited linguistic material which constitutes 
the basic texture of the language. But this is not all that 
has to be taken into consideration, since there are to be found 
in addition many elements in the language whose origin is to be 
sought elsewhere, namely in the influence of the various 
non-Aryan languages in contact with which Indo-Aryan 
developed. 
Such influence affected mainly of course the vocabulary of 
the language. In more general terms such influence is'seen'{n 
the phonetic development of a new series of occ1usives, the so­
called cerebrals. To begin with cerebrals appear in pure Aryan 
words as a result of phonetic changes affecting these (niIda-> 
ni~r!a-> nieja-) and although such a development is a.part of the 
processes taking place within Indo-Aryan itself, it can hardly be 
an accident that it should occur in the only branch of Indo­
European which was in contact with languages possessing such 
sounds. 
In grammar the rapid loss of the Indo-European 
grammar in the stages subsequent to Sanskrit was very likely 
accelerated by the acquisition of Aryan speech by peoples who 
spoke originally different languages. On the other hand foreign 
influence in matters of detail is always difficult to establish. 
One feature in Sanskrit which may perhaps be assigned to such 
influence is the use of the gerund or conjunctive participle. In 
form these adverbial participles are of course purely Indo­
374 
J

375 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
European in origin. and their structure has been analysed above. 
On the other hand thi: type of formation is not used to rnake 
such participles elsewhere in Indo-European, and the employ­
ment of such adverbial forms to rriake a type of participle not 
familiar elsewhere is one of the special characteristics of Indo­
Aryan. The same type of participle with the same' kind of 
syntactic usage happens also to be a noteworthy feature of 
Dravidian. It may well be that the extensive use made of this 
formation in Sanskrit is partly due to the influence of Dravidian 
usage. 
Although a few points of this kind may profitably be exam­
ined from the point of view of foreign influence, it is mainly in 
the vocabulary that detailed confirmation of such influence 
must be sought, and it is (0 an examination of this side of the 
problem that the present~hapter is devoted. The basic vocab­
ulary of Sanskrit is Ind~uropean. and it is this which has 
appeared in the pref:eding chapters, but in addition there exist 
large numbers of words which are without Indo-European 
etymology. In the very earliest language such words are few, 
but they progressively become more nume.rous. In the Middle 
Indo-Aryan period there is a further growth of new vocabulary,' 
and again in the Modern Indo-Aryan languages there appears 
an abundance of words which are unknown to the earlier stages 
of the language. 
The tendency to substitute new words for inherited IE words 
has been permanently active in Indo-Aryan. Among common 
examples in Sanskrit we may note ghotaka- • horse 1 which 
appears beside asva- in later Sanskrit and supplants it in the 
later history of Indo-Aryan. Similarly sva1t- •dog' gives way 
to kukkura- and its derivatives. It is not unusual to find pairs 
of names in Sanskrit, used equally commonly, of which one is 
non-Aryan, e.g. miirjiira- ( cat • (mri·) beside bi¢,iila-, tyiighra­
( tiger • beside siirdula-, fk~a- (bear' beside bhalluka-. Some­
times the number of synonyms is much greater. The common 
word for elephant is hastin- (' possessed of a hand '), but beside 
it, .all in common use, we find gaja-, kunjara., ibha-, niiga- and 
miitanga-. Sirnilarly beside mahi~d.- • buffalo' we find other 
terms such as kiisara-, luliiya-, sairibha- and heramba-. In such 
cases what are clearly local words, belonging originally to 
different languages have been a.dopted into Sanskrit, and the 
multiplicity of the Sanskrit vocabulary reflects an original 
N 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
linguistic complication in India which has receded before the 
advance of Indo-Aryan. 
These few examples serve to illustrate the composite nature 
of the Sanskrit vocabulary, and the total number of such 
extraneous words is. very large. Their source is mainly to be 
found in pre-Arya,n languages of India. It is likely that there 
existed in India various linguistic groups which have been 
totally extinguished by the advance of Indo-Aryan, and in so 
far as Sanskrit has drawn words from such sources, their origin 
must remain for ever unknown. On the other hand those non­
Aryan languages which have maintained their independent 
existence form a valuable source for the investigation of the 
extraneous elements in Sanskrit. It will therefore be conven­
ient to enumerate the various groups involved, and to examine 
what contribution each has. to make to the investigation of the 
problem. 
On its northern and eastern frontiers Indo-Aryan is con­
tiguous with Tibeto-Burman languages and a number of such 
dialects' are spoken within the political frontiers of India. In 
spite of this contact no evidence of influence from this side on 
Indo-Aryan has been produced. This linguistic family has 
always remained essentially external to India proper. Further­
more it appears that on the Eastenl frontiers of India these 
peoples have displaced earlier Austro-Asiatic populations and 
that their contact is not very ancient. It is possible that a few 
Sanskrit words may eventually be traced to this origin, but at 
present no satisfactory evidence of such influence is available. 
In the extreme North-West of India there is found Buru­
shaski, a language which so far stands on its own. A connection 
between Burushaski and certain of the Caucasian languages has 
been suggested, but not proved, though it is possible that further 
work in this direction might be fruitful. An earlier form of this 
language must have existed in this region before the Aryan in­
vasion, and it is likely to have occupied a more extensive terri­
tory. Evidence that Sanskrit has been influenced from this 
source has not been produced. I t is a border language and such 
influence would only have been possible in the very earliest 
period of Indo-Aryan, since from the Vedic period it must have 
existed much as it does now, an isolated unit in a remote 
mountain tract. 
In Eastern India there is found a family of langu,ages which 

377 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
is of considerable importance from this and other points of view. 
The MUJ).Q.a or Kolarian languagts as they are variously called, 
have in no instances achieved the status of literary languages 
but they are important scientifically firstly because there is 
definite evidence that Indo-Aryan had been influenced from 
this source, and secondly because of their connection with 
Mon, Khmer and other languages east of India. The most 
important centre of this family is the Chota Nagpur Plateau, 
where Santali, Mundari, and a number of fairly closely related 
dialects are spoken. In Orissa, not far from the above area 
occurs Juang, and further south, on the Orissa Madras border, 
Savara, Gadaba and two other dialects which form a special 
group within the MUJ).Q.a family. Of these Savara is particularly 
well preserved and less overlaid by Indo-Aryan than most 
members of the family. The most western MUJ)Q.a tribe is that 
of the Kurkus, who occupy the Satpura and Mahadeo hills in 
Madhya Pradesh. 
The most important linguistic family in India outside Indo­
Aryan is the Dravidian family. Four members of this family 
have achieved the status of literary languages-Tamil, Malay­
alam, Telugu, Kanarese, and in the case of Tamil the literary 
tradition goes back for at least two thousand years. Besides the 
major languages there are numerous minor non-literary Dravid­
ian languages spoken in various pads of India, namely: 
(i) Southern: Tulu, Coorg, Toda, Kota. 
(ii) Central: (a) Kolami,..Naiki, Parji, Dravidian Gadba; 
(b) Gondi, K-onda, Pengo, Kui, Kuvi. 
(iii) Northern: (a) Kiirukh, .:Malto; (b) Brahui. 
The existence of the last member of the family in Baluchistan, 
far away from the main concentration of Dravidian is consistent 
with the theory that before the Aryan conquest Dravidian 
occupied a much greater area including considerably portions 
of Northern India. We shall see that the extensive influence of 
Dravidian on Sanskrit, beginning at an early period, also seems 
to point to this conclusion. 
In addition to the above-mentioned linguistic groups it has 
recently been established that the Nahali language still spoken 
by a small number of people in the Nimar district of Madhya 
Pradesh constitutes a further independent unit, unconnected~ 
with any of the groups previously mentioned. This language 
was briefly treated in the Linguistic survey of India where it 

378 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
was wrongly assigned to the MU1JQa or Kolanian family. 
Examination of the material provided by the Linguistic Survey 
itself rendered this assertion extremely doubtful, and recent 
field researches, by greatly increasing the material available, 
have made it clear that Nahali is the last surviving remnant of 
what must originally have been a quite independent family. 
Yet others may have existed of which nothing is now know!!, 
and the possibility that Sanskrit (and also later Indo-Aryan) 
has drawn on such sources is always to be borne in mind. 
Remains of an ancient language of India have been unearthed 
in the Indus cities of the third millennium B.C. SO far no serious 
progress has been made in its decipherment, since no key to the 
solution is available. There is at present no means of knowing 
what kind of language is represented in these documents, which 
might be connected with one of the linguistic groups known in 
India, or be something quite different. Nor is there any means 
of knowing whether or not Sanskrit may have been influenced 
from this. There is only the possibility that some day, with the 
discovery of further information, a new chapter may be con­
tributed to the "linguistic history of India. 
From this brief survey it is clear that there are two practical 
sources where the origin of the non-Aryan element in Sanskrit 
may be sought, namely the MUI;l<;la and Dravidian languages, 
and in both tij.ese directions progress has been made. As far as 
the MuI;lQ.a languages are concerned the main difficulty is that 
many of them have been inadequately explored. A necessary 
basis for the study of their influence on Sanskrit is a proper 
comparative study of the languages themselves, but this cannot 
be undertaken until adequate grammars and dictionaries exist 
for all the independent members. At present the most detailed 
information exists for the Northern group (Santali, Mundari, 
etc.) but this happens to be the one which has been most pro .. 
foundly influenced by Indo-Aryan. Consequently in the absence 
of full comparative evidence it is often difficult to decide which 
way the borrowing has taken place. Thennsatsolhequestion 
of the relation of MUJ).Qa and Mon-Khmer. The evidence of this 
is clear enough to be decisive, but it has not been worked out in 
proper detail. This will eventually be necessary both for the 
comparative study of the MUJ).Q.a languages themselves, and for 
the special question under discussion, their influence on Indo­
Aryan. 

379 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
The connection between Mm:H;la and Mon-Khmer, etc.) as 
members of a larger Austro-Asiatic family, has normally been 
assumed by those who have investigated this section of the 
Sanskrit vocabulary. Such etymologies are in some cases only 
available from Austro-Asiatic languages outside Indja. For 
instance one of the words for elephant mentioned above, 
matanga- has been explain~d as Austro-Asiatic for t animal with 
a hand' (d. hastin-), but the forms with which it may be com­
pared {tang' hand J, maintong ( elephant ') are quoted not from 
India but from the Malay peninsula. The same is the case with 
Skt. atigana ( women' which is explained as containing a com­
mon Austro-Asiatic word for woman with prefix an-: d. 
Khmer kan, Mon k'na, etc., with prefix a-, Bahnar akan, with 
prefix en-, Nicobar enkan[!. The bird known in Sanskrit as 
kulinga-
(' fork-tailed strike ') has apparently an Austro.. 
Asiatic name (Khasi khliit kite, eagle " Khmer khlen, Stieng
t 
kliti kite '), but forms are not quoted from MUl).Q.a. Common
t 
Austro-Asiatic words may have ceased to be current in MUl).Q.a, 
or not known through defective documentation, and conse­
quently etymologies based on languages outside India may be 
consistent with Sanskrit having acquired the words in India. 
In some cases the source of a word is definitely to be sought out­
side India, e.g. in the case of imported plants. Such is the case 
with lavanga-
< cloves', where the origin of the plant as well as 
the name (Javanese lawan, etc.) is to be sought in Indonesia. 
The following is a short list of words for which, with reason­
able plausibility, a MUl).Q.a, or more widely, Austro-Asiatic 
source has been claimed : 
alabu (bottle-gourd': d. Malay lab·u, labo, Khmer lbow, 
Batak labu, etc. 
unduru- ( rat ': with prefix un-; d. Khmer kiindar with dif­
ferent prefix, Savara guntur- (rat', further Savara ondreit­
'rat '. 
kadali 
banana': d. Sakai telui, kelui, Nicobar talui,
t 
Khmer tut taloi, Palaong kloai 'plantain '; Savara kin-ten­
t banana '. 
karpasa- • cotton' (> Gk. K&.p7Taao~): d. Malayan kapas, 
. etc. An unprefixed form appears in Crau par, bay, Stieng p"atic, 
which may be reflected in Ta. panci, Ka. pai£ji cotton " and
t 
possibly in Skt. piC'll ' id '. 
. 
jambala-
mud>: d. Santal jgbg, etc., • damp'o Kharia
t 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
jobhi swampy ground " jubila ' a wet field " H,o. jobe ' mud',
t 
Savara jobba-
< id '. 
jim-, jemati to eat' (late; common in Mod. lA, Hi. jepna
f 
f
'to eat " jimana 'to feed', Mar. jevnl to eat', etc.): d. 
Santal jam, Kurku jome, Juang jim, Savara jvm, etc. 
tambiila- 'betel': prefixed form; d. Alak balu, Khmer 
mluo, Bahnar bolou, etc.; various prefixes, Mon Jablu, Halang 
lamlu, etc. No form is quoted corresponding exactly to San­
skrit, but the same radical element is shared by all. 
marica- ' pepper': d. Mon mriik, Khmer merec f id '. In the 
Munda languages there are. some forms corresponding to Skt. 
marica-, but the opinion now is that these are loans from 
Sanskrit. 
liingala- ' plough " Pa. nangala :, d., with varying prefixes,. 
Khmer ankdl, Cam lanal, lanar, Khasi ka-lynkor, Malay tengala,. 
tatigiila, Batak tingala, Makassar nankala. In MUQQ.a there is 
Santal nahel. This word is interesting because Dravidian has 
borrowed independently from the same source: Ta. fiiincil. 
Ka. negal, etc. A non-prefixed form with the change k> h 
characteristic of the northern group of MUI}Qa languages, appears 
in Sanskrit as hala- ' plough '. 
sar$apa- ' mustard': Pkt. sasava-; d. Malay sesawi, etc. 
Old Tamil aiyavi, if form *sasavi also belongs here. 
This short selection of words is sufficient to show the import­
ance of Austro-Asiatic as a source of Sanskrit words. When the 
languages concerned have been properly studied and properly 
compared it is expected that more will be available, and that 
there will be greater certainty about the detailed history of the 
forms concerned. At present such studies are in their infancy, 
so that it is not possible to estimate how much of the Indo­
Aryan vocabulary will eventua~ly prove to be derived from this 
source. 
The most important source of the foreign element in the 
Sanskrit vocabulary is to be found in the Dravidian languages. 
Although the comparative study of the Dravidian languages is 
still in its infancy, the position is much better than with the 
MUI).Q.a languages. 
Full lexicographical material is available 
for the major literary languages •.and although much work 
remains 'to be done in. the first-hand study of the minor lan­
gauges, more is known about them than about the majority of 
the MUI).Qa languages, More work has been done on the influ­

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
38I 
ence of Dravidian on Sanskrit and more abundant results have 
been achieved. It is now possible to draw up a considerable 
list of words in Sanskrit which can be traced either with 
certainty or with a high degree of probability to a Dravidian 
origin. This is illustrated by the following list: 
aguru' fragrant aloe wood': Ta. Ma. akil, Tu. agil'/f id'.
t 
aitkola- ' Alangium hexapetalum ': Ta, arincil, Ma. arinnil 
~ id '. 
anala- ' fire- ': Ta. atpal ( fire; vb. to burn', Ma. anal' fire' 
Ka. analu ' heat '. 
arka- ' Calotropis gigantea ': Ta. erukku, Ma. erikku, Ka. erke, 
ekke tid.. 
ulapa- ' bush, shrub, a kind of soft grass, a creeper': Ta. 
ulavai {green twig with leaves on it, branch of a tree, grove, n. 
of various shrubs'. 
ulup-in- ' porpoise: ·Ka. utz.aci, Te. uluca, ulusa. 
ulakhala- ' mortar': Ta. ulakkai {pestle', Ma. ulakka, Ka. 
olake ' id " Te. rokali ' a large wooden pestle'. 
e4a- ' sheep, ram, wild goat': Ta. yii#u, iitu ' goat, sheep " 
Ka. a4u ( goat', Tu. eq,'/f 'id " Te. eta 'ram', Go. epi ' she­
goat J, Brah. het {id '. 
kaitka- «heron': d. Ta. Ma. Ka. kokku • crane, stork, 
heron " Tu. korngu • crane " Te. konga, Kuvi kongi ' id '. 
kajjala- {soot, lampblack': Ta. karical' blackness '. 
katu-
pungent, acrid, sharp': Ta. katu • severe, pungent, 
t 
sharp', Ma. katu 'extreme, impetuous, fierce', katukka ' to 
grow hard, sharp', Ka. Te. Tn. kaq,u ' severe, intense " etc. 
kathina·-
hard, firm, stiff': Ta. kat# 'anything hardened.
I 
coagulated', Ka. ka¢ugu 'to become hard', gatti 'firmness, 
hardness " Tu. ga!# ( firm, hard " Te. kat#4i 'hard-hearted " 
gat# hard, firm '. 
i 
karira- ' shoot of bamboo': d. Ka. kalile < bamboo shoot', 
t 
I
Tu. ka1}ile, Pa. karri, Kur. kharra 
id " Brah. kharring 
to 
sprout '. 
kiika- • crow': Ta. kakkai, Ma. kakka, Ka. kake, Pa. kakal, 
Kur. khakha, Malt. qaqe, Brah. khiikho id '.
l 
kiica-, kiija- • carrying yoke': Ta. ka id " kavu carry with
t 
t 
yoke', Pa. kacal carrying yoke', kiin- ' to carry with yoke',
t 
Kui kiisa, Kuvi kiiiiju carrying yoke'.
I 
kiiiicika-, kiiiijika- «rice-gruel': Ta. kaiici, Ma. kaiiiii, Ka. 
Tu. Te. gaiiji I id '. 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
kiinana- ' forest': Ta. ka < forest' ,kiin < id " kiitJam < wood­
land, . grove " kii?Jal ' grove or forest on the seashore', Ma. kiivu 
'garden, grove', kanal ' dry jungle', Ka. kii ' forest'. 
kiila- ' black': Ta. kal ' blackness', Ka. kat' id " kar.gu ' to 
turn black '. 
ku!a- ' pot': Ta. Ma. kutam, Ka. korJa, Ko. korm ' id '. 
kuti- ' hut, house': Ta. Ma. ku!i, Ka. Tu. Te. gurJi ' hut, 
house, temple', Kui k{tri ' hut'. 
kut£la- ' crooked': Ta. ko!u ' crooked', kula' curved, bent' 
kutavu < bend. curve', Ma. kotu, Ka. kurju ' crooked'. 
kuU- ' to pound': Ta. kutt- ' cuff, strike with the knuckles', 
Ma. kuttuka ' to pound, cuff', Ka. kuttu ' to beat, pound'. 
kU1JrJa- ' hole in the ground, pit': Ta. kU1Jtu ' hollow, poolr 
pit', Ma. kU1Jtu 'hole, pit', Ka. kutJle, kU1JcJa. gU1Jrji 'hole~ 
pit " etc. 
kU1JcJala- ' ring, earring, coil of rope': d. Ka. gU1Jt!a, gU1JtJ'lt 
, round', Tu. gU1Jej,u ' anything round', gU1Jrjala ' an ear orna­
ment " Te. gU'l'Jrjrana ' roundness', gU1Jrjrani ' round'. 
kuddiila- ' kind of spade or hoe': Ka. guddali ' kind of pick­
axe, hoe', Tu. guddoli, Te. guddali 'id", Ko. kudiiy 'hoe " 
Malt. qodali ' id ': d. Ka. guddit ' strike, pound " etc. 
kuntala- ' hair of head': Ta.l\Ia. kuntal, Ka. kudal' id '. 
kurula- 'curl': Ta. kurut '"to curl; a curl', Ma. kuru? 
, curls', Ka. kuru?, Te. kurulu ' id '. 
kulattha- ' Dolichos uniflorus ': d. Ta. kot, Ma. ko?!u, Tu. 
kutJu, Pa. kol ' id.'. 
kuvalaya- ' lotus': Ta. kuvatai, Ka. komate, koval, kole ' id '. 
kupa- ' mast': Ta. Ma. kiimpu, Tu. kuve, kuve ' id '. 
ketaka- ' Pandanus odoratissimus ': Ta. kaitai, kaital, Ma. 
Ka. kedage, Te. gedage ' id '. 
kemuka- (also kevuka-, kecuka-, kacu-, kacvi) , Colocasia anti­
quorum': Ta. Ma. cempu, Tu. cevu, levu, Ka. kesu, kesa, 
kesavu, kesu, kesave, Te. cema ' id '. 
kotara- 'hollow; cavity': Ka. go{aru, go!r!J 'hollow, hole 
(in wall, tree, etc.), d. gorjagu' id'. 
k01Ja- ' corner': Ta. k01J ' crookedness, corner, angle " k01Ju 
, to be bent, crooked', Ma. k01J ' corner, angle',ko1Juka ' to 
bend', Ka. k01J, k01Je, Tu. k01Je, Te.. kona ' corner'. 
koraka- 'bud', Ta. kurai ' sprout, shoot', Kui koru ' new 
shoot or bud', KUL khornii ' to shoot out new leaves', khor 
, leaf-bud, new leaves', Malt. qoroce ' to sprout'. 

383 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
kkala- 'threshing-floor': Ta. l\la. ka?am 'threshing-floor, 
open space " Ka. kala, ka1}a ' threshing floor', Te. kalanu, Pa. 
kali, Kui klai ' id '. 
khala- ' a rogue': Ta. kal ' to steal', kalvan ' thief', kalavu 
, theft, deception " Ka. kaUa' thief " Te. kalla' deceit " kallari 
{ a rogue', etc. 
ga1J¢a- 'lump, excrescence, boil' Ka. ga¢¢e 'mass, lump, 
concretion', Te. ga¢¢a ' lump, mass, clot, boil'. 
gu¢a- ' globe. ball': Ka. gu¢asu ' anything round', gut!4u 
, eyeball, egg " Te. gu¢4u' id ' 
ghuka- 'owl"': Ta. kukai, Ka. gtlgi, guge, gubi, Te. gitba, 
gt1bi ' id '. 
candana- ' sandal wood': Ta. cantu' paste, sandal paste " 
ciittu 'daub, smear', Ma. cantu sandal paste', Ka. sadu ' a 
fragrant substance', Te. cadu ' to rub into a paste'. 
capeta ' slap with the open hand': Ka. capparistt ' to slap', 
cappa!i ' clapping the hands' J Te. cappafa ' a clap of the hands'. 
cikka'iJa- 'unctuous, viscid': Te. ci.kkii-ba¢u · to become 
thick Dr inspissated', cikkani 'thick or inspissated', Ka. cigil 
jigil ' to be viscous, glutinous'. 
cumb- 'to kiss': Ta. cuppu 'to suck', c'umpu 'to suck, 
fondle with the lips ", Tu. jumbuni · to' suck', etc. 
ciuf,a ' tuft of hair, crest: Ta. cutu to wear on the head'; 
hair tuft, crest'. 
l\'la. cutuka 'to. wear on the head', ctlftu 
, cDck's comb', Ka. sii¢u, etc. 
talina- ' thin, fine, slender, meagre': Ka. tel ' thinness fine­
ness'. teUane, tef?anna' thin, delicate', Te. tellena' thinnish', etc. 
ta4aka~, tala-, tiilaka- ' lock, boIt ': Ta. tar' bolt I bar', tar­
kkal ' id " Ma. Ka. tar, Tu. tarkolu ' id '. 
tamarasa- 'lotus',: Ta. tamarai, ::\fa. tamara Ka. tamare, 
Te. tamara, Pa. tamar' id '. 
tiila- palmyra palm': Ka. tar, Te. tiirJ,u ' id '. 
tubari' Cajanus indicus': Ta. tuvarai, Ma. tuvara, Ka. logari, 
tovari, Tn. togari, togare ' id '. 
tuvara- ' astringent': Ta. tuvar ' to be astringent; astrin­
gency " tuvarppu 'astringent taste', Ka. tuvara, tovara, 
togari, togaru ' astringent', Kui torpa ' to be astringent'. 
tula- ' cotton, down': Ta. Ma. U'ival ' feather, down', etc. 
nakra-
alligator': Ka. negar, Tn. negar'l,t, Te. negatf,u · id '.
t 
nirgu1JrJ,f' Vitex negundo ': d. Ta<. nocci, Tu. nekki Ka. nekki, 
lekki. lakki ' id '. 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
nira- ' water': Ta. Ma. Ka. nir, Tu. nir1f. Pa. nir ' water', 
Kui niru ' juice, sap, essence', Brah. dir ' water '. 
patola- 'Trichosanthes dioeca': Ta. putal. putalai, Ma. 
puttal, Pittal, Ka. Te. po#a t id '. 
pa1J4a- ' eunuch, effeminate man': Ta. pm;, pet:ttu ' woman', 
pettaiyarJ. Pili' hermaphrodite " Ka. pe'IJ. pet:t¢a ' woman " Te. 
pe1Jti ' woman', p eif,i ' eunuch'. etc. 
palli 'house lizar~': Ta. Ma. Ka. Tu. palti 'lizard,' Te. 
balli' id '. 
patti 'small village': Ta. Ma. Ka. paUi 'hamlet, settlement, 
small village', Te. palli, palliya ' id '. 
punkha- ( feathered part of arrow': Ta. PUluku {arrowhead', 
Ka. Piluku, Pi/ku {feathered part of arrow'. 
puttikii ' the white ant or termite t: d. Ta. pu!!.u, Ka. puttu, 
Te. putta, KUL putta, Malt. pute ' white anthill'; This Drav. 
word also appears in Skt. as pu!a- in pipilikapu!a- ' anthill'. 
punnaga Calophyllum inophyllum ': Ta. punnai, Ma. punna, 
Ka. ponne, punnike, Tu. ponne, Te. ponna • id '. 
baka- ' crane': Ta. vakkii, vankii white stork " Te. vakku
I 
( crane '. 
bala- ' strength': Ta. val ' strong', valam (strength', Ka. 
bal ' strong I, balume, baluhu ' strength' I Tu. baiu {big, power­
ful " Te. vali, valudu ' id " etc. 
bila- ( hole, cave': Ta. vi/avu (cleft, crack " vii, vi!!u ' to 
crack, split " Ma. viUu ' to crack, burst open', viI/at ( a hollow, 
rent " villu ' a crack, aperture'. 
bilva- 'Aegle marmelos': Ta. vila, vi/avu, ceUil 'Feronia 
elephantum " Ma. vi/a, Ka. belaval. Te. veliiga ( id '. 
maitku- ' confused, stupefied' (Buddh. Skt. madgu-): d. Ta. 
makku ' to become dull; dullness', manku ' to grow dim, lose 
lustre', Ma. maniz-uka id I, Ka. manku dimness, obscurity',
I 
maggu ' grow dim or faint '. 
mayiira- 'peacock': Ta. maiiiiai, mayil, Ma. mayil, Tu. 
mair1!, Pa. manil ' id '. 
mallikii (jasmine': Ma. mullai, Ma. mulla, Ka. molle, Te. 
molta (id '. 
ma~i- • ink, lampblack': Ta. mai (blackness, ink, lamp­
black " Ka. masi • dirt, impurity, soot, ink I, Tu. maji ' coal, 
black powder, ink' Te. masi blackness. soot, charcoal, ink'. 
maid { wreath, garland': Ta. malai, Ka. male, Ma. Te. mala 
garland " Ta. malai {to wear as a garland '. 

385 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
mina-
< fish': Ta. mi1j, Ka. min, Te. min'll, Go. m'i'n, Malt. 
minu · id '. 
muku/a- 'crest, diadem': Ta. Ma. mukatu «top, highest 
part, head', Ta. mueei • crown of head', Ma. muka! 
top,
t 
summit, ridge of roof', Ka. Te. mogatj,u rudge of roof', Tu.
f 
mugili · turret " Go. mukur · comb of cock '. 
mukula- ( bud': Ta. Ma. mukit ' a bud " Ta. mukai f to bud, 
a bud', Ta. mokkuf ' a bud', Ka. mugu! 'a bud; to bud', 
moggu, mogge · a bud " K ui mogo · bud '. 
muktii • pearl': Ta. muttu, muttam, Ma. Ka. Tu. muttu 'id '. 
muraja- ' drum': Ta. muracu,' drum " mraeam ' id " mural 
'ton sound " Ka. more' to hum " Te. morayu • to sound '. 
murungiMoringa pterygosperma': 
Ta. murunkai, Ma. 
murinna, Ka. nuggi, nugge, Tu. nurige, nurge, Te. munaga, Pa. 
mul?}ga ' id " etc. 
lilla ' saliva, spitt1e': Ma. no/a, nola, Tu. noli, notte, Ka. 
lole 'id '. 
valaya- · bracelet ': Ta. valai • circni t, 1:>racelet ' , vb. to bend, 
be round, surround', Ka. bale' bracelet', balasu · to go round, 
encircle, encompass " 
valli' creeper': Ta. Ma. valli, Ka. bani, Te. valli' id '. 
sakala- ' scales of' fish; bark': Ta. ceki{ 'skin or rind of 
fruit' ;' ,fish-scales', Tn. eagu{i , rind of fruit', Malt. ceglo ( shell 
of fruit'. 
simikii 'ant': Te. eima, Kol. s'i'ma, Kuvi sima' ant' 
hintiila-
f the marshy date tree': Ta. rntu ' date pam " Hieu, 
recam-pa1Jai ' id " Ma. itta, ittal, Ka. real, zeil, Tu. ifieilu, zeilu, 
Te. idu, idii¢u ( id '. 
hutj,ukka- 'small drum): Ta. utukku, utukkai · a small 
drum " Ma. utu,kka, Tu. u¢uku, Te. ufjuka (id'. 
heramba·· ( buffalo': Ta. erumai ' buffalo', Ma. erima, Ka. 
emme, Tu. erme, Go. ermi, armi • id '. 
Concerning the date when these words were taken into 
Sanskrit it may be observed that the majority are post-Vedic. 
On the other hand it is important to note that there is a small 
nucleus already found in the Rgveda. 
Such are:' ulukhala-, 
kaluka-~ kurt¢a, khala-, bala-, bila-, may-iira-. 
The number 
added in the later Sarphitas (e.g. AV tula-, bilva-, VS kanka-) 
and in the Brahmalfas (e.g. SB arka-, manku-) remains com­
paratively restricted. The large majority first appear in the 
classical language, but in its early stage, being first recorded in 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
PaDini, Patafij ali , Mahabharata, Srautasutra" etc. 
The ma­
jority appear also in Pali, which is important for dating since 
these canonical texts take us back to a period from 500­
300 B.C. The number that occur first only in later Sanskrit 
literature is again comparatively small. It is clear that as far 
as Sanskrit is concerned the active period of borrowing from 
Dravidian was well over before the Christian era. In Prakrit 
there are some nev.r borrowings from Dravidian, but they are a 
good deal less numerous than those recorded above for the early 
Sanskrit period. They form only a small percentage of the new 
vocabulary of Prakrit. The common vocabulary of Modern 
Indo-Aryan has further new elements as opposed to Prakrit, 
but it is only rarely that any of these can be shown to be 
Dravidian. 
It is evident fronl this survey that the main influence of 
Dravidian on Indo-Aryan was concentrated at a particular 
historical period, namely between the late Vedic period and the 
formation of the classical language. This is significant from the 
point of view of the locality where the influence took place. It 
is not possible that at this period such influence could have been 
exercised by the Dravidian languages of the South. There were 
no intensive contacts with South India before the Maurya period 
by which time the majority of these words had already been 
adopted by Indo-Aryan. If the influence took place in the 
North in the central Gangetic plain and the classical Madhya­
desa the assumption that the pre-Aryan population of this 
area contained a considerable element of Dravidian speakers 
would best account for the Dravidian words in Sanskrit. The 
Dravidian languages Kurukh and Malta are preserved even now 
in Northern India, and may be regarded as islands surviving 
from a once extensive Dravidian territory. The Dravidian 
words in the lJ-gveda attest the presence of Dravidian in North­
\Vestern India at that period. Brahui in Baluchistan.remains 
as the modern representative of north-western Dravidian. 
It follows that the problem of Dravidian loanwords in San­
skrit is somewhat different from what fs usually met with in 
loanword studies, since the particular dialects or languages 
from which the borrowings took place have vanished leaving no 
record behind, and the major Dravidian languages of the South, 
with which mainly tJ;1e comparisons mustbe made, are separated 
by great distances geographically and by anything up to a 

387 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKR.IT 
millenium or over in time. Fortunately the differences be­
tween the various Dravidian languages are not so great as to 
render dubious the reconstruction of the primitive form of the 
language and .the form of words met with in the loanwords in 
Sanskrit does not differ materially from that which is arrived at 
by the comparative study of the existing Dravidian languages. 
It is a characteristic of the Dravidian languages that they have 
not evolved with the same rapidity as Indo-Aryan, and con­
sequently the classical Dravidian languages and even the minor 
spoken languages recorded only in modern times can be used 
profitably to trace the Dravidia.n origin of Sanskrit words which 
were borrowed before any of these languages are themselves 
recorded, and from other ancient Dravidian dialects which have 
themselves disappeared. 
§ 2. 
LOANWORDS FRO;:"} GREEK A:t\D IRANIA~ 
The Sanskrit vocabulary acquired a limited number of Greek 
words, partly as a result of the rule of the Bactrian Greel,s in 
North-\Vest India in the second and first centuries B.C., and 
partly through contacts in respect of 
etc. with the 
Graeco-Roman world. 
\;Vords that can be ascribed to the 
Bactrian Greeks are khaltna-
'bridle' (xaAivos-) , surunga 
'underground passage' (aiJpLyg) and 
' coverlet, 
blanket (1T€ptaTpwp,a), and possibly kunta- lance' (KOVTOS). The
I 
Sanskrit lexica have preserved a \vord 
' tent' which can 
be explained as a Prakritic adaptation of Gk. aK7]v~. In common 
with other Hellenistic rulers the Greeks of Bactria and India 
adopted the title aW'T77P 'saviour'· (rendered trijtara- in their 
coins). This title, not in its precise sense, but as an honorific 
epithet gained currency in the local Prakritsas sotira-/sotjira-, 
and thence was adapted into Sanskrit as sautira- ( hero, noble 
and generous man '. 
Other words of Greek origin are better accounted for as 
having been acquired through trade, etc., e.g. kastira- 'tin' 
(Kuaatnipos) mela ' ink' (piAuv ), marakata- { emerald ' (p,apayoos. 
oJ-LapaySos) kimpala- ( kind of musical instrument' (KVp,{3aAOV). 
Some 'words of Greek origin which only appear very late in 
Sanskrit have probably been taken in the first place from some 
intermediate language, e.g. kalama- ( pen I (KaAap,os) dramma­
( a coin I 
(opaxJ.L~). The word kramelaka- (canlel' (Kap,'f}Aos) is 
also late, and disguised by popular etymology (as if from kram-). 

LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
I t is possible that harimantha- ' chickpea' has been similarly 
adapted from Gk. €P'f3tV(}o~, though if so it has been even more 
effectively disguised. 
There is a special class of Greek words occurring as technical 
terms in astronomical literature. The development of Indian 
astronomy in the early centuries of the Christian era was pro­
foundly affected by Greek astronomy and a considerable 
1)umber of its technical terms were adopted. Such words are 
heli- ' sun', hara ' hour', kendra- ' centre of a circle' jiimitra­
, diarneter' (Gk. if>"LV~, wpa, KEVTpOV, OUJ.J-LETpOV). Some of these 
also were distorted by popular etymology, e.g. hrdroga:. ( the 
zodiacal sign Aquarius' (Gk. v8poX6o~). 
Contact with the Graeco-Roman world introduced one Latin 
word only into Sanskrit, namely dfniira- 'name of a coin' 
( < denarius) . 
" 
Following on the Greek invasions the northwestern part of 
India was the scene of a series of invasions by Iranian tribes, 
Pahlavas, ~akas, Ku~anas and finally HUQas. 
This state of 
affairs prevailed during most of the first six centurIes of the 
Christian era, and resulted in the establishment of a number of 
powerful dynasties of such origin, principally in Northwestern 
and Western India, but sometimes extending their sway further 
afield. This resulted in the adoption of a number of Iranian 
terms, first into Prakrit (principally the North-Western 
Prakrit), and eventually into Sanskrit. Examples from Indian 
inscriptions in Kharo$thi and Brahmi scripts are haraka­
( donator', and bakanapati- ' shrine attendant' (Khot. ha1,tr-, 
har- ' to give " Sogdian f3ynpt). In the North-\Vestern Prakrit 
used in Centra1 Asia these are quite frequent. In Sanskrit itself 
there are a not inconsiderable number which have entered the 
1anguage at various periods.- One of the earliest is lipi' writing' 
(occurring in Asokan also in the form diPi-) from OPers. dipi-. 
This word was borrowed at the time writing was introduced into 
India. Later a word divira- ' scribe' of the same origin was 
introduced, though it had restricted . currency. 
The word 
mudra / seal' is likewise attributable to Old Persian, although.it 
happens not to be recorded in Iranian until later (Pahl. NPers. 
muhr) , and kar$a- ' n. ofa particular weight' has been con­
sidered to derive from OPers. karsa-. 
Among the other Iranian loanwords the following may be 
listed: k~atrapa-' satrap' used as a title by certain of the above 
I

389 
LOANWORDS IN SANSKRIT 
mentioned Iranian rulers, varabiit:ta- • armour, mail" (OIr. 
*varopiina- ' protecting the breast '), khola~ ( helmet, a kind of 
hat' (Av. xaoSa-, PaSt. x6l), jagara- ' armour' (d. PaSt. zgara 
( armour '), miitJ,hi' armour mail J (MPers. maSi(k)), tiri ( a kind 
of arrow' (NP~rs. tfr) paryat:ta-
saddle' (Ir. *paridana- in
t 
NPers. palan' pack-saddle', etc.)' piltt- (elephant' (NPers. 
Pil) bandi • prisoner, captive' (NPers. bandah). gola- 'ball' 
(NPers. g6y<*gauda-), ganja- • treasury' (NPers. ganf). 
As 
can be seen from this list the words borrowed from Irania.n have 
mainly to do with military affairs and equipment, which is in 
accordance with their military superiority over many centuries. 
Of words not connected with war, mention may be made of 
pustaka- ( book' ultimately derived from Iranian (Pers.) post 
, skin' and mihira- (sun' (Pers. niihr OIr. mi8ra-). 
Some 
Iranian loanwords are attested only in writers from Kashmir 
(e.g. gaii,ja-, divira-) where they derive from the North-Western 
Prakrit. There are others which are found only in Buddhist 
Sanskrit, e.g. kiikhorda- 'wizard' (d. Av. kaxVarSa-) mocika­
· shoemaker' MPers. mocak) whence Hindi modi' id '. These 
words are also derived through the North-\Vestern Prakrit, 
since it was the Buddhist writers of the North-Western schools 
who were responsible for their adoption. 

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
Supplementary Notes  
and Bibliographical References  
CHAPTER I 
§ I. For a detailed discussion of the term c'irya- and its 
cognates see H. \V. Bailey, Iranian arya and daha, Transactions 
of the Philological Society, 1959, pp. 7I-II5. For c'irya- as 
applied to the language of the Indo..;Aryans, d. Sankhayana 
Aral)yaka 8, 9: yatrarya vag vadati, and Aitareya Ara:Qyaka 
3, 2, 5: yatra kva ca aryli vaco bhii$ante. For similar usage in 
Buddhist Sanskrit, see Bailey, op. cit. p. 102. 
The term 
Sarpskrta is late in appearing, and it is not used by Pa!).ini or 
Patafijali. The earliest recorded occurrence is in Ramaya:Qa, 
3, 10, 54, after which it becomes quite common (NatYaSastra, 
Susruta, Kavyadarsa, etc). 
§ 3. The mutual relations of the Indo-European languages, as 
well as the question of their original home, have continued 
to be the subject of active discussions. Among recent works 
dealing with these problems the following list is a selection: 
W. Porzig, Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebietes, 
Heidelberg, 1954; P. Thieme, Die H eimat der indogermanischen 
Gemeinsprache, Mainz, I953; H. Krahe, Sprache lund Vorzeit, 
Heidelberg, 1954; H. Hencken, I Itdo-European languages and 
archaeology (American Anthropological Association, Memoir 84) 
1955; 
P. Bosch-Gimpera. 
Les Indoeuropeens: 
problemes 
archeologiques, Paris, 196I; G. Devoto, Originc indoeuropee, 
Firenze, 1961; M. Gimbutas, The Indo-europeans; archaeo­
logical problems (in American Anthropologist, 65, pp. 815 ft.), 
1963; V. Georgiev, Introduzione alta storia delle lingue indo­
europee; Rome, 1966; G. Cardona, H. M. Hoenigswald and 
A. Senn (ed.), Indo-European and Indo-Europeans, Philadelphia, 
1970; R. A. Crossland. Invaders from the IVorth (in Cambridge 
390 

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
391 
Ancient History, pp. 824-876), 1971. 
Opinions as to the 
original Indo-European homeland continue to differ; sugges­
tions include the region south of the Baltic sea (Thieme). the 
steppes north of the Caucasus (Gimbutas) and the Danube 
basin and surrounding regions (Ge9igiev). The last alternative 
seems to fit in best wit,h the hIstorical distribution of the 
languages and dialect$. 
§ 4. The inportance of the connections between Indo­
Iranian and Baltic in particular has been stressed by H. W. 
Bailey (BSOAS 2I (1958), ,pp. 42 ff.) in connection 'with such 
words asnavanita-
I butteJr', nctra- t churning string' (cf. Lett. 
niju, nit ( to make a circular movement, churn '), htja-
seed'
I 
(with b-<m-; cf. Lith. ti/,iezys • barley-corn', Lett. miezis), 
rip- ' ascent, elevation' (Lith. lipti I to-rise, ascend '). 
Further Baltic comparison_s, to be added to the list given in 
this section are as follows: tand- «to be weary, slothful', 
tandrt' sloth': Lith: tandus ' lazy. slotltlul J; murkha-' fool': 
Lith. mulkis; 
tvi~- • to $'parkle, glitter': Lith. tviskiti 'to 
lighten J; sa kala- • chip, .fragment, splinter': Lith. sakalys 
'- chip of wood J; pula- 'hunch, bundle': Lett. pulis • heap') 
buli- · anus', Lith. bulis villa- 'the hair of an animals tail 
(particularly a horse's tail)': 
Lith vii-las 
I hair of horse's 
tail '. 
§ 5- The Indo-Aryan (and Indo-European) loanwords in the 
Finno-Ugrian languages are listed by B. Collinder in Fenno­
ugric vocabulary; an etymological dictionary of the U ralic 
languages, pp. I29-141, Stockholm, 1955. 
§ 6. Since 1955 a small amount of new Aryan_material from 
the Near East has turned up. The documents from Nuzi have 
revealed certain colour adjectives applied to horses, in Hurrian 
fonn paprunnufbabrunnu, ·pinkarannu, paritannu.correspond­
ing to Sanskrit babhru- pinga1d- and palita-. The change of 
original -1- to -r- in parita-- and pinkara-, a change which had, 
previously been noted in Surias, is of considerable importance. 
since it shows thatthis change, characteristic of Iranian and the 
E.gvedic~dialect of Old Indian had already taken place before 
1500 B.C. Other words that have been noted in this connection 
are makanni I gift " maninnu ' neck ornament " d., Skt. matti-, 
maghd-, and possibly urukmannu corresponding to Skt. rukmd­

392 
APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
'bright ornament'.' If the connection between mistannu 
• reward' and Skt. mftf,hd- proposed by, Mayrhofer is accepted, 
then we have a pre-Vedic Indo-Iranian form (*mizdha-) repre­
sented. 
A complete bibliography to the end of I965, and a summing 
up of the subject, is provided by M. Mayrhofer in Die Indo­
Arier im alten Vorderasien; mit einer analytisch/:n Bibliographie, 
Wiesbaden, 1966. 
There is also a detailed discussion of. the 
subject by A. Kammenhuber in Die Arier im vorderen Orient, 
Heidelberg, 1968. The work contains valuable discussions, but 
carries scepticism too far {on which see M. Mayrhofer, Die 
vorderasiatischen Arier, Asiatische Studien (Etudes Asiatiques) 
XXIII, pp. I39-I54), Bern, I969. 
The Aryan gods of the Mitanni treaties are discussed in an 
important adicle by P. Thieme in lAOS, 80, pp. 301-317, I960. 
CHAPTER II 
§ 2. On the subject matter of this section see further: M. B. 
Emeneau, The dialects of old Indo-Aryan, in H. Birnbaum and 
]. Puhvel (ed.), Ancient Indo-European dialects, Berkeley and 
Los Angeles,I966. 
§ 3. The study of Pa~ini and the Sanskrit grammarians has 
been actively pursued during recent years. The following are 
the most important publications since 1955: 
P. Thieme, 
Pattini and the Pattiniyas, JAOS, 76, pp. 1-23, I956; L. Renou, 
Terminologie grammaticale du sanskrit (2nd ed.), Paris, I957; 
Y. Ojihara and L. Renou, La Kasik,'i-vrtti (Adhyaya I, Pada 1), 
Paris, 1960-67; K. V. Abhyankar, A dictionary of Sanskrit 
grammar, Baroda, 1961; B. Shefts, Grammatical method in 
Pii:~ini: his treatment of Sanskrit present stems, New Haven, 
1961: K. Birwe. Der Gattapa/ha zu den Adhyiiyas IV and V der 
Grammatik Piittinis, Versuch einer Rekonstruktion, Wiesbaden. 
1961, and Studien zu Adhyaya III der A#iidhyayi Pattinis. 
Wiesbaden, 1966; V. N. Misra, The descriptive technique of 
Pii1Jini, The Hague, 1966; R. Rocher, La thiorie des voix du 
verbe dans l'ecole pti1Jinineenne, Brussels, I968; G. Cardona, 
Studies in Indian grammarians, I: the method ·0/ description 
,eflected in the $ivasutras•. Philadelphia, 1969­

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
393 . 
§ 7 (p. 61). The use of mixed Sanskrit in inscriptions, par­
ticularly of the Kushanas. is iliscussed, and illustrated.· with· 
examples by E. Lamotte in H istoire de la Bouddhisme indienne; 
pp. 640-41, Louvain,1958. 
On Buddhist Sanskrit see further H. W. Bailey. Buddhist 
Sanskrit, JRAS, 1955. pp. 13-24; J. Brough, The language ofthe 
Buddhist Sanskrit texts, BSOAS, 16, 357-375. I954; V. Ragh­
avan, Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, Indian Linguistics, 16,313-322. 
(pp. 61-2). The vocabulary of Jaina Sanskrit has now been 
dealt with by B. J. Sandesara and J. P. Thaker in Lexico­
graphical st,ttdies in ] aina Sanskrit, Baroda. 1962. 
§ 8. For Sanskrit in Indonesia see now J. Ensink and J. A. 
B. Buitenen. Glossary of Sanskrit from Indonesia, V 4k, no. 6. 
Poona, 1964. 
CHAPTER III 
§ 3. There is now a detailed study of the surd aspirates by 
R. Hiersche: Untersuchungen zur Frage der tenues aspiratae im 
Indogermanischen, Wiesbaden, 1964. 
Hiersche rejects the 
laryngeal explanations, and considers the aspiration to have 
developed mainly in combinations with sibilant (sthdgati, as 
opposed to Gk. crrEYW, etc., a phenomenon to which reference 
was made above, P,72). Initial surd aspirates are explained 
by assuming loss of mobile s- (phina-: 
OPruss. spoayno, 
etc.). Unfortunately Hiersche does not deal at all with those 
cases of sonant aspirates where such an explanation is 
impossible: 
e.g. rdtha-, saphd..;, sankhd-. sakh4. 
For 'the 
opposing view see F. B. J. Kuiper, Indo-Iranian Journal, 9, 
pp. 218-227. It seems however that only a portion of the 
instances can be explained-by the laryngeal theory, and that 
for others (e.g. ph'ena-) an explanation on the lines proposed by 
Hiersche is preferable. 
§ 5. The statement (p. 75, 1. 21) that the sat3m languages 
have uniformly abandoned all trac~ of the labial element needs 
qualification in one respect as far as Sanskrit is concerned. As 
first pointed out by O. Szemerenyi in a paper • The problem of 
Indo-European labio-velars ' read tathe Philological Society in 
March, 1952, roots in ; have a weak form in urlur when the 
original was a labio-velar, just as happens in the case of the 

394 
APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
iabials, Whereas when the initial was a pure velar the weak form 
is in ir/ir. This is seen most clearly in the derivatives from the 
root gf-/gur < to welcome • (originallabio-velar) on the one hand, 
and gf-fgir-
f to sing' on the other. . See further my article 
Sanskrit gf/g'll-r-
to welcome' (BSOAS, 1957. pp. 133-144),
j 
and Szemerenyi, Einfuhrung in die vergleichende Sprachwissen­
schaft, pp.60-6I. 
§ 10. The most recent comprehensive discussion of IE mobile 
s is by F. Edgerton, IE s movable, Language 34, pp. 445-453. 
He takes it to be a sandhi·phenomenon due to the great fre­
quency of final -s in Indo-European. 
§IL The subject matter of this section is dealt with in 
detail in my two articles, On the phonologicll:l h£story of Sanskrit 
k~dm- ' earth', fk~a- < bear' and lik~a • nit j',and Sanskrit k~i-: 
Gk. q,8i.vw. in Journal of the American Oriental Society, 79. pp. 
85-90 and 255-262, 1959. The subject is treateddiflerently, but 
beginning from the same standpoint (IE dheghom- 'earth' J 
etc.) by W. Merlingen in MY~p..'fJ) XaptY (Gedenkschrift Kret­
schmer)II. 49 fl. 1957, and Die Sprache, 8, pp. 74-76, 1962. See 
also O. Szemerenyi. Einjuhrung in die vergleichende Sprach­
wissen$chajt, pp. 46-47. 
§ 13. The literature on IE H and its varieties (' laryngeals ') 
since 1955 is extensive. A useful survey and.summing up is to 
be found in W. Winter (ed.) Evidence for laryngeals, The Hague, 
.1965; 
especially to be recommended is E. Polome's intro­
ductory survey in this volume: The laryngeal theory so far. 
A critical bibliographical survey (pp. 9-78). 
§ 17. On Fortunatov's law see my article A reconsideration of 
Fortunatov's law, BSOAS, 35. pp. 53I~544, 1972, which con­
tains a brief account of the disputes concerning this subject, as 
well as a defence of Fortunatov's theory. 
As regards spontaneous cere bralisation it was made clear by 
. H. "!'N. Bailey in a series of articles from 1952 onwards that this 
has taken' place to a much greater extent than previously 
recognised. I have discussed this subject, adding to Bailey's 
material, in my article Spontaneous cerebrals in Sanskrit. BSOAS, 
35, pp. 538~559, 1971 . 
There are also some cases where the occurrence of cerebral-~-
11 

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
395 
after a and a can be accounted for by special reasons: see my 
articles, Sanskrit jdlii~a in W. B. Henning Memorial Vclume, 
pp. 89-97, I9, 1970 , and Sanskrit sd$pa- and bii~pa-, JRAS, 
1969, pp. 112-117. 
§ 18. Under miscellaneous changes reference should be made 
to H. W. Bailey's remarks on the alternation of band m (Skt. 
btja-: Ir. miz-, Lith. mieiys) in his articles Iranian mi~~a.., 
Indian bija-, BSOAS, 18, pp. 32-42, and Mi~:;a suppletum, ibid. 
21, pp. 40-47. See also my article, Sanskrit iimoda- 'fragrance, 
perfume', Indologica1 Studies in honour of W. Norman Brown, 
pp. 23-27, New Haven, 1962. 
§ 24. There have recently been some investigations into the 
rendering of the Vedic accents by traditional reciters of the 
Veda in S. India. See J. E. B. Gray, An analysis of Nambudiri 
lJ.gvedic recitation and the nature of the Vedic accent, BSOAS, 22, 
499-430, and J. F. Staal, Nambudiri Vedic Recitation, The 
Hague, 1961. 
CHAPTER IV 
§ 5 (p. 131). On the IE suffix -men- (and the Sanskrit suffix 
-man-) see now J. Haudry, Le suffixe I.E. -men, BSL, 66, pp. 
1972 . 
§ 13. The Sanskrit s-suffixes have been studied in· detail by. 
j. Manessy-Guitton in a number of books and artiCles; Les 
substantifs en -as dans 1a lJ.ksf!.mhita; contribution a l'ltude de la 
morphologie vedique, Dakar-Paris, 1961;' Rech7?rches sur les 
derives nominaux a bases sigmatiques en Sanskrit et en Latin, 
Dakar, 1963; Les adjectifs simples en .-:as d1$ lJ.k~sa'1J'thitil IIJ, 
7, 
; Les noms Sanskrits en -nas, IlL 8, 171- 196, 1965. 
§ 14 (p~ 168). On the Sanskrit stems in -ti see the detailed 
study by G. Liebert, Das nominal suffix -ti im altindischen, 
Goteborg-Lund. 1947. 
(p. 173) .On the Vedic abstract nouns in ·-tat and' -tati see 
now L ..Renou, Les derives abstraits en -tilt et -taU· du lJ.gveda. 
BSL., 55,10-19. 1960. 

396 
APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
CHAPTER V  
§ 9 (p. 256). The instrumental singular termination -ena of 
the a-declension is the subject of a detailed study by C. Hauri: 
Zur Vorgeschichte des Ausgangs ·ena des Instr. Sing. der a­
stamme des Altt:ndischen, Gottingen, 1963. 
CHAPTER VI 
§ 1. The most recent comprehensive. study of the Indo-Euro­
pean numerals is by O. Szemerenyi: Studies in ·the Indo­
Eur.opean system of numerals, Heidelberg, 1960. 
§ 2 (p. 268, 11. 33-34). The question as to whether Prakrit 
se is to he directly compared with the Iranian words quoted in 
this section has long been a matter of dispute. The subject 
has recently been exhaustively discussed by M. Scheller: Das 
mittelindische Enklitikum se, KZ, 81, pp. I-53. He comes to the 
conclusion that Pkt. se is a secondary development fronI un­
accented asya. 
CHAPTER VII 
§ 2 (p. 298 ff.). On the Indo..European (and Sanskrit) moods, 
see J. Gonda, The character of the Indo-European moods, Wies­
baden, 1956. 
(p. 299). The use of the Vedic Injunctive has been exhaus­
tively examined and discussed by K. Hoffman: Der Injunktiv 
im Veda, Heidelberg, 1967. 
§ 3 (p. 302). The question of multiple presents formed from 
Sanskrit roots has been discussed by J. Vekerdi: On poly­
morphic presents in the lJ,gveda, Acta Orientalia Academiae 
Scientiarum Hungaricae 12, pp. 249-287, Budapest, 1955. 
§ 9. On the periphrastic future see now' J..Gonda, . A critical 
survey of ike publicatiims on the periP.hrastic future in Sanskrit, 
Lingua, 6: 158-179. 
§ 10. The . Sanskrit aorist has been studied by.T. J. Elari-

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
397 
zenkova, Aorist v Rigvede, Moscow, 1960, and the sigmatic 
aorist in particular, very fully and exhaustively, by J. Narten, 
Die sigmatiscken Aoristen im Veda, Wiesbaden, 1964. 
Cf. 
further on the reduplicated aorist, M. Leumann, Der altin­
dische kausative Aorist aiijanat, I ndological Studies in honour of 
W. Norman Br.own, pp. 152-159, New Haven, 1962, and on the 
sa-aorist, S. Insler, The Sanskrit sa-Aorist, Munchener Studien 
zur Sprachwissenschaft, 26, pp. 43-50, 1969. 
§13 (p. 350). Concerning the imperatives in -si, it should be 
stated not only that they are not normally formed from roots 
having root prese{lts, but also that in the majority of cases they 
are formed from roots which make an s-aorist. From this it is 
clear that these forms are to be attached to the s-aorist stem, 
and they may be most simply classified as s-aorist imperatives. 
This is the conclusion reached by G. Cardona in arecent study 
of this problem; The Vedic imperatives in -si, Language, 41, 
pp. 1-18, 1965. On the other hand O. Szemerenyi (Language, 
42, 1-6, 1966) prefers to regard them as syncopated forms of 
original subjunctives (dar§asi>dar#). This appears to be less 
satisfactory, not only on account of the phonetic difficulties 
involved, but also because the primary and predominant use of 
these forms is as imperatives. The few cases, to which Cardona 
and Szemerenyi draw attention, in which they are used in sub­
ord~nate clauses, are probably to be accounted for as misuse 
by later poets of a form which had become obsolete. 
§ 14 (p. 352). The termination -s of the third person singular 
active of the root aorist optative/precative is found also in 
Iranian, for which see Iny article The Sanskrit Precative in 
Asiatica (Festschrift Weller), pp. 35-42 , 1954. 
§ IS 1. On the passive see J. Gonda, Remarks on the Sanskrit 
passive, Leiden, 1951. 
§ 17. The latest study of the Vedic infinitives is by P. Sgall, 
Di'e Infinitive im lJ.gveda, Orientalia Pragensia I, pp. 137-268, 
Prague, 1958. 
CHAPTER VIII 
§ I (p, 374). On Sanskritghotaka- 'horse' see now my observa.. 
tions in International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics I, pp. 

.398 
APPENDIX TO THE THIRD EDITION 
20 ff. (1972) where it is argued that it is in origin a middle Indo­
Aryan descriptive epithet. 
(p. 380). On marica- in the MUl)<;1a languages see now N. H. 
Zide, Current Trends in Linguistics, Vol. V, pp. 420-421. In 
the same paragraph he also queries the origin of the verb jim­
from MUt:u;la, on the ground that the vowel is different in the 
MUl)cJa languages (Santali jom-, etc.), and further remarks that 
• the identification of words in Indo-Aryan and Dravidian as 
MUl)cJa loans, even when this has been done by careful scholars. 
is not often convincing, particularly in the light of newer data'. 
As regards sar$apa- • mustard " the Austro-Asiatic origin of 
this word has now been rendered doubtful by an article by W. B. 
Henning (Istituto Orientale di Napoli, A nnali, Sezione 
Linguistica, VI, 29-47. 1965), where he treats of the Iranian 
words for' mustard' going back to an original *sinsapa-, and 
obviously related to the Sanskrit word. In view of this Malay 
sesawi, etc., should probably be regarded as loanwords from 
Indo-Aryan rather than vice-versa. 

1 
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ALLEN, W. S. 
Phonetics in ancient India, Oxford 1953. 
- Sandhi; the theoretical j phonetic and historical bases ofword­
junction in Sanskrit, 's-Gravenhage 1962. 
ARNTZ, H. Sprachliche Beziehungen zwischen arisch und 
Balio-slavisch, Heidelberg 1933. 
BENVENISTE, E. Origines de La formation des nQms eft indo­
europeen, I, Paris 1935. 
BLOCH, J. L'indo-aryen du Veda aux temps modernes, Paris 
1934· 
BRUGMANN, H. Grundriss der vergleichende Gramma#k der 
indo-germanischen Sprachen, 2nd ed., Strassburg 1897-1916 
(Reprint, Berlin 1967). 
-- Kuru vergleichende Grammatik der indo-germanischen 
Sprachen, Strassburg 1902-4 (reissue, Berlin 1922) .. 
BUHLER, J. G. 
Indische Paliiographic, Strassburg 1896. 
CHATTER]I, S. K. Indo-Aryan and Hindi, Ahmedabad 1942. 
DELBRUCK, B. Altindische Syn.tax, Halle 1888. 
EDGERTON, F. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit, I Grammar, II 
Dictionary, Newhaven 1953. 
FRIEDRICH, J. 
Hethitisches Elementarbuch, I, Heidelberg 
1940 • 
GEIGER, W. Pali Literatur und Sprache, Strassburg 1916. 
GHOSH, B. 
Linguistic Introduction to Sanskrit, Calcutta 
1937· 
~ 0 N D A, J. Old Indian (Handbuch der Orientalistik, II- Abt. 
Bd. I, Abschnitt I), Leiden/Koln 1971. 
HENDRIKSElt, H. 
Untersuchungen uber die Bedeutung des 
H ethitischen fur die Laryngaltheorie, Copenhagen 1941. 
JACOBSOHN, H. 
Arier und Ugrojinnen, G6ttingen 1922. 
KENT, R. G. Old Persian Grammar, Texts, Lexicon, Newhaven 
HJ50 . 
K U R Y LOW I C z, J. L 1 accentuation des langues indo-europeennes, 
Cracow 1952. 
L'apophonie en indo-europe en, Wroclaw 1956. 
399 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY  
MACDONELL, A. A. 
Vedic Grammar, Strassburg 1910. 
MANSION, J. Esquisse d'une histoire de la langue sanskrite, 
Paris 1931. 
' 
MAYRHOFERJ M. KurzgeJasstes etymologisches Worterbuch des 
Altindischen (in progress), Heidelberg 1953 ·ff. 
Sanskrit~Grammatik (mit sprachvergleichenden ErlaiUer­
ungen), Berlin 1965. 
MEILLETJ A. Les dialectes indo-europeennes, Paris 1908 (1922). 
-- Introduction a l'etude comparative des langues indo-euro­
peennes,·8th ed., Paris 1937 (1949). 
PEDERSEN, H. Hettitisch und die anderen indoeuropiiischen 
Sprachen. Copenhagen 1938. 
-- Tocharisck von Gesichtspunkt der indoeuropiiischen Sprach-' 
vergleichung, Copenhagen 1941. 
PISANI, V. 
Grammaticadel Antico Indiana (incomplete), 
Rome 1930-33. 
PISCHEL, R. 
Grammatik der Prakrit-Sprachen, Strassburg 
1900 . 
Po K 0 R NY, J. I ndogermanisches etymologisches W orterbuch. 
Bern 195~. 
REICHELT, H, Avestisches Elementarbuch, Heidelberg 1909. 
RENOU, L. 
Grammaire sanscrite, Paris 1930. 
-- Grammaire de 1a langue vedique, Paris 1952. 
-.- Histoire de la langue sanskrite, Lyon and Paris 1956. 
SPECHT, F. Der Ursprung der indogermanischen Deklination, 
G6ttingen 1944 (1948). 
SP EYE R, J. Sanskrit Syntax, Leiden 1886. 
-.- Vedische und Sanskrit-Syntax, Strassburg 1896. 
STURTEVANT, E. H. The Indo-Hittite Laryngeals, Baltimore 
1942. 
-- A Comparative Grammar of the Hittite Language (Revised 
Edition), I. New Haven 1951. 
SZEMERENYI, O. 
Einfuhrung in die vergleichende Sprach­
wissenschaft, Darmstadt 1970. 
THUMB, A. Handbuch des Sanskrit. 
Dritte, stark umgear­
beitete Auflage von Richard Hauschild; I Teil: Gram­
matik, Heidelberg 1958-59. 
UHLENBECK, C. C. 
Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Worterbuch 
der altindischen Sprache. Amsterdam 1898-99. 
WACKERNAGEL, J. and DEBRUNNER, A. 
Altindische 
Grammatik, vols. I-III, Gottingen 1896-1954. 

401 
SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
WALDE, A. 
Vergleichendes Warlerbuck der indogermaniscken  
Spracken, herausgegeben und bearbeitet von }. Pokorny. 3  
vols.; Berlin and Leipzig I927-32.  
WHITNEY, W. D. A Sanskrit Grammar, 5th ed., Leipzig 1924­
'tt 
Y 
t 

INDEX  
aO, 104, 283  
a-, 272, 285  
alJtsu-, 180  
alJtsa-, 68, 163  
a'f!lhaU-, 169  
d'f!lhas-, 73, 96, 223  
a'f!lh1J-, 73, 182  
ak!$~apacyd-, 213  
dkravihasta-, 160. 177  
ak~-, 290  
dk~a-, 80  
dk~i, 19, 82, 177, 221, 224, 247  
ak~1}ayti, 153  
agdsti, 164  
aguru-, 381  
agniiyf, 181, 251  
agntivi~n~7, 181. 251  
agni-. 157, 184, 223. 233,  
245 ft., 252  
agnimdnt-, I47  
agnivant-, 147  
agnimindha-. 214  
agra-, I36, 286  
agratas, 167  
agrimd-, 176  
agriya-, 185  
agni:.., 225  
agryd-, 185  
aghd-, 197  
aghayati, 364  
ankd-, 76  
alikasd-, 163  
atikura-, 149  
a?ik~fydti, 363  
ankola-, 38r  
,i1iga., 284  
anganii, 379  
angara-, 22  
anguri-, 157  
angya-, 185  
dnghri-, 157  
dcchd, 287  
aj-. 25. 73. I48, 304. 329  
ajd-, 20  
ajagard-, 126  
ajalomd-. 211  
ajavayaft. 218  
ajina-. 21  
ajmd-, '175 
ajman-, 131 , 175  
ajra-, 102, 148, 185  
ajrya-, 185  
anj-, 327, 342  
anjana-, 136, 138  
anjasd-. 163  
alijivd-, 187  
at-, 98  
atani-. 98  
a1Jfyaskd-. I97 
a1JU-, 184  
atas, 277  
atasa-, 163  
atasi-, 164  
ati, 285, 286  
dtithi-, 137, 188, 196  
atimiitra-. 2 17  
dtka-, 39, 197  
attdr-, 147  
dtya'f!lhas-, 216  
atra-. 147, 151  
dtra, 132, 277. 280  
dtri-, 157  
athari-, 192  
dtharvan-, 4  
40Z 

I 
adand-, ISS  
ddiibhya-, 109  
ddga-, 94  
addhii,94  
addhiiti-, 169  
admard-, 149  
adyatana-, 153  
adhamd-, 176, 275  
I.. 
ddhara-, I29, 275  
adharahanu-, 210  
adhariit, 
adhds, 279. 286  
adhdstiit, 280  
ddhi, 285, 286  
adhivasd-. 288  
adhyapayati. 358  
ddhvan-, 134, 148  
adhvard-, 148  
adhvarydti, 362  
ad-, 112, 295, 319, 342  
adad, 194  
addnt-, III, 145. 226  
adds, 276 fl.  
adhvary~t-, 187  
an-, 102, 190, 321, 329  
ana-, 20, 272, 274  
anat;lviih-, 221  
dnatidbhuta-. 190  
dnapta-, 167  
anarviS-, 128  
anala-, 381  
dnas-, 103, 158.  
anilayd, 213  
«nu, 248, 285,286  
anudiitta-, 115  
anudrd-, 216  
anu~!h1t, 279  
dntaka-, 197  
dntama-, 176, 275  
antdr, 132, 278, 285, 286  
dntara-. ISO, 275  
antarii, 28S, 286  
antdrhita-, 288  
anti, 85, 102, 279  
INDEX 
40 3  
antrd-, 137  
dndhas-, 39  
anniidti-, 126, 213  
anyd-,275  
anydtas, 279  
anydtra, 132  
anydthii, 280  
anvavasarga-, 54  
dp- (dpas), 221  
dpa, 68, 102, 286  
dpaciti-, 114, 169, 288  
dpatt:ghni, 194  
apamd-,27S  
dpara-, 275  
aparahr;d-, '114  
dpas-, 39, I03, 140, 158, 203  
apds-, 160,203  
apasydti, 368  
apiirrt napat, 4  
dpi, 285. 286  
aptur-, 139  
dpnavana-, 156  
dpnas-. 159  
aprata, 250  
apvli, 191  
abjit-, 90  
abhi, 285. 286  
abhidyu-, 216  
abhidrzth-, 288  
abhidrohd-, 125  
abhipitvd-, 171  
abhimaU-, 170  
abhimatin-, 170  
abhiratha-, 29  
abhyase, 286  
abhrd-, 104, 136  
dbhri-. 157  
am-, 322  
ama-, 39. 272 , 275  
dmati-, 169  
amativan-, 142  
amatra-. 151  
dmanyuta-, 167  
dmav(lti, 194  

404 
ama.275 
am#raddmbhana-, 213  
amitraydti; 363  
amind-, 152  
dmiva, 191  
amu-, 276 ff. 
amurhi,28I 
amrtatvd-, 171  
dmbhas-, 136  
dya-, 125  
aydm, 246 ft. 
dyas-, 102  
dyase, 159, 224, 365  
ayujd-, 57, 124  
ayuta-,262 
arat}i-, 157  
aratni-, 83, 99, 157  
dram, 174  
ariitiydti, 363  
ara.tivan-, 142  
ari-, 40, 185, 222, 245, 247  
arutta-, 152  
aruntudd-, 160  
aru$d-, 163  
drus, 160  
arka-, 124, 381, 385  
aTghd-, 25,75, 78, 124  
arc-, 342  
arcd-, 124  
arcatri-, 157  
arci-, 177, 179  
arcin.-, 143  
aTci$-, 160, 177. 225  
drju.na-, 85, 152  
artLava-, 189  
drttas, 159  
arttasd-, 163  
arth-, 289, 364  
drtha-, 196, 286  
QrPdyati, 358  
drbha-,22 
arbhakd-, 197  
aTya-, 40  
aryd-. 15, 185  
INDEX 
aryamdn-, 4. 143  
dTvan-, 229  
drvan~, 39. 120, 229  
arvdk,286  
drsas, 158  
arsasana-, 155  
arh-,78  
arka-, 124  
arh(i1;a, 157, 191  
arhdse,365  
dlam, 85. 174  
alabu, 379  
ava, 279, 284, 285  
avd-, 272, 274  
avafd-, 98  
avatd-, 21, 39, 98, 153  
avatara-, ISO  
avadhrd-, 147  
avapddas, 365  
dvapanna-, 288  
avapdna-, 288  
avdr, I28, 148, 278  
dvara-, 148. 285  
avalokayati, 33I  
avds, 279. 286  
avasd-, 163  
avahittka-, 57  
dvi-, 68, 88; 102, 177, 222-3.  
245  
avikti, 197  
avi~ydti. 189. 362  
avi~yii, 189  
avi$Yu-, 189  
avirat-, 165  
dvya-, 87. 185  
avyathi~yai, 164  
as-, 290, 324, 342  
asiti-, 91, 261  
asni-, 157  
dsman-, 77, III, 135  
asmanta-, 130, 153  
asmard-, 149  
asmari, 135  
aSTi-, 157  

INDEX 
40 5  
dsru, 157, 178  
diva-, 102, 120, 187, 375  
asvatard-, ISO  
divavant-, 120  
asvaviila-, 211  
asvavid-, 213  
divii, 103  
asviiydti, 363  
d~ii4ha-, 95  
a#amd-, 176, 262  
a~tau, 33, 91, 104, 25g-t)0  
d~tra, 25, 97, 156  
as-, 94, 96, III, 295, 319,322,  
349  
asatrtkhyeya-, 262  
asdnii, 157  
asi-, IS, 104. 184  
asikni, 99, 161  
dsita-, 41 , 99, 161  
asu-, 180  
dsura-, 5, 24, 40  
asuyati, 363  
asuryampaiya-, 213  
asri-, 85, 128, 221  
asau, 226 ff.  
astra-, 137  
dsthi, 68. 85. 103, 177, 221, 227  
asmd-, 264 ff.  
asmadiya-, 269  
dsvapnaf-, 198  
dha, 284  
ahdm} 20, 88, 263 ft.  
dhar, 127, 222,226  
dhi-, 184  
ahoriitTd-, 218  
ahnaya, 283  
if, 285-7  
akhard-, 290  
akhu-, 290  
dgas-.76, 158  
agniveSi-, 199  
ifgnidhTa-. 200  
iingirasd-. 199  
angu~d-, 163  
aciiryajaya, 211  
ajarasd-, 216  
aji-, 179  
ajya-, 180  
arJ,hyd-, 98  
a1}~d-, 22  
atithyd-, 137  
atmdn-, 134, 269  
iidityd-, 186  
adya-, 200, 371  
adho.ra1}a-, 129  
iidhrd-, 39  
iinu§dk, 278  
antrd-, 137  
lipathi-, 216  
apas, 158  
apt-, 39. 184  
iimdtara-, 151  
amoda-, 395  
iiyasd-, 163 '  
tiyu, 160, 178-9, 183-4  
tiyu-, 183-4  
dyu~-, 160  
drii, 25  
artnf, 98  
drtvijya-, 199  
lirya-, IS, 40 , 390  
iir~eyd-, 199  
iivdm, 263  
avis. 279, 287  
dsa, 191  
as~nd-, 152  
dsi$tha-, 162  
asu-, 103. 146, 182, 184  
asumdnt-, 146  
iisvina-, 200  
iis-, 94,295, 219-20  
lis-, 103, 123  
asandt, 192  
asdnni$u-; 215  
asanvdnt-, 146  
asutivald~, 149  
ii~ya-, 221  

406 
INDEX 
ahuti-,I6g 
i-, 103. 111,290, 291,319.324,  
349  
ijyii,IOg  
itjiidadha-, 214  
ltara-, 275  
itas, 279 
.  
itthdm, 277, 280  
ittha. 280  
itya, 191  
itvard-. I48'-9  
idam, 270, 276 ff.  
ida, 277, 280  
idanim, 277, 280  
indra-. 5, 28  
indravayu, 218  
i1tdrasatru-, 2 IS  
indrasenii, 211  
indrotd-, 28, 214  
iddhiigni-, 215  
idhmd-, 175  
inv-. 290, 324  
ibha-,375  
iydnt-.144  
irasydti, 362  
i~-, 326, 330, 331 , 342  
i~dtJ'i, 133  
i$ird-, 39, 149  
f~u-, 180  
i~udhydti, .363  
i#d-, 78  
i#dni-, 157  
#tapurtd-, 218  
i~#va, I72  
ih~ 33, 45, 70, 277, 28I  
fk~e1Jya-, I52  
t4ya~, 185  
ips-, 360  
irma-, 39, 87  
is-, 320  
iSvard-, 28, 148-9  
f~dt,279 
U, 284  
uktd-, 91  
ukthd-, Ig6  
ukthasa1Jtsin-, 213  
uk~-, 220  
uk~d~-, 143, 220, 222, 225  
uk~avehdt-, 211  
ukha, Ig1  
ugrd-, 76-7. 147  
ugrdtama-, 176  
ugrdbiihu-, 215  
uC-,342  
ucdtha-,. 196  
uccd, 232  
ueeals, 282  
uceaistaram, 282  
1,I4U-,56 
utd, 284  
uUama-, 176  
uttara-, ISO, 285  
utsd;., I63 
ud-,330 
Ud,285-6 
udakd-, 208, 221  
udaktiit, 280  
udan-, 103, 208, 221  
udan£ya-., 88, 186  
udanyu-, 187  
udapatrd-, 21 I  
uddyana-, 288  
uddra-. 136  
udiitta-. 1 I4 
udrd-, 118, 120, 121, 147, 204,  
206  
udvana-, I52  
unduru-, 379  
upa. 279. 286  
upakak~d-, 216  
upajivantya-, 371  
upatdpat, 164  
upatrttya-. 216  
upanadam, 217  
upabdd-, 73, go, 109  
upara-, 148  

INDEX 
40 7  
upardtat-, 173  
uparajam, 2I7  
upari, 128, 286  
upasruti-, 288  
upasarga-, 48  
ttpastha-, 164  
upiinasa-, 163  
uptd-, 109  
ubhd-, 258  
·uras-, 158  
uru-, 182  
urtt~ydti, 133. 189  
urft1Jasd-, 2I6  
urvdra, 87, IS6  
ulapa-, 381  
ulupin-, 38I  
ul1,ikayiilu-, 2 I I  
'ltiukhala-, 381 , 385  
ulkli, 191  
ulkttbhihata-, 214  
usij-, 39, 198  
u~-, 328  
u~ar-, 81, I28, 135, 222  
u~ds-, 94, 207, 222  
u~dsii-naktii, 2 I 7  
u#d-, 168  
u~tra-. 151  
U~1Jd-, 151  
usra-, ISO  
uq,hd-, 78, 91 , 95  
uti-, 168, 232  
adhar, 
102, 127, 222, 232  
ama-, 175  
iirj-. 101  
urjasvala-, 149  
iir1Jii, 87, 98, 191  
ur1Ju-, 289  
urdhvd-, 87, 186, 286  
urdhvdnabhas-, 216  
urdhvasand-, 156  
urmi-, 87, 185-6  
ii"mya-, 185  
urvd-, 186  
u~mdn-, 134  
o 
!-, 323, 330  
fkvan-, 142, 145, 206, 229  
fkvant-, 145  
fk$a-, 82, 92, III. 163. 375.  
394  
o!k~ard-, ISO  
fc-, 123, 221  
rease, 159, 224  
rji$d-, 163  
rju-, 182  
rfilydti, 363  
rjrd-. 152  
!1Jdvdn-, 142  
.rtadhaman-. 28  
rtayti, 282  
rtavan-, 142, 227  
rtavari, 142, 194  
rlutha, 280  
rtupati-, 57  
rti, 286  
rdh-, 302, 360  
fddhi-, 168  
rbhuk~-, 229  
fbhvan-, 227  
fbhvas-, 160, 227  
r$abhd-, 198  
f$i-, 184  
r$(i-, 4  
r$vd-, 186  
rhdnt-, 144  
ika-, 30, 258, 275  
ikataya-, 263  
eka-vartana-, 28  
ekavira-, 210  
tkadasa, 261  
ekonavi1]tsati-, 261  
etf,a-, 98, 381  
eta-, 167  
etdrhi, 281  
etave, 171, 365  
~tavai, 171 , 365  
etos, 365  
edh-, 292  

408 
edhatlt-, 170  
idhas-, r03, 158  
ena-, 270, 274  
int, 167  
ima-, I75  
iman-, 175  
evd, 283  
eva1n, 283  
e~a-, 124  
e;>ti-, 124  
e~a, 262, 270  
6kas-, 141  
okivas-, r60  
oja-, 57  
6jas-,  
6ji!}tha-,  
ojn;dn-, 134, 207  
o~i-, 192  
otu.-, 170.  
oman-,  
o!}tha-. 21  
ausijd-, 199  
kd-, 13, 20, 75, 270, 272-3  
kakud-, 198  
kakubh-, 70, 198  
kakubhd-, 70  
kakuhd-, 70  
kdk!ja-, 68, 76, 92  
kanka-, 381  
kacu-, 382  
kacvr,382  
kacchapa-, 93  
kajjala-, 381  
katu-, 381 , 385  
kathina-, 98, 381  
karJevara-, 98  
kat;rJuyd-, 304  
katamd-. ·274-5  
katara-, 274-5  
kati, 168, 274  
katidhli, 280  
kathdm, 276, 280  
INDEX 
katha, 276, 280  
kadali, 379  
!ladli, 20, 276-7  
kadril-, 192  
kdni!}!ha-, 162  
kdniyas-, r6r  
kanydna. 156  
kanydla, 156  
kanyli, 77. 193, 195, 227  
kapand, 181  
kapi·, 184  
kapild-, 184  
kap£sa-, 197  
kdPrth-. 128  
kap6.ta-, r67  
kapha-.2{}  
kam-,33 1  
kdrat;ta-, 136, 138, 151  
kara1pd-, 
136, 138, 151  
karaniya-,  
kdra~-~ 
karasna-, 153  
karira-.  
kdri!ja-,  
kartt,1pa-,  
kdrii¢ati, 101  
karkata-, 75  
kartdr-, 139, 188  
kartave, 171  
kartdvya-, 172, 371  
kdrtum, 163  
kartr (nt.), 170  
kartos, 171  
kdrtra-, 137  
kdrtva-, 171,372  
karpata-, 57  
karpasa-, 379  
karmakard-, 213  
karmafha-, ISO  
kdrman-, 131  
karmanta-, 154  
karmiira-, 141, I54  
kdrvara-, 136  
kar!ja-, 136  

kdrhi, 274, 281  
kalatra-, 138  
kalama-, 387  
kalu~aydH, 364  
kalu~aydte. 364  
kalyattf, 254  
kavatnt~-, 158  
kavasakhd-, 181  
kavi-, 76, 181, 184~5  
kaviydti, 363  
kavyd-, 89, 185~6  
kascana, 283  
kasyapa-. 93  
ka{;tam, 284  
kastira-, 387  
kiika-, 381  
kakhorda-,  
kiica-, 381  
kiija-, 381  
kiiiicika-,  
kiiiijika-,  
kiit;Lviiyana-, 199  
kanana-, 382  
karatpa-, 33, 97  
kara1J,iya-, 359  
karayitavya-, 359  
kii,ayitum, 359  
kiirayitvii, 359  
ka,i-. 184  
kiiritd-, 359  
kiiru-, 40  
kii,ota,d-, 150  
kii'ya-, 359. 371  
kar{;iva1J,a-, 149  
kala-, 77. 382  
kiivyd-, 200  
kiis-, 355  
kasa,a-, 375  
kim, 75. 273  
kimpala-, 387  
kiyant-, 144, 274  
kila, 284  
ki,i-, 184  
ki,t;Ui-, 87, 370  
INDEX 
40 9  
kilcila-, 41  
ktvant-, 274  
f.ukkura-, 375  
kttiijara-, 375  
kuta-, 382  
kut£-, 98, 382  
kutila-, 382  
kuU-, 382  
ku(hiira-, 98  
kU1;Li-. 98  
kU1Jtha-. 98  
kU1Jq.,a-, 382,  
kU1J¢ala-,  
kulas, 274  
kulra, 274, 280  
kuddiila-, 382  
kunta-, 387  
kuntala-, 382  
kup-, 330  
kupaya-, 186  
kupitd-, 189  
kumiirakd-, 197  
kumiirikii, 197  
kurula-, 382  
kulattha-, 382  
kulampund-, 214  
kulinga-. 379  
kulisa-, 98  
°kulva-. 76, 83, 187  
kuvalil,ya-, 382  
kuvit, 274  
ku~tha-, 57  
kuha, 20, 274, 281  
kiicit,.274  
kuta-,98  
k-apa-, 27, 382  
kr-, 79, 110, 178, 294, 325,  
332-4,341,354,358-60,365  
krcchrd-. 136, ISO  
krliadiisa-, 194  
krtpvdnt-. 368  
krt-, 48, 76, 291 , 294, 328, 330  
krtd-, 109  
krtdvant-,371  

410 
krtakrta-I 218  
krte, 286  
krtnu-, 158  
krtrima-, I76  
kftvan-, 142  
kftvas, 163  
krtvd, 172  
krtvi, 172  
krtsnd-, 133  
krdhu-, 182  
krntdtra-, 138  
kfP-, 105  
krpar;a-, 138, 362  
krpa~tydti, 362  
kfmi-, 75  
krsa-, 124  
kr~-, 302  
kr#-, 179  
kr~Tvald-, 146, 148  
k{$r;a-, 21, 153  
kr~r;atii, i72, 191  
kr~r;asakuni-, 2 I °  
kr~r;asarpa-, 55, 210  
krsara-, ISO  
kf-, 8r, 330, 355  
kIP-, 105  
kecuka-, 382  
ker;ikii, 387  
keta-, 124  
ketaka-, 382  
kendra-. 387  
kemuka-, 382  
kevuka-, 382  
kesa-, 99  
kesava-, 99, 187  
kesavant-, 145  
kdavardhana-, 213  
kesasmasru-. 2 I 8  
kesara-,99  
kotara-. 382  
ko#-, 98, 262  
kotha-, 57  
kotpa-. 382  
kola-, 57  
INDEX 
krdtu-, 41, 170, 223, 230, 245  
krdtvc'imagha-, 2I5  
krant-, 367-{3  
krand-, 292 , 343, 356  
kram-,329  
kramelaka-, 387  
krav{s-, 39, 68, 76-7, 106, 100,  
I77  
kravya-, 18o  
kriyii, 190  
kr~, 75-6, 291, 326  
krT4-, 94, 358  
krTijli,  
kr'lidh-, 330  
kro4a-.S7  
krosand-, 151  
kland-, 292  
kla'J'n,-, 76  
kl~nan-, 83, 99, 134  
kva, 294  
k!jatrd-, 4, 92 , 138, 292  
kJatrapa-. 388  
k!jad-, 
k§an-, 
290, 292, 325. 334  
k!jdp-, 92, I92, 221  
k~apli, 191 , 193  
k~am-, 
295  
k!jam,-, 
220, 234  
k§ama, 191  
k!jdmya-. 185  
kJar-, 82, 95  
k!jama-, 95  
k!jay-, 95  
k!ji-, 82, 92, 323. 334, 354. 394  
k#ti-, 168  
k!jiP-, 100  
k!jipar;u-, 148  
k§iprd-,  
k!jitJd-, 95, 370  
k!jird-, I36  
k!j'ltdrd-, 80, 147  
k!judh-, 92, 292, 295  
k§umdnt-, 100  
~umd, 176  

INDEX 
411  
k~'ttrd-, 149, 32 4  
k~epnu-, 148  
k~tftra-, 92, 137  
k~tfma-, 175  
k~o~d-, 192  
k~~l'll-, 289, 324  
khaiij-, 81  
khan-, 290  
khdnitra-, 188  
kharvd-, r87  
khala-, 383, 385  
khalina-, 387  
khalu, 284  
khti-, 72, 290  
khiirt, 192  
khu4t!aka-, 57  
khola-, 389  
khya-, 335  
gaja-, 375  
gai'ija-, 389  
gat;t!a-, 383  
gatd-, 110, 168, 370  
gati-, r04, 169, 245.  
gatva, 172  
gatvi, 172  
gdntum, 170  
gdbhasti-. 164  
gam-, 75, 79, 93, 110, 290, 32 9  
334. 339, 356, 358-60  
gdmadhyai, 198  
gamana-, 110  
gamz"td-, r89  
gdmbhan-, 128  
gambhdra-, 128, 136  
gdya-, 124, 290  
gdri~tha-, 162  
garutmant-, 166  
gardabha-, 198  
gdrmut-, 166  
garh-,91  
gdvya-, 185  
gavydya-, 186  
gahvara-, 136  
ga-, 290 , 291 , 330, 331 , 334  
giittt-, 39, 170  
gdtha-. I96  
giri-, 21, 87, 184  
gfn;,a-, 370  
gut!a-, 98, 383  
gup-, 361  
gur-,75  
guru-, 46, 75, 86, 116, 182  
guh-, 358  
glthya-, 185, 371  
gr-, 342  
grt;f~d~ti,I33, 361  
grdhntt-, 148, 158  
grdhra-, 148  
gfbhi-, r84  
gr-. 22, 75, 87, 290, 358  
g6-, 75, 104, 117. IBI, 251  
goghnd-. 126, 213  
g6mant-, 223  
gomin-, 144  
gola-, 389  
govinda-, 214  
g6~pada-, 212  
gauri, 253  
gnii, 39. 75--6, 205  
gniispati-, 212  
gmdnt-, 367  
grath-, 292  
grapsa-, 163  
grabh-. 70 , 326, 340  
gras-, 290  
grah-, 7°  
grabhd-. 126  
griimaviisa-. 217  
griimyd-, 185  
gravan-, IS, 75. 134  
griihi-.200  
griva, 20, 191  
gri~md-, 175  
graivya-, 186  
glii-, 331  
gliini-, 157  

412 
I 
gha, 284  
ghand-, 124  
gharmd-, 
78, 175  
ghas-, 109  
ghasmard-, 149  
ghtituka-, 197  
ghasd-, 109  
ghuka-, 383  
ghr1}d-, lSI  
ghf'1}i-, 157  
ghrtd-, 15  
ghf~u-, 187  
ghf~vi-, 187  
ghotaka-, 375, 398  
ghndnt-, 144  
ghra1ftsd-, 162  
ghra-, 329  
ca, 77. 104, 113. 284  
cakrvas-, 161, 224, 369  
cakra-, 76-7. 83  
cakri, 192  
cakril",d-. 370  
cak~-, 92, 320  
cdk~ase, 159  
cdk~u~-, 161  
cdtasras. 141 , 259  
caturtha-. 196, 262  
caturdasa. 260  
caturdhtl. 280  
cdtu~taya-, 263  
catus, 263  
catvara~, 136, 141 , 259  
catviiras, 77, 136, 141, 259  
catvdri. 238• 259  
catvari1f'sd.., 263  
catviiri,!,sat-, 261  
canas, 39  
canasydti. 362  
candana-. 383  
candramas-, 210  
capela, 3.83  
cam-, 329  
camasa-, 163  
t'NDEX 
cama,sddhvaryu-, 217  
camu-, 192, 254  
cdyana-. 138  
car-, 325, 328  
card~i-, 157  
carase, 159, 224  
cari~1Ju-, 158  
caru-, 77  
carman-, I3I~2  
c~l-, 355  
caru-, 204  
carutara-, 151  
ci-, 191 , 322 , 343  
cikitvit, 166, 279  
cikitsa-, 361  
cikka~a-, 383  
cit-, 291, 293, 297. 320, 331 ,  
343. 358  
citd, 172  
citi-, 179  
citti-, 232  
cintdyamana-, 369  
cintayana-. 156  
cird-, 282-3  
cumb-,383  
cur-, 331  
c{ujd, 383  
cikitiina-, 369  
coda-, 124  
coditdr-, 190  
caurabhaya-, 211  
cyu-.358  
cyautna-, 39. 153  
chafil, 57  
chad-, 331  
chardis, 160  
chii-. 292, 328, 331  
chaga-, 26-7  
chdya, 93. 191  
chid-, 93. 292 , 321  
chidurd-. 149  
chinnd-, 370'  
chinnapak~a-, 215  

jak~-. 109, 190, 321  
jagatkartar-. 55  
jagara-. 389  
jagnu.l$i, 194  
jagdhd-, 95  
jdHhat-, 95, 109  
jajiUind-, 370  
ja(hdra-, 97  
jacj.a-, 98  
jdtu, 78, 178  
jata-, 192  
jati"4,kii, 197  
jatru-, 178, 183  
jan-, 79, 321 . 344, 354  
janamejayd-, 2 13  
jdnas, 39  
jdni-. 39, 247, 363  
jdniya-, 88, 186  
jan£tavya-, 371  
janiydti, 363  
jambala-, 379  
jdmbha-, 73  
jdmbhya-, 185  
jayd-, 125  
jaY11$-. 161  
jdyya-, rSS  
jara1;ta, 157, 191  
jdrant-, 73, 84  
jards-, 159  
jara, 191  
jarimdn-, 134  
jartU-, 98  
jdlii$a-, 395  
jdlPi-, 179  
javd-, 124  
jdvana-, 152  
jdvi$tha-, 162  
jdsu-, 180  
jdsuri-, 157  
jdsvan-, 142  
jagar-, 305, 327, 355  
jiigrvi~, 187  
jiitu, 170  
janasruteyd-, 199  
INDEX 
41 3  
j~nu, 73, 178-9, 242  
Jamarya-, 129  
jiimatar-, 140  
jami-, 184  
jamitra-, 387  
jayd, 191  
jayiiPatf. 2IS  
jayu-, 182  
ji-, 79, 110, 190, 290, 301 , 324.  
326, 343. 354  
jigzvds-, 161  
jigi$li, 207  
jighats1~-, 96  
jighiitftsant-, 145  
jita-, 110  
jitvara-, 148  
jinv-, 290, 324  
ji1U-. 380, 398  
ji$tJ;u-. 158  
jihmd-, 175  
jihvd, 191-2. 195  
fir~ld-, 45  
jiv-, 290, 327, 358  
jivd-, 77, r03, IS6, 324  
jivapitrka-, 216  
jivdputra-, 215  
iivdse, !S9  
jfviitu-, 170  
juvas-, 158  
jU$-, 73, 80,103. 328  
jtt$#-, 168, .232  
juhviina-, 369  
ju-, 291  
jutd-, 291  
jut{-, r69  
jur1;ti-, 157  
jf-, 301- 2  
jitva-, 171 , 372  
jinya-, 39  
jiya-, 185  
jaitra-, 151, 199  
jO$a-, 74, 80, 125  
jO$!dr-, 74  
johdtra-, lSI  

414 
INDEX 
jnii-, 340, 341, 343 
tanyatU-, 189 
jfiiiti-, 169 
tap-, 330 
jyii-, 291 
tapant-, 192 
jytt, 77 
tdpas-, 158 
jyiini-, 157 
tapasvin-, 144 
jye§~hdtiiti-, 173 
tdpu$-, 160-1 
jydk, 279 
tapyatU-, 170 
jy6ti$-, 160, 225 
tamasd-, 163 
jyoti~kft-, 166, 213 
tamisrli, 138, 156, 191 
jrayasand-, 155 
tdr-, 140 
tdra-, 125 
Pika, 99 
tarafta-, 138 
tJamara-, 99 
tard~t£-, 157 
tj.f-,98 
tardddve$a-, 216 
£j,hakkii, 99 
taras-, 160 
tart, 192 
td-, 19, 269 ft. 
tdriyas-, 162 
tdku-, 186 
tarf§rivi, 162 
takmdn-, 134-5 
trirufta-, 152 
tak!j-, 72, 80, 92, 94, 329 
taruttaydti, 364 
tdk!jan-, 82-3, 241 
taru1;tiiydte, 364 
tacj-, 331 
tarutrir-, 190 
tata-, 167 
trirutra-, 151 
tatan1,t~#-, 164 
tdrus-, r60 
tdtas, 167, 279 
tdru~a-, 190 
tdti, 168-9 
taru$yriti, 363 
tdtra, 280 
tarj-, 292 
tdtha, 280 
tdrdman-, 132 
tadtt, 20, 270, 280 
tdrhi, 281 
taddnfm, 280 
talina-, 383 
'taddhita-, 48 
talpeSayd-, 213 
tan-, 325, 341-2 
tavas-, 159-60 
tdn-, 127, 193 
tavi$d-, 163 
tdna-, 127 
tavi$t, 164, 192, 363 
tdnaya-, 186 
tavi$fydte, 363 
tdnu~-, 192-
tdvyas-, 161 
tanu-, 192-3, 204, 225, 230, tdsara-, 136 
253 ft., 269 
tasthivds-, 161 
tan1iSubhra-, 214 
tiiiJ.aka-, 383 
tdntu-, 170, 207 
tiimarasa-, 383 
tantrt-, 192 
tiimbula-, 380 
tand-, 391 
tiiyit-, 81 
tandrt-, i57, 192 
tard-, 125 
tdnyati,81 
tiirtt, 81 

tiira1Ja-, 138  
tiila(ka-), 383  
titlu, 178  
tavakd-, 26q  
tigitd-, 167­
tigmd-, 76, 8r, 175  
tij-, 81, 356, 361  
iitau-, 39, 178  
titik§u-, 361  
tirds, 87, 159, 279, 285, 287  
tildmisra-, 214  
tisrds, 81, 14I~'203, 259  
~I'  
tik~1Jd-, 153  
tirtpa-, 87, III  
tirtvd, 172  
tirthd-, 45, 196  
tivrd-, 149  
ttl, 284  
tuccha·-, 93  
tucchyd-, 21  
tud-. 81, 301, 329  
tuddnt-, 145, 368  
tubari, 383  
tumra-, 148  
tur-, 330  
turd-, 125  
turd1Ja-, 362  
tura1Jydti, 362  
turiya-, 262  
turya-, 262  
tuvara-, 383  
tuvi§vd~ti-, 157  
tu§-, 330  
tit-, 321  
UirlJt'-, 157  
Mirv-, 190, 290, 32 9  
tiirvd~ti-, 157  
il7rvd1;le, 131, 224  
tiirvayat,ta-, 166  
t1irvi-, 184  
tuta-, 383, 385  
tU§1Jtm, 21  
tflJa-, 25, III,  
trtlOdakd-, 218  
INDEX  
4,15 
trtiya-, 259  
trtiyasavand-, 210  
trd-, III, 328  
trdild·, 149  
trP-, 99, 324, 358  
trPdnt-, 367  
tr§u-, 182  
tr#d-, 167  
tr§~taj-, 198  
tf~tpa, 156, 191  
trk-, 95  
tf-, 81, 87, 106, III, 178, 190 ,  
290, 291 , 302, 329, 360  
tejas-, 158  
tejasvin-, 144  
tenivds-, 369  
toka-, 39  
t6kman-, 39. 175  
tosas-, 160  
tyd-, 210, 272-3  
tydjas-, 160  
trdpu, 178  
trayd-, 263  
trdyastri1Jtsat-, 261  
trdyodasa, 260  
tras-, III, 290 , 293. 32 9, 358  
trasddasyu-, 216  
tra-, 291, 331  
tri-, 68, 80, 259  
tri1Jtsd-, 263  
trit.nsdt-, 261  
tridhii, 263, 280  
tridhiitu, 280  
trivatsd-, 216  
trivft-, 221  
tris, 263  
treta, 201  
traitana-, 201  
tva-, 210, 272 , 274  
t'lJak~-, 39, 92  
tvadiya-, 269  
tvam, 264  
tval-, 358  
tvaratJd-, 151  

416 
INDEX 
tva rita-, 46  
tvd#ar-, 100  
tvi~-, 3g1  
tvi~i-, 179  
ddtrt~tra-, 147, 151  
datrtsdna-, 138  
ddk~a-, 163  
ddk~as-, 159  
dak~iiyya·-, 372  
ddk~i1Ja-, 20, 80, 92, 152, 275,  
285  
dak~i1Jatds, 167, 279  
dak~i1Jatrii, 280  
daksinii, 282  
dak~i~agni-, 210  
ddk~u-, 164  
dak~u~-, 161  
dagdhd-, 78, 90, 91  
dattd-, 106  
ddtra-, 138  
dddhi, 21, 177, 221  
ddnt-, 90, 112  
dabh-, 71, 95, 109, 324, 360  
dam-, III  
ddma-, 39, 68, 103, 125  
damanydti,362  
ddmiya-, 82, 186  
daya, Igl  
darad-, Ig8  
daridrati, 321  
dartnu-, 158  
darmd-, 175  
darmdn-, 143, 175  
ddrvi-, 187  
darsatd-, 112, 161  
darsana-, 138  
dala-,83  
ddsa, 68, 74, 173, 258, 260  
dasdt-, 165, 168, 261  
dasati-, 165, 168  
ddsataya-, 186  
dasamd-, 176, 262  
dasasydti, 362  
dasmd-, 39, 175  
ddsyu-, 37, 41 , 187  
dasrd-, 39  
dah-, 71, 78, 329, 360  
dii-, 20, 89,go, 106-7,302,322,  
330- 1, 334, 343, 354, 358,  
360  
diik~iiya'1Ja-, 152, 199  
diitdr-, III, 121  
ddtave, 171  
diitiviira-, 216  
datu, 170  
diitrt, 203, 254  
dadhrvi-, 187  
dana-, 68, 128  
diinavd-, 200  
danu, 39, 178  
diinupinvd-, 213  
diinta-, 87, 211  
daman-, 134-5, 143, 207  
damane, 131, 224, 305  
diivd-, 125  
davdne, 131. 159, 226. 365  
°diivarf, 142  
daru, 178-9, 200, 222, 227,  
247-8  
diiru1Jd-, 152  
diirsanika-, I II  
dasuri-, 157  
diisvds-, 39. 160, 343  
diisa-, 25, 41  
dasyii}.zputra-. 212  
dita-, 189  
dina-, 292  
dips-,33  
div-, 330  
divasd-, 103  
diva, 282  
diviitara-, 150  
divit(mant-L 166  
diviyoni-, 215  
divira-, 388  
divodiisa-, 212  
divyd-, 185  

417 
INDEX 
di-. 98  
didivi-, 187  
didi-,32I  
diniira-, 387  
diP-, 292  
dirghd-, 68, 76, 87, 198  
dirghatii, 172  
dirghdsmasru-, 215  
;.. 
ducch'ltna, 93  
ducchunaydte, 363  
duradabhnd-, 214  
dur01Jd-, 152  
duvasand-, 153  
dis-, 73, 95, 220-I, 329. 341,  
355  
dts-, 193  
disii, 193  
dih-,7°  
duvas-, 158, 160  
duvasyu-, 187  
dU§i-. 321, 358  
duh-, 70, 78, 95, 320, 332, 341  
duhddhyai, 365  
duhdnt-, 368  
duhand-, 155, 369  
duhitdr-, 88, 140, 243  
dU4dbha-,94, 101  
dutd., 16r  
dutya-, 180  
durakd-, 197  
d'ltratJtgamd-, 126  
diirva,191  
dr-,355  
drf!lh-, 294. 357  
drfJ1hitdr-, 140  
drs-,73,111, 178,341 ,343,354 
drsati-, 169  
drsi.:;e, 179  
drsand-, 369  
drSB, 123, 365  
drsenya-, 372  
d!~dd-, 198  
d!~/d-. 110, 168  
d!~/v4, 172  
deya~, 371  
devd~, 5, 103, 230, 255  
devakilbi$d-, 211  
devdta, 172, 194  
devdtiit(i) -, 173  
devatta-, 214  
devatrd, 132, 280  
devatvd- I 171  
devaydiana·, 213  
devaydti, 187, 363  
devayu-, 37, 187  
devdr-, 103, 141  
devavandd·, 213  
devasds, 28I  
devastttt-, 166  
devdhiti-, 212  
devi, 194-5,253 fl.  
de~trd-, 137  
de$t;d-. 153  
deht, 70, 163, 192-3, 225, 253  
ddivya-, 199  
dO$t2, 191, 282  
d6s, 133, 158, 221  
dohada-,s6  
dohala-, 56  
ddhas-, 158  
dohdse, 159  
daurhrda-, 56  
dyuk~d-, 162  
dyut•• 292, 331 • 356-7  
dyut-, 123  
dyumdnt-, 146  
dyumnd-, 146, 152  
dyo-, 104, 117, 181, 230, 234,  
250  
dy6tana-, 152  
dyotanit. 157  
dyotani-, 157  
drapsd·, 39. 163  
dram-, 290-1  
dramma-, 387  
dravd-, 125  
dravdt,279  
dravard-, 148  

418 
drdvit}a-, I38  
drdvilJas-, 159  
dravitnu-, 158, 188  
drdvya-, r80  
dra~tdr-, 188  
drahydt, 279  
dra-, 290-1  
draghmdn-, 175  
dru-, 290, 291 , 337, 356  
drugdhd-, 78  
drughalJd-, 211  
drupadd-, 211  
druh-, 78, 292  
druh-, 123  
drtihvan-, 142, 145  
dvayd-, 263  
dvddasa, 260-1  
dviidasd-, 263  
dvdr-, 221  
dvi-, 258  
dvita, 194  
dviti:ya-, 258, 262  
dvipad-, 258  
dvisds, 281  
dvi~-, 96, 319  
dvi~-, 93, 119, 123  
dvis, 263  
dve,sas-, 119  
dve~ya-, 371  
dvau, 19, 258  
dhdk~u-. 164  
dhdna-, 138  
dhanajit-, 213  
dhananjayd-, 2i3  
dhdnasiiti-, 212  
dhanin-, 143  
dhdnu, 180, 192  
dhanutdr-. 190  
dhdnu?-, 160, 192, 227-8  
dhana-, 192  
dhdnvan-, 130, 134, 160,  
223, 227-8 
.  
dham-, 22  
INDEX 
dharulJa-, 152  
dharr;asi-, 164  
dharlJi-, 157  
dhartdri, 132, 365  
dhdrtra-, 136  
dhdrma-, 175  
dharman-,  
dhii-, 69, 70, 90,r06, 110, 290,  
322, 333-4, 343, 360  
dhdtu-, 170  
dhana, 22  
dhaman-, 135  
dhityase, 159, 224  
dhara, 156  
dharu-, 157  
dhiirm£ka-, 199  
dhiiv-, 294, 329, 356  
dhasi-, 164  
dhik, 283  
dhiya1Jtjinvd-, 213  
dhi~aIJydti, 362  
dkf-, 221, 230, 231 , 254  
dhiti-, 169  
dhuni-, 180  
dhu-, 290, 30 2, 324, 351  
dhiiti-, 169  
dht7md-, 69. 103, 175  
dhiimra-, 149  
dhurv-, 290  
dht-lrvaIJe, 131  
dhusara-, 150  
dhr-, 290, 341 , 354  
dhfti-, 168  
dhr~-, 80,324  
dhr~dj-. 198  
dhf$#-, 169  
dhr$IJu-, 158  
dhr~IJ'ttyd, 283  
dhena, 157  
dhenu-, 158, 245, 252  
dhenukii, 197  
192 , 
dhenumdti, 194  
dhenu$fari, 2 I I  
dhaurita-, 129  

r,  
dhya-, 339  
dhriiji-, 179  
dhru-.29 2 
dhruvd-, 186  
dhrltvi-, 187  
dhvani-, 179. 180  
dhvards-, I60 
dhvas-, 290  
dhvasdni-, 148  
dhvastndn-, 135  
dhvasrd-, 148  
> 
na, 20, 283  
I  
nagna-, 151  
ndk~J 39. 75. 165. 168  
naktdn-, 132, 227  
naktam, 282  
naktayd, 282  
ndkti-, 168  
nakra-, 383  
nak~-, 290  
ndk~atra-, 138, 196  
nakhd-, 196  
na!a-, 56, 98  
na¢a-, 98  
nadd-, 98, 124  
nadi-, 184  
nadt, 192  
naddhd-, 70  
ndntva-, 372  
ndPlit, 103, 140, 165  
naptdr-, 140  
nabhana-, 152, 192  
ndbhas-, 68-9, 158  
nabhasd~, 163  
ndbhya-, 177, 180  
nam-, 340, 358  
nanasiind-. ISS  
namasydti, 114, 362  
ndmasvant-, 228  
nar-, 141, 243-4  
nari~tiij 164  
narma-, 175  
ndrman-. 175  
INDEX 
419  
narmafha-, 150  
ndrya-, 185  
nava-, n., 81  
ndva-. adj., 68, 126, 261. 283  
nava, num., 260  
navati-, 261  
navadiivd-, 210  
navanita-, 391  
navama-, 260, 262  
ndva, 86,194  
ndm:~#-, 164  
ndvryas,,:. I6r, 194  
navyas-. 161  
nas-, 290 , 334, 358  
nasvara-, 148  
nas-, 329  
ntis-, 102, 221  
nasvdnt-, 146  
nah-, 70, 330  
ndhu~-, 39, 139. 161  
niiga-, 375  
niidyd-, 200  
nana, 284  
niinandm, 284  
nandi. 192  
najitd-. 167-8  
nibh~, II, 177. 179. 201  
niiman-. 19. 24, 48, 68, 223,  
226, 232  
niiyd-, 125  
niiyaka-. 110  
ndsatya-, 5, 28  
nt, 285-6 
.  
ni1J1s-. 321  
nika~ii, 285  
niktd-, 78, 168  
nik~-, 290  
nij-, 78, 322, 355  
nityam, 282  
nid-, 329  
nidiighd-, 78  
nidhi-, 288  
nind-, 329  
ninda, 191  

4-20 
nipiita-, 48  
nimnd-, 152  
niyut-, 165  
niraya1pa-, 288  
niravasita-, 54  
nira$la-, 92  
nirukta-, 41  
nirguttif,i, 383  
nirjhara-, 95  
nirhasta-, 137  
ni§advard-, 148  
nis, 286  
nihakii, 81  
ni-, 100, 110, 338  
nicais, ·282  
nitjd-, 33, 45, 94  
nitd-, 110  
nira-,383  
nilalohitd-, 219  
1tilotpald-, 210  
nihiira-, 81  
nu, 283  
na, 283  
natana-, 153, 283  
nutna-, 153. 283  
nundm, 283  
nrti-, 179  
nrt1t-, 182  
nrpatr-, 213  
nrm'IJd-, 152  
nrvdnt-, 146  
netTa-, 137, 391  
nt!di~tha-, 94, 162  
nema-, 39, 272, 275  
ne~d1Ji, 133, 365  
ni#aT-, 137  
ne~trd-, 137  
nairhastd-, 137  
nau-, 104, 246-7  
nau,,268  
paktha-, 262  
pakvd-, 186, 370  
pak~a-, 163  
INDEX 
pak~ati-, 169  
Pdk~as-, 159  
Pdk~man-, 131  
pak~mald-, 149  
pak~in-, 143  
pankti., 260, 261  
pa~, 77, 294, 329, 342, 354  
pacchds, 93  
pajrd-, 136  
panca, 68, 77, 259, 260  
pancatha-, 262  
pancamd-, 262  
paiicasa-, 
paficiisdt-, 
pafijara-, 136  
pata., 97  
patala., 97  
palola., 383  
pa1Ja-, 98  
pa1J¢a-, 384  
pa1Jtja, 98  
pa1)tjita-, 98  
pat~, 68, 
329, 336, 342,  
357  
pataga·, 198  
patangd-, 198  
pdtatTa-, 138, 196  
patana-. 138  
pataTa-, 148  
paturu-, 158  
pdti-, 102, 169, 223, 247, 249  
patti-, 165, 169  
patnt, 99, 247  
pafman-, 131  
patvan-. 130, 142  
patsala-. 138  
path-, 72, 229  
pad-, 90, 103, 109, lIZ  
padd-, 127, 174  
padati-, 165. 169  
padvdnt-, 146  
pan-, 39, 190  
·panaytiyya-, 190  
pandyya-,372 

INDEX 
421 
panittir-, 190  
ptini#i-, r64, I90  
pdnyas-, 161  
payas-, 2I  
paramd-, 176  
parastt-, 83  
paras, 279, 286  
parastlit, 286  
parti, 285-6  
parari,42  
pari, 84, 279,  
paritas, 167  
paripanthin-, 216  
pari~advald-, 149  
paristoma-, 387  
parihastd-, 2 16  
Pdri~tas-, 159  
parittasa-, 163  
par'ut, 42, 119,234  
Pdru~-, 40, roo, 227  
paru~a-, 40, 163  
pdreta-, 288  
pan;adhvas-, 96  
pard-, 84, 329  
paryii'lja-, 389  
pdrvata-, 153  
pdrvan-, 40, 130, 16o, 227  
pdrsu-, 180  
par~dt.ti, 133, 157  
palasti-, 164  
paliiU, 192  
paldva-, 83  
Pdlikni, 99, 167  
palitd-, 83, 99, 164. 167, 391  
palli, 384  
palvald-, 83, 148  
pdvirava-, 189  
paviru-, 187  
pas-, 81, 330  
pdsu, 77, 178, 222, 225, 245-6  
pasu-, 81,102,179,222,245-6  
pasumdnt-, 147, 220, 224, 228  
pascii, 232  
pasc4t, 233, 283, 286  
pdsas-, 158  
pastYd, 39  
Pii-, 72, 85, 103, III, 329  
Piittl-su-, 22  
piittl-st-trd-, 149  
piittl-suld-. 149  
piijas-, 40, 158-9  
pdiicajanya~. 186  
patrahasta-, 215  
pilda-, 122  
piiparddhi-, 57  
piipmdn-, 134-5  
piiman-, 134-5  
piimand-, 135, 149  
piimara-, 135, 149  
piiyu-; 40, 183  
pdr~t;i-, 84, 157  
pdlitya-, 199  
pa$iittd-, 98  
pi-, 289, 324  
pingala-, 391  
picu, 379  
pi7JrJ,a-, 98 '  
pitdr-, 105, 106, III, 140, 203,  
220, 222, 230, 234, 243  
Pitiiputrau, 218  
Pitu-, 39, 179, 222, 226, 246  
pitrya-, 185  
pinv-, 289, 324  
pipilikiipufa-, 384  
pisuna-, 152, 291  
pi~-, 80, 292 , 327, 341  
pirJ,-, 94, 292  
pitd-, III  
pitva, 172  
piy-, 291  
piyatnu-, 158  
Piyt't-, 182  
piytt~a-, 133, 163  
Pilu-, 389  
pivan-, 103, 149, 187  
pivara-, 149  
pivari, 142  
pivas-, 118  

422 
INDEX 
pivasd-, 163  
PtttJ1-S-, 228  
pttnkha-, 384  
pu~a-, 97  
pu1;tyalak~mika-, 216  
puttikii, 384  
putrd-, 151  
p~tfrakd-, 197  
p~ttrdvant-, 145  
p~ttriydti, 363  
punar, 278  
punarmanyd-, 213  
punnaga-, 384  
pur-, 83, 87  
purandard-, 213  
purds, 87. 159, 279. 280, 286  
purastiit, 280, 286  
pura, 194, 286  
p~trii1Jd-, 155  
puri~a-, 163  
puru-, 87, 182, 207, 230, 245,  
250- 2  
puru!}a-, 163  
puru~dtii, 172  
puru~atrii, 132, 280  
purU!jamrgd-, 210  
puru~ariijd-, 217  
pu,laka-, 164  
pulast1,'-, 164  
PU!}-, 133  
pu~ti-, 169  
pustaka-, 389  
pU-, 105, 291 , 339  
putd-, 291  
p-ati-, 103, 169  
puru-·, 163  
pliru~a-, 163  
purt,td-, 87, III, 151 291  
purttdmasa-, 210  
pitrva-. 187, 275  
pula-,39I  
pii~a1Jd-, I53  
p£i~dn-, 133, 143  
pu~arya-, 133  
Prk!}d-, 162  
Prtaniiydti, 363  
Pfthaviina-, 156  
Prthu-, 72, 104, 182  
Prthuka- J 71  
Prthvt, 194, 254  
pfdiiku-, 197  
pfsni-, 157  
Pf~at-, 144, 164, 167  
p.r~atd-, 167  
Pf-, 83, III, 120, 291, 301-2,  
322, 326, 358  
pitva-, 171  
p6tar-, 137  
potrd-, 137  
paurukutsi-, 199  
pauru~eya-, 199  
pya-, 29I  
pyuk~t.ta-, 153  
prd, 114, 279, 286  
prach-, 94, 104, 289. 330  
prajapatis.r~ta-, 214  
pratard-, ISO  
prdti, 177, 279, 285, 287  
pratidtvan-, 141  
pratido:;dm, 282  
pratinisam, 217  
pratiram,365  
pratisara-, 198  
pratnd-, 153  
pratndtha, 280  
pratyagni, 217  
pratydiic-, 221  
prath-, 72, 292  
prathamd-, 262  
prathimdn-, 131, 135, 188, 227  
prdthiyas-, 161  
pradak~ittit, 167, 279  
prapitvd-, 171  
prapyasd-, 163  
prabhangtn-, 288  
prdyatadak#1;ta-. 2I5  
prdyas-, 158  
praY1,I,ta-, 262  

prava~td-, 152  
prasnd-, 91, 289, 330  
prii-, 344  
priikrta-, 1  
prtiktat, 280  
prajiipatyd-, 186  
pratdr, 128, 132, 234, 278  
priidus, 279, 287  
prdyas, 279  
pras'a-, 194  
priyd-, 125  
priyddhama-, 175  
priyaydte, 304  
pri-, 358  
pru-, 83, 285, 328  
pru~-, 22  
pre~i-, 157  
premdn-, 134  
plihdn-, 81, 83, 134  
plu-, 83, 99, 328  
pluti-, 169  
plu~i-, 84, 164, 184  
psa-, 291  
phdrvara-, 136  
phalgu-, 40, 192  
phO,la-, 71, 81  
phina-, 20, 71 , 81, 393  
baka-,384  
badhird-, 149  
bandt, 389  
bandh-,70  
bdndhu-, 70, 180  
bandhuta, 172  
babhuvds-, 161  
babhru-, 192, 391  
babhrusd-, 197  
barhdt,tii, 157  
barhi~-, 21, 160  
bala-, 384, 385  
balado'van-, 213  
baUn-, 195, 225, 253  
bahirdha, 280 
­
INDEX 
423  
bahis, 20, 102, 131, 279, 280,  
286  
bahu-, 145, 182  
bahudhtl, 280  
bahuvrihi-, 215  
bahvt, 204  
biidh-, 190, 329, 367  
bii,la-, 191, 235  
ba~pa-, 395  
bahu-, 70, 103, 116, 180  
bdhya-, 102  
birf,iila-, 375  
bibhrat-, 368  
bila-, 384, 385  
bilva-, 384, 385  
bija-, 391, 395  
buddhd-, 90  
buddhi-, 90  
budh-, 20, 21, 104, 328, 335  
budhd-, 125  
budhnd-,70  
bubudhiind-, ISS  
buli-, 391  
br1'fZh-, 22  
brhdnt-, 144, 368  
bfhaspdti-, 209, 212  
b6dha-, 125  
bradhnd-, 22  
brdhman-, Ilg, 121, 131, 136,  
139, 206  
brahmdn-, 15, 120, 121, 136,  
142, 206, 223, 230  
brahmabhuya-, 180  
bru-, 320~1  
bhaktd-, 78, 92  
bhakti-, 169  
bhak~-, 92, 290  
bhagnd-, 370  
bhaitga-, 22  
bhangurd-, 149  
bhaj-, 33, 78, 92  
bhanj-, 100 
• 
bhata-, 98  

424 
bhafta-, 56  
bhattara(ka-), 56, 98  
bhadrapiipa-, 218  
bhayd-, 174  
bhdra-, 21  
bharatd·-, 167  
bharddviija-, 37, 216  
bhdrant-, 145  
bhdrantt, 203  
bhari$d-, 163  
bhdrman-, 131  
bharv-, 290  
bhala, 284  
bhalliika-, 375  
bhdvana-, I 18  
bhdvant-, 223, 269. 368-9  
bhdvamana-, .369  
bha§-, 98  
bhas-, 291  
bhasdd-,.198 
bhii-, 70  
bhJjana-, 138  
bhiinu-, 158  
bho..ma-, 175  
bhiird-, 125, 207  
bhiirata- (-i) 1 
1  
bhiirvard-, 149  
bha.rman, 200  
bhiivyd-, 200, 371  
bhii~-, 98  
bhasura-, 149  
bliasvard-, 148  
bhid-, 327. 359  
bhidurd-, 149  
bhidelima-, 176  
bhinnd-, 151 , 370  
bhiyds-, 159, 202, 222, 225  
bhiyasiina-, 155  
bhi~dj-, 198  
bhi~ajydti, 363  
bh~, 22, 290, 297, 302, 358  
bhimd-, 174  
bhirtt-, 158  
bhi~4. 164, 191  
INDEX 
bhug11d-, 151, 370  
bh'ltj-. 100. 2<)5, 327  
bhuji-, 179  
bhuji~ya-, 164  
bhujmdn-, 143  
bhuiytt-, 187  
bhur-, 291  
bhurattyati, 129, 362  
bhurij-, 198  
bhurvdtti-, 149, 157  
bhuvana-, 138  
bhuvanli-, 129  
bhuvar, 128  
bhu-, 30 ,333, 342,365  
bha-, 221,231,254  
bh£ttvi,172  
bhuman-,134-5,227  
bhiimi-. 176, 185  
bhumyd-, 185  
bhiiyas-.161  
bh'a,Yasi, 204  
bhuri-, 157  
bJu"irja-, 73, 87  
bhu~-, 331  
bhr-, 15, 102, 116, 322, 328,  
338, 356  
bhfgavii1}a-. 156  
bhrta-, 167  
bhrti-, 169  
bhoga-, 124  
bhogd-, 125  
bhriitar-, 103  
mdk~-, 25  
mdk~ii, 25  
mdk~ikii, 25  
mak~ii, 80, 92 , 196, 279  
makhd-,196  
magha-,391  
maghdvan-. 142, 222, 229  
manku-,384  
majj-. 94, 32 9  
majjdn-. 21, 134  
matzi-, 98, 184, 391  

INDEX 
42 5  
ma1Jigrivri-, 214  
mdtasna-, 138  
. mati-, 169, 207, 230, 233, 246  
matka-, 269  
matsard-, 133,I50 
math-, 229, 32~ 363  
mad-, 331 , 357  
tnadird-, 149  
madiya-, 269  
mdderaghu-, 214  
madgu-,94 
mddvan-, 142  
mddhu. 24, 69, 88, 102, 177-8,  
184. 194. 222-3. 227. 232 , 
245 ft. 
mddhujihva-, 215  
madhurd-, 149  
madhula-, 149  
mddhuhastya-, 216  
mddhya-, 102, 174, 177, 180,  
286  
madhyamd-,174 
man-,234, 360, 361  
manas-, 158  
manasa-, 163  
manasydti, 362  
maniivi, 18r, 251  
manf~if, 164, 191  
mdnu-, r80, 201  
mdnu~-. 139. 16r 
manojighra-, 214  
manoyu.1-, 213  
mdntu-, 170-I 
mantrdyate, 364  
mandaydtsakha-, 216  
mandasand-, 133, 155  
mdnman-, 131  
manyu-, 37, 187  
mayiira-, 384 .  
mayiiraroman-, 215  
marakata-, 387  
marica-, 380, 398  
mdrici-, 166. 197  
marUt-, 29, 166  
marrjitdr-, 190  
marya-,40 
tttaryakd-, 197  
mdr~a-, 80  
mallika, 384  
malvd-, 186  
ma#-,384 
masti~ka-, 164, 197  
mdstu, 170  
mdhar, 128-9  
mahdnt-, 144  
mdhas-, 160  
mdha-, 88, 195, 229  
mahagramd-, 210  
maluivira-, 210  
mahiidhand-, 210  
mdhi,229 
mahitvand-, 171  
mahimdn-, 131, 134  
mahi~d-, 163. 375  
ma-, 68, 322-3, 358  
mit, 102, 299  
ma1flsiytiti, 363  
ma4hf,389  
matanga-, 375, 379  
mattir-, 19, 68, 103. 116, 140,  
203, 243  
matariSvan-, 41  
matftama, 176  
miltra, 156  
milna-, 125  
manava-, 199, 200-1  
manasa-, 163  
mamaka-, 199, 269  
mamakina-, 269  
maya, 191  
mJruta-, 199  
marjara-, 375  
miirtj.fkd-, 199  
mala, 384  
miis-, 94, 103  
nuihina-,46  
mi-, 292, 324  
mik~-, .290  

426 
INDEX 
mit, 124,. 165  
mitra.,., 4, 28, 151  
mitradhii, 280  
mitrfivartttlii, 217  
mith-, 292  
mithati-, 169  
mithas, 159, 279  
mith'U-, 279  
mithund-, 152  
miyidha-, 40, 94  
misrd-, 21, 290  
mih-,95  
mihira-, 389  
mi-,291  
mitjhd-, 40, 94. 391  
mitjhu#ama-, 176  
mi¢hvas-, 160, 343  
mina-, 385  
mimii1J1sii, 36r  
mukuta-.. 385  
mukula-, 385  
muktii, 385  
mukhatas,387  
muc-, 22, 330 , 354  
mudra, .388  
muni-, 184  
muraja-,385  
murungi,385  
mu~-, 363  
mu#vtin-, 142  
muhu, 130 , 279  
nuthur, 130 , 153, 279  
muhurtd-, 130, 253  
murkha-,391 
murdhdn-, 134, 222, 226, 234  
mii.~-, 68, 80  
mr-, 354, 360  
mrk~-, 290  
mrgdyate,364  
mrj-,78, 290 , 320, 342 ,357  
mr4-, 190, 331  
mrt!ay4ku-, 190  
mr4ikd-, 40, 91 , 94, 197  
mrtd-, I04  
mrtytt-, 187  
mrtyubdndhu-; 211  
mrtsna-, 153  
mrd-, 291  
mrd1t-, 104  
mrdh-,292  
mfdhas-,  
mrs-,329  
mt§-, 80  
mr~a, 194  
mr§ta-, 78  
mf-, 291 , 326  
meghd-, 69, 76  
medhii-, 33, 94  
medhird-, 149  
mela, 387  
mocika-, 389  
mna-, 291  
mrit-, 291  
mradiyas-, 161  
mliina-. 151  
mluc-, 292  
mlecchd-, 1  
yd-, 272, 274  
yakrt, 68, 127, 164, 220, 221,  
226  
yak~d-, 163  
ydk~ma-,  
ydk~man-, 175  
yaj-, 34, 78, 102, 109, 294  
yajatd-, 112, 167  
ydjatra-, 151  
yajdtha-, 196  
ydjamiina-. ISS  
yajds-, 160  
ydju~-, 160  
yajnd-, 4, 102, 151  
yajnddhira-, 214  
ydjyu-, 37, 187  
ydjvari, 142  
yatamd-, 275  
yatard-, 274-5  
ydti, 168, 274  

427 
INDEX 
yatra, 274  
ydthii, 274  
yddi, 274, 280  
yantur-, 139  
yant-, 329, 330, 343  
yamd-, 4  
ydrhi, 281  
ytivamant:-, 147  
ydvasa-, 163  
ydsas-, 120, 160, 206  
yasas-, 120, 16o. 206  
)Ia~!ukama-. 367  
yas-, 329  
yahu-, 40, 120, 186  
yahvd-, 40, 186  
yahvdnt-, 120  
ya-, 291. 330, 360  
yaga-, 79  
yac-. 292  
yiicitdr-. 188  
yatana, 147  
ydtar-. 140, 147. 203  
ydvant-, 274  
°ydvari, 142  
yu-, 292, 320, 322  
yUkta-. 78, 89, 9 1  
yukti-. 169  
yugd-, 68, 89, 127, 173-4. 232  
yugapad, 278  
yugma-, 173,232  
yuj-, 78, 89, 91 , 104, 292 , 327  
yunjdnt-. 222  
yunjand-, 369  
yudh-, 330, 359  
yudhdye, 179, 365  
yudhenya-, 372  
yudhmd-, 175  
yudhvan-, 142  
yuvaU-, 229  
yuvan-, 68, 141, 222. 229  
yuvasa-, 197  
yuvdku, 197, 227  
yuvddatta , 267  
yuvdm, 264  
yu:;mdka-, 267  
yu~mJ,datta-, 267  
yfithd-, 196, I98  
yapa-. 198  
yiipadiiru, 2I I  
yiiyam, 264  
ya~-, 68, 221  
yoga-, 124  
yodhd-, I25  
yodhya-, 185  
yoni-, 152, 185  
yo~it, 141, 166  
yos, IS, 40, 158  
rd1J1-hi-, 179  
rak~-, 82, 290  
rdk~as-, 92, 160  
rak~as-, 160, 224, 230  
ragh'l'-, 182  
raghuyii, 283  
rajatd-, 73. 167  
rajatapiitrd-, 210  
rdjas-,4°  
rajasd-, 163  
rdji-, 179  
ratza-, 138  
ratzvd-, 186  
rdt,wan-, 186  
rati-. 168  
ratna-, 99, 138  
ratnadhdtama-, 176  
rdtha-,71,72,84.129,196,393  
ratharydti, 362  
rathaspdti-, 256  
rdthiya-, 87, 186  
rathird-, 149  
ratht-, 194-5, 205. 253  
r.adiivasu-, 216  
'rabh-, 360  
rdbhyas-, 161  
ram-, 336  
rayi-, 179, 222, 226, 246  
rasand,157  
rasmdn-. 134. 175  

428 
INDEX 
rasmi-, 176 
rudhira-, 68, 70, 84, 103, 149 
raso, 191 
rup-, 85, 292 
Takas, 281, 283 
Tuva1;tyati, 362 
,ii-, 323 
T'l-lSant-, 76, 144, 292 
rdj-, IS, 68, 92, 103, 123 
ruk-, 70 , 328, 333, 358 
TOjan,-, IS, 68, 84, 103, 123, Tiik§id-, 163 
128, 141-2, 200, 211, 223, rupakd-, 197 
234 
. Te, 284 
riijaputrd-, 211, 215 
Tik~tas-, 118, 159 
Tiijar~i-, 211 
re1;tU-, 180 
rajay4te, 363 
ritas-, 159 
rii:jiva-, 187 
Te§man-, 134 
rdjiii, 205, 254 
rai-, IS, 86 
rdjya-, IS, 180, 185 
rokd-. 124 
riiti-, log, 170 
roga-, 124 
riiUn-, 170 
roca-, 124 
rotri, 157 
roei-, 177, 189 
rdyaspo~a-, 212 
roei§-, 106, 160, 177, 189 
rii~#rti-, 137 
roci§1Ju-, 188 
'ii~/radipsu-, 2i3 
rodasi, 40 
riisabha-, 198 
ropi-, 179 
riktd-, 75 
roman-, 131 
,ikthd-, 196 
romasa., 197 
ric-, 75, 80, 103, 327, 335 
Tohita-, 70, 85 
rit-, 165 
rohi§ya£, 164 
rip-. 83, 292 
rip-,391 
lak§d-, 262 
,ipu-, 182 
lak~mt-, 176, 192 
,iprd-, 136-
lagh'l4-, 68, 75, 83, 182 
rih-, 83, 95 
labdha-, go 
ri-, 328 
labh- J 295. 360 
rtl-,292 
lard-, 61 
,ukmd-:, I75~ 391 
lavanga-, 379 
ruk~d-, 162 
lava1Ja-, 81, 152 
''(I,C-, 291 
laitgala-, 380 
,uca·, 125 
lala, 385 
ruci-. 177, 179, 189 
lik~ii, 394 
rucird-, 149 
lip-, 83. 292 , 330 
ruj-, 292,329 
lipi-, 388 
,uja-, 124 
lik-, 73, 78, 83, 91 , 95 
rud-, 292~3, 321, 340 
1i-, 292, 326, 356 
rudrd-, 57 
1it!hd-, 78 
ruddkd-,9° 
lu.p-, 85, 292 , 330 
ruilk-, 70, 327-8,338 
lubdhaka-.57 

lubh-, 68, 83  
luliiya-, 375  
lokd-, I04  
l6hita-, 70, 85  
vdtJ~saga-, Ig8  
vdktva-, 171, 372  
vakrd-, 147  
vak:<;-, 143, 299  
vak~dtha-, 196  
vagvand-, 152  
vagvanu-. 158  
vac-, 80, 92 , 336, 342  
vacana-, 151  
vdc(Js-, 116, 118, 120, 158  
vacasd-, 163  
vdjra-, 24, 26, 148  
vdjrabiihu-, 215  
va1Jij-, Ig8  
vatsd-, 162  
vatsatard-, ISO  
vad-, 106, Ig0, 342, 359  
vadh-, 339  
vadhd-, 125  
vddhatra-, 138, Ig6  
vadhdnii, 128  
vddhar, 128-9, 147, 362  
vadharydti, 362  
vadhasna-, 153  
vadhasnu-, 158  
vadha-, 192  
vddhri-, 40, 157  
van-, 340, 360  
vdn-, 123, 127  
vana-, 123. 127  
vandd-, Ig8  
vandna, 157  
vdnanvant-, 128  
vanaro-, 148  
vanargu-, 128  
vdnas-, 158  
vdnaspdti-. 212  
vani#hu-, 164  
vanu~-, 161  
INDEX 
429 
vanu~ydti, 189  
vdnya-, 87, 185-6  
vap-, 109, 342  
vdpra-, 148  
vdPu~-, 160~I  
vdPu~a-, 201  
vam-, 301, 321  
vamrakd-, 197  
vaydm, 264  
vaY'ttna-, 138  
vara~, 124  
varatra, Ig8  
varahd-, 25, I98  
varimdn-, 131 , 135  
varimdt-, 132  
vdrivas-, 159, 160, 188  
vdriman-, 161  
vdru1Ja- > 28  
varutra-, 324  
vdrutha-, 196  
vdre'1Jya-, 152 , 372  
vartani-, 157  
varti~-, 160  
vdrtman-, 131  
vdrdha-, 125  
vardhitdr-, 188  
vdrdhra-, 198  
vdrman-, 131  
vdr~iyas-, 80  
var~man-. 80, 134  
valaya-, 385  
valgu-, 182  
valli, 385  
vas-, 91 , 97, 264, 319  
vd§ti-, 169  
vas-, 93. 96, 267. 295, 320--1,  
329, 330, 342  
vasati-, 169  
vdsana-,25  
vasantd-, 129  
vasaro, 148, 222, 226  
vdsi~tha-, 100  
vasiyas-, 100  
vasu, 100, 178, 184  

430 
INDEX 
vasutii, 172  
vasutati-, 173  
vas1tyati, 363  
vasliya, 364  
vasityu-, 187, 364  
vdstu, 170, 248  
vdstra-, 137  
vasnd-, 40  
vasnaydti, 363  
vasman-, 131-2  
vdsyas-, 161  
vah-, 20, 68, 78, 92 , 95, 294,  
329  
vahdt-, 165  
vahaiu-, 170  
vdhni-, 40, 157  
vii, 284  
viigura, 156  
vagmin·, 144  
viighdt., 165  
vac-, 68, 92, 103, 123, 207, 221  
vacya-, 185, 371  
viija-, 40  
vajayu-, 37  
vajina-, 138  
vatyii, 192  
viinara-, 128, 148  
viipu~a-, 163. 201  
vam, 267-8  
vama-, 175  
viiyavyd-, 199  
vayasa-, 163  
vayu-, 123  
vara-, 125  
viirabii1Ja-, 43, 389  
viri, 177, 223, 227. 245, 248  
varya-,200  
vata-, 391  
vava, 284  
vavrdhadhyai, 367  
viiha-. 125  
v4has-, 158  
vasa-, 125  
vasantikd., 199  
viisara·, 148, 200  
vasas-, 158, 200  
vastu, 170, 242  
vasteya-, 199  
vi, 285,287  
vi-, 181, 251  
vit{lsd-, 263  
vitJtsati-, 261  
vitJtsatitama-, 176  
viklava-. 99  
vik~iPti-, 57  
vicchitti-, 57  
vij-, 292  
vithuryati, 362  
vid-, 68, 71, 90, 103, 116, 325,  
327, 330, 335, 349, 362  
viddtha-, 196  
vidadvasu-, 216  
vidura-, 149  
vidmanapas-, 214  
vidmdne, 131, 159, 224  
vidya, 191  
vidvald-, 148  
vidvds-, 228-9  
v{dhavii. 69, 187  
vidhu., 182, 187  
vina, 20, 285-6  
viP-, 292  
vipanya, 129, 148  
vipanyu-, 129  
vipds-, 92  
vipula-, 42, 84  
vipra-, III, 148  
vipru~-, 91 , 93-4, 96  
viplava-, 99  
vibhavasu-, 161  
vibhrtra-, 151  
vibhvan-, 141  
virii~ii~, 100  
virukmant-, 146  
vivasvan-, 130 , 145  
vivasvant-, 4, 145  
vis-, 322, 329  
viS-, 33, 73, 91- 2 , 242  

~ 
INDEX 
431  
visamana- J 369 
vr#iydt~, 363-4  
visya-, 186, 201 
V[!jti-, 97  
vispati-, 22, 209, 211 
v[!jtJi-, 157  
viSva-, 275 
vitana-, 138  
visvdkarma-, 175 
vetasd-, 163  
visvajit-, 166 
vida-, 125  
visvdtha, 280 
ven-, 4°  
visvaminvd-, 213 
venit, 191  
visvdha, 281 
vepdthu-, 196  
vi~a-, 80, 126 
vila, 138  
vi~una-, 152 
ve~a,ntd-, 129, 153  
visra-, 81 
vesas-, 160  
vit!u-, 40 
ve~dtJa-,· 138  
vitdye, 365 
vehdt-, 165  
vird-, 85, 103 
vai, 284  
virdjata-, 212 
vaiyaprtya-, 57  
vr-, 32 4, 334 
vaiyiivrtya-, 57  
vfka-, 19, 25, 104. III, 116, vaisya-, 201  
126, 196, 232 
vyac-, 323  
vrkdtat-, 173 
vyath-, 292  
vrkdti-, 169 
vydthis-, 160  
vrkt, 195, 225, 252 
vyadvard-, 148  
vrkkd-, 25 
vyadh-, 330 , 343  
vr~d-, 162 
vyaghrd-, 375  
vrjana-, 138 
vratd-, 22  
vrjind-, 152 
vratacarin-, 213  
vrt-. 68, 84, III, 295, 322, 328,  
344. 356 
sd'lftstar-, 137  
vft-, 165 
sak-, 324, 335, 360  
vrttd-, 104, 168 
sakala-, 385  
vrtrd-, 151 
sakund-, 22, 152  
vrtrahdn-, 213, 220-1 
sakuni-, 153  
vrddhd-, 9° 
sakunta-, 153  
vfddhi-, 168 
sdkrt, 127, 164, 221  
vrdh-, 294, 358 
sdkti-, 168  
vrdhd-, 125 
sagmd-.I75  
vrdhdnt-, 367 
sank-, 73  
vrdhasand-, 155 
saitkii, 191  
vrdhiind-, 369 
saiiku-, 180  
vr~atJydti, 363 
saitkhd-, 72 , 196, 393  
vf!}an-, 143 
sdef, 192  
vr~abhd-, 198 
sacivasu-, 161  
vr~asydti, 362 
satagv{n-. 216  
vr!jitkapi-, 211 
satatama-, .263  

432 
satam, I3, 24, 73, 104, 262  
satasds, 263, 281  
satru-, 223  
satrutvd-, 171  
sad-, 102  
sdnakais, 282  
santliti-, 173  
santivd-, 187  
sapa!ha-, 196  
sapha-, 71, 197, 393  
saphara-, 22  
sam-, 321  
sdm, 123  
sdma-,40  
sami, 177, 192  
sdmi, 192  
sayu-, 182  
sayutra, 132, 280  
sardd-, 74. 198  
sarabhd-, 25  
sdru-, 180  
sardha-, 77  
sardhanjaha-, 214  
sarod-, 186  
sdrvari, 142  
salabhd-, 198  
salakii, 27  
salka(la-), 386  
salyakrntd-, 214  
savasiind-, 155  
savas{n-, 143  
savast, 164  
sasa-, 99  
sasayd-, 145. 186  
sasiyas-, 145, 186  
sasvant-. 145, 186  
sa§pa-, 395  
sas-, 99, 290 , 292  
sastra-, 137  
sa-, 322-3, 331  
siika-, 22  
sakina-, 132  
siikvara-, 148  
sakha, 72, I91, 393  
INDEX 
santa-, 87  
santi-, 168  
siipa-, 22  
sardfda-, 375  
sas-, 94, 99. 320  
sastra-, 137  
sikvd-, 186  
sikvan-, r86, 227  
sikvas-, 160, 223  
sita-, 106, r89  
sith£rd-, 46, 149  
sithild-, 46, 149  
sipra, 40  
sipha, 191  
Siras-, S.7, 133. 158, 221, 227  
sirogrivd-, 218  
sisaya-, 106  
siSu-, 187  
sisna-, 292  
fighra-, 198  
sito$1Ja-, 219  
sibham,lg8  
sir$dn-, 87, 227,.234  
sukrd-, 148  
sukld-, 148  
suc-, 291, 321  
sued-, 124-5  
sucddratha-, 215  
sucdmiina-, 369  
suci-, 186, 204, 230, 245  
sucitvd-, 171  
sund-, 40, 93  
sundhyu-, 187  
subh-, 291, 331  
subhri-. 157  
s'l'tbhvan-, 142  
susukvand-, 152  
s~t§ukvani-, 157  
susruvds-, 161  
su~ka-, 80, 100, 197  
su~mdya-, 186  
su-, 291, 331  
suka-, 25-6  
sudrd-,40  

433 
INDEX 
st1nyd-,74  
sara-, 148  
si:t~d-, 163  
shiga-, 198  
snzvdnt-, 368  
s;-,326  
soka-, 124~5  
soci-, 177  
soci~-, 160, 177  
sobhdse, 159  
sO$a-, 103  
saufira-, 387 '  
snath~, 292, 321  
smasru-, 77, 99, 178  
smasrtt~d-, 149  
smasruld-, 149  
syamd-, 22, 175, 186  
syiivd-, 22, 175, 186  
syetd-, 40, 161  
syend-, 82  
syeni, 167  
srath-, 292, 363  
sratharydti, I 2~, 362  
sraddha-, IS  
sraddhivd-, 187  
sram-, 331  
srdva1J,a-, .109, 152  
sravas-, 73, 83, IS8  
sravdyya-, 372  
sri-, 83, 291 , 337  
sru-, 22, 110, III, 290-1, 293,  
301, 324, 341, 359, 361  
sruta-, 103, 110, III, 116, 167.  
370  
srutya-, 371  
sru~-, 290  
sru$livdn-, 142  
sri1:.ti-, 157  
sre1:,tiSds. 281  
sreyas-, 228  
srrn.td-; 152  
sr(1)i-, 73, 83. 157  
srotra-, 137  
srOmata-, 138  
srO$amana- J 7'7  
slakHta-, 83, 99, 153  
sli~-, 99  
sle~1ndn-, 99  
sle$mattd-, 148  
slesmald-, 149  
s16ka-, 84. 197  
. slottd-, 152  
ivdn-. 73,141,222,375  
s1.Janin-, 143  
svdbhra-, 136  
svdsura-, 77, 99, 149  
svasTz7-. 192 , 253  
svas-. 190, 321  
svds, 279  
svi-, 291  
svit-, 22, 291  
sviticl-, 197  
svitna-, lSI  
svitra-,.148  
svetana. 129, 148  
svetra-. 129  
$valtari, 129  
~dl, 100, 260  
~a44hii, 95  
$a~!f-, 261  
~a~#tama-, 263  
~a$lhd-, 262  
$otjasa, 260  
$o4ha,95  
sa, 268 ff.  
satpvatsard-, ISO  
satpsk,ta-. I  
sakft,258  
sdklu-, 170  
sdklhi, 177. 234  
sak~a-, 163  
sak$a1Ji-, 157  
sdkhi-, III, 137. 180, lSI. I8S,  
196. 223. 230  
sa.khyd•• 137, ISO  
sakhitvand-, 171  

434 
INDEX 
sakhiyati, 363  
sagh-. 29I  
sa~gama-, 125  
sac-, 77. 93, 109, 295.,329  
sacatha-, 196  
saca, 194, 286  
saci, 177, 185  
saciv(1.-, 187  
saJ-, 322  
sattra-, 90 , 137  
satya-, 185  
satydtati-, 173  
satyavadin-, 213  
satyanrta-, 2 18  
satydvan-. 142  
satvan-, 28, 145  
satvand-, 152  
satvant-, 145  
sad-, 88, 94. IOg, 178, 329.  
335-6, 342 , 359  
sadana-, I38  
sadandi-, I g8  
sddam, 174  
sadas-, 109, 158  
sddd, 194  
sadap!1Ja-, 214  
sadivas, 179  
sadman-, 131, 142 , 174  
sadman-, 142  
sadyds, 279  
sadhastha-, 88  
sddhi~-, 197  
san-, III, 325, 360  
sdna-, 68, 102, 126  
sanakd-, 197  
sandJ-, 198  
sanat, 166  
sanaya-, 186  
sanara-, 136  
sandt, 233. 283  
sanatdna-, 153  
sani-, 179  
sanitur, 278  
sanitva-, 171  
sanitvan-, 130  
sani~yati. 189  
sani~Y1:t-, 189  
sanutar-. 190  
sanutdr, 132, ISO, 278  
sanutara-, ISO  
sannatara-, 115  
sanyas-, 161  
sap-, 40, 129  
sapadi, 283  
saparyati, 40, 129, 362  
sapta, 104, 173, 259. 260  
saptati-, 26I  
saptatha-, 262  
saptama-, 176, 260, 262  
sapti-,- 169  
sapsard-, IS0  
sabardugh-, 128  
sam, 285. 287  
sama-, 272, 275  
sama-, 258  
samajyii, I91  
samana-, 138  
samanas-, 258  
samam, 285  
samayii. 285  
samaha, 275, 281  
samiina-, ISS, 258  
samit-, 165, 168  
samiti-, 168  
samipe, 286  
samu~yala-, 149  
samr&jni, 194  
sar-, 81, 291  
sardgh-, 198  
sarattydti, 362  
saratham, 285  
sarast, 164  
sarit-, 166, 291  
sarira-, 149  
sarga-,79  
sarpip-, 83, 160  
sdrma-, 176  
sdrva-, 187. 275  
11 

l 
435 
sarvcitas, r67  
sarvdtiit(i-), 173  
sarvadti, 280  
sarvaniiman-, 48  
sarvavedasd-, 216  
sar$apa-, 380, 398  
salild-, 149  
sdvitave, 171  
savyd-. 21  
sascat-.  
sas-, 40. 319. 322  
sasthiivan-, 149  
sasvdr, 130, 279  
sasvarta; 194  
sah-, 78, 360  
sahd., 281, 285  
sdhadhyai, Ig8, 36:  
sdhas-, 158  
sahasana-, 155  
sahdsra-, 262  
sahasrasds, 281  
sdhuri-, 157  
sahobhdri-, 213  
sdhyas-, 161  
sdhyu-, 187  
sii-, 85, 106, 2gI, 331  
siikdm, 285  
siik$tit, 283  
siitf,hd-, 78  
siitd-, 87, III  
siitdye, 365  
sadd-, 125  
sadh-,324  
siidhu-, 182. 324  
siinasi-, 164  
sanu, 178-9, 200, 247-8  
sandra-, 22  
siimana-, 135  
sami-, 102, 279  
siimavipra-, 214  
siimidhent, 152  
siirdhdm, 285  
savd-, 125  
saha-. 126  
INDEX 
siihvds-, 140, 343  
si-
also sa-), 189, 2g1  
sic-, 292-3, 330, 335  
sita-, 41  
sita-, 106, 189  
sindhu-, 72, 88, 180, 197  
simd-,  
sim,  
simdn-, 134  
simdnta-, 153  
shnikii,  
SU-, 289, 323  
sutarman-, 27  
sutvan, 142  
sunvdnt-, 222  
sunviind-, 369  
suptd-, 75  
sumdnas-, 137. 203. 230  
sftmna-, 152  
sumndya, 282  
s1tyasas-, 216  
sura-, 41  
sura, 25, 156, Ig1  
surunga. 387  
suviisas-, I22  
susiSvi-, 187  
su#hu, 284  
sU-, 320, 342  
suta-, 167  
satave, I7I  
satu-, 170  
satra-. 137  
sttri-, 157  
sunu-, 68, 
104, 158, 233.  
245 fl., 251  
siirya-, 29, 83, 185  
suryatejas-, 215  
s'i"irmt, 176, 192  
sikvan-, 130  
srkvin-, 131 , 177  
srj-. 78, 329  
sit}~-, 157. 185  
S!t}i, 192  
sit}ya-, 185  

INDEX 
srivan-, 142  
srtvara-, 148  
srP-, 68, 84, 295, 329  
s.rmard-, 149  
sr~td-, 78  
setu-, 25, 170  
send, 4, 157, 252  
seva, 191  
sairibha-, 375  
sofjhd-, 78  
solari, 365  
solu-, 170  
soma-, 4, 176  
somdn-,143  
somapavan-, 213  
somasuti-, 212  
somyd-, 185  
saumanasd-, 137, 201  
saumyd-, 199  
skabh-, 326  
s1d~ad-, 81  
stan-, 106, 321, 328, 330  
stdna-, 100  
stanayitnu-, 81, 106. 158, 189  
stanasydti, 362  
stanitd-, 189  
stabhuydti, 363  
stdr-. 140  
start, 192  
staydnt-, 81  
stayu-, 81  
stigh-, 40, 69, 76  
stiTtui-, 291  
stu-, 94. 292 , 320  
stuka. Ig8  
stut-, 124, r65  
stuti-, 169  
stubk-. 292  
stubhvan-. 142  
stdpa-, 198  
sl;-, 291;, 323-4  
stena-, 81, 151  
stotTa-, 137  
stOma-, 176  
stydna-, 46  
sthag-, 68,71-2, 76, 329, 393  
sthapdti-, 169  
sthdla-, 136  
sthlr-, 71-2, 103, 106, 107, 190,  
298,322,329,33°,334,343, 
358~9 
*sthatar, 132  
sthiitdr-, 139, 206  
sthiitrd-, 137  
sthavana-, 148  
sthiivard-, 148  
sthita-, 106, 189  
sthiti-, 106  
sthird-, 106, I49  
slhUtlii, 98, 157  
slhi"ird-, 148  
sth{:(.ld-, 148  
sth17labhd-, 198  
stheman-, 106  
sthiyas-. 106  
snii-, 103  
snatva, 172  
sniiyu, 178  
snavan-. 130  
snthiti-, 106  
Sntt~ii, 103  
snuh-, 7°  
spas-, 81,92, 123,221  
spurdhdse. 159, 226  
spr-, 292  
sP!dh-, 292  
SP!S-, 329  
sprh.. , 292, 331  
sprhii, 191  
spka{ika-, 97  
sPhigt. 192  
sphij-, 198  
sphird-. 149  
sphuta-, 97  
sphulinga-, 97  
SPhUTj-.71  
sphyd-, 71, 81  
sma, 284  

INDEX 
437 
smdt, 279  
syd, 270, 272-3  
syand-, 72, 88, 197, 292  
syaman-, 131 , 134  
syond-, 40, 152  
sra1Jzs-, 137, 360  
sragvin-, 144  
srdj-, 198  
sravdt-, 165  
sravdtha-, 196  
srastara-, 137  
sriimd-, 22, 176  
sru-, 84. 291 , 328  
srutd-, 168  
sruti-, 169  
sruvd-, 186  
sr6tas-, 118, 159· 
svd-, 141. 268  
svadhdvan-, 142  
svan-, 290, 328  
svap-, 190, 292, 321, 343  
svapand-, 151  
svdpna-, 46, 75  
svapnayd,282 
svaydm, 268  
svar-, 290  
svar, 129. 226  
svari-, 184  
svarita-. I 15  
svdru-. 180  
svavas-. 228  
svasar-, 19, 25, 203, 234, 243  
svifdi~tha-. 162  
svadu-, 103, 182  
svaduk~ddman-, 213  
svtidman-, 131, 134  
svadmdn-, 134  
ha, 384  
hatflsd-, 102, 163  
hata-, 104, 110, 168  
han-, 32, 70, 75, 78-9, IIQ-I,  
319. 343. 355, 360  
hdnu-, ,180 
hdntar-, 284  
hdntavat, 17I  
hdntos, 171  
hdntva-, I72  
hdnman-, 131  
hdras-, 40, 78, 158  
hdri-, 139  
harit-, 166  
hdrita-, 166-7  
harit;td-, 152  
hdri1)i, 167  
harimdn-. 134  
harimantha-, 387  
harmu!a-, 150  
harmyd-, ISO  
harY-.40  
hdva-. 125  
hdvana-, 110  
havirad-, 213  
havirddya-, 180  
havi~, 160, 193. 253  
hdviman-, 135  
hdvya-, 185  
havyd-.87  
havyavO,h-, 221  
hala-, 380  
hdlik~1Ja-, 153  
has-, 109  
hasand.I57  
hdsta-.74  
hdstakrta-. 214  
hasUn-, 375  
hasrd-. 147  
ha-. 2g0, 322-3, 361  
has··, 290  
Juj~aka-, 97  
hdrdi.I77  
hasa-, 109  
hi-,324  
hi, 284  
hitp,sa, 191  
hi1tJsitavya-, 371  
hitd-, 70  
hitvt, 372  

438 
INDEX 
kintiila-, 385  
hinv-. 324  
hima-, 32. 73. 175  
hinui. 176  
hira1Jya-, 4, 25, 87  
hira1Jyakesya-. 216  
hira1Jydya-, 186  
hira1Jyarathd-. 211  
hiq.-, 94  
hu-, 322, 360  
h'luj,ukka-, 385  
huvanydti, 362  
hu-, 22, 79, 110, 329, 331, 355  
hutd-, 110  
hr1Jiiya-, 363  
hn'tiya-, 363  
hrttds, 279  
hfdaya-, 180.  
hrdayiividh-, 213  
hrdroga-, 387  
hr~-, 330  
hetU-, 170  
heman, 103  
hemantd-, 73, 103, 153  
heramba-, 375, 385  
heli-, 387  
he~as-, 158  
h6tar-, 4, 137, 140  
hotrvilrya-, 180  
hotrd-, 137  
haira, 156  
h6ma-, 176  
h6man-, 110  
hora, 387  
hyas, 82, 279  
hyastana-, 153  
hradd-, 100  
hrasvd-, 186  
hrtiditni-, 157  
hri-, 322  
hrut-, 165  
hvar-, 323  

