The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century
Algebra of Logic∗
Volker Peckhaus
January 18, 2003
1
Introduction
Most 19th century scholars would have agreed to the opinion that philoso-
phers are responsible for research on logic. On the other hand, the history
of late 19th century logic clearly indicates a very dynamic development in-
stigated not by philosophers, but by mathematicians. A central outcome of
this development was the emergence of what has been called the “new logic”,
“mathematical logic”, “symbolic logic”, or, from 1904 on, “logistics”.1 This
new logic came from Great Britain, and was created by mathematicians in
the second half of the 19th century, ﬁnally becoming a mathematical subdis-
cipline in the early 20th century.
Charles L. Dodgson, better known under his pen name Lewis Carroll
(1832–1898), published two well-known books on logic, The Game of Logic of
1887 and Symbolic Logic of 1896 of which a fourth edition appeared already
in 1897. These books were written “to be of real service to the young, and to
be taken up, in High Schools and in private families, as a valuable addition
of their stock of healthful mental recreations” (Carroll 1896, xiv). They were
meant “to popularize this fascinating subject,” as Carroll wrote in the preface
of the fourth edition of Symbolic Logic (ibid.). But, astonishingly enough, in
both books there is no deﬁnition of the term “logic”. Given the broad scope
of these books the title “Symbolic Logic” of the second book should at least
have been explained.
∗The text is based (but elaborated and enlarged) on my paper “19th Century Logic
Between Philosophy and Mathematics” (Peckhaus 1999).
1Independently of each other, Gregorius Itelson, Andr´e Lalande and Louis Couturat
suggested at the 2nd Congress of Philosophy at Geneva in 1904 to use the name “logistic”
for, as Itelson said, the modern kind of traditional formal logic. The name should replace
designations like “symbolic”, “algorithmic”, “mathematical logic”, and “algebra of logic”
which were used synonymously up to then (cf. Couturat 1904, 1042).
1

2
Volker Peckhaus
Maybe the idea of symbolic logic was so widely spread at the end of the
19th century in Great Britain that Carroll regarded a deﬁnition as simply
unnecessary. Some further observations support this thesis. They concern a
remarkable interest by the general public in symbolic logic, after the death
of the creator of the algebra of logic, George Boole, in 1864.
Recalling some standard 19th century deﬁnitions of logic as, e.g., the art
and science of reasoning (Whately) or the doctrine giving the normative rules
of correct reasoning (Herbart), it should not be forgotten that mathematical
or symbolic logic was not set up from nothing. It arose from the old phil-
osophical collective discipline logic. It is therefore obvious to assume that
there was some relationship between the philosophical and the mathematical
side of the development of logic, but standard presentations of the history of
logic ignore this putative relationship; they sometimes even deny that there
has been any development of philosophical logic at all, and that philosophical
logic could therefore justly be ignored.
Take for instance William and Martha Kneale’s programme in their em-
inent The Development of Logic. They wrote (1962, iii): “But our primary
purpose has been to record the ﬁrst appearances of these ideas which seem
to us most important in the logic of our own day,” and these are the ideas
leading to mathematical logic. Another example is J. M. Boche´nski’s assess-
ment of “modern classical logic” which he dated between the 16th and the
19th century. This period was for him non-creative. It can therefore justly
be ignored in a problem history of logic (1956, 14). According to Boche´nski
classical logic was only a decadent form of this science, a dead period in its
development (ibid., 20).
Authors advocating such opinions adhere to the predominant views of
present-day logic, i. e. actual systems of mathematical or symbolic logic. As
a consequence, they are not able to give reasons for the ﬁnal divorce be-
tween philosophical and mathematical logic, because they ignore the seed
from which mathematical logic has emerged. Following Boche´nski’s view Carl
B. Boyer presented for instance the following periodization of the develop-
ment of logic (Boyer 1968, 633): “The history of logic may be divided, with
some slight degree of oversimpliﬁcation, into three stages: (1) Greek logic,
(2) Scholastic logic, and (3) mathematical logic.” Note Boyer’s “slight de-
gree of oversimpliﬁcation” which enabled him to skip 400 years of logical
development and ignore the fact that Kant’s transcendental logic, Hegel’s
metaphysics and Mill’s inductive logic were called “logic”, as well.
This restriction of scope had a further consequence: The history of logic
is written as if it had been the 19th century mathematicians’ main motive for
doing logic to create and develop a new scientiﬁc discipline as such, namely
mathematical logic, dealing above all with problems arising in this discipline
and solving these problems with the ﬁnal aim of attaining a coherent theory.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
3
But what, if logic was only a means to an end, a tool for solving non-logical
problems? If this is considered, such non-logical problems have to be taken
note of. One can assume that at least the initial motives of mathematicians
working in logic were going beyond creating a new or further developing the
traditional theory of logic. Under the presupposition that a mathematician
is usually not really interested in devoting his professional work to the devel-
opment of a philosophical subdiscipline, one can assume that theses motives
have to be sought in the mathematician’s own subject, namely in founda-
tional, i. e., philosophical problems of mathematics.
Today historians have recognized that the emergence of the new logic
was no isolated process. Its creation and development ran parallel to and
was closely intertwined with the creation and development of modern ab-
stract mathematics which emancipated itself from the traditional deﬁnition
as a science which deals with quantities and geometrical forms and is there-
fore responsible for imaginabilia, i. e. intuitive objects. The imaginabilia are
distinguished from intelligibilia, i. e. logical objects which have their origin
in reason alone. These historians recognized that the history of the develop-
ment of modern logic can only be told within the history of the development
of mathematics because the new logic is not conceivable without the new
mathematics. In recent research on the history of logic this intimate relation
between logic and mathematics, especially its connection to foundational
studies in mathematics has been taken into consideration. One may mention
the present author’s Logik, Mathesis universalis und allgemeine Wissenschaft
(Peckhaus 1997) dealing with the philosophical and mathematical contexts
of the development of 19th century algebra of logic as at least partially uncon-
scious realizations of the Leibnitian programme of a universal mathematics,
Jos´e Ferreir´os’ history of set theory in which the deep relations between the
history of abstract mathematics and that of modern logic (Ferreir´os 1999) are
unfolded, and the masterpiece of this new direction, The Search for Mathe-
matical Roots, 1870–1940 (2000a) by Ivor Grattan-Guinness, who imbedded
the whole bunch of diﬀerent directions in logic into the development of foun-
dational interests within mathematics. William Ewald’s “Source Book in the
Foundations of Mathematics” (Ewald, ed., 1996) considers logical inﬂuences
at least in passing, whereas the Companion Encyclopedia of the History and
Philosophy of the Mathematical Sciences edited by Ivor Grattan-Guinness
(1994) devotes an entire Part to “Logic, Set Theories and the Foundation of
Mathematics” (vol. 1, pt. 5).
In the following the complex conditions for the emergence of 19th century
symbolic logic will be discussed. The main scope will be on the mathematical
motives leading to the interest in logic, the philosophical context will be dealt
with only in passing. The main object of study will be the algebra of logic
in its British and German versions. Special emphasis will be laid on the

4
Volker Peckhaus
systems of George Boole (1815–1864) and above all of his German follower
Ernst Schr¨oder (1841–1902).
2
George Boole’s Algebra of Logic
2.1
Philosophical Context
The development of the new logic started in 1847, completely independent of
earlier anticipations, e.g. those by the German rationalistic universal genius
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) and his followers (cf. Peckhaus 1994a;
1997, ch. 5). In that year the British mathematician George Boole (1815–
1864) published his pamphlet The Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847).2
Boole mentioned (1847, 1) that it was the struggle for priority concerning the
quantiﬁcation of the predicate between the Edinburgh philosopher William
Hamilton (1788–1856) and the London mathematician Augustus De Morgan
(1806–1871) which encouraged this study. Hence, he referred to a startling
philosophical discussion which indicated a vivid interest in formal logic in
Great Britain. This interest was, however, a new interest, just 20 years old.
One can even say that neglect of formal logic could be regarded as a char-
acteristic feature of British philosophy up to 1826 when Richard Whately
(1787–1863) published his Elements of Logic.3 In his preface Whately added
an extensive report on the languishing research and education in formal logic
in England. He complained (1826, xv) that only very few students of the
University of Oxford became good logicians and that
by far the greater part pass through the University without knowing
any thing of all of it; I do not mean that they have not learned by
rote a string of technical terms; but that they understand absolutely
nothing whatever of the principles of the Science.
Thomas Lindsay, the translator of Friedrich Ueberweg’s important System
der Logik und Geschichte der logischen Lehren (1857, translation 1871), was
very critical of the scientiﬁc qualities of Whately’s book, but he, nevertheless,
emphasized its outstanding contribution for the renaissance of formal logic
in Great Britain (Lindsay 1871, 557):
Before the appearance of this work, the study of the science had fallen
into universal neglect. It was scarcely taught in the universities, and
there was hardly a text-book of any value whatever to be put into the
hands of the students.
2For a book-length biography see MacHale 1985. See also contemporary obituaries and
biographies like Harley 1866, Neil 1865, both reprinted. For a comprehensive presentation
of Boole’s logic in the context of British mathematics, cf. Grattan-Guinness 2000a.
3Whately 1826. Risse (1973) lists nine editions up to 1848 and 28 further printings to
1908. Van Evra (1984, 2) mentions 64 printings in the USA to 1913.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
5
One year after the publication of Whately’s book, George Bentham’s An
Outline of a New System of Logic appeared (1827) which was intended as a
commentary to Whately. Bentham’s book was critically discussed by William
Hamilton in a review article published in the Edinburgh Review (1833). With
the help of this review Hamilton founded his reputation as the “ﬁrst logical
name in Britain, it may be in the world.”4 Hamilton propagated a revival
of the Aristotelian scholastic formal logic without, however, one-sidedly pre-
ferring the syllogism. His logical conception was focused on a revision of the
standard forms by quantifying the predicates of judgements.5 The contro-
versy about priority arose, when De Morgan, in a lecture “On the Structure
of the Syllogism” (De Morgan 1846) given to the Cambridge Philosophical
Society on 9th November 1846, also proposed the quantiﬁcation of the pred-
icates.6 Neither had any priority, of course. The application of diagrammatic
methods in syllogistic reasoning proposed, e. g., by the 18th century mathe-
maticians and philosophers Leonard Euler, Gottfried Ploucquet, and Johann
Heinrich Lambert, presupposed a quantiﬁcation of the predicate.7 The Ger-
man psychologistic logician Friedrich Eduard Beneke (1798–1854) suggested
to quantify the predicate in his books on logic published in 1839 and 1842,
the latter of which he sent to Hamilton (cf. Peckhaus1997, 191–193). In the
context of this presentation it is irrelevant to give a ﬁnal solution of the pri-
ority question. It is, however, important that a dispute of this extent arose
at all. It indicates that there was a new interest in research on formal logic.
This interest represented only one side of the eﬀects released by Whately’s
book. Another line of research stood in the direct tradition of Humean em-
piricism and the philosophy of inductive sciences: the inductive logic of John
Stuart Mill (1806–1873), Alexander Bain (1818–1903) and others. Boole’s
logic was in clear opposition to inductive logic. It was Boole’s follower William
Stanley Jevons (1835–1882; cf. Jevons 1877–1878) who made this opposition
explicit.
As mentioned earlier, Boole referred to the controversy between Hamil-
ton and De Morgan, but this inﬂuence should not be overemphasized. In his
main work on the Laws of Thought (1854) Boole went back to the logic of
Aristotle by quoting from the Greek original. This can be interpreted as in-
dicating that the inﬂuence of the contemporary philosophical discussion was
4This opinion can be found in a letter of De Morgan’s to Spalding of 26th June, 1857
(quoted in Heath 1966, xii) which was, however, not sent. George Boole lists Hamilton
among the “two greatest authorities in logic, modern and ancient” (1847, 81). The other
authority is Aristotle. This reverence to Hamilton might not be without irony because of
Hamilton’s disregard of mathematics.
5Cf. Hamilton 1859–1866, vol. 4 (1866), 287.
6For the priority struggle see Heath 1966.
7For diagrammatic methods in logic see Gardner 1958, Bernhard 2001.

6
Volker Peckhaus
not as important as his own words might suggest. In writing a book on logic
he was doing philosophy, and it was thus a matter of course that he related
his results to the philosophical discussion of his time. This does not mean,
of course, that his thoughts were mainly inﬂuenced by this discussion. In
any case, Boole’s early algebra of logic kept a close connection to traditional
logic, in the formal part of which the theory of syllogism represented its
core.8 Traditional logic not only provided the topics to be dealt with by the
“Calculus of Deductive Reasoning”,9 it also served as a yardstick for evalu-
ating the power and the reliability of the new logic. Even in the unpublished
manuscripts of a sequel of the Laws of Thought entitled “The Philosophy of
Logic” he discussed Aristotelian logic at length (cf., e. g., Boole 1997, 133–
136), criticizing, however, that it is more a mnemonic art than a science of
reasoning.10
2.2
The Mathematical Context in Great Britain
Of greater importance than the philosophical discussion on logic in Great
Britain were mathematical inﬂuences. Most of the new logicians can be re-
lated to the so-called “Cambridge Network” (Cannon 1978, 29–71), i. e. a
movement which aimed at reforming British science and mathematics which
started at Cambridge. One of the roots of this movement was the foundation
of the Analytical Society in 1812 (cf. Enros 1983) by Charles Babbage (1791–
1871), George Peacock (1791–1858) and John Herschel (1792–1871). Joan
L. Richards called this act a “convenient starting date for the nineteenth-
century chapter of British mathematical development” (Richards 1988, 13).
One of the ﬁrst achievements of the Analytical Society was a revision of the
Cambridge Tripos by adopting the Leibnizian notation for the calculus and
abandoning the customary Newtonian theory of ﬂuxions: “the principles of
pure D-ism in opposition to the Dot-age of the University” as Babbage wrote
in his memoirs (Babbage 1864, 29). It may be assumed that this successful
movement triggered oﬀby a change in notation might have stimulated a new
or at least revived interest in operating with symbols. This new research on
the calculus had parallels in innovative approaches to algebra which were
motivated by the reception of Laplacian analysis.11 In the ﬁrst place the
development of symbolical algebra has to be mentioned. It was codiﬁed by
8Cf., e. g., the section “On Expression and Interpretation” in Boole 1847, 20–25, in
which Boole gives his reading of the traditional theory of judgement. The section is followed
by an application of his notation to the theory of conversion (ibid., 26–30), and of syllogism
(ibid., 31–47).
9This is the subtitle of Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847).
10For the inﬂuence of Aristotelian logic on Boole’s philosophy of logic, cf. Nambiar 2000.
11On the mathematical background of Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of Logic, cf. Laita
1977, Panteki 2000.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
7
George Peacock in his Treatise on Algebra (1830) and further propagated in
his famous report for the British Association for the Advancement of Science
(Peacock 1834, especially 198–207). Peacock started by drawing a distinc-
tion between arithmetical and symbolical algebra, which was, however, still
based on the common restrictive understanding of arithmetic as the doctrine
of quantity. A generalization of Peacock’s concept can be seen in Duncan F.
Gregory’s (1813–1844) “calculus of operations”. Gregory was most interested
in operations with symbols. He deﬁned symbolical algebra as “the science
which treats of the combination of operations deﬁned not by their nature,
that is by what they are or what they do, but by the laws of combinations
to which they are subject” (1840, 208). In his much praised paper “On a
General Method in Analysis” (1844), Boole made the calculus of operations
the basic methodological tool for analysis. However in following Gregory, he
went further, proposing more applications. He cited Gregory who wrote that
a symbol is deﬁned algebraically “when its laws of combination are given; and
that a symbol represents a given operation when the laws of combination of
the latter are the same as those of the former” (Gregory 1842, 153–154). It is
possible that a symbol for an arbitrary operation can be applied to the same
operation (ibid., 154). It is thus necessary to distinguish between arithmetical
algebra and symbolical algebra which has to take into account symbolical,
but non-arithmetical ﬁelds of application. As an example Gregory mentioned
the symbols a and +a. They are isomorphic in arithmetic, but in geometry
they need to be interpreted diﬀerently. a can refer to a point marked by a
line whereas the combination of the signs + and a additionally expresses the
direction of the line. Therefore symbolical algebra has to distinguish between
the symbols a and +a. Gregory deplored the fact that the unequivocity of no-
tation did not prevail as a result of the persistence of mathematical practice.
Clear notation was only advantageous, and Gregory thought that our minds
would be “more free from prejudice, if we never used in the general science
symbols to which deﬁnite meanings had been appropriated in the particular
science” (ibid., 158).
Boole adopted this criticism almost word for word. In his Mathematical
Analysis of Logic he claimed that the reception of symbolic algebra and its
principles was delayed by the fact that in most interpretations of mathemat-
ical symbols the idea of quantity was involved. He felt that these connotations
of quantitative relationships were the result of the context of the emergence
of mathematical symbolism, and not of a universal principle of mathematics
(Boole 1847, 3–4). Boole read the principle of the permanence of equivalent
forms as a principle of independence from interpretation in an “algebra of
symbols”. In order to obtain further aﬃrmation, he tried to free the princi-
ple from the idea of quantity by applying the algebra of symbols to another
ﬁeld, the ﬁeld of logic. As far as logic is concerned this implied that only

8
Volker Peckhaus
the principles of a “true Calculus” should be presupposed. This calculus is
characterized as a “method resting upon the employment of Symbols, whose
laws of combination are known and general, and whose results admit of a
consistent interpretation” (ibid., 4). He stressed (ibid.):
It is upon the foundation of this general principle, that I purpose to
establish the Calculus of Logic, and that I claim for it a place among
the acknowledged forms of Mathematical Analysis, regardless that in
its objects and in its instruments it must at present stand alone.
Boole expressed logical propositions in symbols whose laws of combination
are based on the mental acts represented by them. Thus he attempted to es-
tablish a psychological foundation of logic, mediated, however, by language.12
The central mental act in Boole’s early logic is the act of election used for
building classes. Man is able to separate objects from an arbitrary collection
which belong to given classes, in order to distinguish them from others. The
symbolic representation of these mental operations follows certain laws of
combination which are similar to those of symbolic algebra. Logical theo-
rems can thus be proven like mathematical theorems. Boole’s opinion has of
course consequences for the place of logic in philosophy: “On the principle of
a true classiﬁcation, we ought no longer to associate Logic and Metaphysics,
but Logic and Mathematics” (ibid., 13).
Although Boole’s logical considerations became increasingly philosophi-
cal with time, aiming at the psychological and epistemological foundations
of logic itself, his initial interest was not to reform logic but to reform math-
ematics. He wanted to establish an abstract view on mathematical opera-
tions without regard to the objects of these operations. When claiming “a
place among the acknowledged forms of Mathematical Analysis” (1847, 4)
for the calculus of logic, he didn’t simply want to include logic in traditional
mathematics. The superordinate discipline was a new mathematics. This is
expressed in Boole’s writing: “It is not of the essence of mathematics to be
conversant with the ideas of number and quantity” (1854, 12).
2.3
Boole’s Logical System
Boole’s early logical system is based on mental operations, namely acts of
selecting individuals from classes. In his notation 1 symbolizes the Universe,
comprehending “every conceivable class of objects whether existing or not”
(1847, 15). Capital letters stand for all members of a certain class. The small
letters are introduced as follows (ibid., 15):
The symbol x operating upon any subject comprehending individuals
or classes, shall be supposed to select from that subject all the Xs
12On Boole’s “psychologism”, cf. Bornet 1997, Vasallo 2000.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
9
which it contains. In like manner the symbol y, operating upon any
subject, shall be supposed to select from it all individuals of the class
Y which are comprised in it and so on.
Take X as the class of animals, then x might signify the selection of all sheep
from these animals, which then can be regarded as a new class from which we
select further objects, etc. This might be illustrated by the following example:
animals
sheep
horned sheep
black horned sheep
X
Y
Z
↓
↗
↓
↗
↓
↗
x
y
z
sheep
horned
black
This process represents a successive selection which leads to individuals com-
mon to the classes X, Y, and Z. xyz stands for animals that are sheep, horned
and black. It can be regarded as the logical sum of some common marks or
common aspects relevant for the selection. In his major work An Investiga-
tion of the Laws of Thought of 1854 Boole gave up this distinction between
capital and small letters, thereby getting rid of the complicated consequences
of this stipulation.
If the symbol 1 denotes the universe, and if the class X is determined by
the symbol x, it is consequent that the class not-X has to be denoted by the
symbol 1−x which forms the supplement to x, thus x(1−x) = 1. 0 symbolizes
nothing or the empty class. Now one can consider Boole’s interpretation
of the universal-aﬃrmative judgement. The universal-aﬃrmative judgement
“All Xs are Ys” is expressed by the equation xy = x or, by simple arithmetical
transformation, x(1 −y) = 0 (p. 22):
As all the Xs which exist are found in the class Y, it is obvious that
to select out of the Universe all Ys, and from these to select all Xs, is
the same as to select at once from the Universe all Xs.
The universal-negative judgement “No Xs are Ys” asserts that there are no
terms common in the classes X and Y. All individuals common would be
represented by xy, but they form the empty class. The particular-aﬃrmative
judgement “Some Xs are Ys” says that there are some terms common to both
classes which form the class V. They are expressed by the elective symbol v.
The judgement is thus represented by v = xy. Boole furthermore considers
to use vx = vy with vx for “some X” and vy for “some Y”, but observes
“that this system does not express quite so much as the single equation [ . . . ]”
(p. 22–3). The particular-negative judgement “Some Xs are not Ys” can be
reached by simply replacing y in the last formula with 1 −y.

10
Volker Peckhaus
Boole’s elective symbols are compatible to the traditional theory of judge-
ment. They blocked, however, the step towards modern quantiﬁcation theory
as present in the work of Gottlob Frege, but also in later systems of the al-
gebra of logic like those of Ch. S. Peirce and Ernst Schr¨oder.13
The basic relation in the Boolean calculus is equality. It is governed by
three principles which are themselves derived from elective operations (cf.
ibid., 16–18):
1. The Distributivity of Elections (16–17):
[ . . . ] it is indiﬀerent whether from of group of objects consid-
ered as a whole, we select the class X, or whether we divide the
group into two parts, select the Xs from them separately, and
then connect the results in one aggregate conception,
in symbols:
x(u + v) = xu + xv ,
with u + v representing the undivided group of objects, and u and v
standing for its component parts.
2. The Commutativity of Elections: The order of elections is irrelevant:
xy = yx .
3. The Index Law: The successive execution of the same elective act does
not change the result of the election:
xn = x , for n ≥2.
Boole stressed the importance of the Index Law which is not generally valid
in arithmetic (only in the arithmetic of 0 and 1) and therefore peculiar for
elective symbols. It allows to reduce complex formulas to forms easier capable
of being interpreted.
In his An Investigation of the Laws of Thought (1854) Boole abandoned
the Index Law and replaced it by the Law of Duality (“Boole’s Law”) xx = x,
or x2 = x.14 His esteem for this law becomes evident in his claim “that the
axiom of the metaphysicians which is termed the principle of contradiction
[ . . . ], is a consequence of the fundamental law of thought whose expression
is x2 = x” (Boole 1854, 49). Boole referred to the derivation
13For the development of quantiﬁcation theory in the algebra of logic see Brady 2000.
14The reason was that already the factorization of x3 = x leads to uninterpretable
expressions. On Boole’s Laws of Thought cf. Van Evra 1977; on the diﬀerences between
Boole’s earlier and later logical theory cf. Grattan-Guinness 2000b.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
11
x2
=
x
x −x2
=
0
x(1 −x)
=
0 ,
the last formula saying that a class and its complement have no elements in
common. Boole was heavily criticized for this “curious error” (Halsted 1878,
86) of considering the Law of Contradiction a consequence of the Law of
Duality, not the other way around (the derivation works, of course, also in
the other direction).
Boole’s revisions came along with a change in his attitude towards logic.
Boole’s early logic can be seen as an application of a new mathematical
method to logic, thereby showing the eﬃcacy of this method within the
broad project of a universal mathematics, and so serving foundational goals in
mathematics. This foundational aspect diminished in later work, successively
being replaced by the idea of a reform of logic. Already in the paper “The
Calculus of Logic” (Boole 1848) Boole tried to show that his logical calculus
is compatible with traditional philosophical logic. Reasoning is guided by the
laws of thought. They are the central topic in Boole’s An Investigation of the
Laws of Thoughts claiming that “there is to a considerable extend an exact
agreement in the laws by wich the two classes of operations are conducted”
(1854, 6), comparing thereby the laws of thought and the laws of algebra.
Logic, in Boole’s understanding, was “a normative theory of the products of
mental processes” (Grattan-Guinness 2000, 51).
2.4
Reception of the New Logic
Although created by mathematicians, the new logic was widely ignored by fel-
low mathematicians. George Boole was respected by British mathematicians,
but his ideas concerning an algebraic representation of the laws of thought
received very little published reaction.15 He shared this fate with Augustus
De Morgan, the second major ﬁgure of symbolic logic at that time.16 In 1864,
Samuel Neil, the early chronicler of British mid 19th century logic, expressed
his thoughts about the reasons for this negligible reception: “De Morgan is
esteemed crotchety, and perhaps formalizes too much. Boole demands high
mathematic culture to follow and to proﬁt from” (1864, 161). One should
add that the ones who had this culture were usually not interested in logic.
The situation changed after George Boole’s death in 1864. In the following
comments only some ideas concerning the reasons for this new interest are
hinted at. In particular the rˆoles of William Stanley Jevons and Alexander
15On initial reactions cf. Grattan-Guinness 2000a, 54–59.
16For a discussion of De Morgan’s logic cf. Grattan-Guinness 2000a, 25–37; Merrill 1990.

12
Volker Peckhaus
Bain are stressed. These examples show that a broader reception of symbolic
logic commenced only when its relevance for the philosophical discussion of
the time came to the fore.
2.4.1
William Stanley Jevons
A broader international reception of Boole’s logic began when William Stan-
ley Jevons (1835–1882) made it the starting point for his inﬂuential Principles
of Science of 1874. He used his own version of the Boolean calculus intro-
duced in his Pure Logic of 1864. Among his revisions were the introduction
of a simple symbolical representation of negation and the deﬁnition of logical
addition as inclusive “or”, thereby creating Boolean Algebra (cf. Hailperin
1981). He also changed the philosophy of symbolism (1864, 5):
The forms of my system may, in fact, be reached by divesting his
[Boole’s] of a mathematical dress, which, to say the least, is not es-
sential to it. The system being restored to its proper simplicity, it
may be inferred, not that Logic is a part of Mathematics, as is almost
implied in Professor Boole’s writings, but that the Mathematics are
rather derivatives of Logic. All the interesting analogies or samenesses
of logical and mathematical reasoning which may be pointed out, are
surely reversed by making Logic the dependent of Mathematics.
Jevons’ interesting considerations on the relationship between mathematics
and logic representing an early logicistic attitude will not be discussed here.
Similar ideas can be found not only in Gottlob Frege’s work, but also in
that of Hermann Rudolf Lotze (1817–1881) and Ernst Schr¨oder (1841–1902).
Most important in the present context, is the fact that Jevons abandoned
mathematical symbolism in logic, an attitude which was later taken up by
John Venn (1834–1923). Jevons attempted to free logic from the semblance of
being a special mathematical discipline. He used the symbolic notation only
as a means of expressing general truths. Logic became a tool for studying
science, a new language providing symbols and structures. The change in
notation brought the new logic closer to the philosophical discourse of the
time. The reconciliation was supported by the fact that Jevons formulated
his Principles of Science as a rejoinder to John Stuart Mill’s (1806–1873)
A System of Logic of 1843, at that time the dominating work on logic and
the philosophy of science in Great Britain. Although Mill called his logic
A System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, the deductive parts played
only a minor rˆole, used only to show that all inferences, all proofs and the
discovery of truths consisted of inductions and their interpretations. Mill
claimed to have shown “that all our knowledge, not intuitive, comes to us
exclusively from that source” (Mill 1843, Bk. II, ch. I, § 1). Mill concluded
that the question as to what induction is, is the most important question of

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
13
the science of logic, “the question which includes all others.” As a result the
logic of induction covers by far the largest part of this work, a subject which
we would today regard as belonging to the philosophy of science.
Jevons deﬁned induction as a simple inverse application of deduction.
He began a direct argument with Mill in a series of papers entitled “Mill’s
Philosophy Tested” (1877/78). This argument proved that symbolic logic
could be of importance not only for mathematics, but also for philosophy.
Another eﬀect of the attention caused by Jevons was that British al-
gebra of logic was able to cross the Channel. In 1877, Louis Liard (1846–
1917), at that time professor at the Facult´e de lettres at Bordeaux and a
friend of Jevons, published two papers on the logical systems of Jevons and
Boole (Liard 1877a, 1877b). In 1878 he added a booklet entitled Les logiciens
anglais contemporaines which had ﬁve editions until 1907, and was translated
into German in 1880. Although Hermann Ulrici (1806–1884) had published
a ﬁrst German review of Boole’s Laws of Thought as early as 1855 (cf. Peck-
haus 1995), the knowledge of British symbolic logic was conveyed primarily
by Alois Riehl (1844–1924), then professor at the University of Graz, in Aus-
tria. He published a widely read paper “Die englische Logik der Gegenwart”
(“English contemporary logic”) in 1877 which reported mainly Jevons’ logic
and utilized it in a current German controversy on the possibility of scientiﬁc
philosophy.
2.4.2
Alexander Bain
Surprisingly good support for the reception of Boole’s algebra of logic came
from the philosophical opposition, namely from the Scottish philosopher
Alexander Bain (1818–1903) who was an adherent of Mill’s logic. Bain’s
Logic, ﬁrst published in 1870, had two parts, the ﬁrst on deduction and the
second on induction. He made explicit that “Mr Mill’s view of the relation of
Deduction and Induction is fully adopted” (1870, I, iii). Obviously he shared
the “[ . . . ] general conviction that the utility of the purely Formal Logic is but
small; and that the rules of Induction should be exempliﬁed even in the most
limited course of logical discipline” (ibid., v). The minor rˆole of deduction
showed up in Bain’s deﬁnition “Deduction is the application or extension of
Induction to new cases” (40).
Despite his reservations about deduction, Bain’s Logic became important
for the reception of symbolic logic because of a chapter of 30 pages entitled
“Recent Additions to the Syllogism.” In this chapter the contributions of
William Hamilton, Augustus De Morgan and George Boole were introduced.
Presumably many more people became acquainted with Boole’s algebra of
logic through Bain’s report than through Boole’s own writings. One example
is Hugh MacColl (1837–1909), the pioneer of the calculus of propositions

14
Volker Peckhaus
(statements) and of modal logic.17 He created his ideas independently of
Boole, eventually realizing the existence of the Boolean calculus by means of
Bain’s report. Even in the early parts of his series of papers “The Calculus of
Equivalent Statements” he quoted from Bain’s presentation when discussing
Boole’s logic (MacColl 1877/78). In 1875 Bain’s logic was translated into
French, in 1878 into Polish. Tadeusz Bat´og and Roman Murawski (1996)
have shown that it was Bain’s presentation which motivated the ﬁrst Polish
algebraist of logic, StanisÃlaw Pi ,atkiewicz (1848–?) to begin his research on
symbolic logic.
3
Ernst Schr¨oder’s Algebra of Logic
3.1
Philosophical Background
The philosophical discussion on logic after Hegel’s death in Germany was
still determined by a Kantian inﬂuence.18 In the preface to the second edition
of his Kritik der reinen Vernunft of 1787, Immanuel Kant (1723–1804) had
written that logic had followed the safe course of a science since earliest times.
For Kant this was evident because of the fact that logic had been prohibited
from taking any step backwards from the time of Aristotle. But he regarded
it as curious that logic hadn’t taken a step forward either (B VIII). Thus,
logic seemed to be closed and complete. Formal logic, in Kant’s terminology
the analytical part of general logic, did not play a prominent rˆole in Kant’s
system of transcendental philosophy. In any case, it was a negative touchstone
of truth, as he stressed (B 84). Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831)
went further in denying any relevance of formal logic for philosophy (Hegel
1812/13, I, Introduction, XV–XVII). Referring to Kant, he maintained that
from the fact that logic hadn’t changed since Aristotle one should infer that
it needs to be completely rebuilt (ibid., XV). Hegel created a variant of logic
as the foundational science of his philosophical system, deﬁning it as “the
science of the pure idea, i.e., the idea in the abstract element of reasoning”
(1830, 27). Hegelian logic thus coincides with metaphysics (ibid., 34).
This was the situation when after Hegel’s death philosophical discussion
on formal logic started again in Germany. This discussion on logic reform
stood under the label of “the logical question”, a term coined by the Neo-
Aristotelian Adolf Trendelenburg (1802–1872). In 1842 he published a paper
entitled “Zur Geschichte von Hegel’s Logik und dialektischer Methode” with
the subtitle “Die logische Frage in Hegel’s Systeme”. But what is the logical
question according to Trendelenburg? He formulated this question explicitly
towards the end of his article: “Is Hegel’s dialectical method of pure reasoning
17On MacColl and his logic cf. Astroh/Read (eds.) 1998.
18See for the following chs. 3 and 4 of Peckhaus 1997, and Vilkko 2002.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
15
a scientiﬁc procedure?” (1842, 414). In answering this question in the nega-
tive, he provided the occasion of rethinking the status of formal logic within
a theory of human knowledge without, however, proposing a return to the old
(scholastic) formal logic. The term “the logical question” was subsequently
used in a less speciﬁc way. Georg Leonard Rabus, the early chronicler of
the discussion on logic reform, wrote, e. g., that the logical question emerged
from doubts concerning the justiﬁcation of formal logic (1880, 1).
Although this discussion was clearly connected to formal logic, the so-
called reform did not concern formal logic. The reason was provided by the
Neo-Kantian Wilhelm Windelband who wrote in a brilliant survey on 19th
century logic (1904, 164):
It is in the nature of things that in this enterprise [i.e. the reform of
logic] the lower degree of fruitfulness and developability power was on
the side of formal logic. Reﬂection on the rules of the correct progress
of thinking, the technique of correct thinking, had indeed been brought
to perfection by former philosophy, presupposing a naive world view.
What Aristotle had created in a stroke of genius, was decorated with
the ﬁnest ﬁligree work in Antiquity and the Middle Ages: an art of
proving and disproving which culminated in a theory of reasoning,
and after this constructing the doctrines of judgements and concepts.
Once one has accepted the foundations, the safely assembled building
cannot be shaken: it can only be reﬁned here and there and perhaps
adapted to new scientiﬁc requirements.
Windelband was very critical of English mathematical logic. Its quantiﬁcation
of the predicate allows the correct presentation of extensions in judgements,
but it “drops hopelessly” the vivid sense of all judgements, which tend to
claim or deny a material relationship between subject or predicate. It is
“a logic of the conference table”, which cannot be used in the vivid life of
science, a “logical sport” which has its merits only in exercising the ﬁnal
acumen (ibid., 166–167).
The philosophical reform eﬀorts concerned primarily two areas:
1. the problem of a foundation of logic itself, dealt with using psycholog-
ical and physiological means, thereby leading to new discussion on the
question of priority between logic and psychology, and to various forms
of psychologism and anti-psychologism (cf. Rath 1994, Kusch 1995);
2. the problem of the applicability of logic which led to an increased in-
terest in the methodological part of traditional logic. The reform of
applied logic attempted to bring philosophy in touch with the stormy
development of mathematics and sciences in that time.

16
Volker Peckhaus
Both reform procedures had a destructive eﬀect on the shape of logic and
philosophy. The struggle with psychologism led to the departure of psychol-
ogy (especially in its new, experimental form) from the body of philosophy
at the beginning of the 20th century. Psychology became a new, autonomous
scientiﬁc discipline. The debate on methodology resulted in the creation of
the philosophy of science which was separated from the body of logic. The
philosopher’s ignorance of the development of formal logic caused a third de-
parture: Part of formal logic was taken from the domain of the competence of
philosophy and incorporated into mathematics where it was instrumentalized
for foundational tasks. This was the philosophical background before which
the emergence of symbolic logic in Germany, especially the logical work of
the German mathematician Ernst Schr¨oder (1841–1902) has to be seen.
3.2
The Mathematical Context in Germany
3.2.1
Logic and Formal Algebra
The examination of the British situation in mathematics at the time when
the new logic emerged showed that the creators of the new logic were basi-
cally interested in a reform of mathematics by establishing an abstract view
of mathematics which focused not on mathematical objects like quantities,
but on symbolic operations with arbitrary objects. The reform of logic was
only secondary. These results can be transferred to the situation in Germany
without any problem.
The most important representative of the German algebra of logic was
the mathematician Ernst Schr¨oder (1841–1902)19 who was regarded as having
completed the Boolean period in logic (cf. Boche´nski 1956, 314). In his ﬁrst
pamphlet on logic, Der Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls (1877), he presented
a critical revision of Boole’s logic of classes, stressing the idea of the dual-
ity between logical addition and logical multiplication introduced by William
Stanley Jevons in 1864. In 1890 Schr¨oder started the large project of his mon-
umental Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik which remained unﬁnished
although it increased to three volumes with four parts, of which one appeared
only posthumously (1890, 1891, 1895a, 1905). Contemporaries regarded the
ﬁrst volume alone as completing the algebra of logic (cf. Wernicke 1891, 196).
Nevertheless, Schr¨oder’s logical theory kept, like the one of Boole, close con-
tact to the traditional shape of logic. The Introduction of the Vorlesungen
is full of references to that time’s philosophical discussion on logic. Schr¨oder
even referred to the psychologistic discussion on the foundation of logic, and
19On Schr¨oder’s biography see his autobiographical note, Schr¨oder 1901, which became
the base of Eugen L¨uroth’s widely spread obituary, L¨uroth 1903. See also Peckhaus 1997,
234–238.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
17
never really freed his logical theory from the traditional division of logic into
the theories of concept, judgement and inference.
Schr¨oder’s opinion concerning the question as to what end logic is to be
studied (cf. Peckhaus 1991, 1994b) can be drawn from an autobiographical
note (written in the third person), published in the year before his death. It
contains his own survey of his scientiﬁc aims and results. Schr¨oder divided
his scientiﬁc production into three ﬁelds:
1. A number of papers dealing with some of the current problems of his
science.
2. Studies concerned with creating an “absolute algebra,” i. e., a general
theory of connections. Schr¨oder stressed that these studies represent
his “very own object of research” of which only little was published at
that time.
3. Work on the reform and development of logic.
Schr¨oder wrote (1901) that his aim was
to design logic as a calculating discipline, especially to give access to
the exact handling of relative concepts, and, from then on, by eman-
cipation from the routine claims of spoken language, to withdraw any
fertile soil from “clich´e” in the ﬁeld of philosophy as well. This should
prepare the ground for a scientiﬁc universal language that, widely dif-
fering from linguistic eﬀorts like Volap¨uk [a universal language like
Esperanto, very popular in Germany at that time], looks more like a
sign language than like a sound language.
Schr¨oder’s own division of his ﬁelds of research shows that he didn’t consider
himself a logician: His “very own object of research” was “absolute algebra,”
which was similar to modern abstract or universal algebra in respect to its
basic problems and fundamental assumptions. What was the connection be-
tween logic and algebra in Schr¨oder’s research? From the passages quoted
one could assume that they belong to two separate ﬁelds of research, but
this is not the case. They were intertwined in the framework of his heuristic
idea of a general science. In his autobiographical note he stressed:
The disposition for schematizing, and the aspiration to condense prac-
tice to theory advised Schr¨oder to prepare physics by perfecting math-
ematics. This required deepening—as of mechanics and geometry—
above all of arithmetic, and subsequently he became by the time aware
of the necessity for a reform of the source of all these disciplines, logic.
Schr¨oder’s universal claim becomes obvious. His scientiﬁc eﬀorts served for
providing the requirements to found physics as the science of material nature

18
Volker Peckhaus
by “deepening the foundations,” to quote a famous metaphor later used by
David Hilbert (1918, 407) in order to illustrate the objectives of his axiomatic
programme. Schr¨oder regarded the formal part of logic that can be formed
as a “calculating logic,” using a symbolical notation, as a model of formal
algebra that is called “absolute” in its last state of development.
But what is “formal algebra”? The theory of formal algebra “in the nar-
rowest sense of the word” includes “those investigations on the laws of al-
gebraic operations [ . . . ] that refer to nothing but general numbers in an
unlimited number ﬁeld without making any presuppositions concerning its
nature” (1873, 233). Formal algebra therefore prepares “studies on the most
varied number systems and calculating operations that might be invented for
particular purposes” (ibid.).
It has to be stressed that Schr¨oder wrote his early considerations on formal
algebra and logic without any knowledge of the results of his British prede-
cessors. His sources were the textbooks of Martin Ohm, Hermann G¨unther
Graßmann, Hermann Hankel and Robert Graßmann. These sources show
that Schr¨oder was a representative of the tradition of German combinatorial
algebra and algebraic analysis (cf. Peckhaus 1997, ch. 6).
3.2.2
Combinatorial Analysis
Schr¨oder developed the programmatic foundations of the absolute algebra in
his textbook Lehrbuch der Arithmetik und Algebra (1873) and the school pro-
gramme pamphlet ¨Uber die formalen Elemente der absoluten Algebra (1874).
Among the sources mentioned in the textbook, Martin Ohm’s (1792–1872)
Versuch eines vollkommen consequenten Systems der Mathematik (1822) oc-
curs that stood in the German tradition of the of algebraical and combina-
torial analysis beginning with the work of Carl Friedrich Hindenburg (1741–
1808) and his school (cf. Jahnke 1990, 161–322).
Martin Ohm (cf. Bekemeier 1987) aimed at completing Euclid’s geomet-
rical programme for all of mathematics (Ohm 1853, V). He distinguished
between number (or “undesignated number”) and quantity (or “designated
number”) regarding the ﬁrst one as the higher concept. The features of the
calculi of arithmetic, algebra, analysis, etc. are not seen as features of quanti-
ties, but of operations, i. e. mental activities (1853, VI–VII). This operational
view can also be found in the work of Hermann G¨unther Graßmann who also
stood in the Hindenburg tradition.
3.2.3
General Theory of Forms
Hermann G¨unther Graßmann’s Lineale Ausdehnungslehre (1844) was of de-
cisive inﬂuence on Schr¨oder, especially Graßmann’s “general theory of forms”

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
19
(“allgemeine Formenlehre”) opening this pioneering study in vector algebra
and vector analysis. The general theory of forms was popularized by Hermann
Hankel’s Theorie der complexen Zahlensysteme (1867).
Graßmann deﬁned the general theory of forms as “the series of truths that
is related to all branches of mathematics in the same way, and that therefore
only presupposes the general concepts of equality and diﬀerence, connection
and division” (1844, 1). Equality is taken as substitutivity in every context.
Graßmann choses ⌢as general connecting sign. The result of the connection
of two elements a and b is expressed by the term (a ⌢b). Using the common
rules for brackets we get for three elements ((a ⌢b) ⌢c) = a ⌢b ⌢c
(§ 2). Graßmann restricted his considerations to “simple connections”, i. e.
associative and commutative connections (§ 4). These connecting operations
are synthetic. The reverse operations are called resolving or analytic con-
nections. a ⌣b stands for the form which results in a if it is synthetically
connected with b: a ⌣b ⌢b = a (§ 5). Graßmann introduced furthermore
forms in which more than one synthetic operation occur. If the second con-
nection is symbolized with ⌢⌢and if there holds distributivity between the
synthetic operations, then the equation (a ⌢b) ⌢⌢c = (a ⌢⌢c) ⌢(b ⌢⌢c) is
valid. Graßmann called the second connection a connection on a higher level
(§ 9), a terminology which might have inﬂuenced Schr¨oder’s later “Opera-
tionsstufen”, i. e. “levels of operations”.
Whereas Graßmann applied the general theory of forms in the domain of
extensive quantities, especially directed lines, i. e. vectors, Hermann Hankel
later used it to erect on its base his system of hypercomplex numbers (Hankel
1867). If λ(a, b) is a general connection of objects a, b leading to a new object
c, i. e. λ(a, b) = c, there is a connection Θ which, applied to c and b leads
again to a, i. e., Θ(c, b) = a or Θ{λ(a, b), b} = a. Hankel called the operation
θ “thetic” and its reverse λ “lytic”. The commutativity of these operations
is not presupposed.
3.2.4
“Wissenschaftslehre” and Logic
Hermann G¨unther Graßmann had already announced that his Lineale Aus-
dehnungslehre should be part of a comprehensive reorganization of the system
of sciences. His brother Robert Graßmann (1815–1901) attempted to real-
ize this programme in a couple of writings published under the series title
Wissenschaftslehre oder Philosophie. In its parts on logic and mathematics
he anticipated modern lattice theory. He furthermore formulated a logical
calculus being in parts similar to that of Boole. His logical theory was obvi-
ously independent from the contemporary German philosophical discussion
on logic, and he was also not aware of his British precursors.20 Graßmann
20On Graßmann’s logic and his anticipations of lattice theory cf. Mehrtens 1979.

20
Volker Peckhaus
wrote about the aims of his logic or theory of reasoning (“Denklehre”) that
it
should teach us strictly scientiﬁc reasoning which is equally valid for
all men of any people, any language, equally proving and rigorous. It
has therefore to relieve itself from the barriers of a certain language
and to treat the forms of reasoning, becoming, thus, a theory of forms
or mathematics.
Graßmann tried to realize this programme in his Formenlehre oder Math-
ematik, published in six brochures consisting of an introduction (1872a),
a general part on “Gr¨osenlehre” (1872b) understood as “science of tieing
quantities” and the special parts “Begriﬀslehre oder Logik” (theory of con-
cepts or logic), “Bindelehre oder Combinationslehre” (theory of binding or
combinatorics), “Zahlenlehre oder Arithmetik” (theory of numbers or arith-
metic) and “Ausenlehre oder Ausdehnungslehre” (theory of the exterior or
Ausdehnungslehre).
In the general theory of quantities Graßmann introduced the letters a, b,
c, . . . as syntactical signs for arbitrary quantities. The letter e represents
special quantities: elements, or in Graßmann’s strange terminology “Stifte”
(pins), i. e. quantities which cannot be derived from other quantities by tieing.
Besides brackets which indicate the order of the tieing operation he introduces
the equality sign =, the inequality sign,and a general sign for a tie ◦. Among
special ties he investigates joining or addition (“F¨ugung oder Addition”)
(“+”) and weaving or multiplication (“Webung oder Multiplikation”) (“·”).
These ties can occur either as interior ties, if e ◦e = e, or as exterior exterior
ties, if e ◦e, e.
The special parts of the theory of quantities are distinguished with the
help of the combinatorically possible results of tieing a pin to itself. The ﬁrst
part, “the most simple and, at the same time, the most interior”, as Graß-
mann called it, is the theory of concepts or logic in which interior joining
e + e = e and inner weaving ee = e hold. In the theory of binding or com-
binatorics interior joining e + e = e and exterior weaving ee, e hold; in
the theory of numbers or arithmetic exterior joining e + e, e and interior
weaving ee = e hold, or 1 × 1 = 1 and 1 × e = e. Finally, in the theory of
the exterior or Ausdehnungslehre, the “most complicated and most exterior”
part of the theory of forms, exterior joining e + e, e and exterior weaving
ee, e hold (1872a, 12–13).
Graßmann, thus, formulated Boole’s “Law of Duality” using his interior
weaving ee = e, but he went beyond Boole in allowing interior joining e+e =
e, so coming close to Jevons’ system of 1864.
In the theory of concepts or logic Graßmann started with interpreting the
syntactical elements, which had already been introduced in a general way.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
21
Now, everything that can be a deﬁnite object of reasoning is called “quan-
tity”. In this new interpretation, pins are initially set quantities not being de-
rived from other quantities by tieing. Equality is interpreted as substitutivity
without value change, inequality as impossibility of such a substitution. Join-
ing is read as “and”, standing for adjunction or the logical “or”. Weaving is
read as “times”, i. e. conjunction or the logical “and”. Graßmann introduced
the signs < and > to express sub- and superordination of concepts. The sign
≦expresses, that a concept equals or that it is subordinated another con-
cept. This is exactly the sense of Schr¨oder’s later basic connecting relation
of subsumption or inclusion. In the theory of concepts Graßmann expressed
this relation in a shorter way with the help of the angle sign ∠. The sign
T stands for the All or the totality, the sum of all pins. The following laws
hold: a + T = T and aT = a. 0 is interpreted as “the lowest concept, which
is subordinate to all concepts.” Its laws are a + 0 = a and a · 0 = 0. Finally
Graßmann introduced the “not” (“Nicht”) or negation as complement with
the laws a + ¯a = T and a · ¯a = 0.
3.3
Schr¨oder’s Algebra of Logic
3.3.1
Schr¨oder’s Way to Logic
In his work on the formal elements of absolute algebra (1874) Schr¨oder inves-
tigated operations in a manifold, called domain of numbers (“Zahlengebiet”).
“Number” is, however, used as a general concept. Examples for numbers are
“proper names, concepts, judgements, algorithms, numbers [of arithmetic],
symbols for quantities and operations, points, systems of points, or any ge-
ometrical object, quantities of substances, etc.” (Schr¨oder 1874, 3). Logic
is, thus, a possible interpretation of the structure dealt with in absolute al-
gebra. Schr¨oder assumed that there are operations with the help of which
two objects from a given manifold can be connected to yield a third that
also belongs to that manifold (ibid., 4). He chooses from the set of possible
operations the non-commutative “symbolic multiplication”
c = a . b = ab
with two inverse operations
measuring (“Messung”)
b . (a : b) = a ,
and division (“Teilung”)
a
b . b = a .
Schr¨oder called a direct operation together with its inverses “level of oper-
ations” (“Operationsstufe”). And again Schr¨oder realized that “the logical
addition of concepts (or individuals)” follows the laws of multiplication of
real numbers.

22
Volker Peckhaus
But there is still another association with logic. In his Lehrbuch, Schr¨oder
speculated about the relation between an “ambiguous expression” like √a
and its possible values. He determined ﬁve logical relations, introducing his
subsumtion relations. Be A an expression that can have diﬀerent values
a, a′, a′′, . . .. Then the following relations hold (Schr¨oder 1873, 27–29):
Superordination
A









a
a′
a′′
...
,
Examples: metal silver;
√
9 −3.
Subordination
a
a′
a′′
...








 A
,
Examples: gold metal; 3
√
9.
Coordination
a a′ a′′ . . . ,
Examples: gold
silber [in respect to the general concept “metal”] or
3 −3 [in respect to the general concept
√
9].
Equality
A = B
means that the concepts A and B are identical in intension and extension.
Correlation
A(=)B
means that the concepts A and B agree in at least one value.
Schr¨oder recognized that if he would now introduce negation, he would
have created a complete terminology which allows to express all relations be-
tween concepts (in respect to their extension) with short formulas which can
harmonically be embedded into the schema of the apparatus of the mathe-
matical sign language (ibid., 29).
Schr¨oder wrote his logical considerations of the introduction of the Lehr-
buch without having seen any work of logic in which symbolical methods
had been applied. It was while completing a later sheet of his book that
he came across Robert Graßmann’s Formenlehre oder Mathematik (1872a).
He felt urged to insert a comprehensive footnote running over three pages
for hinting at this book (Schr¨oder 1873, footnote, pp. 145–147). There he

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
23
reported that Graßmann used the sign + for the “collective comprehension”,
“really regarding it as an addition—one could say a ‘logical’ addition—that
has besides the features of common (numerical) addition the basic feature
a + a = a.” He wrote that he was most interested in the rˆole the author had
assigned to multiplication regarded as the product of two concepts which
unite the marks being common to both concepts.
In the Programmschrift of 1874 Schr¨oder also gave credit to Robert Graß-
mann, but mentioned that he had recently found out that the laws of the
logical operations had already been developed before Graßmann “in a clas-
sical work” by George Boole (Schr¨oder 1874, 7).
3.3.2
Logic as a Model of Absolute Algebra
In 1877 Schr¨oder published his Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls in which he
developed the logic of Boole’s Laws of Thought stressing the duality of the
logical operations of addition and multiplication. An “Operationskreis” (cir-
cle of operations) is constituted by more than one direct operation together
with their inverses. The “logical calculus” is the set of formulas which can
be produced in this circle of operations. Schr¨oder called it a characteristic
mark of “mathematical logic or the logical calculus” that these derivations
and inferences can be done in form of calculations, namely in the ﬁrst part
of logic as calculation with concepts leading to statements about the objects
themselves, i. e., categorical judgements, or, in Boole’s terminology, “primary
propositions”. In its second part the logical calculus deals with statements
about judgements as in conditional sentences, hypothetical or disjunctive
judgements, or Boole’s secondary propositions. In this booklet Schr¨oder sim-
pliﬁed Boole’s calculus stressing, as mentioned, the duality between logical
addition and logical multiplication, and, thus, the algebraic identity of the
structures of these operations.
Sch¨oder developed his logic in a systematic way in the Vorlesungen ¨uber
die Algebra der Logik (1890–1905). Again he separated logic from its struc-
ture. The structures are developed and interpreted in several ﬁelds, beginning
from the most general ﬁeld of “domains” (“Gebiete”) of manifolds of elements
(which are not necessarily to be individuated), then classes (with and with-
out negation), and ﬁnally proprositions (vol. 2, 1891). The basic operation in
the calculi of domains and classes is subsumption, i. e., identity or inclusion.
Schr¨oder presupposes two principles, Reﬂexivity a a, and Transitivity “If
a b and at the same time b c, then a c”. Then he deﬁnes “identical
zero” (“nothing”) and “identical one” (“all”), “identical multiplication” and
“identical addition”, and ﬁnally negation. In the sections dealing with state-
ments without negation he proves one direction of the distributivity law for
logical addition and logical multiplication, but shows that the other side can-

24
Volker Peckhaus
not be proved, he rather shows its independence by formulating a model in
which it does not hold, the so-called “logical calculus with groups, e. g. func-
tional equations, algorithms or calculi”. He thereby found the ﬁrst example
of a non-distributive lattice.21
Schr¨oder devoted the second volume of the Vorlesungen to the calculus of
propositions. The step from the calculus of classes to the calculus of propo-
sitions is taken with the help of an alteration of the basic interpretation of
the formulas used. Whereas the calculus of classes was bound to a spatial
interpretation especially in terms of the part–whole relation, Schr¨oder used
in the calculus of propositions a temporal interpretation taking up an idea of
George Boole from his Laws of Thought (1854, 164–165). This may be illus-
trated regarding subsumtion as the basic connecting relation. In the calculus
of classes a b means that the class a is part of or equal to the class b. In
the calculus of propositions this formula may be interpreted in the following
way (Schr¨oder 1891, § 28, p. 13):
In the time during which a is true is completely contained in the time
during which b is true, i. e., whenever [ . . . ] a is valid b is valid as well.
In short, we will often say: “If a is valid, then b is valid,” “a entails
b” [ . . . ], “from a follows b.”
Schr¨oder then introduces two new logical symbols, the “sign of products” Q,
and the “sign of sums” P. He uses Q
x to express that propositions referring
to a domain x are valid for any domain x in the basic manifold 1, and P
x
to say that the proposition is not necessarily valid for all, but for a certain
domain x, or for several certain domains x of our manifold 1, i. e., for at least
one x (Schr¨oder 1891, § 29, 26–27).
For Schr¨oder the use of P and Q in logic is perfectly analogues to arith-
metic. The existential quantiﬁer and the universal quantiﬁer are therefore
interpreted as possibly indeﬁnite logical addition or disjunction and logical
multiplication or conjunction respectively. This is expressed by the following
deﬁnition which also shows the duality of P and Q (Schr¨oder 1891, § 30,
35).
λ=n
X
λ=1
aλ = a1 + a2 + a3 + . . . + an−1 + an |
λ=n
Y
λ=1
aλ = a1a2a3 · . . . · an−1an .
With this Schr¨oder had all requirements at hand for modern quantiﬁcation
theory which he took, however, not from Frege, but from the conceptions
21Cf. Schr¨oder 1890, 280. On Ch. S. Peirce’s claim to have proved the second form as
well (Peirce 1880, 33) cf. Houser 1991. On Schr¨oder’s proof cf. Peckhaus 1994a, 359–374;
Mehrtens 1979, 51–56.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
25
as developed by Charles S. Peirce (1836–1914) and his school, especially by
Oscar Howard Mitchell (1851–1889).22
3.3.3
Logic of Relatives
Schr¨oder devoted the third volume of the Vorlesungen to the “Algebra and
Logic of Relatives” of which only a ﬁrst part dealing with the algebra of rela-
tives could be published (Schr¨oder 1895a). The algebra and logic of relatives
should serve as an organon for absolute algebra in the sense of pasigraphy,
or general script, that could be used to describe most diﬀerent objects as
models of algebraic structures.
Schr¨oder never claimed any priority for this part of his logic, but always
conceded that it was an elaboration of Charles S. Peirce’s work on relatives
(cf. Schr¨oder 1905, XXIV).
He illustrated the power of this new tool by applying it to several mathe-
matical topics, such as open problems of G. Cantor’s set theory (e. g. Schr¨oder
1898), thereby proving (not entirely correctly) Cantor’s proposition about
the equivalence of sets (“Schr¨oder-Bernstein Theorem”). In translating Ri-
chard Dedekind’s theory of chains into the language of the algebra of relatives
he even proclaimed the “ﬁnal goal: to come to a strictly logical deﬁnition of
the relative concept ‘number of –’ [‘Anzahl von –’] from which all proposi-
tions referring to this concept can be deduced purely deductively” (Schr¨oder
1895a, 349–350). So Schr¨oder’s system comes close, at least in its objectives,
to Frege’s logicism, although it is commonly regarded as an antipode.
4
Conclusions
Like the British tradition, but independent of it, the German algebra of logic
was connected to new trends in algebra. It diﬀered from its British counter-
part in its combinatorial approach. In both traditions, algebra of logic was
invented within the enterprise to reform basic notions of mathematics which
led to the emergence of structural abstract mathematics. The algebraists
wanted to design algebra as “pan-mathematics”, i. e. as a general discipline
embracing all mathematical disciplines as special cases. The independent at-
tempts in Great Britain and Germany were combined when Schr¨oder learned
about the existence of Boole’s logic in late 1873, early 1874. Finally he en-
riched the Boolean class logic by adopting Charles S. Peirce’s theory of quan-
tiﬁcation and adding a logic of relatives according to the model of Peirce and
De Morgan.
22Cf. Mitchell 1883, Peirce 1885. On the development of modern quantiﬁcation theory
in the algebra of logic cf. Brady 2000.

26
Volker Peckhaus
The main interest of the new logicians was to utilize logic for mathemat-
ical and scientiﬁc purposes, and it was only in a second step, but nevertheless
an indispensable consequence of the attempted applications, that the reform
of logic came into the view. What has been said of the representatives of
the algebra of logic also holds for the proponents of competing logical sys-
tems such as Gottlob Frege or Giuseppe Peano. They wanted to use logic
in their quest for mathematical rigor, something questioned by the stormy
development in mathematics.
For quite a while the algebra of logic remained the ﬁrst choice for logical
research. Author like Alfred North Whitehead (1841–1947), and even David
Hilbert and his collaborators in the early foundational programme (cf. Peck-
haus 1994c) built on this direction of logic whereas Frege’s mathematical
logic was widely ignored. The situation changed only after the publication of
A. N. Whitehead’s and B. Russell’s Principia Mathematica (1910–1913). But
even then important work was done in the algebraic tradition as the contribu-
tions of Clarence Irving Lewis (1883–1964), Leopold L¨owenheim (1878–1957),
Thoralf Skolem (1887–1963), and Alfred Tarski (1901–1983) prove.
Bibliography
Astroh, Michael/Read, Stephen (eds.) 1998
Proceedings
of
the
Conference
Hugh MacColl and the Tradition of Logic. Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universit¨at
Greifswald, March 29-April 1, 1998, special issue of Nordic Journal of Philo-
sophical Logic 3 (1998), no. 1–2.
Babbage, Charles 1864 Passages from the Life of a Philosopher, Longman,
Green, Longman, Roberts, & Green: London; reprinted Gregg: Westmead 1969.
Bain, Alexander 1870 Logic, 2 vols, pt. 1: Deduction, pt. 2: Induction, Longmans,
Green, & Co.: London
Bat´og, Tadeusz/Murawski, Roman 1996 “StanisÃlaw Pi ,atkiewicz and the Be-
ginnings of Mathematical Logic in Poland,” Historia Mathematica 23, 68–73.
Bekemeier, Bernd 1987 Martin Ohm (1792–1872): Universit¨ats- und Schul-
mathematik
in
der
neuhumanistischen
Bildungsreform,
Vandenhoeck
&
Ruprecht: G¨ottingen (Studien zur Wissenschafts-, Sozial- und Bildungs-
geschichte der Mathematik; 4).
Beneke, Friedrich Eduard 1839 Syllogismorum analyticorum origines et ordinem
naturalem, Mittler: Berlin.
— 1842 System der Logik als Kunstlehre des Denkens, 2 vols., F. D¨ummler: Berlin.
Bentham, George 1827 An Outline of a New System of Logic. With a Critical
Examination of Dr. Whately’s “Elements of Logic”, Hunt and Clark: London;
reprinted Thoemmes: Bristol 1990.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
27
Bernhard, Peter 2000 Euler-Diagramme. Zur Morphologie einer Repr¨asenta-
tionsform in der Logik, Mentis: Paderborn.
Boche´nski, Joseph Maria 1956 Formale Logik, Alber: Freiburg/M¨unchen (Orbis
Academicus, III, 2), 41978.
Boole, George 1844 “On a General Method in Analysis,” Philosophical Trans-
actions of the Royal Society of London for the Year MDCCCXLIV , pt. 1,
225–282.
— 1847 The Mathematical Analysis of Logic. Being an Essay Towards a Cal-
culus of Deductive Reasoning, Macmillan, Barclay, and Macmillan: Cam-
bridge/George Bell: London; reprinted Basil Blackwell: Oxford 1951.
— 1848 “The Calculus of Logic,” The Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Jour-
nal 3, 183–198.
— 1854 An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, on which are Founded the
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities, Walton & Maberly: Lon-
don; reprinted Dover: New York [ca. 1958].
— 1952 Studies in Logic and Probabilities, ed. by R. Rhees, Watts & Co.: London.
— 1997 Selected Manuscripts on Logic and its Philosophy, ed. by Ivor Grattan-
Guinness/G´erard Bornet, Birkh¨auser Verlag: Basel/Boston/Berlin (Science
Networks. Historical Studies; 20).
Bornet, G´erard 1997 “Boole’s Psychologism as a Reception Problem,” in Boole
1997, xlvii–lviii.
Boyer, Carl B. 1968 A History of Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons: New
York/London/Sydney.
Cannon, Susan Faye 1978 Science in Culture: The Early Victorian Period, Daw-
son Scientiﬁc History Publications: New York.
Brady, Geraldine 2000 From Peirce to Skolem. A Neglected Chapter in the His-
tory of Logic, Elsevier: Amsterdam etc. (Studies in the History and Philosophy
of Mathematics; 4).
Carroll, Lewis 1887 The Game of Logic, MacMillan: London; reprinted in Car-
roll 1958.
— 1896 Symbolic Logic, MacMillan: London; reprinted in Carroll 1958.
— 1958 Mathematical Recreations of Lewis Carroll. Symbolic Logic and The Game
of Logic (both Books Bound as One), Dover Publications and Berkeley Enter-
prises: New York.
Couturat, Louis 1904 L’Alg`ebre de la logique, Gauthier-Villars: Paris (Scientia.
Phys.-math´ematique; 24), 21914; reprint of the 2nd ed., Olms: Hildesheim 1965.
De Morgan, Augustus 1846 “On the Syllogism I. On the Structure of the Syl-
logism, and on the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to Questions of
Argument and Authority,” Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Soci-
ety 8, 379–408.

28
Volker Peckhaus
Enros, Philip C. 1983 “The Analytical Society (1812–1813): Precursor of the
Renewal of Cambridge Mathematics,” Historia Mathematica 10, 24–47.
Ewald, William (ed.) 1996 From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Founda-
tions of Mathematics, 2 vols., Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Ferreir´os, Jos´e 1999 Labyrinth of Thought. A History of Set Theory and Its
Role in Modern Mathematics, Birkh¨auser Verlag: Basel/Boston/Berlin (Sci-
ence Networks. Historical Studies, Vol. 23).
Gardner, Martin 1958 Logic Machines and Diagrams, McGraw-Hill: New York,
University of Chicago Press: Chicago 21982.
Gasser, James (ed.) 2000 A Boole Anthology. Recent and Classical Studies in the
Logic of George Boole, Kluwer: Dordrecht/Boston/London (Synthese Library;
291), 1–27.
Graßmann, Hermann G¨unther 1844 Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre ein neuer
Zweig der Mathematik dargestellt und durch Anwendungen auf die ¨ubrigen
Zweige der Mathematik, wie auch auf die Statik, Mechanik, die Lehre vom
Magnetismus und die Krystallonomie erl¨autert, Otto Wigand: Leipzig; 21878.
Graßmann, Robert 1872a Die Formenlehre oder Mathematik, R. Grassmann:
Stettin; Reprinted in Graßmann 1966.
— 1872b Die Gr¨osenlehre. Erstes Buch der Formenlehre oder Mathematik, R.
Grassmann: Stettin; Reprinted in Graßmann 1966.
— 1966 Die Formenlehre oder Mathematik, mit einer Einf¨uhrung von J. E. Hof-
mann, Georg Olms: Hildesheim.
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor 2000a The Search for Mathematical Roots, 1870–1940.
Logics, Set Theories and the Foundations of Mathematics from Cantor Through
Russell to G¨odel, Princeton University Press: Princeton/Oxford.
— 2000b “On Boole’s Algebraic Logic after The Mathematical Analysis of Logic,”
in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 213–216.
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor (ed.) 1994 Companion Encyclopedia of the History
and Philosophy of the Mathematical Sciences, 2 vols., Routledge: London/New
York.
Gregory, Duncan Farquharson 1840 “On the Real Nature of Symbolical Alge-
bra,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 14, 208–216.
— 1842 “On a Diﬃculty in the Theory of Algebra,” The Cambridge Mathematical
Journal 3, 153–159.
Hailperin, Theodore 1981 “Boole’s Algebra isn’t Boolean Algebra,” Mathemat-
ics Magazine 54, 172–184; reprinted in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 61–77.
Halsted, George Bruce 1878 “Boole’s Logical Method,” The Journal of Specu-
lative Philosophy 12, 81–91.
Hamilton, William 1833 “Logic. In Reference to the Recent English Treatises on
that Science,” Edinburgh Review 66 (April 1833), 194–238; again in Hamilton,

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
29
Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Education and University Reform.
Chieﬂy from the Edinburgh Review; Corrected, Vindicated, Enlarged, in Notes
and Appendices, Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans: London/Maclachlan
and Stewart: Edinburgh 1851, 16–174.
— 1859–1866 Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, 4 vols., eds. H. L. Mansel/J.
Veitch, William Blackwood and Sons: Edinburgh/London.
Hankel, Hermann 1867 Theorie der complexen Zahlensysteme insbesondere der
gemeinen imagin¨aren Zahlen und der Hamilton’schen Quaternionen nebst ihrer
geometrischen Darstellung, Leopold Voss: Leipzig (Hankel, Vorlesungen ¨uber
die complexen Zahlen und ihre Functionen, pt. 1).
Harley, Robert 1866 R. H., “George Boole, F. R. S.,” The British Quarterly Re-
view Juli 1866; reprinted in Boole 1952, 425–472.
Heath, Peter 1966 “Introduction,” in Augustus De Morgan, On the Syllogism
and Other Logical Writings, ed. by Peter Heath, Routledge & Kegan Paul:
London (Rare Masterpieces of Philosophy and Science), vii–xxxi.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 1812/1813 Wissenschaft der Logik, vol. 1: Die
objective Logik, Johann Leonhard Schrag: N¨urnberg; critical edition: Hegel,
Wissenschaft der Logik. Erster Band. Die objektive Logik (1812/1813), eds.
Friedrich Hogemann/Walter Jaeschke, Felix Meiner: Hamburg 1978 (Hegel,
Gesammelte Werke, vol. 11).
— 1830 Encyclop¨adie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse. Zum
Gebrauch seiner Vorlesungen. Dritte Ausgabe, Oßwald’scher Verlag: Heidel-
berg. Critical edition Hegel, Enzyklop¨adie der philosophischen Wissenschaften
im Grundrisse (1830), eds. Wolfgang Bonsiepen/Hans-Christian Lucas, Felix
Meiner: Hamburg 1992 (Hegel, Gesammelte Werke, vol. 20).
Hilbert, David 1918
“Axiomatisches Denken,” Mathematische Annalen 78,
405–415.
Houser, Nathan 1991 “Peirce and the Law of Distribution,” in Perspectives
on the History of Mathematical Logic, ed. by Thomas Drucker, Birk¨auser:
Boston/Basel/Berlin, 10–33.
Jahnke, Hans Niels 1990 Mathematik und Bildung in der Humboldtschen Re-
form, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht: G¨ottingen (Studien zur Wissenschafts-,
Sozial- und Bildungsgeschichte der Mathematik; 8).
Jevons, William Stanley 1864 Pure Logic or the Logic of Quality apart from
Quantity with Remarks on Boole’s System and the Relation of Logic and Math-
ematics, E. Stanford: London; reprinted in Jevons 1890, 3–77.
— 1874 The Principles of Science. A Treatise on Logic and Scientiﬁc Method, 2
vols., Macmillan and Co.: London [New York 1875].
— 1877–1878 “John Stuart Mill’s Philosophy Tested,” The Contemporary Review
31 (1877/78), 167–82, 256–275; 32 (1878), 88–99; again in Jevons 1890, 137–
172.

30
Volker Peckhaus
— 1890 Pure Logic and Other Minor Works, eds. Robert Adamson/Harriet A.
Jevons, Macmillan and Co.: London/New York; reprinted Thoemmes Press:
Bristol 1991.
Kant, Immanuel 1787 Critik der reinen Vernunft, 2nd ed., Johann Friedrich
Hartknoch: Riga; again in Kant’s gesammelte Schriften, vol. 3, ed. by K¨oniglich
Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften, Reimer: Berlin 1911.
Kneale, William/Kneale, Martha 1962 The Development of Logic, Clarendon
Press: Oxford; Reprinted 1986.
Kusch, Martin 1995 Psychologism. A Case Study in the Sociology of Philosoph-
ical Knowledge, Routledge: London/New York (Psychological Issues in Sci-
ence).
Laita, Luis Mar´ıa 1977 “The Inﬂuence of Boole’s Search for a Universal Method
in Analysis on the Creation of his Logic,” Annals of Science 34, 163–176;
reprinted in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 45–59.
Liard, Louis 1877a “Un nouveau syst`eme de logique formelle. M. Stanley Jevons”
Revue philosophique de la France et de l’´Etranger 3, 277–293.
— 1877b “La logique alg´ebrique de Boole,” Revue philosophique de la France et
de l’´Etranger 4, 285–317.
— 1878 Les logiciens anglais contemporains, Germer Bailli`ere: Paris, 51907.
— 1880 Die neuere englische Logik, ed. by J[ohannes] Imelmann, Denicke’s Ver-
lag: Berlin, 21883.
Lindsay, Thomas M 1871 “On Recent Logical Speculation in England,” in Ue-
berweg 1871, 557–590.
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann 1880 Logik. Drei B¨ucher vom Denken, vom Untersuchen
und vom Erkennen, 2nd ed. Hirzel: Leipzig (Lotze, System der Philosophie, pt.
1), partly reprinted as Lotze 1989a,b.
— 1989a Logik. Erstes Buch. Vom Denken (Reine Logik), ed. by by Gottfried
Gabriel, Felix Meiner Verlag: Hamburg (Philosophische Bibliothek; 421).
— 1989b Logik. Drittes Buch. Vom Erkennen (Methodologie), ed. by by Gottfried
Gabriel, Felix Meiner Verlag: Hamburg (Philosophische Bibliothek; 408).
L¨uroth, Jakob 1903 “Ernst Schr¨oder †. Mitglied der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung,” Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 12,
249–265; again in Schr¨oder 1905, III–XIX.
MacColl, Hugh 1877/78 “The Calculus of Equivalent Statements (Second Pa-
per),” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 9, 177–186.
MacHale, Desmond 1985 George Boole: His Life and Work, Boole Press: Dublin
(Proﬁles of Genius Series; 2).
Mehrtens, Herbert 1979
Die Entstehung der Verbandstheorie, Gerstenberg:
Hildesheim (arbor scientiarum; A.VI).

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
31
Merrill, Daniel D. 1990 Augustus De Morgan and the Logic of Relations,
Kluwer: Dordrecht/Boston/London (The New Synthese Historical Library;
38).
Mill, John Stuart 1843 A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive. Being
a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence and the Methods of Scientiﬁc
Investigation, 2 vols., J. W. Parker: London.
Mitchell, Oscar Howard 1883 “On a New Algebra of Logic,” in Charles S.
Peirce (ed.), Studies in Logic. By Members of the Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity, Little, Brown, and Company: Boston; reprinted John Benjamins: Am-
sterdam/Philadelphia 1983 (= Foundations in Semiotics; 1), 72–106.
Nambiar, Sriram 2000 “The Inﬂuence of Aristotelian Logic on Boole’s Philoso-
phy of Logic: The Reduction of Hypotheticals to Categoricals,” in Gasser (ed.)
2000, 217–239.
Neil, Samuel 1864 S. N., “John Stuart Mill,” The British Controversialist and
Literary Magazine n. s. (1864), 161–173, 241–256.
— 1865 S. N., “The Late George Boole. LL. D., D. C. L., Professor of Mathematics,
Queen’s College, Cork; Author of ‘The Laws of Thought’, etc.,” The British
Controversialist and Literary Magazine n. s. No. 80 (August 1865), 81–94; No.
81 (September 1865), 161–174; reprinted in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 1–25.
Ohm, Martin 1822 Versuch eines vollkommen consequenten Systems der Mathe-
matik, pt. 1: Arithmetik und Algebra enthaltend, pt. 2: Algebra und Analysis
des Endlichen enthaltend, Reimer: Berlin; Jonas: Berlin 21828/1829.
Panteki, Maria 2000 “The Mathematical Background of George Boole’s Mathe-
matical Analysis of Logic (1847),” in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 167–212.
Peacock, George 1830
A Treatise on Algebra, J. & J. J. Deighton: Cam-
bridge/G. F. & J. Rivington: London.
— 1834 “Report on the Recent Progress and Present State of Certain Branches
of Analysis,” Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science held at Cambridge in 1833, John Murray: London,
185–352.
Peckhaus, Volker 1991 “Ernst Schr¨oder und die ‘pasigraphischen Systeme’ von
Peano und Peirce,” Modern Logic 1, no. 2/3 (Winter 1990/91), 174–205.
— 1994a “Leibniz als Identiﬁkationsﬁgur der britischen Logiker des 19. Jahrhun-
derts,” in VI. Internationaler Leibniz-Kongreß. Vortr¨age I. Teil, Hannover,
18.–22.7.1994, Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz-Gesellschaft: Hannover, 589–596.
— 1994b “Wozu Algebra der Logik? Ernst Schr¨oders Suche nach einer universalen
Theorie der Verkn¨upfungen,” Modern Logic 4, 357–381.
— 1994c “Logic in Transition: The Logical Calculi of Hilbert (1905) and Zermelo
(1908),” in Logic and Philosophy of Science in Uppsala. Papers from the 9th
International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, ed. by

32
Volker Peckhaus
Dag Prawitz/Dag Westerst˚ahl, Kluwer: Dordrecht/Boston/London (Synthese
Library; 236), 311323.
— 1995 Hermann Ulrici (1806–1884). Der Hallesche Philosoph und die englische
Algebra der Logik. Mit einer Auswahl von Texten Ulricis und einer Bibliogra-
phie seiner Schriften, Hallescher Verlag: Halle a. S. (Schriftenreihe zur Geistes-
und Kulturgeschichte. Texte und Dokumente).
— 1997 Logik, Mathesis universalis und allgemeine Wissenschaft. Leibniz und die
Wiederentdeckung der formalen Logik im 19. Jahrhundert, Akademie Verlag:
Berlin (Logica Nova).
— 1999 “19th Century Logic Between Philosophy and Mathematics,” Bulletin of
Symbolic Logic 5, 433–450.
Peirce, Charles Sanders 1880 “On the Algebra of Logic,” American Journal of
Mathematics 3, 15–57; critical ed. in Writings of Charles Sanders Peirce: a
Chronological Edition, vol. 2: 1867–1871, ed. by Edward C. Moore, Indiana
University Press: Bloomington 1986, 163–208.
— 1885 “On the Algebra of Logic. A Contribution to the Philosophy of Notation,”
American Journal of Mathematics 7, 180–202.
Rabus, Georg Leonhard 1880 Die neuesten Bestrebungen auf dem Gebiete der
Logik bei den Deutschen und Die logische Frage, Deichert: Erlangen.
Rath, Matthias 1994 Der Psychologismus in der deutschen Philosophie, Karl Al-
ber Verlag: Freiburg/M¨unchen.
Richards, Joan L. 1988 Mathematical Visions. The Pursuit of Geometry in Vic-
torian England, Academic Press: Boston etc.
Riehl, Alois 1877 “Die englische Logik der Gegenwart,” Vierteljahrsschrift f¨ur
wissenschaftliche Philosophie 1, 51–80.
Risse, Wilhelm 1973 Bibliographia Logica. Verzeichnis der Druckschriften zur
Logik mit Angabe ihrer Fundorte, vol. 2: 1801–1969, Olms: Hildesheim/New
York (Studien und Materialien zur Geschichte der Philosophie; 1).
Schr¨oder, Ernst 1873 Lehrbuch der Arithmetik und Algebra f¨ur Lehrer und
Studirende, vol. 1 [no further volumes published]: Die sieben algebraischen
Operationen, B. G. Teubner: Leipzig.
— 1874 ¨Uber die formalen Elemente der absoluten Algebra, Schweizerbart’sche
Buchdruckerei: Stuttgart; at the same time supplement to the programme of
the Pro- und Real-Gymnasium in Baden-Baden for 1873/74.
— 1877 Der Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls, Teubner: Leipzig; reprinted as “spe-
cial edition,” Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft: Darmstadt 1966.
— 1890 Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik), vol. 1, B. G.
Teubner: Leipzig; reprinted Schr¨oder 1966.
— 1891 Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik), vol. 2, pt. 1, B. G.
Teubner: Leipzig; reprinted Schr¨oder 1966.

The Mathematical Origins of 19th Century Algebra of Logic
33
— 1895a Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik), vol. 3, pt. 1:
Algebra und Logik der Relative, B. G. Teubner: Leipzig; reprinted Schr¨oder
1966.
— 1895b “Note ¨uber die Algebra der bin¨aren Relative,” Mathematische Annalen
46, 144–158.
— 1898 “Ueber zwei Deﬁnitionen der Endlichkeit und G. Cantor’sche S¨atze”’,
Nova Acta Leopoldina. Abhandlungen der Kaiserlich Leop.-Carol. Deutschen
Akademie der Naturforscher 71, Nr. 6, 301–362.
— 1901 anon., “Grossherzoglich Badischer Hofrat Dr. phil. Ernst Schr¨oder[,]
ord. Professor der Mathematik an der Technischen Hochschule in Karlsruhe i.
Baden,” in Geistiges Deutschland. Deutsche Zeitgenossen auf dem Gebiete der
Literatur, Wissenschaften und Musik, Adolf Eckstein: Berlin-Charlottenburg
no year [1901].
— 1905 Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik), vol. 2, pt. 2, ed.
by Karl Eugen M¨uller, B. G. Teubner: Leipzig; reprinted Schr¨oder 1966.
— 1966 Vorlesungen ¨uber die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik), [“second edition”],
3 vols., Chelsea: Bronx, N.Y.
Trendelenburg, Friedrich Adolf 1842 “Zur Geschichte von Hegel’s Logik und
dialektischer Methode. Die logische Frage in Hegel’s Systeme. Eine Auf-
foderung [sic!] zu ihrer wissenschaftlichen Erledigung,” Neue Jenaische All-
gemeine Literatur-Zeitung 1, no. 97, 23 April 1842, 405–408; no. 98, 25 April
1842, 409–412; no. 99, 26 April 1842, 413–414; separately published in Trende-
lenburg Die logische Frage in Hegel’s System. Zwei Streitschriften, Brockhaus:
Leipzig 1843.
Ueberweg, Friedrich 1857
System der Logik und Geschichte der logischen
Lehren, Adolph Marcus: Bonn.
— 1871 System of Logic and History of Logical Doctrines, translated from the
German, with notes and appendices by Thomas M. Lindsay, Longmans, Green,
and Co.: London; reprinted Thoemmes Press: Bristol 1993.
Ulrici, Hermann 1855 Review of Boole 1854, Zeitschrift f¨ur Philosophie und
philosophische Kritik 27, 273–291.
Van Evra, James 1984 “Richard Whately and the Rise of Modern Logic,” His-
tory and Philosophy of Logic 5, 1–18.
Venn, John 1894 Symbolic Logic, 2nd ed., “revised and rewritten,” Macmillan &
Co.: London; reprinted Chelsea Publishing: Bronx, New York 1971.
Vasallo, Nicla 2000 “Psychologism in Logic: Some Similarities between Boole
and Frege,” in Gasser (ed.) 2000, 311–325.
Vilkko, Risto 2002 A Hundred Years of Logical Investigations. Reform Eﬀorts
of Logic in Germany 1781–1879, mentis: Paderborn.
Wernicke, Alexander 1891 Review of Schr¨oder 1891, Deutsche Litteraturzeitung
12, cols. 196–197.

34
Volker Peckhaus
Whately, Richard 1826 Elements of Logic. Comprising the Substance of the Ar-
ticle in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana: with Additions, &c., J. Mawman:
London.
Whitehead, Alfred North/Russell, Bertrand 1910–1913 Principia Mathemat-
ica, 3 vols., Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, England.
Windelband, Wilhelm 1904 “Logik,” in Windelband (ed.), Die Philosophie im
Beginn des zwanzigsten Jahrhunderts. Festschrift f¨ur Kuno Fischer, vol. 1,
Carl Winter: Heidelberg, 163–186.

