
The Life and Work of George Boole
A PRELUDE TO THE DIGITAL AGE

The Life and Work of George Boole
A PRELUDE TO THE DIGITAL AGE
Desmond MacHale

First published in 1985 by
Boole Press Limited This edition published in 2014 by
Cork University Press
Youngline Industrial Estate
Pouladuff Road, Togher
Cork, Ireland © Desmond MacHale 2014
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted
or reproduced or utilised in any electronic, mechanical or other
means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and
recording or otherwise, without either the prior written permission
of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in
Ireland issued by the Irish Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,
25 Denzille Lane, Dublin 2.
The right of Desmond MacHale to be identified as author of this Work
has been asserted by him in accordance with Copyright and Related
Rights Acts 2000 to 2007.
NEW EDITION ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The publishers, Cork University Press, and the author, Desmond MacHale, wish
to express their sincere thanks to Professor John Miller of Boole Press,
publisher of the first edition of this book, for his generosity and cooperation
in the publication of this second edition.
We would also like to sincerely thank President Michael Murphy of
University College Cork and Mr Brian McCarthy of FEXCO
for their support.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from
the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-78205-004-9
Typeset by Tower Books, Ballincollig, Co. Cork
Printed in Malta by Gutenberg Press

Contents
List of Illustrations
Milestones in Boole’s Life
Acknowledgements
Preface to new edition
Foreword to 1985 edition by J.L. Synge
Foreword to new edition
Chapter 1 
Early Life
Chapter 2 
His Own Master
Chapter 3 
Social Involvement
Chapter 4 
Early Mathematical Work
Chapter 5 
The Cork Professorship
Chapter 6 
Queen’s College Cork
Chapter 7 
Love and Marriage
Chapter 8 
The Cuvierian Society
Chapter 9 
The Laws of Thought
Chapter 10 
Controversy
Chapter 11 
Family Life and Social Attitudes
Chapter 12 
Poetry
Chapter 13 
Boole and Hamilton: Some Unanswered Questions
Chapter 14 
Religion
Chapter 15 
Later Mathematical Work
Chapter 16 
The Final Years
Chapter 17 
The Remarkable Boole Family
Bibliography of Boole’s Published Works
Sources and References
Index

List of Illustrations
The Boole Family Tree
No. 3 Potter Gate, Lincoln, one of Boole’s schools
Portrait of Boole as a young man
Queen’s College, Cork
The opening of Queen’s College, Cork, in 1849
Mary Everest Boole as a young woman
Sir Robert Kane, FRS
Lichfield Cottage, Ballintemple, Cork, home of the Boole family from 1862 to
1864
Three of Boole’s daughters
A sample of George Boole’s handwriting
Sir William Rowan Hamilton
Photograph of Boole, taken shortly before his death
A flattering portrait of Boole, drawn shortly after his death
The burning of the western wing of Queen’s College, Cork, in 1862
Mary Everest Boole in later life
The Boole Memorial Window in University College, Cork
The panel of the Memorial Window, showing Boole at work
The Boole Library, University College, Cork, opened in September 1984
Professor Tadhg O’Ciarda, late President of University College Cork, unveils
a memorial plaque on Boole’s final place of residence
George Boole’s family: Mary Boole (seated), their five daughters (standing)
and some grandchildren, circa 1900
Alicia Boole, the mathematician

Alicia Boole holding some of her grandchildren
Alicia Boole’s polytopes 297 Sir G.I. Taylor. FRS, Boole’s grandson,
unveiling a plaque to Boole at his Potter Gate school in Lincoln
Lucy Everest Boole, the chemist
Mary Hinton Boole
Howard Everest Hinton, FRS, Boole’s great grandson
Ethel Lilian Boole, the novelist

Milestones in Boole’s Life
1815 Born in Lincoln
1830 Published first poems
1831 First teaching post
1831 First studied mathematics
1834 Opened his own school
1835 First major public address, later published
1841 First mathematical publication
1844 Awarded Gold Medal for mathematics by the Royal Society
1847 First book, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, published
1849 Appointed Professor of Mathematics at Queen’s College, Cork
1851 Elected Dean of the Science Division of the Faculty of Arts
1851 First honorary degree, LL.D., from Trinity College, Dublin
1854 Second book, An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, published
1854 Elected President of the Cuvierian Society
1855 Married Mary Everest
1856 First daughter, Mary Ellen, born
1857 Elected Fellow of the Royal Society
1857 Won the Keith Prize
1858 Second daughter, Margaret, born
1859 Third book, Differential Equations, published
1860 Fourth book, Finite Differences, published
1862 Fourth daughter, Lucy Everest, born
1864 Fifth daughter, Ethel Lilian, born
1864 Died in Cork

T
Acknowledgements to
1985 edition
his book, the first full-length biography of George Boole, was begun in
1974 as a result of discovering some letters of Boole’s in the archives of
University College Cork. Very many people have helped me in my
investigations into Boole’s life and work and I should like to express my sincere
thanks to the following in particular:
My colleagues at University College Cork, especially the President, Dr T. O
Ciardha; the Registrar, Professor M. Mortell; the Finance Officer and Secretary,
Mr M.F. Kelleher, and their staffs; Professor P.D. Barry; Professor F. Holland;
Professor M.C. Sexton; Professor Sean Lucy; Professor Patrick O’Regan; the
late Professor M.J. O’Kelly; Professor M.A. MacConaill; Professor H. St J.
Atkins; Dr S.F. Pettit; Dr S. Vernon; Dr N. Ó Murchadha; Dr G. Barden; Dr
Patrick Cronin; Mr F. Dorr; Mr R. Studdert; Mrs Mary Conroy; Mr Tim
O’Leary; Mr Edwin McCarthy; Mr Ambrose Nestor; Mr Tony Perrott; and Mr
Donal Counihan.
To the Librarian, Mr Patrick Quigg, and his staff, I owe a special debt,
especially to Ms Beatrice Doran, Ms Nora Brown, Mr Henry Ryan, Mr Max
McCarthy, Mr Jimmy Murphy and Ms Finola O’Donovan.
Boole’s descendants and other relatives and their agents have been
exceptionally helpful and generous both in giving me access to facts, documents
and other material in their possession and in giving me permission to reproduce
letters, photographs and extracts from Boole’s works. In particular, I should like
to express my sincere gratitude to Miss Gabrielle Boole of London; Mrs M.
Hinton and the late Professor H.E. Hinton, FRS, of Bristol and their family for
their generosity and hospitality; The Rev. Mr R.H.P. Boole of Lincoln; Professor
G.K. Batchelor of the University of Cambridge and Miss Gladys Davies, in
connection with the estate and papers of Sir G.I. Taylor, FRS.
To the following libraries, institutions, public offices and companies, I am
deeply indebted for information, photocopied documents and permission to
reproduce letters and other works: Cork City Library; Cork County Library;

Library of Trinity College, Dublin; Public Record Office of Ireland; Library of
Trinity College, Cambridge; Bodleian Library, Oxford; Archives of Trinity
College, Dublin; Cambridge Philosophical Society; Library of the Royal
Society; Lincolnshire Central Library (Local History Collection); Cork
Examiner; Cork Evening Echo; Lincolnshire Echo; State Papers Office, Dublin
Castle; Cambridge University Library; Archives Department, Victoria Library,
City of Westminster; Registration Office, Cork; RCB Library of the Church of
Ireland, Dublin; Library of University College, London (Boole – De Morgan
Correspondence); St Andrew’s University Library; Library of the Royal Irish
Academy; Library of the Royal Dublin Society; Library of the British Museum;
Library of the University of London; C.W. Daniel and Company, Essex; British
Newspaper Library; Cork University Press; Lincolnshire Archives Council;
Boole Archive, University College Cork; and The Embassy of the USSR,
Dublin.
In addition, I wish to thank the following individuals all of whom have helped
me in various ways: Mr Calvin Jongsma; Professor Theodore Hailperin; Mr
Laurence Elvin; Mr G. Layton; Mrs E. Whittingham; Dr N.T. Gridgeman; Dr
John Dubbey; Miss Denise Waltham; Professor G.L. Huxley; Dr Edwin Owen,
Bishop of Killaloe; Professor J.L. Synge; Canon J.L. Salter; Dr Perdue, Bishop
of Cork; Rev. J.D. and Mrs Hutchinson; Mr and Mrs S.T.S. Harman; Rev. Eric
Akers Perry; Mr Rush Rhees; Professor H.S.M. Coxeter; Mr Frank Corr;
Professor A.J. McConnell; Mr and Mrs G.Y. Goldberg; Dr Donal Caird, former
Bishop of Limerick; Mrs Brigid Dolan; Rev. John Dennis; Mrs Sheila
O’Riordan; Mr W. O’Sullivan; Mr N.H. Robinson and his staff; Mr M.C.
Griffith; Mr M.B. Smith; Mr Seán Bohan and his staff; the late Mr P. Ó Maidín
and his staff, especially Ms Ann Barry; Mr Walter McGrath; Mr C.J.F.
McCarthy; Ms Joy Robinson; Professor T. Hankins; Mrs Elizabeth Melrose; Dr
Charles Mollan; Dr I. Grattan-Guinness; the late Sir Francis Hill; Mr Donald
Crispie; Lt. Col. Sir Benjamin Bromhead and Lady Bromhead; Professor Harry
Goheen; Dr L. Laita; Mr Peter Gryce and Mrs Jane Gryce; Mr and Mrs John
MacHale; Mr Michael McGann; Miss Margaret MacSweeney; Mr T.F.
Shepherd; Dr Diarmuid Ó Mathúna; Captain Seán Feehan; Mr Séamus Ó
Buachalla; Mr and Mrs D. Terry; and Mr Finbarr O’Connell.
I am very grateful to Uninversity College Cork, the Council of the Royal Irish
Academy, and the Irish National Board for Science and Technology, without
whose financial help I could not have written this book.
Finally, a word of praise for my typist, Una Sheehan, to whom I tender my

most sincere thanks.

S
Preface to
new edition
ince the publication of the first edition of this book in 1985, the reputation of
George Boole as an innovator and trail blazer in mathematics, logic and
probability theory has grown steadily. So too have the applications of his work
in computer science, digital technology, electronics, cybernetics, and automated
devices of all kinds. Indeed it is no exaggeration to describe Boole as one of the
founders of the digital age.
George Boole was born in Lincoln on 2 November 1815 and died in Cork on
8 December 1864, so 2014 sees the one-hundred-and-fiftieth anniversary of his
death, and 2015 sees the two-hundredth anniversary of his birth. The period 1
December 2014 to 30 November 2015 has therefore been designated the Year of
George Boole by University College Cork, where he was Professor of
Mathematics for over fifteen years. There will be many events, conferences,
lectures, and commemorations to celebrate these historic anniversaries, leading
to future memorials to honour this great mathematician.
This book is a corrected paperback second edition of George Boole, His Life
and Work, first published by Boole Press in Dublin in 1985. It has been
produced by Optical Character Recognition (OCR) a technology that can be
traced back to Boole’s work. In addition, it will also be published as an e-book –
yet another link with Boolean technology.
The main difference between biographical investigations on George Boole
nowadays and back in the 1980s is of course the Internet and the World Wide
Web, both of which would have delighted George and Mary Boole immensely.
But beware. While the Internet is undoubtedly the greatest informational and
educational resource ever invented by humanity, in the area of Boolean studies
at least I have found it quite prone to error, with many ‘facts’ exaggerated and
some myths promulgated, with the result that they are now virtually impossible
to correct or eradicate. Even to mention such examples here would serve only to
give them further credence, so I will not do so.
The main lessons to be learned from this book are that there in an innate

simplicity and humanity in genius, and that investigations in pure mathematics
are worthwhile, both for their intrinsic value and beauty, and the possibility that
they will lead to something useful and beneficial to society. In their day, the
engines of Charles Babbage and the Algebra of Logic of George Boole attracted
neither industrial attention nor financial support, yet together the innovations of
these two great minds led to the digital technology which controls virtually every
aspect of life in the twenty-first century. And yet, it is still extremely difficult to
find government or other support for basic research in pure mathematics, under
the current philosophy of quick and easy returns for investment. It took almost
one hundred years for the work of George Boole in mathematical logic to see
fruition in Shannon’s work on switching circuits, but once the floodgates
opened, the simplicity and genius behind Boole’s ideas came into their own.
DESMOND MACHALE,
Cork, 2014

T
Foreword to 1985 edition
by J.L. Synge
Emeritus Professor, Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies
he world at large knows very little about what mathematicians are doing or
have done. They use a highly technical language and discuss problems
which seem remote from ordinary life. But it often happens that in the course of
time – it might be in fifty or a hundred years – someone realises that a
mathematician’s ideas can actually be used for practical matters.
This happened in the case of George Boole, who devised a mathematical
language for dealing with questions of logic and so provided what was needed in
the design of modern high-speed computers. That was not the only fruit of his
original mind – other mathematical techniques devised by him have also found
useful applications.
In a sense, this is beside the point. Few mathematicians are interested in
practical applications of their craft: they pursue it for its own sake because they
find it exciting. But until such time as a practical application is found, their work
circulates only in a very restricted academic circle.
This is not a book intended to explain to the reading public the essence of
Boole’s mathematical work. It attempts to reconstruct, with considerable
success, an interesting personality who happened to be a mathematician. The
mathematics are certainly there, but presented in a form which will not deter the
reader from following the life of this remarkable man – and not only the man
himself, but also his remarkable progeny.
An Englishman, a stranger to Cork (which he found strange), a kindly man, a
methodical man, a quarrelsome man when rubbed the wrong way, a victim of his
own excessive sense of duty: a heavy rainstorm soaked him when walking to a
lecture and he died in his prime. Dr MacHale has given us a vivid picture of a
man who was very human but who also happened to be a genius.

A
Foreword to new edition
search for ‘Boolean’ on the internet reveals a long list of terms containing
this rather curious word: Boolean algebra, circuit, data type, expression,
function, model, module, network, processor – even the Boolean satisfiability
problem. A more technical request, say for ‘Boolean’ AND (‘algebra’ OR
‘circuit’), is an example of yet another such term: a Boolean search, which looks
for information that satisfies a combination of conditions.
One common thread that links all these things is logic: the formal properties
of ‘true’ and ‘false’. Another is the source of that strange word. ‘Boolean’ is
derived from a name: the English-born mathematician, logician and philosopher
George Boole, who was appointed Professor of Mathematics at Queen’s College,
Cork, and died at Ballintemple in 1864. If judged by name recognition, Boole
pretty much sank without trace, except among mathematicians and computer
scientists. If judged by results, he was one of the most influential intellectuals of
his era, and one of the great unsung architects of today’s world.
It was Boole, perhaps more than any other, who first came to appreciate the
deep connections between mathematics and logic. Not the use of logic in
mathematical proofs but the use of mathematics to illuminate the workings of
logic. He summed up his ideas about this connection in two books. The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, written in some haste, appeared in 1847; it was
followed in 1854 by The Laws of Thought, developing the subject in greater
generality. Boole had noticed that logical inferences can be represented by
algebraic formulas, in which the symbols 0 and 1 denote ‘false’ and ‘true’
respectively. These obey most of the usual algebraic rules but not all and it is
these exceptions that capture the essence of logic. With suitably amended rules,
Boolean algebra can perform logical deductions using routine algebraic
calculations.
Boole was not entirely alone in pursuing such ideas; others included Gottfried
Leibniz, Johann Lambert and Augustus de Morgan. But Boole formalised and
systematised the underlying concepts and appreciated the vital role of symbolic
reasoning. Others developed a new branch of mathematics, mathematical logic,
from these beginnings. However, for a long time the subject remained esoteric,
accessible only to specialists, opaque even to most mathematicians, more a

branch of philosophy than one of mathematics.
Only with the invention of the digital computer did the real value of Boole’s
ideas emerge. What had seemed little more than abstruse philosophy suddenly
became engineering practice. His take on logic was exactly what electronic
engineers needed to give computers the ability to perform different tasks
according to the truth or falsity of some condition. ‘If cursor on button 1 and
mouse clicked, display e-mail message. If cursor on button 2 and mouse clicked,
open new field for reply to be typed into. If cursor on button 3 and mouse
clicked, display photo.’ His true/false symbols 0 and 1 can be interpreted as ‘no
electrical current flowing’ and ‘some current flowing’. His algebraic operations
and rules translate into electronic circuits that carry out logical tasks. Boole’s
reduction of basic features of logic to mathematics informs both computer
software and hardware design.
Boole worked in other areas of mathematics: differential equations, finite
differences, invariant theory, probability. To them all, he brought the same key
insight: the importance of abstract symbols, manipulated according to formal
rules. He ushered in the age of abstract algebra, in which symbols no longer
represented unknown numbers, but took on a life of their own. In particular, his
discovery of invariants – algebraic formulas that remain the same when the
variables involved are transformed – created an entire new area of mathematics,
now basic to both relativity and quantum mechanics. Boole left it to others to
develop this particular insight but with one simple idea he had invented an entire
new field of mathematics.
His work on logic was even more influential but not immediately. Boole was a
century ahead of his time. When the world was ready, his brainchild changed the
working philosophy of mathematicians, freed algebra from its numerical
shackles, and – most importantly of all – gave electronic engineers and computer
programmers vital thinking tools. As a result, computers ceased to be merely
powerful calculating devices. They became machines that could carry out
instructions to manipulate and represent data of any kind: numbers, messages,
images, audio, video. Every laptop, every tablet, every mp3-player, every
smartphone owes its existence, in part, to Boole’s mathematical legacy; so does
the internet.
This new edition of Desmond MacHale’s marvellous biography will help to
nudge the balance of fame in Boole’s favour. He was a brilliant thinker, the
possessor of a truly original mind. His story is our story: the creation of one of
the great intellectual pillars that support our modern world. It is a remarkable

story of a remarkable man, beautifully told.
IAN STEWART
Coventry, 2014

This book is dedicated
to my wife Anne
and my family
who tolerated me while I was writing it

T
CHAPTER ONE
Early Life
here are two basic approaches to the study of the history of scientific and
mathematical discovery. The first of these is what might be termed the
‘spirit of the age’ theory, which claims that at a given period in the development
of human thought the time was ripe for a particular invention or discovery and
that any of several scientists or mathematicians who lived during that period
could very well have made the breakthrough. In support of this theory, the
discovery of the infinitesimal calculus is often cited. Isaac Newton, working in
England, and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, working in Germany, in the second
half of the seventeenth century, independently and almost simultaneously,
discovered the method of fluxions, as the calculus was originally called. Not
unnaturally, the whole affair is still shrouded in controversy but, although it is
generally accepted that Newton actually had priority in making the discovery,
Leibniz is usually given the credit because he was the first to publish his results.
The spirit of that particular age certainly demanded and encouraged an invention
such as the calculus as a tool for the solution of important problems in celestial
mechanics and physics.
The second fundamental approach is what is often called the ‘Great Man’
theory, which claims that discoveries and inventions are due simply to the genius
of individuals. This theory is undoubtedly the one which corresponds more
closely to the popular conception of the scientist or mathematician. But how are
we to account for ‘genius’? How are we to explain the genetic accidents or
perhaps the predestined plans of nature from which genius springs to enrich and
benefit humankind? Genius is a rare and delicate flower that flourishes in the
most unexpected of places. It is possibly the most inexplicable of all human
attributes and its occurrence follows no perceptible pattern. It transcends the
divisions of age and race, religion and sex, social class and educational
background. Ultimately, perhaps, it is not for us to explain genius but rather to
stand in awe of it.
Fortunately, the two theories can be viewed so as to complement rather than
contradict each other. Surely a truly important scientific or mathematical
discovery is more likely to occur when a man of genius is impelled by the spirit

of the age. The poet Shelley tells us that a somewhat similar situation prevails in
the realms of artistic creation:1
It is impossible that anyone who inhabits the same age with such
writers as those who stand in the foremost ranks of our own can
conscientiously assure himself that his language and tone of thought
may not have been modified by the study of the productions of those
extraordinary intellects. It is true that, not the spirit of their genius, but
the forms in which it has manifested itself are due less to the
peculiarities of their own minds than to the peculiarity of the moral
and intellectual condition of the minds among which they have been
produced. Thus a number of writers possess the form, whilst they want
the spirit of those whom, it is alleged, they imitate; because the former
is the endowment of the age in which they live, and the latter must be
the uncommunicated lightning of their own mind … Poets, not
otherwise than philosophers, painters, sculptors and musicians, are, in
one sense, the creators and, in another, the creations of their age.
Broxholme is a little village in Lincolnshire in the east of England. A guide book
tells us:2
It is a friendly cluster of cottages and barns and hayricks among flat
pastures by the river Till, here flowing southwards to join the Witham
near the city of Lincoln. To the east, the cliff ridge is seen riding
towards the Cathedral towers, a noble and uplifting sight for the
villagers who rise at dawn and plod homeward wearily at dusk.
It was in Broxholme in 1777 that John Boole was born of an old Lincolnshire
farming and trading family. His ancestry can be traced to his great grandfather
Joshua Boole, born in that county in 1670, but of the early history of the family,
details are understandably scant.3 It appears however that they were highly
respected and that they were the ‘best thatchers and the most reading men’ in the
village. The Boole family were not particularly well-off but, on the other hand,
neither were they destitute. For example, there still survives a set of silver
tablespoons dated 1789 and bearing John Boole’s monogram. In all probability
they were a confirmation gift, for by that year he had reached the age of twelve.
As a young man, John Boole decided to become a shoemaker and, in 1791, he
was apprenticed to a man named Johnson at Saxilby near Lincoln.4 He remained
in this position for about seven years and disliked the conditions intensely. His

life was one of drudgery; continual working on cold wet floors led to the chronic
bronchitis from which he suffered in later life and which indeed was to be the
cause of his death. In 1800, at the age of 23, John Boole moved to London to
seek his fortune. Here he made shoes in an underground, and sometimes very
dark, cellar and, in order to distract himself from the unpleasantness of his
surroundings, he sought consolation in learning. In the drawer with his tools he
kept a French dictionary, a strange possession indeed for a struggling
shoemaker. He developed a particular interest in science and mathematics and
especially in the application of mathematical principles to the construction of
telescopes, microscopes and other optical instruments.
In London he met Mary Ann Joyce, a member of an old Berkshire family who
was employed as a lady’s maid by the wife of a minor canon of St Paul’s. After a
short acquaintance, the couple were married, after banns, on 14 September 1806
at the Parish Church of St Martin-in-the-Fields. At the time of their marriage
John Boole was twenty-nine, while Mary Ann was twenty-six. Their
circumstances are well illustrated by the fact that they did not have a
honeymoon. After the marriage ceremony, he returned to his lodgings and she
returned to the house where she worked.
The couple lived apart in London for the first six months of their married life.
Soon however, they decided to make their home in Lincoln and they set up
house there at New Road, as the present Lindum Road was then called. John
Boole opened a boot and shoe shop and practised his cobbler’s trade in premises
at 34 Silver Street, near St Peter-at-Arches Church. The Booles were destined to
wait a long time before they were blessed with a family and at times they must
have despaired of ever having the child they desired so earnestly. In fact, after
ten years of marriage, they had given up all hope of a family. However, to their
great delight on 2 November 1815, their first son was born, at four o’clock in the
afternoon. John Boole was so excited at the birth that he invited a number of
friends into his house to celebrate and drink the baby’s health. In his enthusiasm,
he forced his wife to join the party with the result that she became quite ill. The
child was baptised at St Swithin’s Parish Church by the Reverend Thomas
Francis Beckwith on the following day, possibly an indication that he was not
considered strong at birth. He was christened George after his paternal
grandfather who had died the previous April.
At the time of George’s birth, his mother was thirty-five, a relatively late age
at which to start a family in that era. However, three further children were to
follow in rapid succession – a girl, Mary Ann (1818), and two boys, William

(1819) and Charles (1821) – before the family was complete. Soon after
George’s birth, the Booles had moved house to 49 Silver Street, where they were
to live for the next fifteen years. This was a much bigger house than their
previous one and, in the early days there, they could afford the luxury of letting
rooms until they required more accommodation for their growing family.
Despite John Boole’s new responsibilities, his heart was never in his work.
His love of science, literature and mathematics always took preference over his
business interests and, as a consequence, he remained a poor man to the end of
his days. He sought the company of men of learning and acquired knowledge
from every available source, earning in the process the respect and admiration of
all who came in contact with him. He seems to have been a more than competent
experimental scientist and particularly successful in the application of
mathematical principles to the construction of scientific apparatus. Among his
proudest possessions was a large telescope which he had made himself. When it
was finished, he displayed in his shop window the following notice:
Anyone who wishes to observe the works of God in a spirit of
reverence is invited to come and look through my telescope.
John Boole was by all accounts a thinking man. Some years after his death,

when his wife was being congratulated on having so famous a son, she replied ‘I
dare say George is clever – very clever; but did you know his father? He was a
philosopher.’ But philosophy is of little practical use to a mother engaged in the
task of rearing a young family. To make matters even worse from her point of
view, John Boole devoted much of his time to voluntary work. He audited the
accounts of the Lincoln Savings Bank for some twenty years; he was a founder
member of the Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute and for many years its curator and
librarian. He was also among those prominent in the agitation for early closing
of shops, so that time for leisure and education might be made available to the
assistants. His situation is well summed up in a note written by his daughter-in-
law and pasted inside a box containing a microscope which he had
manufactured: ‘He seems to have been able to do anything well except his own
business of managing the shop.’ In an obvious reference to the failure of his
father’s business, George Boole wrote in later life:5 ‘A studious person may
neglect his business for the sake of books; but if he does this, it is not his books
that are to blame, but his want of principle or of firmness.’
According to his sister Mary Ann, George quickly became a strong and
relatively healthy child.6, 7 He was extremely inquisitive about a great variety of
matters and remarkably precocious in his behaviour. At the tender age of one
and a half, he was sent to a dame’s school run by a Mrs Holmes, merely to keep
him out of mischief and perhaps out of his parents’ way. The next school to
which he was sent was a preparatory school for the children of respectable
tradesmen run by two ladies, the Misses Clarke. Here he remained for one year
and Miss Clarke was to boast in later life that she was George Boole’s first real
teacher. She described him as an amiable child who gave indications of great
talent from an early age. It was during this period that he went missing from
home one day and after an anxious search he was found, still dressed in frocks
and pinafore, surrounded by an astounded gathering of people in down-town
Lincoln, spelling hard words and being rewarded for his trouble with a shower of
coins.
John Boole next placed his son’s education in the care of Mr Gibson, a
personal friend who conducted a small commercial school in Mint Lane,
Lincoln. Here the boy remained until his seventh year when he transferred to a
primary school of the National Society where his master was John Walter
Reeves. Later on, George was for a short time a monitor at this school. An old
fellow-pupil related that he was, at this period, of a shy and retiring disposition,
a character he retained to the end of his life.8 From an early age he was fond of

books and learning, but not exclusively so, because he managed to find time for
sports as well. ‘He was not of my class’, continues his companion, ‘or indeed of
any class; for we had no boy in the school equal to him and perhaps the master
was not, though he professed to teach him. This George Boole was a sort of
prodigy among us and we looked upon him as a star of the first magnitude.’
It is difficult to overemphasise the importance of the informal education John
Boole personally gave to his eldest son. George first studied English under his
father’s guidance and developed an interest in its literature and the structure of
language. Even at this early stage it was noticed that he loved ‘abstract studies’.
Next, with his father, he progressed to elementary mathematics and a cousin of
the family is recorded as saying that, at the age of seven, George was so intent
on receiving mathematical instruction from his father that at times he became
almost completely oblivious to his surroundings and the presence of others. He
made rapid progress in all his studies and his proud father pencilled in the sixth
book of Leslie’s Geometry ‘George Boole finished this book 1 Nov. 1826’ the
day before his eleventh birthday.
Even as a young boy, George experienced the joy of practical scientific
creation through his father’s passion for optics and astronomy. Together they
built cameras, kaleidoscopes, microscopes, telescopes and a sundial. There is a
story that they even attempted to construct a primitive calculating machine.
Although George was later to become one of the greatest pure mathematicians of
the age, he never lost sight of the fact that much of mathematics had its origins
in the search for solutions to practical scientific problems, with the result that for
the rest of his life he retained a lively interest in such applications of
mathematics. Nevertheless, the fact that he was exposed from a very early age to
the mysteries and techniques of elementary pure mathematics must also have
had a profound effect on his mental development.
As a boy, he was a voracious reader and eagerly consumed books on history,
biography, travel and science, but he also found time for poetry and fictional
novels. He was often to be found perched on a favourite tree, reading Scott’s
Romances or dreamily composing poetry. He was blessed with an almost
photographic memory which he himself later described in the following words:
This does not result so much from strength of memory as from the
power of arrangement which provides its proper place in the mind for
every fact and idea and thus enables me to find at once what I want
just as you would know in a well-ordered set of drawers where to lay

your hand in a moment upon any article you required.
One could ask for no better intuitive description of information storage and
retrieval! His sister relates that he delivered an oration in Latin at the funeral of a
pet rabbit and that although he indulged in games with other children, he
preferred less boisterous activities such as fishing, possibly because of his weak
eyesight. Once while he was fishing in a canal in the late evening, his defective
sight caused him to miss his step and fall into the water. Fortunately, he was
rescued but the incident chastened him and he never forgot this early brush with
death. Dr Snow, the family physician, had him cover his right eye for a period to
correct the fault, but without success. All agreed that it was his excessive reading
that was the cause of the trouble. On one occasion while his mother was away
from home, he shut himself away in the library of the Reverend Richard
Andrew, one of his early teachers of Latin and Greek, and had ‘an overdose of
reading’ which caused him to become ‘quite booksick’.
If John Boole had an important influence on his son’s educational
development, his mother Mary Ann had an equally important influence on his
personal development. Though lacking in formal education, she had a lively
mind and a vivacious spirit, and transmitted to her eldest son many of her gentle
qualities – a sweet temper, a love of truth, goodness and beauty, and a warm and
generous personality. She did not believe in personal rancour or violent
chastisement, but felt that character could best be formed through music and
family activities. She differed greatly in temperament from her husband but
complemented him in many ways. The result was that although the financial
position of the family was often difficult, George Boole grew up in the secure
atmosphere that surrounds an intensely happy marriage.
It was in the field of classics, however, that the young Boole’s genius first
revealed itself. John Boole’s great interest in science and mathematics had not
blinded him to the beauties of literature and the classics and to these he also
introduced his son. To his great surprise, George showed a decided preference
for literature and the classical languages. He eagerly devoured every Latin text
that came within his grasp and showed a particular talent for translation. At the
astonishingly early age of ten, he had surpassed his father to such an extent that
John Boole decided to enlist the services of a tutor to extend his son’s
knowledge of Latin. The tutor was William Brooke, a bookseller and printer who
conducted his business at 290 High Street, Lincoln. He was a man of culture and
learning who was to become a lifelong friend of Boole’s and, besides teaching
the young George Latin, he lent him books from his extensive and scholarly

library and encouraged him in every possible way.
To the study of Latin, George soon added Greek which he mastered without
the aid of a tutor. John Boole was so proud of his son’s accomplishments that he
induced a visitor to Lincoln from Cambridge University, a man well versed in
the classics, to examine the young student. As might have been expected,
George was found to have ‘a very considerable grammatical and lexicographical
acquaintance with the ancient languages’.9,10 However, in the opinion of the
visitor, he was relatively unaware of the existence and importance of prosody,
the science of versification. This incident was George Boole’s first real contact
with anybody from the formal world of higher learning and he clearly paid
attention to the advice which his visitor had given him. He decided to restudy in
a systematic way the entire classical course he had covered. This task occupied
two years, but he considered it time well spent.
At the age of fourteen, George became the centre of a small literary
controversy in his home town. John Boole, justifiably proud of his son’s prowess
as a translator of the classics, submitted to a local newspaper his son’s verse
translation of Ode to the Spring, a poem attributed to the Greek poet and
epigram-writer Meleager, with the information that it was the unaided work of a
boy of fourteen. On 21 May 1830, the Editor of the Lincoln Herald
acknowledged in his newspaper’s correspondence column receipt of the poem
and promised that he would publish it at the first opportunity. He remarked that
the poem did not read much like a ‘juvenile production’, except in the case of an
amusing slip of the pen which described the Goddess of Spring as being
‘Enrob’d in flour-empurpled green’. Then, on 28 May, the Lincoln Herald
carried the following lines, signed ‘G.B.’:11
Winter with all its storms is past,
No more the cold and bitter blast
Obscures our tranquil sky;
And smiling Spring with look serene,
Enrobed in flow’r-empurpled green,
Again salutes the eye.
She clothes with verdant herbs the earth,
Gives to the tender leaves their birth,
And decks the budding trees;
The laughing meadows drink the dew,
The fragrant rose with blooming hue,
Fresh opens to the breeze.

The happy shepherd tunes his reed,
His fleecy care around him feed,
Upon the mountain’s side;
The Goatherd like a parent dear
Delights his tender kids to rear;
(His kids, are all his pride.)
Borne on the wave the sailors now,
Their trackless course through ocean plough
Nor fear the tempest’s low’r.
The Zephyrs fill their swelling sails,
And wafted by propitious gales,
They gain the destined shore.
And now around the leafy shrine,
Sacred to joy and sparkling wine,
The Bacchanalians wait;
The ivy round their temples spread,
(The cluster’d honours of the head.)
Their God they celebrate.
By instinct led,
the Bees prepare,
With liquid wax their ceaseless care,
And form the celly comb;
Some cull the sweetness of the flowers,
While others give their busy hours
To decorate their home.
From every bush,
from every tree,
In the full tide of harmony,
Symphonious music floats;
The swallow from the jutting beam,
And the king-fisher from the stream,
Send forth their welcome notes.
By the slow-winding river’s side,
Responsive to the silver tide,
The swan’s low murmurs sound;
The nightingale in every grove Pours the wild melody of love,
Re-echo’d all around.
If, then, all nature smile around,
If living verdure deck the ground

And clothe the fertile mead;
If the blithe shepherd on the rock,
While round him frisk his mountain flock,
Attune his simple reed;
If Bacchus lead his sportive train,
And if across the tranquil main
The sailor bend his way;
If the bee plume its active wing,
And birds their swelling anthems sing,
Shall not the Poet hail the Spring,
With an enraptur’d lay?
The Editor, Mr Amphlett, added the following rather cryptic comment: ‘In our
former notice of the above lines, and the connected course of the thought, we
had not observed that they were a translation: and regarded the passage named
as an oversight – not as the result of ignorance. The English versification is
highly creditable to the youthful writer, who is only fourteen years of age.’
But there were those who found it impossible to believe that a fourteen-year-
old could, unaided, have produced such a translation and they lost no time in
saying so. A few days later, the Lincoln Herald carried the following indignant
letter to the Editor from one ‘P.W.B.’ of Bracebridge:
Does the Editor of the Lincoln Herald take upon himself to declare
that the fourteen-year-old ‘G.B.’ was really and properly the author –
the ipso facto translator of the lines from Meleager? It is indeed only
bare justice that when a person asserts another to be a plagiarist, he
should be able to prove the truth of his assertion, by producing such
documents as will at once decide the question – but this unfortunately
is not at all times feasible. Memory bears the writer of this note out in
saying that he believes he has met with the lines somewhere before –
and this is confirmed by a friend of his. He also has a shrewd
conjecture the lines in question saw the public light ere they were
inserted in the Herald. It ought to be recollected that what Meleager
wrote is never, or indeed scarcely ever, read but by those bookworms
of maturer years. Nowhere, perhaps, are the compositions of Meleager
to be met with in a compact form – they exist merely as fugitive pieces
I believe, in the Anthologia. Some periodical or other is the suspected
source whence the lines have been smuggled. Where has this ‘youth of
talents rare’ been crammed with Meleager? Is he independent of

school? Or is he a fellow of some jesuitical college where every
classical exotic that can absorb the prying vision of the spectacled
nose is to be found?
Mr Amphlett hastily added: ‘We have not asserted the translation to be original;
we give it only as it is handed to us, viz. as the assumed ‘Translation of G.B. of
Lincoln, aged 14 years’ – and by the insertion of this letter, the question will
remain open to enquiry and challenges contradiction. We have received some
other correspondence on the subject, some doubting the originality of the
translation and others affirming it to be the genuine production of the youth. We
believe the original Greek, instead of being scarce, is found in a very common,
though a very excellent, school book.’
But George Boole was too spirited a youngster to take these accusations of
plagiarism lying down. On 12 June, he replied to P.W.B. with a letter to the
Editor which almost certainly was not an unaided composition.
Sir, When I submitted to your notice the lines from Meleager, which
appeared in the Lincoln Herald of May 28th, I little expected they
would be honoured with that kind of notice which P.W.B. has
bestowed on them. Had his remarks been directed against the
performance itself, instead of the author, they would have remained
unnoticed by me – but as he has thought fit to proclaim me a plagiarist,
notwithstanding his own acknowledgment of the injustice of so doing
without some proof, I am called upon in justice to myself to repel the
charge; I repeat, the lines in question are altogether my own and I call
upon P.W.B. to produce his evidence to the contrary. P.W.B.
sneeringly asks ‘where has this “youth of talents rare” been crammed
with Meleager? Is he independent of school?’ etc. In answer, I am
indebted for the original of the above mentioned lines to the kindness
of a young friend and former schoolfellow, who about two months ago
lent me the second volume of Collectanea Gracea Majora. In it I
found Meleager’s Ode to the Spring from which I made the translation
(such as it is) which appeared in the Lincoln Herald. To the question
‘is he independent of school?’ I answer, as far as regards this subject I
am independent of school, the lines were written solely for my own
amusement and were never seen by anyone connected with ‘school’
till they appeared in your paper – they were never seen but by one
person, and he totally unacquainted with the original language; and it
was by his persuasion I reluctantly consented to offer them to you for

publication – that there are translations of the same piece, there can be
little doubt, although I have never seen one.
Though P.W.B. does not profess to be himself the owner of the
supposed stolen property, I would recommend him and his shrewd
friend to be earnest and unremitting in their search for the rightful
owner: ‘the prying vision of the spectacled nose’, an organ of vision so
well adapted for researches of that kind, will doubtless render them
valuable assistance. G.B.
P.W.B. seems to have been a classical pedant of a particularly tedious variety.
Rather than let the whole unimportant affair die a natural death, he launched
forth into a protracted series of lengthy letters to the Editor. We quote a few
extracts from his pompous letter of 22 June:
Sir, Wantonly to assail those qualities or acquirements in anyone,
which ought only to ensure our respect and esteem, is evidently to give
indubitable proof of an envious and malicious disposition; but by no
such influence as this was I induced to doubt the originality of G.B.’s
translation. I believed the lines had previously appeared in some
publication or other, and solely from that belief which I still retain – it
was that I was prompted to address my first communication to you …
… I have frequently heard the superior acquirement of boys, just in
their teens, much talked of and scarcely ever met with an instance
where it did not prove, upon a little investigation, to be indeed vox et
praeterea nihil; so that I almost join in the exclamation, odipuerulos
praecoci sapientia. G.B. however may be an exception –
He may indeed translate ‘Greek As naturally as pigs do squeak’
but I doubt it, although I cannot doubt the ‘organ’ of his senses – I
mean his headquarters generally – were rather out of tune when he
wrote the latter part of his letter, for hitherto I had always considered a
pair of spectacles a medium of vision, but should G.B. mean the ‘nose’
as his ‘organ’, most probably he was sweetly snoring while his ‘gray
goose quill’ was asserting his claim to a niche in the temple of his
parent god Apollo …
He challenges ‘G.B.’ to translate into English about a dozen named passages of
Greek and Latin verse and concludes his letter thus:
… As I do not intend to trouble you on this subject again, yes, Sir, if

G.B. will himself give us as creditable translation of any two or more
of the pieces I have ventured to select for him, as the lines which
appeared in your paper of the 28th of May, then he shall be a Magnus
Apollo to Your humble servant, P.W.B.
At this stage our young poet, closely advised no doubt by his father and William
Brooke, optimistically decided that a quick counter-attack might possibly turn
the tables on his longwinded opponent. So on 26 June, he sent yet another letter
to the Editor:
Sir, To the illiberal and unmanly attacks of P.W.B. I shall offer no
reply, those who read them will know how to appreciate them; but he
insinuates that I offensively obtruded myself on the notice of the
public; with what justice I appeal to you. When I sent the lines about
which he has displayed so much learning and so much bad taste and
worse feeling, they were accompanied with a request that you would
give them a place in your paper, if you thought they had sufficient
merit as a juvenile production to appear there. In your ‘notices’ of the
following week, you announced your intention to insert them,
observing that, with one exception, they did not read like a juvenile
production. I took the opportunity, afforded by the delay, to alter and
correct some lines which I sent in a note, in which I observed that
though but 14 years of age, I was not childish enough to suppose my
attempt at versification would be considered anything but a juvenile
production, and that I was satisfied if it held a respectable rank in the
class to which it belongs. These observations were marked ‘private’
and never intended to be seen but by you. When the verses appeared,
you took occasion to compliment them by observing that the English
versification was highly creditable to the youthful writer, who was
only 14 years of age; I appeal to you for the truth of the above
statement, and to your readers whether it was I who offensively
obtruded myself on the notice of the public, or P.W.B. who
offensively and insultingly dragged me there. As I am not the pupil of
P.W.B., nor desirous of being to him ‘the Great Apollo’ or anything
else, I shall decline the tasks he has so kindly pointed out for me – and
recommend him to give them as lessons to those whom he commands.
As to the reiterated charges of plagiarism, allow me to say it comes
with an ill grace from P.W.B. who has actually pilfered the finest and
most prominent idea his papers contain, namely, ‘the prying vision of

the spectacled nose’. Who does not know that this great idea originated
with one William Cowper? If there are any readers who do not know
this, I refer them to the works of that author where they will find,
under the title of Report of an adjudged case, the source from which
P.W.B. has been pilfering. In a contest between ‘eyes and nose’ as to
which the spectacles belonged, it is agreed that: ‘Being made with a
straddle, the spectacles were plainly made for the nose, and the nose
was as plainly intended for them. Hence it was decreed in council –
that whenever the nose put his spectacles on, by day-light or candle-
light, eyes should be shut’, thereby most unequivocally deciding that
the ‘spectacled nose’ is the organ of vision.
Yes, P.W.B. has most unblushingly cribb’d this brilliant thought,
and yet has the impudence to persevere in his charge of plagiarism
against me, which he acknowledges he cannot prove! The duly
plausible excuse P.W.B. can make is that he was merely qualifying
himself according to the ancient Proverb: ‘Set a thief to catch a thief’ –
yet even thus qualified, he has not caught his game! But it is time to
have done with this subject, and I am sure your patient readers will be
glad to hear that P.W.B. does not intend to administer to them another
dose of his pompous and learned lumber. G.B.
P.S. Will P.W.B. allow me to suggest a more poetical version of this
idea? ‘The prying vision of the smelling eye!’
Mr Amphlett should by now have had the good sense to declare the
correspondence closed, but perhaps a continuation of the controversy was an
easy and mildly interesting method of filling his columns. On 13 July, P.W.B.
bounced back with a letter in reply to Boole’s counter-attack, in which he
ironically criticises Boole’s logic. Mercifully, we shall not quote any part of this
letter, but suffice it to say that P.W.B. effectively refutes Boole’s counter-attack,
albeit in a longwinded way.
But we are not yet done. On 26 July, ‘a friend to G.B.’ (possibly William
Brooke) sent to the Editor a letter which brought the storm in a teacup to a
conclusion. A portion of the letter hints at the real reason behind P.W.B.’s
attack.
Sir, A boy is publicly and unjustly accused of attempting to pass for
his own a translation from the Greek which is the work of another, and
the accusation is accompanied with sneering and illiberal taunts, and a

confession that the author of the charge is unable to prove it. The boy
reasserts his claim, complains of the unfairness of the attack and
requires the author of it to make good his assertions. The reply to this
just and reasonable remonstrance, is, a repetition of the charge, a
second admission that the author is unable to prove it, and a
contemptuous scurrility; indignant at the false charges thus repeated
and at the unmanly conduct of his adversary, finding expostulation and
remonstrance in vain, the boy very justly and pointedly retaliates on
his opponent, by exposing and ridiculing his learned blunders. Stung to
the quick by the impertinent retaliation, P.W.B. assails his youthful
opponent with a torrent of malignant abuse, such as has seldom
‘disgraced the Lincoln Herald, or any other paper’. This anonymous
slanderer as though ashamed of the task he had imposed on himself,
skulking behind the signature of P.W.B., pointed the reader to a
worthy and respectable gentleman of ‘Bracebridge’ as the author of the
calumnies – this flimsy disguise and paltry artifice has not however
concealed the PEDAGOGUE – who has been as industrious in
privately propagating these false and groundless calumnies as he has
been active in publicly maligning the talent; and acquirements of one
of whom he knows nothing, and to whom he never spoke! And why
this uncalled for hostility? I leave the reader to divine the cause, and
only remark that G.B. is not of his school. Yes, sir, this learned
pedagogue has exerted himself to the utmost to repress the ardour and
crush the rising ambition of a youth ardent in the pursuit of
knowledge, by the most odious and disgusting epithets and
comparisons – and has actually proposed, attended by second and
bottle-holder – to meet a boy of 14 unattended, in single combat, and
‘prove upon his body if he dare’ that he does not and ought not to
know anything; and that it is impertinent and presumptuous to dispute
the right of P.W.B. to insult and abuse him!!! Need I ask after this to
whom the ‘motley’ belongs? or whose ‘upper story’ the ‘Cap and
Bells’ must adorn? Ridiculous and silly as is this challenge, it has been
made – and were it accepted, P.W.B. dare no more shew himself
unmasked than he dare touch the tongue of a viper!
The Editor at this stage justifiably adds: ‘With the above letter we must close the
subject, the nature of which did not justify any departure from the usual courtesy
between scholars and gentlemen.’ However, the Editor was clearly on the young
Boole’s side throughout the controversy, for shortly afterwards he published two

further verse translations by G.B.
LINES TO A DEPARTED FRIEND
(from the Greek)
Thy soul, superior to the stings
That arm death’s icy hand,
Hath spread its swift, unwearied wings
To reach a lovelier land;
And thou hast gained, from all thy toils
An everlasting rest,
In those for ever festive isles,
The regions of the blest.
Unknown to thee the winter’s cold,
The summer’s scorching heat,
Elysian flowers their tents unfold
Beneath thy bounding feet:
The brightness of Olympian day
Around thy head is thrown:
Thou art where sickness, and decay,
And want, are never known!
The sorrows that on mortals wait,
To thee no sting impart,
Earth has no joys to captivate
Thy undesiring heart;
Thou art beneath a happier clime,
A sky more brightly fair,
Beyond the narrow bounds of time
To shine unfading there!
TO THE EVENING STAR
(from the Greek of Bion)
Hail! brightest wanderer of the west,
Light of the golden realms of love;
Hail! glory of the starry vest
That evening spreads above;
Night’s sacred queen alone can boast,
The splendour of thy silver ray;

Though fairest of the heavenly host Star of departing day!
Thy softest,
sweetest influence shed,
On the lone stillness of the night,
And cast around a shepherd’s head,
The magic of thy light;
No thirst of gold thy heart impels Or prompts thy wandering feet to
roam;
I seek the bower where beauty dwells,
Of love the peaceful home.
Assuming that the translation of Meleager’s Ode to the Spring is the unaided
work of a largely self-educated fourteen-year-old, and there is no reason to
assume otherwise, it is of interest to hear the opinions of a number of classical
scholars on the merits of Boole’s translation. Professor Donald Robertson, late
Professor of Greek at Cambridge, was of the opinion that it was a good
translation in the style of Sir William Jones’ translations from the Persian poets
in the late eighteenth century.12 Professor George Huxley, Professor of Greek at
Queen’s University, Belfast, feels that the translation catches the spirit of the
original, but that the language is in places rather far from the Greek. In addition,
he feels that Boole fails to take up several allusions which are central to the
Greek version.13 Dr Patrick Cronin of the Department of Ancient Classics,
University College, Cork, has made a detailed study of the translation and we are
indebted to him for the following comments:
Boole’s version is a free adaptation of the original, not a translation in
the traditional sense of that word. Though Boole does describe his
attempt as a ‘translation’, we note his qualification ‘such as it is’. I
would suggest that his main objective was to produce an English
poem: how far he succeeded in this is a matter of opinion. To recapture
in English the dactylic rhythms of the Greek hexameter is an
enormously difficult task. With young Boole’s iambics, we are in a
totally different rhythmical world: the loss, though unavoidable, is
devastating. The concision of Meleager’s Greek has vanished, due
partly to the restraint imposed by rhyme and partly, perhaps, to a
contemporary tendency to verbosity. Stanzas 15 and 16, being rough
equivalents for line 18 of the original, are a good example of excessive
expansion, if translation is one’s objective. The preservation of the
metaphors in ‘smiling Spring’ and ‘laughing meadows’ is admirable;

on the other hand, ‘If the bee plume its active wing’ falls far short of
the forceful imagery of line 22 of the original. Lines 5 and 6 of the
original may be literally translated as follows: ‘The meadows, drinking
the soft dews of plant-nourishing Dawn, are laughing’; for Boole this
becomes ‘The laughing meadows drink the dew’. The visual impact of
the original, which seems to me essential, is thus lost. Again, no
attempt is made to translate the sense of line 13. This refers to the
ancient belief that bees can be generated from the dead carcase of an
animal, a belief with which Boole would have come in contact had he
read Virgil’s Georgic IV, or Ovid’s Fasti I in his Latin class. One
suspects that the words baffled him completely: they would certainly
have had rich associations for a Greek reader and I do not think a
translation or adaptation can omit them without loss.
In a matter about which it is impossible to be dogmatic, for
adaption, by definition, allows the adaptor great freedom, I am
inclined to think that Ode to the Spring is the genuine work of a gifted
fourteen-year-old. The points of contact with the original are so few,
however, that I hesitate to say that he had a good knowledge of Greek.
I suspect that our poem could well be the rare offspring of a triple
union: imagination, mastery of English versification and a Greek
dictionary.
Whatever the merits of Boole’s translations of the classics, there is no doubt that
the whole affair earned for him the reputation of a boy prodigy and drew the
attention of the people of Lincoln to the fact that they had a young genius living
in their midst. The incident was to be the first of the many controversies in
Boole’s life, for although he often claimed that he intensely disliked disputes and
dissensions, nevertheless, the strength of his principles and the depth of his
feelings caused him time and time again to become involved in controversies of
various kinds.
George Boole quickly absorbed the limited amount of information that a
primary school had to offer a young boy who was eager for knowledge. The next
step should have been a formal secondary education in science, literature,
mathematics and the classics where his undoubted talents would be allowed to
blossom. But there was no conceivable way in which a struggling shoemaker
with a wife and three younger children to support could provide such an
education for his son. How George must have envied the sons of the rich who
went to grammar school, or even public school, as a matter of course and who
frequently little appreciated or used their educational opportunities. The best

secondary education that John Boole could provide for his son was a period at
Mr Thomas Bainbridge’s Commercial Academy situated in Michaelgate, or Fish
Hill as it was then known. He commenced his studies at this school on 10
September 1828, and Bainbridge was most impressed by the accomplishments of
his young pupil. He studied Valphy’s Greek Gradual and the poet Virgil and,
although the vulgar and decimal fractions on the curriculum would have been
quite familiar to him, he made further progress in mathematics by covering a
vast amount of ground in the theory of algebraic equations. He assisted
Bainbridge by taking classes and correcting exercises, but he never allowed the
drudgery and narrow confines of a commercial school to divert him from his
avowed ambition of becoming a truly educated man. He read the best English
authors and in his spare time taught himself French, German and later, Italian.
His proficiency in these languages was afterwards to have an important
influence on the development of his mathematical ideas for, unlike the majority
of his British mathematical contemporaries, he kept closely in touch with
scientific developments on the Continent.
All the available evidence points to the fact that John Boole and his wife were
a God-fearing couple who brought up their family in a spirit of love and
reverence for God’s creations. George became interested in religion at an early
age and remained acutely conscious of the spiritual side of human nature for the
rest of his life. In such a situation, it is natural to expect that a young boy would
consider devoting his entire life to the service of God and one of the reasons
which prompted George to commence the study of Latin and Greek was his
desire to become a clergyman.
Here we must digress a little to discuss what, perhaps unfortunately, has
become the most widely known account of Boole’s life – a chapter entitled
‘Complete Independence’ in E.T. Bell’s Men of Mathematics, first published in
1937.14 Bell was an extremely readable but highly imaginative writer who was
somewhat given to cynicism and who, it must be admitted, padded out the scanty
facts that he had uncovered concerning Boole’s early life with a number of wild
assertions. Bell’s commitment to socialism need not be questioned, but his
allocation of the Boole family to membership of the enslaved working classes is
not in keeping with the facts. In speaking of Boole’s decision to study classics,
Bell claims:
Making a pathetically mistaken diagnosis of the abilities which
enabled the propertied class to govern those beneath them in the scale
of wealth, Boole decided that he must learn Latin and Greek if he was

ever to get his feet out of the mire.
Surely only a cynic would thus explain away the urge of a young boy to explore
the classical heritage of Western civilisation.
Again, Bell claims that Boole’s ambition to become a clergyman was
motivated by a desire to acquire a profession at any cost. If this was the case, it
seems strange that Boole should have chosen the profession of a clergyman
which was hardly a lucrative one in nineteenth-century England. There is not a
shred of evidence to support Bell’s claim that Boole ‘cast an appraising eye over
the gentlemanly professions’, such as the Army, the Bar and the Church, and for
financial and educational reasons chose the profession of clergyman as the most
practical way of improving his position in life. We shall have further occasion to
dispute the validity of Bell’s account when we come to discuss Boole’s later life.
Boole’s early non-mathematical writings bear testimony to his deep religious
convictions and there is little doubt that these alone motivated his desire to
become a clergyman. Two factors however, one doctrinal and the other practical,
put paid to his ambitions to enter the Ministry. Although he grew up as a
member of the Church of England, Boole read a wide range of Christian
theology and gradually came to doubt many of the usual Christian doctrines, in
particular the doctrine of the Trinity, and he came to realise that his religious
position was closer to that of the Unitarians rather than any other Christian sect.
In the development of his religious thought, he was guided by ‘a learned Jew of
Lincoln’ and he consequently seems to have had a particular fascination for the
Hebrew concept of God as a unity; it is perhaps significant that in his later
mathematical work he chose the symbol 1 to represent the universe of discourse.
He had a novel explanation for the trinitarian interpretation of God which might
be worthy of more serious investigation by both psychologists and theologians –
he claimed that it was closely connected with the fact that man conceives the
physical world in three dimensions.
The upshot of his religious doubts was that he felt he could not in conscience
sign the 39 Articles of the Church of England and this decision made it of course
impossible for him to become a clergyman of that church. But the second reason,
namely the collapse of his father’s business, was of more immediate urgency. At
the age of 16, George Boole inherited the responsibility of providing for his
parents, brothers and sister. He quickly abandoned all thoughts of becoming a
clergyman and sought employment as a teacher, possibly the only career that
was open to him. He applied for, and obtained, a post as usher, as assistant
teachers were then called, in Mr Heigham’s School at South Parade, Doncaster,

some forty miles from Lincoln.15 The school is described as being ‘a very
respectable Wesleyan establishment’ and when Boole arrived there in July 1831,
it had 36 boarders in addition to its day pupils.
During his period of residence in Doncaster, Boole seems to have been much
respected for his attainments and for the conscientious discharge of his teaching
duties. But, not for the last time in his career, his religious beliefs caused him
problems. It became known that he was a Unitarian, read mathematics on
Sunday and even did mathematical problems in chapel. Some of the pupils’
parents were extremely strict Methodists who considered Boole’s conduct little
short of sacrilegious. They complained to Heigham about his assistant’s
behaviour and their sons prayed for Boole’s ‘conversion’ at their prayer
meetings. Heigham was forced to tell Boole that, for the sake of peace and the
smooth running of his school, it would be more desirable for his assistant to be a
Wesleyan; so in 1833, Boole’s first teaching appointment came to an abrupt end.
A short account of Boole’s merits as a teacher of Latin and mathematics about
this time has been given by a man named Dyson, who also taught at Heigham’s
school. It seems that Boole made every effort to stimulate the boys’ interest in
science and caused quite a stir by bringing to the school a camera obscura which
he and his father had constructed. However, in the day-to-day running of his
classes, Boole was not altogether successful. In Dyson’s words:
Another cause of his leaving at the end of two years was that he was so
completely engulfed in his own studies and so ‘absent’ that the lads
cheated him out of their lessons. He was a most excellent teacher when
he had a pupil who could appreciate him and he had one or two such at
that time. But with the vast majority of boys, who have no application
and require drilling again and again in the same subject, he was the
worst teacher I ever met with.
Instead of explaining, he lost his temper and set the pupil off in a
pet, the lad too glad to escape the lesson altogether. They showed him
each other’s work, the same work several times over, and on their
word that it was all right he gladly passed it to be again absorbed in his
own book. This was always his failing – his brother William could not
learn from him, he was so impatient if the pupil could not see the
reason why as soon as he did. This was the second cause of his
leaving. He was as highly respected in every other respect as it was
possible to anyone.

It was about this time, in 1831 to be precise, that George Boole turned seriously
to the study of mathematics. From his father he had learned the rudiments,
including geometry and trigonometry, but John Boole’s interest in mathematics
was largely the means to an end. He was more interested in what was then called
natural philosophy (nowadays termed applied mathematics) and its uses in the
study of physics, optics and astronomy. In later life, George Boole was to give
an extraordinary reason for becoming interested in higher mathematics. The
large and scholarly circulating library, the property of his friend William
Brooke, had just been dispersed and since he had been largely dependent on this
library for his textbooks, George was now forced to buy his own reading
material. He found that mathematics textbooks, because they took longer to read,
offered the best value for the limited amount of money at his disposal. As one
commentator on Boole’s life has not too seriously remarked: ‘One wonders how
many potential mathematical geniuses have been lost because of the decreased
price of textbooks!’
One of the first mathematical textbooks to which the sixteen-year-old Boole
turned was the Differential and Integral Calculus of Lacroix, in the original
French edition. The copy had been lent to him by the Reverend George Stephens
Dickson, the incumbent of St Swithins, Lincoln, who was to remain a lifelong
friend of Boole’s. Dickson had studied mathematics at Oxford and was
proficient and enthusiastic enough to understand and encourage Boole’s early
insights into the subject. Dyson, Boole’s fellow-teacher at Doncaster, relates
how Lacroix, ‘a bulky tome, in a paper cover like all French books’, soon
became one of the few things that made George’s life in Doncaster worth living:
Mr Boole, for obvious and satisfactory reasons, was, by agreement,
released from the duty of teaching writing, and that hour was sacred to
him. At a quarter to 11 o’clock the bell rings, prepare for writing, clear
the way of all old Latin books, slates and other lumber and silence for
writing time. Mr Boole is profoundly happy; for an hour at least he can
study old Lacroix without interruption.
Afterwards, Boole regretted that he had begun with Lacroix and advised others
to use the books of the new Cambridge school instead. He lamented the fact that
imperfect methods of study and the wrong choice of text had cost him two years
of progress in mathematics. However, the time was not altogether wasted. A
self-taught mathematician has certain advantages over somebody who has the
benefit of a conventional university course. From the beginning, Boole was
forced to read and re-read every mathematical argument he encountered until he

understood it perfectly. A student who is accustomed to puzzling out the tiniest
details of the works of the great mathematicians is more likely to be successful
in research than someone who has had the assistance of a lecturer and tutor.
From an early stage in his career therefore, he developed to a extraordinary
degree the power of self-reliance.
It was during his stay at Doncaster, early in 1833, that Boole first
contemplated the ideas which were to grow into his major contribution to
mathematics – the expression of logical relations in symbolic or algebraic form.
He relates that the thought flashed upon him suddenly one afternoon as he was
walking across a field, but he laid it aside for many years, being interested in
other pursuits. The thought however smouldered in his subconscious and became
an integral part of his main ambition in life – to explain the logic of human
thought and to delve analytically into the spiritual aspects of man’s nature. It was
not until 1847 however that Boole – provoked and inspired by a controversy
between the great logicians Sir William Hamilton and Augustus de Morgan –
had sorted out his ideas and sufficiently developed his theory of symbolic logic
to publish his views. The circumstances of his first thoughts on the possible
connections between algebra and logic suggest that he had a vivid experience,
somewhat like that of Saul on the road to Damascus or Descartes in the
celebrated incident of the stove at Ulm. Boole referred to the incident many
times in later life and seems to have regarded himself as cast in an almost
messianic role.
Boole was intensely lonely in Doncaster which, although only forty miles or
so distant from Lincoln, was quite far away by nineteenth-century
communications. He wrote home frequently and complained that nobody in
Doncaster made gooseberry pies like his mother. When he lost his first teaching
position, he cast his eye back to Lincoln in the hope of finding a post there, but
to no avail. The best he could manage was a teaching job in the city of
Liverpool, three times further away from home than Doncaster. However, he had
the consolation that this was a superior position to the one he had lost. Early in
1833, he began to teach at a school conducted by Mr Marrat at 4 Whitemill
Street, Liverpool. Marrat had written a book on mechanics which Boole had
studied and presumably he hoped to be able to continue his mathematical studies
in a somewhat more enlightened atmosphere.
On the teaching front, Boole was happy and successful in Liverpool. Marrat
was a stimulating scientific companion and life was convivial, but in spite of all
this, Boole remained there for only six months. The reason was that he lived on

the premises and was upset by Marrat’s disorganised household and chaotic
domestic arrangements. However, there was worse to come, in the telling words
of his sister Mary Ann:
A brief familiarity with the spectacle of gross appetites and passions
unrestrainedly indulged and domestic duties ill-discharged or entirely
neglected had a deteriorating effect on his pure and refined nature and
he was compelled to leave the position.
In the second half of 1833, Boole returned to Lincolnshire where he obtained
employment as a teacher at Mr Robert Hall’s Academy in the village of
Waddington, some four miles from the city of Lincoln. Mr Hall, the headmaster
and proprietor of the school, was highly popular with the substantial farmers of
the Waddington area and seems to have attached great value to the services of
his young assistant. The school had both day and boarding pupils, and Boole was
assigned to take complete charge of some of its departments. At Waddington, he
experienced none of the difficulties that troubled him at Doncaster and
Liverpool, and in fact he appears to have been appreciated and extremely well-
liked there. The following acrostic, written by Mrs Austin Turner, sister of
Hall’s wife, and presented to Boole in 1846, gives some indication of the esteem
in which he was held at Waddington:
Great man, thy fame will live when thou art gone,
Ennobling thee far more than sculptur’d stone.
O’er thee no marble monument need rise,
Relating thy great work to vulgar eyes;
Genius will bid thy name for ever live;
Envy to thee its praises then will give.
But thou wilt yet, I hope, the merit reap
Of thy vast works e’re thou in death shall sleep.
On thee may honours multiply and fall,
Long, long mayst thou in health enjoy them all,
Enriched as is thy mind with wisdom’s call.
But Boole was not fated to remain long as an assistant at Waddington. His
parents were getting on in years and their health was giving cause for concern.
Moreover, because of his father’s poor financial circumstances, George was still
the sole supporter of the family and the salary of an assistant teacher could
hardly be expected to provide for his own needs as well as those of his
dependants. In 1834 therefore, when he was merely 19, Boole decided to take

the daring step of opening his own school in Lincoln. He was probably reassured
by the fact that there was some tradition of school-teaching in the family – his
uncle William Boole had for many years been a schoolmaster at Bassingham,
near Lincoln. In fact at this time, William Boole was conducting a ‘Classical,
Commercial and Mathematical Academy’ at High Street, Lincoln. A short
prospectus of that establishment still survives and it is clear that George Boole
modelled his school on that of his uncle:16
Mr W. Boole respectfully returns thanks to the inhabitants of Lincoln
and its vicinity for the very liberal share of patronage he has already
received, and begs to inform them that his school will be re-opened on
Monday, the 15th of July, 1833.
To excite in the student a lively interest in the object of pursuit is the
principle on which Mr B. has conducted his Academy: how far his
method has been successful, the progress of his pupils will attest.
TERMS
Of his youth, George Boole had little to say in later life. It was perhaps
inevitable, but in some ways fortunate, that he should become a schoolmaster.
His chosen profession, while never giving him financial security, at least
allowed him time for private study and the obligation to teach elementary
mathematics kept him in close touch with the fundamentals of that subject, to
which he was destined to make such far-reaching contributions.

O
CHAPTER TWO
His Own Master
ne can imagine the trepidation with which the young George Boole, as yet
only in his twentieth year, opened his own school in Free School Lane,
Lincoln, in 1834. He was now the sole support of his parents, his sister Mary
Ann and his brothers William and Charles, and everything hinged on his ability
to put his idealistic views on education into practice. It is probable that at Hall’s
school in Waddington, he had had the opportunity of closely observing the
everyday problems and difficulties that arise in connection with the running of a
school and that he had learned enough to make his own school more than pay its
way as a business venture.
Boole’s school was a day school for boys and girls and there is every evidence to
show that his efforts met with a fair degree of success, both educationally and
financially. He was able to support his family in reasonable comfort, while at the
same time allowing his theories on education to develop and mature. Because he
was now his own master, he had the opportunity to experiment with different
methods of instruction and, in education as well as in other areas, he was not
content to accept a state of affairs simply because of tradition. For example, in
the teaching of mathematics, a subject that was to be of vital interest to him for
the rest of his life, he was clearly motivated by the fact that much of
mathematics has its origins in the solution of extremely practical problems and
that abstraction from this context is by no means desirable, at least in the early
stages of instruction. This opinion is shared by many educational psychologists
of the modern times but could very well have been frowned upon by those of the
nineteenth century. On the teaching of arithmetic and mensuration, he writes:1
In pure arithmetic, the teaching of fractions and decimals may be far
more efficiently performed by the aid of sensible representations than
without. If we speak of the division of a unit, it may be doubted
whether we shall be understood, but if we represent our unit by a line
on a blackboard or by a slip of paper and effect visibly or tangibly the
operation required, our illustration is at least intelligible.
In the teaching of mensuration, we ought not merely to describe the

cone, the circle, the pyramid, but to exhibit them in their reality. We
ought not only to illustrate every rule by appropriate questions, but to
put the line or the rod or the measuring chain in the hands of the pupil
and require him to prove his attainments on any fitting object that may
present itself. In this way, and perhaps only in this way, his
acquaintance with the subject becomes practical, his knowledge apt
and meet for any sudden emergency. (These are the principles upon
which my own system of instruction in these particular departments of
practical knowledge has long been moulded.)
Although Boole was self-taught, his education was well balanced and he saw the
importance, even for students mainly interested in science and mathematics, of
giving a fair share of time to the study of languages, literature and the classics.
He clearly favoured the learning of a language with a view to speaking it and
reading its literature rather than acquiring a sterile knowledge of its vocabulary
and grammar. In his Essay on Education, he writes:
Justly considered the theory of languages depends very much upon the
laws of mental faculties of classification so that instruction in the
science of grammar may be made simultaneous with instruction in the
science of reasoning. Practically it affords almost the one instruction in
reasoning that a large proportion even of our educated countrymen
receive.
The practice of our schools is to begin with the grammar and to end
with the application. We pass from the general formula to the
particular instance, not as in the order of Nature’s teaching from the
particular to the general rule. In the schools and colleges of Hungary,
Latin is still a spoken language and it is, I believe, acquired far more
successfully than here.
Once again we see that Boole’s attitude towards teaching is closer to that of the
twenty-first century rather than to that of the nineteenth. He believed that a new
language should be acquired through experience of speaking it before formal
laws of grammar are introduced.
Boole then turns to a subject that in his day was of immense importance to the
practice of schoolteaching – that of handwriting. The present-day use of
typewriters, cassette recorders and other media tends to push the problem into
the background, but it must be remembered that a large proportion of education
is still conducted through the spoken and written word and that most students

still use handwriting as the basic method of recording notes. In recent years, the
standard of handwriting has seriously declined, possibly because of the fact that
using a ballpoint pen requires much less effort on the part of the writer. The
vanishing of copperplate handwriting is not just an aesthetic loss – it has given
rise to illegibility and a general trend towards sloppy presentation when
handwriting is used. As Boole noted:
The great value of a facile and elegant handwriting is scarcely
sufficiently acknowledged. Were those, who object to the spending of
any considerable time in its acquisition as a waste of opportunities for
mental improvement, aware of the great service which it may render
even in the pursuit of the most abstract studies, their objection would, I
conceive, be diminished. If I may venture to appeal to my own
experience, I must acknowledge that if I have met any success in the
prosecution of literature and science, I am bound to attribute it to the
habit of writing out, early acquired and perseveringly practised.
Now the acquisition of a habit of frequent writing depends much
upon the degree of facility with which the mere act is performed. That
which is done with ease we usually do with pleasure and that which is
done with pleasure is so far the more likely to be often done. For this
reason, I should go far to maintain that the acquisition of a ready and
elegant handwriting is an important aid in the prosecution of other and
higher branches of education and that it ought to receive attention as
such in addition to its other claims.
Throughout the manuscript from which this extract has been taken, Boole’s
handwriting is clear and quite legible. Unfortunately, his handwriting
deteriorated in later life and towards the end became barely legible. This can
hardly be attributed to any cause such as arthritis of the fingers because at all
times his handwriting in official or important letters was of a standard vastly
superior to that of his general correspondence. In addition, he became rather
negligent in the matter of punctuation and even in the crossing of ts.
Boole had some interesting ideas on the balance of subjects in education and
of how seemingly unrelated areas of knowledge could be connected with each
other:
The continued exercise of reason or of memory or of imagination
becomes at length painful; and mechanical employments are gladly
resorted to in preference even to absolute rest. On the other hand the

merely imitative arts too closely pursued are felt to be monotonous and
uninteresting. The mind recoils from a too unremitting application to
them and seeks a stimulus in the exercise of its intellectual power.
Both classes of occupation are valuable and each has its place. But
their highest and best results are produced by union and admixture.
I believe that there are very few studies so remote from each other
and so unconnected that they may not in some way be made to
contribute to their common furtherance. All Science is founded upon
our appreciation of that which is True. All Art on that of the Beautiful
or the useful. All Literature on the one or other according to its
character and object. It is improbable that between these elements
there should exist any real contradiction. We may not be able to place
ourselves in such a point of view as to comprehend the whole in one
harmonious prospect, but such a point of view there is. We may be
assured of its existence though we cannot reach it. And this
consideration should teach us in all we do to keep the common end
steadily before us, to regulate all our particular studies or acts, as
converging to this result, still adapting ourselves to the bent and
capacities of the individual, in the degree of prominence which we
give to the particular pursuits.
We conclude this extract from Boole’s Essay on Education with one of his rather
startling views on moral education, a subject that most present-day schools
would be embarrassed to mention in a prospectus. Boole considered moral
education to be ‘the most difficult part of a teacher’s duty but the highest in
degree and importance’, and his intense feeling on the subject is illustrated by
his attitude to the study of certain portions of the classics:
A very large proportion of the extant literature of Greece and Rome
and more especially that portion of it which is referred to as the
standard of classical elegance is deeply stained with allusions and all
too often with more than allusions to the vices of Heathenism. To
nearly all the poets and to some portion of the writing of philosophers
and the historians this remark applies.
But that the innocence of youth can be exposed to the contamination
of evil without danger I do not believe. However, I do not infer from
these considerations that under proper restrictions the study of the
ancient classic poets may not lawfully be made part of Education.
This period of Boole’s life seems to have suited him ideally. He was able to start

teaching pupils at an early age before they had, in his own words, ‘been spoiled
by bad teaching’. His age, far from being a disadvantage, helped him to forge
links of understanding with his young pupils and, within a few years, he had
become an accomplished teacher. He was respected by his students and indeed
by all the townspeople of Lincoln with whom he came in contact. However, he
still laboured under severe financial restrictions. His school was small and there
was little prospect of expansion and moreover, his parents and family made
increasing demands on his meagre income.
In 1838 however, an opportunity presented itself. Robert Hall, his old
employer at Waddington, died and Boole was invited to take complete charge of
Waddington Academy. He accepted the challenge of running a larger school
with enthusiasm and, although Waddington was only about four miles from
Lincoln, he decided that it would be to his advantage if the whole family were to
set up house there. Accordingly, they moved to Waddington and George Boole,
aided by his parents, brothers and sister, began the onerous task of running a day
and boarding school. The school was well supported by the inhabitants of the
town and by the farmers of the surrounding Lincolnshire area.
Of Waddington Academy not a trace now remains, but a prospectus does
survive, printed by Boole’s friends, the brothers W. and B. Brooke of High
Street, Lincoln. The prospectus is dated 24 December 1839.2
WADDINGTON ACADEMY, NEAR LINCOLN,
conducted by
GEO. BOOLE
The above statement includes all charges except for Washing, Medical
Attendance and Printed Books.
The usual English course includes Arithmetic, Book-keeping,
Geography, Land-surveying, Mensuration accompanied by Practical
Geometry 
and 
Perspective 
Drawing, 
English 
Grammar 
and
Composition, &c. Other subjects may be introduced at the wish of the

parents – lectures are delivered weekly, on the most important
departments of History, Philosophy and Morals.
The method of instruction is in part derived from the experience of
others. Arithmetic and the Mathematical Sciences are taught by the
blackboard; Geography by maps and globes; English Composition by
a peculiar system of dictation exercises and frequent practice. The
pupil is required to commit nothing to memory before it is understood;
and it has been an especial aim with the Conductor of this School to
express those elementary truths which form the basis both of correct
knowledge and accurate practice, in the briefest and most simple forms
of language, which are consistent with philosophical precision.
To the important department of Moral Education, unceasing
attention is paid. To form in the minds and characters of the young
habits of industry, integrity and mutual kindness; to teach them the
distinctions between right and wrong, and to impress them with a
reverence for sacred things, are objects to accomplish which no
exertion will be considered too great.
There is scarcely any need to comment on the content of this prospectus. Suffice
it to say that it is an authentic expression of the educational and moral norms of

the sort of pupils that Boole would have wished to attract to his school.
Boole had by now established his reputation as a schoolteacher and, as
Waddington Academy flourished, confidence in his own abilities grew. His
financial prospects had become considerably brighter and, little by little, the
worry about providing for his family, which had dogged his footsteps since
childhood, was forgotten. But there was to be one further step in his climb to the
position of an independent schoolmaster. He did not own Waddington Academy
and there must have been even a small element of insecurity in his position
there. Boole was not an ambitious man but, in a moment of ambition born of
insecurity, he resolved to branch out and open his own day and boarding school
for boys in Lincoln city.
Accordingly, when in the summer of 1840 suitable premises became available
in Lincoln, he opened a school for young gentlemen at 3 Potter Gate, in the
Minster Yard close to the Cathedral. The whole family was once again forced to
uproot itself and take up residence in the spacious school premises. Mary Ann
was now 22 and William, 21; together they helped out by teaching selected
classes under their elder brother’s watchful supervision.
On the opening of his new school, Boole inserted the following advertisement
in a Lincoln newspaper:3
BOARDING SCHOOL FOR YOUNG GENTLEMEN
Potter Gate, Minster Yard, Lincoln
Conducted by
GEORGE BOOLE
TERMS FOR BOARD AND EDUCATION
TERMS FOR EDUCATION WITHOUT BOARD

A quarter’s notice requested previously to the removal of a Pupil.
It is desirable that each Boarder should, on admission, be provided
with Towels, Combs and Brushes, a pair of Slippers, etc. and that
every article of linen should be marked.
Boole’s school in Lincoln differed little from Waddington Academy except in
details. For example, the higher mathematics is now mysteriously worth an extra
two shillings a year. In addition, there is an emphasis on drilling and gymnastic
exercises and there is evidence to suggest that Boole encouraged healthy outdoor
activities by taking his pupils on frequent rambles in the Lincolnshire
countryside. He seems to have taken great care to impress the parents of
prospective pupils about the suitability of his premises and, in January 1841, he
announced that the school would be open for inspection on the first Wednesday
of each month.
The school increased in numbers and in a letter to a friend in 1846 Boole
described it as ‘large’, adding that he had two assistant tutors. He seems to have
been well known and respected among his fellow schoolmasters, both for his
progressive views on education and his mathematical abilities. But the social
gulf that existed between a humble self-educated schoolteacher and a
schoolmaster in a public school is well illustrated by the following incident. In
September 1846, Boole recounts:4
The Royal College of Preceptors (I don’t much like the name), a body
of more than three hundred schoolmasters including many of the most
respectable masters of private boarding schools in the South, have
elected me as an examiner. I need scarcely say that the appointment
was quite unsolicited on my part. I have taken no share in their
proceedings beyond sending them a guinea which I did as approving
of their object though never intending to avail myself of it.
However, on 6 November 1846, he writes, with thinly disguised disappointment:
I believe that after all I am not appointed as examiner to the College of
Preceptors. The post was certainly offered to me by one of the
Council, but I suppose that he had mistaken his directions in some
way.
Many of the pupils’ parents tended to choose more practical subjects for their
offspring than Boole might have wished. There was a great demand for courses
in book-keeping and elementary accountancy, so much so that Boole in later life

admitted that his establishment was virtually a commercial school and that the
majority of his teaching career had been spent in teaching non-mathematical
subjects.
All the available evidence points to the fact that Boole was extremely
conscientious in the discharge of his teaching and administrative duties, even to
the point of endangering his own health. It was possibly at this period of his life
that he sowed the seeds of the habitual ill-health which was to dog his footsteps
in future years and which was undoubtedly a factor that contributed to his
premature death. Strain from overwork was inevitable in his position. To
supplement his income and possibly to keep in touch with the teaching of higher
mathematics, he took pupils and prepared them for university entrance and other
examinations. In addition, he had become deeply involved in the running of the
Mechanics’ Institute and other social and charitable organisations. Finally, he
had absolutely immersed himself in the study of mathematics which, at the level
of research he was engaged in, is an exhausting and time-consuming business.
Every spare moment was spent in the perusal of the works of the Continental and
British masters of mathematics of the previous hundred years. Having absorbed
their contents, Boole turned to research and produced a series of original papers
which were to contribute in no small way to the development of modern
mathematics.
But, by 1846, even Boole himself was prepared to admit that his health was
suffering. While on a short vacation at Hornsea in Yorkshire, he wrote to a
friend:
I have done very little Mathematics since the appearance of my last
paper in the Journal. Indeed my health has been a good deal affected I
think by the confinement of my school, but it is now stronger within
the last day or two.
By 1849, Boole’s school had changed little. In a newspaper advertisement, we
find that his fees have been increased slightly and are now rather grandly stated
in guineas. In addition, a rather mysterious new category of pupil has been
introduced: the ‘parlour boarder’. The advertisement runs as follows:5
Pupils over ten years of age 
24 gns.
Above that age and under fourteen 
28 gns.
For parlour boarders, an addition of one half to these terms.
Latin, Greek, French and Drawing will involve extra charge.

English education without board, £1.11.6 per quarter.

A
CHAPTER THREE
Social Involvement
ll the available evidence points to the fact that George Boole was acutely
conscious of the social evils of the society in which he lived. Far from
resenting the lack of educational opportunities in his life, he strove, through
sacrifice and dedication, to educate himself and, when he had achieved a
respectable position in society, he did all in his power to improve the social and
educational conditions of his fellow men and women. He also had a deep
compassion for the unfortunate and those rejected by the community and he let
neither embarrassment nor squeamishness stand in the way of righting great
social evils. Around 1847, he was one of those responsible for the foundation of
a Female Penitents’ Home in Lincoln. The purpose of this institution was, in the
discreet words of Samuel Neil,1 ‘the reclamation from the paths of woe of the
misguided and unfortunate of that sex whose chiefest joy or suffering springs
from love.’
Boole was a founder and trustee of the Home and maintained a lively interest
in its activities during his life in Lincoln. Early Victorian Lincoln had many
houses of ill-fame2 and these were concentrated in particular in the Castle
Dykings, an area where parish constables and other authorities had no power to
intervene. In 1836, it was reported that several tenements were being built for
brothels and there was what almost amounted to a white-slave trade in innocent
young girls from the surrounding countryside. The Castle Dykings was also a
hotbed of associated crimes, such as robbery, brutal assaults and attempted
suicides, and even the Mayor was forced to admit that there was more
debauchery in Lincoln than in any other town of its size in the Kingdom. Though
the setting up of the Female Penitents’ Home in 1847 helped to regulate the
problem and bring it to public awareness, nevertheless, a report as late as 1865
stated that there were 58 prostitutes in the City who plied their trade openly
despite being known to the police. In addition, there were over thirty brothels
and many secret prostitutes.
The second annual report of the Lincoln and Lincolnshire Female Penitents’
Home, published in 1849, gives some indication of the nature of the institution

and Boole’s involvement with its affairs.3 The President was the Right
Honorable the Earl of Yarborough, and the Secretary and Director of Religious
Education was the Reverend E.R. Larken, Rector of Burton, a friend and
mathematical correspondent of Boole. ‘Mr Boole’ (almost certainly George) is
listed as a committee member and ‘Mr George Boole’ is listed as a trustee of the
Society’s property. The aims to be pursued by the committee were given as
follows:
That the object of this Institution is to provide a temporary home in
which, by moral and religious instruction and the formation of
industrious habits, females, who have deviated from the paths of
virtue, may be restored to a reputable position in society.
That the principle on which this Institution is established and shall
be conducted is that of entire religious freedom; the object being not to
make proselytes to any particular denomination of Christians, but to
reclaim those who are living in practices condemned by all pious
persons.
The Home had a turnover of some £1,200 for that year (1849) and had acquired
a site on the hill to the south-west of the Castle, on which permanent premises
were later to be built when the necessary £2,000 was forthcoming. The people of
Lincolnshire were generous with their subscriptions, but it is interesting to note
that the total recorded amount given by the Boole family for the year 1848–49
was just one guinea – surely an indication of the relative poverty of a young
schoolmaster responsible for the support of his family.
However, it was to the Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute that Boole devoted most
of his spare time.4 The Mechanics’ Institutes of the nineteenth century can be
looked upon as forerunners of both adult education centres and trade unions, and
the Lincoln Institute provided Boole with an ideal opportunity of putting into
practice his belief in the progress of the individual through education.
Established on 31 October 1833, the Lincoln Institute had as its stated object ‘the
cultivation of Experimental, Natural and Moral Philosophy; and of useful
knowledge in all departments – avoiding Politics and controversial Divinity’. It
provided premises where those interested in furthering their knowledge and
education could study, attend classes in specific subjects, consult books and
periodicals, and attend lectures by eminent invited speakers. There was a
museum and a lending library, and the atmosphere was generally an academic
one – almost that of a nineteenth-century Open University. Some of the rules and
regulations had a quaint touch:

No play or Game of any description, except Chess, shall be allowed in
the Institution, and no Smoking shall be permitted in the Rooms, nor
any fermented Liquors introduced.
Members of the committee also took the daring step of allowing ladies to be
introduced into the rooms, once their names had been duly entered in the
admission book by a current member. The Lincoln Institute became highly
popular and, at its peak, had several hundred members.
Its first patron was the Right Honorable Lord Yarborough and his presence
and influence were largely responsible for the financial and social success of the
venture. Sir Edward ffrench Bromhead, Bart., FRS, was the first President and
John Boole is listed as a member of the first committee, which met monthly. One
of the offices set up was that of Curator, whose job it was to superintend the
library, prepare the apparatus and take charge of the museum, which consisted
mostly of fossils and mineral specimens. John Boole, now unemployed, was in
April 1834 appointed to the position of Curator and, though the job carried a
salary of only £30 per annum, it is probable that he accepted it because provision
was made to accommodate himself and his family on the premises of the
Institute. In the early days, he was active and enthusiastic. The Lincolnshire
Chronicle in November 1834 recorded that:
A very interesting lecture was delivered at the Mechanics’ Institute on
Thursday by the Curator Mr Boole on the Nature and Properties of
Light and the Theory of Vision and Colours. A very high compliment
was paid to Mr Boole, who is self-taught, by the President, Sir Edward
ffrench Bromhead.
By 1834, George Boole, now returned from Doncaster, had become deeply
involved with the Mechanics’ Institute. He soon became a committee member
and was chosen as the superintendent of the classes of instruction. For many
years, he acted as an unpaid teacher of arithmetic, mathematics, science and the
classics and was one of the driving forces behind the Institute.
However, not all of the Institute’s activities met with universal approval. For
example, many of the public lectures, paid for by the committee at three guineas
a time, were poorly attended despite the fact that members were admitted gratis.
Mr Cunningham’s lecture on arithmetic caused the following comment from the
committee to be entered in the minutes: ‘Of Mr Cunningham as a teacher, your
Committee deem it prudent to say nothing, except that they were disappointed.’
The relatively happy state of affairs at the Institute was soon to be marred by

the sudden resignation of John Boole, who seems to have had a stubborn and
controversial streak in his nature. At a specially convened meeting on 12
December 1835, George Boole had the embarrassing experience of having to
read to the committee the following letter from his father:
The following are among the chief reasons which induce me to resign
the office of Curator of this Institution …
The superintendence of the functions of my office has been
delegated to, or usurped by, others and the prospective business of the
Institution studiously concealed from me, in order to give colour to the
assertion that I have been negligent of my duties.
The perversion of this Institution from its professed original objects
by which utility has been sacrificed to the frivolities of light reading
and conversation meetings, has much diminished my usefulness. In the
construction and exhibition of various optical instruments, I have
endeavoured to supply the deficiency of more active services. From
the fact that I have been obliged to prosecute these employments as my
own work and that an individual was permitted publicly to assert that I
do but walk these rooms, it is a fair presumption that services of this
nature are not acceptable.
It will be scarcely necessary to add that events of the last annual
meeting have rendered immediate my determination to resign. J. Boole
RESOLVED
That the Committee regret the loss of Mr Boole’s services.
That the Curator be requested to continue on the premises any time
that may be convenient to himself and family.
That Mr Boole be paid any expenses he has incurred for the advantage
of the Institution.
George Boole took a particular interest in the library of 3,000 volumes attached
to the Mechanics’ Institute. However, it was not here, as some commentators
have suggested, that he first became acquainted with the works of Lagrange,
Laplace and Poisson. The scientific and mathematical section of the library
contained nothing heavier than de Morgan’s Arithmetic and Wood’s Algebra, as
might be expected. However, it did contain the Philosophical Magazine and the

Transactions of the Royal Society. In 1846, Boole was asked to report on the
state of the library, especially as respects works on physical and mathematical
sciences, and on mental, moral and political philosophy. It is interesting to read
his comments and recommendations on the mathematical sciences: he described
the sections on both practical mathematics and the higher analysis as extremely
defective, commenting that there were no books on practical surveying, on the
practical applications of trigonometry, on navigation or descriptive geometry. He
also stated that none of the introductory treatises on algebra and geometry was
sufficiently extensive. To remedy the defects in these areas, he recommended
that the library should contain books such as Hind’s Algebra, Peacock’s
Algebra, Keith’s Trigonometry, Davis’s Descriptive Geometry and Mosely’s
Mathematics of Engineering.
As regards the higher analysis, he remarks, from personal experience, that
there could never exist a wide demand for works the study of which requires
much leisure and long-continued attention. However, since exceptional
individuals might sometimes wish to consult such works, he recommended that a
collection might gradually be acquired and that it should include the following:
Hind’s Trigonometry, Gregory’s Geometry of Three Dimensions, Gregory’s
Examples of the Differential and Integral Calculus, Walton’ s Analytical
Mechanics, 
Newton’s 
Principia, 
Airy’s 
Tracts, 
Laplace’s 
Mécanique
Analytique, Poisson’s Théorie Mathématique de la Chaleur, Poisson’s Théorie
de l’Action Capillaire, and Cauchy’s Exercises.
He described the section on mental and moral philosophy as the most
defective area of the library, containing little beyond the standard works of
Locke, Paley, Brown, Reed, Abercrombie and Mackintosh. He therefore
recommended the inclusion of such authors as Cudworth, Hartley and Bishop
Butler. Similarly in the section on political economy and philosophy, he
recommended the inclusion of Ricardo, Chalmers, Alison and, interestingly,
Whately.
In May 1829, the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge issued a Life
of Sir Isaac Newton which was, in essence, a translation of the short biography
of Newton which J.B. Biot had written for the Biographie Universelle. This was
followed in 1831 by a Life of Newton by Sir David Brewster. Since Newton was
a native of Lincolnshire, these works aroused a great deal of interest and
discussion in the county. Lord Yarborough was moved to commission a marble
bust of Isaac Newton which he presented to the members of the Institute. It was
felt by the management that the occasion of the presentation should be marked in

some special way. The impact which Boole had made on the Institute in so short
a time can be judged from the fact that he was unanimously chosen to deliver an
address on the ‘Genius and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton’. At first he was
reluctant, considering the magnitude of the topic and his own youth (he was only
19 at the time), but eventually he was persuaded to write and deliver the address.
His speech took place on Thursday, 5 February 1835, in the presence of Lord
Yarborough and before a large and appreciative audience, composed not only of
members of the Institute but also some of Lincoln’s most prominent citizens.
The Corporation granted the use of the Grey Friars’ chapel as a lecture hall to
accommodate the capacity audience. All present were struck by the youthful age
of the speaker and not a little amazed by both his knowledge of the subject and
his confident lecturing style.
In a short speech, Lord Yarborough expressed the feeling of the meeting by
suggesting that the address, Boole’s first public lecture, be published in the form
of a printed booklet. Later in 1835, it was printed by the Gazette office and
offered for sale to the public in Lincoln and even in London. Copies are now rare
but, through the courtesy of the Royal Irish Academy, we have one at our
disposal. Viewed objectively, the address displays the extraordinary maturity of
its nineteen-year-old author and shows that even at this age he had developed his
personal philosophy, at least as far as scientific matters were concerned. The
subject of the address would have been one of particular interest to Boole.
Newton was a native of Lincolnshire, a scientist of vision, depth and, most of all,
genius; he had invented the differential calculus, a subject that greatly concerned
Boole at the time; and finally, Boole and Newton shared the same religious
views – they were Unitarians. The address opens with the following dedication:
To the Right Hon. Lord Yarborough, as a testimony of esteem for his
active and enlightened philanthropy, this address, the chief
recommendation of which is the event with which it was associated, is,
by permission most respectfully inscribed by the Author.
At the outset of the address, having expressed doubts about his competence to do
justice to so great a theme, Boole announces his intention, of attempting to
discover ‘the characteristics of Newton’s powerful mind’ rather than dwelling on
events and anecdotes connected with his life. Glancing hastily at the details of
Newton’s early life and upbringing, he comes to a subject that was close to his
own heart – the physical theory of light and optics. Newton had communicated
to the Royal Society in 1675 a paper entitled Optics: or, a Treatise on the

Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light. Boole describes this
as ‘one of the most elaborate and original of his works, carrying on every page
the traces of a powerful and comprehensive mind’.
Having given a short account of Newton’s paper on light (published with
important additions as A Treatise on Optics in 1704), Boole gives his opinions
on the importance of Newton’s theory:
Notwithstanding all the objections which may be urged, it still remains
a gigantic memorial of the vastness of that mind in which it was
conceived. One characteristic of Newton’s mind it strongly
exemplifies, the faculty of generalizing, and this, if I mistake not, was
one of his chief points. In the instance before us, he commences his
research by experimenting on thin plates of air; from this he deduces
the germ of his theory and, to its laws he subjects, in the course of his
inquiry, the whole superstructure of material things. It is true that his
theory has been left imperfect; admit that in some of the applications it
has failed, but at the same time we must acknowledge that in what he
failed, he did not fail as a common mortal and that the marshalled
intellect of Europe has vainly endeavoured to fill up the chasm!

There is in the very idea of light something so vague and intangible
that our imagination can with difficulty attribute to it an independent
and material existence. Yet granting this, and assuming as our data,
that under certain known circumstances, known impressions are
received which we designate colour, the analysis of its primitive
elements, and of the laws and effects of their combinations, would still
remain a mighty problem. It is singular that of all the subtle and
mysterious agencies, light, heat, electricity, attraction, connected by
one general link, and commissioned by their Author to confer upon
dead matter the life and beauty of the Universe, light is the only one
that has yet thoroughly unfolded the harmony of its laws and
submitted itself to human scrutiny. That genius which stands foremost
in the triumph was the calm, patient, all-surmounting genius of
Newton.
Boole then turns to Newton’s Theory of Universal Gravitation and comments
that if the story that the theory had its origin in Newton’s observation of a falling

apple is true, then it is an instance of what vast theories may be deduced from
everyday occurrences. He continues:
It had touched upon some hidden spring, some sleeping and folded
energy: a train of thought was excited which, though interrupted, was
never abandoned until the foundation was laid of the great science of
Physical Astronomy: that science which, in its subsequent
developments, has, above all others, demonstrated the economy of the
universe, the capabilities of our own immortal nature and the majesty
of the Being who created them.
There is a strong undercurrent of religious awe in Boole’s observations on
Newton’s works. Although at this stage he had put aside all thoughts of studying
for the Church, Boole considered that delving into the mysteries of nature and
mathematics were principally, in Milton’s words, ‘to justify the ways of God to
Man’ .
Boole continues with a discussion of one of Newton’s most important works,
The Principia or Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, and his
detailed analysis shows that even at this stage he had mastered its contents. He
emphasises the fact that the observed laws of planetary motion were shown by
Newton to be a mathematical consequence of the law of gravitation. We see here
the beginnings of the principle that was to be Boole’s major contribution to
mathematics and indeed to science – that scientific results can frequently be
deduced as mathematical consequences of stated principles. He goes on to claim,
probably with some justification, that it was not until Newton introduced ‘the
principles of the celebrated doctrine of fluxions or limits’ that he was able to
make his theory explain some of the more difficult aspects of the earth’s motion,
such as tides, the spheroidal figure of the earth and the irregularities of the
moon’s orbit. The section on Newton’s contribution to planetary motion is
concluded with some remarks which indicate that Boole was familiar with what
is now called the ‘three-body problem’, a problem that still awaits solution.
In this lecture, Boole had the insight to see the deficiencies of Newton’s
methods and the courage to voice them – a step that might easily have been
interpreted as implying criticism of Newton by Boole’s relatively
unsophisticated audience. It would be easy to claim that this was an arrogant
attitude for a self-educated, nineteen-year-old schoolteacher to adopt toward a
man who was unquestionably one of the greatest scientists of all time, but Boole
had a deep commitment to truth which transcended his admiration for

personalities. The following extract exhibits extraordinary perception:
There was yet another disadvantage attaching to the whole of
Newton’s physical inquiries which, though it gave rise to the most
sublime applications of Geometry, must yet be considered as having
presented an insurmountable barrier to his progress – the want of an
appropriate notation for expressing the conditions of a dynamical
problem, and the general principles by which its solution must be
obtained. By the labours of Lagrange, the motions of a disturbed
planet are reduced with all their complication and variety to a pure
mathematical question. It then ceases to be a physical problem; the
disturbed and disturbing planet are alike vanished; the ideas of time
and force are at an end; the very elements of the orbit have
disappeared or only exist as arbitrary characters in a mathematical
formula.
In Newton’s investigations, this felicitous transformation could not
take place. Nature must be combated on her own grounds: the
disturbing force is analysed; its effect must be considered in every
variety of position – above, below, and in coincidence with the ecliptic
plane: from syzigy to quadrature, and thence again to syzigy, the same
influence is to be followed and its resulting effects determined. The
everlasting wheels of the universe are before us, and their revolutions
are to be traced through all the changing varieties of cause,
circumstance and effect.
But Boole could see disadvantages in the method of abstract analysis which he
himself was advocating. The topic is still a burning issue in mathematical
education and even today, many feel that if mathematics is allowed to become
completely abstract and to lose sight of its physical and scientific origins, then it
will suffer because intuition, analogy and visualisation have given rise to an
enormous amount of inspiration and progress in mathematics. Boole observes
further:
It is not to be denied, that this mode of investigation is attended with
such complication as to render it decidedly inferior, both in power and
facility, to the methods now pursued. Yet there is one respect in which
it possesses an advantage. Following step by step the process of
Newton’s demonstrations, we become more familiar with the
machinery which they are intended to unravel, than if our results were

immediately obtained by the discussion of an analytical formula. This
consideration is, I am persuaded, of some importance to the young
astronomer.
Boole finishes the lecture with his views on what he considers the most
important of Newton’s contributions to human knowledge and with some other
remarks of a general nature:
The arena of his boldest triumphs was the science of Astronomy. In
the very choice which thus directed his inquiries there was something
most auspicious for his fame. Those bright and distant worlds, whose
laws it was reserved for him to investigate, had ever been the objects
of human curiosity. In their silent and eternal courses they have
received the idolatry of a hundred generations. Through the annals of
human superstition their influence has been ever predominant,
presiding by some mysterious and fearful agency over the chances and
calamities of life. That feeling of dread with which they were once
regarded is past; a better philosophy has dispelled the terror, but it has
not diminished the interest; it has taught us to consider them not as
omnipotent over the fortunes and interest of earth, but as individually
possessing an interest of their own, the abodes of other forms of
organic life, or other orders of intelligent existence. Such are the
prospects of modern astronomers: they are bold, yet scarcely
conjectural …
The very pertinacity with which error retains its hold is one of the
strongest arguments for the final and eternal establishment of truth: it
results from a natural fear that in the wreck of received opinions, the
very foundation of credibility should be destroyed and mankind a
second time involved in darkness and uncertainty …
If, from the history of false and discarded systems, we may pass by
analogy to the more enduring influence of truth, we shall perceive how
high above the chances of time and vicissitude, the pedestal of
Newton’s immortality is founded.
On its publication, Boole’s lecture was widely read, considering the limited
number of copies that were printed. His name became known throughout the
county and the citizens of Lincoln came to realise more and more that they had
living among them a young man of exceptional genius and ability.
The day-to-day running of the Mechanics’ Institute was not without its

difficulties and one article in particular in its constitution gave rise to a
considerable amount of controversy and dissension. The rule in question was the
one under which works on party politics and controversial theology were
directed to be excluded from the library. The rule was surely a sensible one in an
Institute whose members would have professed widely differing religious views
and political opinions and, moreover, it was hardly the function of the
Mechanics’ Institute to develop its members’ religious and political views.
George Boole however took great exception to this rule and considered it an
infringement of personal liberty. The intensity of his feelings on the subject can
be judged from the fact that he addressed to the members of the Institute a
lecture entitled A Plea for Freedom, in which he appealed for the rescission of
the rule. The extracts we quote are of independent interest because they throw
considerable light on Boole’s attitude towards religious and political freedom:5
In the first place, I remark that the rule has never been systematically
obeyed. Its strict observance is indeed impracticable. We require a
previous definition of the terms ‘party politics’ and ‘controversial
divinity’. In the stricter and only definite acceptations of the terms,
every work is a party work in as far as it maintains the opinion of a
party; every work is controversial which contains a defence or decided
expression of opinions that are controverted.
Now consider for a moment to how great an extent politics and
theology have influenced our national literature. They run through our
history and much of our poetry and philosophy; they enter into our
best works of fiction; they tinge our magazine and periodical essays;
they are the two poles to which every stronger mind is irresistibly
drawn. Rigidly enforce the rule for their exclusion and you shut your
Library against the ablest writers, the most earnest thinkers of this and
every age. You debar your fellow members from the study of
questions which at once afford the noblest employment for our
faculties and affect the most vital interests of our common race. You
banish from your shelves Locke and Smith, Taylor and Barrow,
Chalmers and Whately, Alison and Vaughan. How will you supply the
place of this class of writers? What provision can you make for the
instruction of the old, for the moral nurture of the young, if you forbid
all inquiry into the gravest and most serious questions with which a
human being is concerned? The great extent to which the practice of
novel-reading prevails among the younger members of the Institution
ought to be the subject of deep concern to its friends and should

stimulate them to inquire into the real merits of that system of
exclusion under which so pernicious a habit has been permitted to
grow up.
This last sentence is ironic in view of the fact that Boole himself, in later life at
least, was an inveterate reader of novels. The address continues with a reminder
of the dissensions to which the rule had already given rise, in view of the
impossibility of its rigid enforcement. For example, a large donation of books
had been returned to their owner because most of them were considered to be in
contravention of the rule, while a donation of the ‘eminently controversial’
works of Dr Arnold had been accepted. Boole claimed that the members of the
Institute were being forced to reconcile conscience with expediency and that the
highest advantage of the Institute would be dearly purchased by the sacrifice of a
single conviction of duty on the part of its meanest servant.
He then turns to what one suspects was his real motive for the address in the
first place – the introduction of works of controversial theology into the
Institute’s library. It is hard to avoid a suspicion that Boole, on this occasion at
least, allowed his heart to rule his head.
There are some subjects in which Indifference is Ignorance or
Weakness. Such are all which relate to questions of Human Duty. The
Christian religion is the foremost of these and I hold that the
investigation of its principles is a proper study for the members of a
Mechanics’ Institute. The diversity of the forms and modes with which
it presents itself to different minds affords us reason for its exclusion
but should rather instruct us to be impartial in our choice of authors. I
dislike Puseyism but I would permit it to speak for itself in Newman
on Development. I am not a Unitarian but I would make room for the
mild and eloquent Channing. I have no moral sympathies with what is
called High Calvinism but would find a place for the unrivalled
dissertations of Jonathan Edwards. And the same liberal system would
I extend to Politics and Social Economy.
Religion is a subject of which even the greatest minds should be wary. Boole
could in truth claim not to be a Unitarian only because he did not formally
belong to the Unitarian Church, but his theology and inclinations were
undoubtedly Unitarian. His singling out of the ‘mild and eloquent Channing’ is
suspicious and his mentioning the Unitarian sect in this context at all is more so.
Religion is a matter of faith and belief, and religious doctrines are not to be

acquired from ‘a selection fairly made from the different schools into which
opinion is divided’, as Boole suggested. However, he finishes his address by
stressing his faith in the good taste and sound judgement of the members of the
Institute, whatever the outcome of his plea:
The only restriction which is worthy of the Institution is that imposed
by the good sense and right feeling of its members. As this is sufficient
to prevent the introduction of immoral and licentious publications so
would it bar the admission of all works in either Politics or Religion,
which should not be conceived in a spirit befitting the pursuit of Truth
and answering to the dignity of the subject.
Another body for social reform with which Boole was connected was the
Lincoln Early Closing Association, whose title at first glance might easily cause
it to be mistaken for a sort of temperance society!6 This was not the case
however. Its stated aim was ‘for obtaining an abridgement of the hours of
business in all trades, with a view to the physical, mental and moral
improvement of those engaged therein’. Boole was one of its twenty-four Vice-
Presidents and the list also includes his friends William Brooke and the
Reverend E.R. Larken. The purpose of the Association was a worthy one and
there is evidence to show that its efforts met with some success. The aims of the
Early Closing Association were somewhat similar to those of the Mechanics’
Institute – a combination of those of a trade union and those of a centre for adult
education.
Early in 1847, the Association achieved a notable breakthrough. Largely as a
result of their agitation, the ten-hour day was introduced for all shop assistants,
apprentices and other workers in the city of Lincoln. A celebration was called for
and a speech had to be made. Once again, George Boole was asked to deliver the
address. The title he chose was a particularly appropriate one, The Right Use of
Leisure, and the address was delivered in the Mechanics’ Hall on 2 February
1847. Boole’s efforts were once again considered worthy of publication.7 The
expenses were covered by Mr J. Porter, Honorary Secretary of the Association,
and the printing was done by the brothers W. and B. Brooke.
The Reverend Robert Harley, in one of the longest biographical memoirs on
Boole published in the nineteenth century, romances a little on Boole’s delivery
of this address:
We have come in late: the lecturer, a man of middle-stature, light

complexioned, slenderly built, with a countenance in which both
genius and benignity are expressed, and a manner gentle and modest,
almost to womanliness, has held the attention of his youthful auditors
for upwards of an hour, while he has discoursed in a clear and forcible
style on the different ways in which they may advantageously employ
the limited portion of leisure allotted to them. He has spoken of that
wise arrangement of Providence, by which there exist at once so great
a diversity in the human mind and so wide a variety of objects, in
which it may innocently seek for gratification. He has vindicated
athletic sports and games as not merely conducive to health and
recreation, but also as assisting to produce ‘a vigorous and manly
character of mind’ and to encourage ‘a free, generous and open
disposition’. The education to be derived from books, from
communion with nature and from other sources has been eloquently
expatiated upon …
In his address, Boole has some extravagant things to say about the quest for truth
in nature and in the moral sphere:
If we desire to acquaint ourselves with the structure of the Universe,
how many subjects of inquiry and of meditation present themselves!
What wonders in the heavens; what a glory and beauty in the world
around us! What indications of order and presiding intelligence
throughout the whole! Dr Chalmers has remarked that every
investigator of Nature is led to regard his own particular department of
research as the richest in interest and wonder. How replete and
gorgeous, he then observes, should we consider the whole to be! If we
quit the study of material Nature, and apply ourselves to the pursuit of
Truth in the province of moral and social inquiry, another Universe,
not less replenished with wonder and with interest, presents itself …
… In short, to whatever province of the kingdom of Thought we
turn our attention, we find abundant scope and reward for the activity
of our inquiry.
The next extract shows clearly that Boole was of the mens sana in corpore sano
school of thought:
A healthy frame is indeed in some measure necessary to the possession
of a vigorous mind. Happily we may by the same course of action
consult the advantage of both. The exercise which imparts vigour to

the bodily system may at the same time furnish the mind with
agreeable ideas. Nor are athletic sports and games to be looked upon
as merely conducive to health and recreation. They may assist in
producing a vigorous and manly character of mind and in encouraging
a free, generous and open disposition.
But for less innocent pleasures, Boole has no time at all:
If you seek gratification in those pursuits from which virtue turns
aside, you do so without excuse. The constitution of things has not
been so ordered as to render it necessary that you should have recourse
to such means. I say nothing here of the fading character of all merely
sensual pleasures, and of the ruin and self-reproach which their excess
entails, because all experience shews that the most effectual teaching
is that which appeals to our better principles and which seeks rather to
attract than to warn. I content myself by remarking, that you may turn
your leisure to the best account, as respects not only your personal
improvement but also your individual happiness, in a manner which is
perfectly consistent with the requirements of Duty and of Virtue.
Boole devotes a large proportion of his address to the recommendation of
suitable books for his audience to read. Books he regards as memorials to the
industry of man, containing the accumulated results of human labour to a greater
degree than any other monument of past ages. In them, he tells his audience, he
found a refuge from the cares and distractions of life and the inspiration to bear,
with upright courage and serene integrity, the most trying and difficult
circumstances. To his listeners, Boole recommends the study of history and
gives a list of books concerning both general history and the history of
individual nations. The study of history, he feels, should be followed by a close
examination of the philosophy of history, with a view to helping the reader form
objective opinions of what he had read. Lastly, he recommends the biographies
of eminent men as the most attractive form of historical reading and indeed as a
most effective form of self-education. He gives his audience the same advice
that he gave pupils in his school: that a knowledge of geography greatly
facilitates the understanding of a historical situation.
Boole next turns to the study of physical science and emphasises to his
listeners the importance of observation as the basis of all scientific theory. The
next step, he claims, consists of combining reason with observation in order to
discover the laws by which scientific phenomena are governed. He draws a

distinction between a scientific explanation and the cause of a phenomenon.
Boole at this stage envisaged a system which was tantamount to the
axiomatization of science:
The last and highest step in the progress of a science, is the reducing of
the secondary laws of the phenomena to some higher and more
comprehensive law, standing to them in the relation of a mechanical
cause and constituting a definite limit to our inquiry …
… That process of the mind by which we are enabled to discover
general truths is called Induction. It is the highest exercise of our
intellectual powers: and it is that which most specially distinguishes
the mind of man from that of the lower creatures. When through its
operation, a science has been brought to that state in which Astronomy
now is, a reverse process, to which we give the name Deduction,
becomes possible. We have already proved the existence of a cause
and determined the mode of its agency, from the observation of
phenomena. We now take our starting point from the cause itself, and
deduce from it new phenomena unobserved before. That recent
prediction, by Leverrier and Adams, of a new planet, with the fame of
which the scientific world is still ringing, was a discovery of this class.
Boole concludes his remarks on physical science with a reference to the ‘great
Author and Founder’ and reminds his listeners that the laws of the material
universe are the expressions of His will; that their unfailing certainty is a symbol
of His immutability; that their wondrous adaptation is an argument of His
wisdom; and that their wide dominion is a testimony to His universal presence.
He then turns to the subject of moral philosophy and in particular to what he
calls the ‘science of duty’. He justifies the study of the science of human duty on
the assumption that although the general rules of right and wrong are clear and
unmistakeable, the complexity of human affairs causes their individual
application to become difficult and obscure. In this area, he recommends in
particular the books of Paley and Chalmers. One feels that if Boole had read
even half the books mentioned in this address, then he was widely read by any
standard. Study of the Scriptures, of course, he recommends, notwithstanding the
existence of passages like ‘knowledge that puffeth up’, a passage which he
interprets as a condemnation of the ‘delusive speculation of Gnostic philosophy’.
He concludes this section with a striking passage:
We are not to regard Truth as the mere creature of the human intellect.

The great results of Science, and the primal truths of religion and of
morals, have an existence quite independent of our faculties and of our
recognition. We are no more the authors of the one class than we are
of the other. It is given to us to discover Truth – we are permitted to
comprehend it; but its sole origin is in the will or the character of the
Creator; and this is the real connecting link between Science and
Religion. It has seemed to be necessary to state this principle clearly
and fully, because the distinction of our knowledge into Divine and
Human has prejudiced many minds with the belief that there is a
mutual hostility between the two – a belief as injurious as it is
irrational.
Boole concludes his address by exhorting his listeners to cultivate a love of
beauty and to commune with nature. Above all he recommends the practice of
philanthropy as a means of self-improvement and as a method of giving the
community some return for the priceless gift of education.
We have quoted at length from three of Boole’s addresses and clearly these
quotations reveal the depth of his social involvement. The sentiments expressed
are all that a present-day advocate of adult education could wish for and show
that Boole had a deep commitment to his personal philosophy of education and
morality.

B
CHAPTER FOUR
Early Mathematical Work
efore we can appreciate Boole’s early contributions to mathematics, we
must first examine the state of the subject in Britain in the first half of the
nineteenth century. Incredibly, the dominant influence seems to have been the
work of Isaac Newton, whose shadow stretched all the way from the seventeenth
century. Newton of course was one of the greatest mathematicians of all time
and a man of whom England could be justifiably proud, but his very greatness
had produced complacency in those who followed him. The futile controversy
over whether Newton or Leibniz had been the true inventor of the infinitesimal
calculus had become almost a political matter and every patriotic Englishman
concerned in the affair considered it his duty to side with Newton. But the matter
did not end there, for although the content and results of the calculus as
conceived by both men individually were essentially the same, their approaches
and methods differed in a crucial way. Newton was at heart an applied
mathematician for whom mathematics was a very powerful tool by means of
which he hoped to construct a model of the physical universe and thereby
understand its structure. It was inevitable that he should be a geometer and that
his basic approach to mathematics should be intuitive and geometric.
Leibniz, on the other hand, with his strong background in philosophy, was
more of a pure mathematician though, of course, the distinction between the
disciplines was virtually non-existent in those days. He viewed the calculus as an
exciting development in its own right rather than as a tool for physics. His
approach to the subject was akin to that of a present-day algebraist and his
methods were abstract and analytical.
The different attitudes of the two men were clearly reflected in the notations
they employed to express their ideas and results. The subject of the influence of
notation on the development of mathematics is curiously a neglected one, but
there can be no doubt that notation was a reflection of the principal and vital
difference between Newton and Leibniz. For the fundamental concept of
derivative of a variable x with respect to time, Newton employed the rather
arbitrary symbol , which incidentally is still used in some books on dynamics
and by some applied mathematicians. Leibniz, on the other hand, used the

symbol dx /dt, or more properly d/dt(x), which indicated that he conceived of
differentiation as a process or as the result of an operator applied to the variable
x.
There is very little insight to be gained into the calculus by using Newton’s
‘dot notation’ and developments of the subject do not present themselves
naturally. The ‘d-notation’ of Leibniz, on the other hand, lends itself quite
naturally to calculation and manipulation when the symbol d/dt = D is regarded
as a mathematical entity in its own right. In addition, the techniques of Leibniz
were less dependent on diagrams and geometric models than those of Newton. In
fact, the name which Newton gave to his version of the calculus, ‘the method of
fluxions’, shows that he conceived of the subject almost entirely in terms of
physical motions of various kinds – quite an unnecessary restriction as it turns
out.
The situation thus arose that British mathematicians had fallen seriously
behind their Continental counterparts, both in content and technique. Playfair,
reviewing Laplace’s monumental book Mécanique Céleste in the Edinburgh
Review of 1808 summed up the situation as follows:
In the list of mathematicians and philosophers to whom the science of
Astronomy for the last sixty or seventy years has been indebted for its
improvements, hardly a name from Great Britain falls to be mentioned
… Nothing prevented the mathematicians of England from engaging
in the question of lunar theory … but the consciousness that in the
knowledge of higher geometry they were not on a footing with their
brethren on the Continent. We will venture to say that the number of
those in this island who can read the Mécanique Céleste with any
tolerable facility is small indeed.
However, there were some British mathematicians who were keenly aware of the
unhappy state of the subject in their own country and who were determined to
remedy the situation. As early as 1803, the Cambridge mathematician
Woodhouse published his Principles of Analytical Calculation in which he not
alone explained the Continental usage of the differential notation, but actually
demanded that a more rigorous treatment of the subject be employed.
Woodhouse’s book greatly influenced three young undergraduates at Cambridge
who, in 1812, came together to form what they called the Analytical Society, for
the promotion of analytical methods in mathematics as used on the Continent.
The three were Peacock, Babbage and Herschel, who were all later to achieve

fame in various areas of pure and applied science. In a rather feeble pun,
Babbage coined the phrase that the aim of the Society was to promote the
principles of pure ‘d’ism’ (the notation d /dt) as opposed to the ‘dot-age’ of
Cambridge (the dot notation  of Newton).
Over a period of twenty years, the Society changed the outlook of British
mathematics almost beyond recognition. Peacock, Babbage and Herschel,
together with their pupils and disciples, published their own textbooks and
translations of the great Continental works and slowly but gradually their ideas
were adopted throughout the British Isles. In 1819, the Analytical Society was
replaced by the still flourishing Cambridge Philosophical Society. In some
respects, it became a rival to the Royal Society which, at the time, paid very little
attention either to mathematics or mathematicians.
However, the policies of the Analytical Society had consequences far beyond
what was originally intended. They turned their attention to algebra, and
Peacock, inspired by Woodhouse’s book, produced in 1830 his important
Treatise on Algebra. The study of the differential operator as an object in its own
right had led in turn to the study of other mathematical entities such as symbols,
exponents and operations in the same light. The traditional stranglehold of
arithmetic on algebra was gradually being broken and the subject of abstract
algebra was emerging. To Peacock and the Analytical Society must go a great
deal of the credit for these exciting developments in mathematics. The most
important principle to emerge was that the rules of behaviour and manipulation
of mathematical entities are more worthy of study than the possible
interpretations of these entities.
This then is a short summary of the state of mathematics in the England of
Boole’s youth. Though Boole had no contact with, or indeed knowledge of, the
activities of the Analytical Society in his early years, it might be claimed that he
followed in their path quite independently. Because he could read French,
German and Italian from an early stage, he was able to study the very books by
Continental authors that the Cambridge reformers were recommending.1 He
began his serious study of mathematics at the age of 16 in 1831 by reading
Calcul Différentiel by Lacroix in the original French. The book was given to him
by the Reverend G.S. Dickson, a Lincoln clergyman and friend. He then
proceeded to Lagrange’s Mécanique Analytique and Laplace’s Mécanique
Céleste, heavy tomes with few diagrams, infuriating gaps and frequent cryptic
declarations prefaced by the most dangerous of all phrases in mathematics – ‘it
is clear that’. Slowly and painstakingly he mastered these books, all the time

marvelling at the facility with which their authors manipulated the symbols of
the differential and integral calculus. Lagrange’s Calcul des Fonctions also
greatly influenced his thinking and later on, he read the works of Jacobi,
Lebesgue and Poisson.
Though Boole had a great admiration for Isaac Newton, he did not allow
chauvinistic feelings to blind him to the faults of Newton’s methods. However,
he did read and master Newton’s monumental Principia at an early stage of his
development. Nor did he neglect the new books that were being written at the
time by the Cambridge reformers and indeed, he eventually came to the
conclusion that the newer English textbooks were superior because they
combined the experience and knowledge of the Continentals with a fresh
enthusiasm for analytic methods. He even regretted having begun with Lacroix
and complained that although the French textbooks were good on theory, they
were weak on examples. In later life, he adopted mostly English textbooks
(especially those of Todhunter) for teaching his college classes.
Far from hindering his mathematical development, Boole’s very educational
deprivation was possibly one of the reasons for his great success. Apart from the
little help given to him by his father and the Lincoln clergymen, the Reverends
G.S. Dickson and E.R. Larken, he received virtually no tutoring in mathematics
in those early years. He became quite used to working on his own and
developing his own train of thought. When asked afterwards how he had
managed to read and master Lacroix unaided, he replied that he read, and read
on, and read over, again and again until he understood it. Had his talents been
allowed to develop along more orthodox lines at Cambridge or at some other
university, it is quite possible that, with a tutor by his side, his originality might
have been stunted and never allowed to blossom. Despite the difficulties he had
to endure, he could have had no better background for a career in independent
mathematical research.
It is probable that Boole was originally motivated to study mathematics as a
tool for the understanding of science. His early interest was in practical science
and his early reading concerned itself with mechanics, optics and the movements
of the heavenly bodies. Gradually however, he came to realise that mathematics
was a most exciting, interesting and even beautiful subject in its own right.
Young George Boole devoured and mastered every mathematical textbook he
could lay his hands on and soon discovered that his talents lay in the area of pure
mathematics. In a few years, virtually unaided, he had travelled the path from
applications to abstraction, a step which had taken the subject literally thousands

of years to accomplish.
Mathematics is essentially a creative science, though many would claim it is
in fact a creative art form. In the beginning, an enthusiastic young student of the
subject is content to study and learn what others before him have discovered and
perhaps in the course of his investigations, he will rediscover some of their
minor results. Sooner or later, however, every genuine mathematician wants to
create or discover new mathematics or solve problems whose solutions have
eluded previous generations.
Boole was fortunate that there was living just a few miles from the city of
Lincoln, at Thurlby Hall, a man of considerable standing in the mathematical
world, in the person of Sir Edward ffrench Bromhead, FRS. A Cambridge
graduate in mathematics, Bromhead had been involved with the Analytical
Society from its very inception. He was a close friend of Babbage and well
acquainted with Herschel, Peacock and other members of the Society, and he
was an enthusiastic advocate of analytic methods in mathematics. In later years,
he gave help and encouragement to another famous British mathematician,
George Green of Nottingham, so his influence on the development of nineteenth-
century mathematics in England was quite considerable.
Bromhead lent Boole many books from his extensive personal library of
mathematical works and commented on the validity and originality of Boole’s
early researches. In fact, it is probable that Bromhead first introduced Boole to
many of the more advanced works of authors such as Lagrange and Monge, and
indeed Boole borrowed copies of books by these authors for long periods. In a
series of letters from Boole to Bromhead spanning the years 1838 to 1840, one
can trace many of the influences which certain authors (notably Lagrange,
Monge, Fourier and Lebesgue) had on Boole’s mathematical development. On a
personal level, it is interesting to note in the letters the rather untypical use by
Boole of words such as ‘important’, in reference to his own work; but perhaps
this may be explained by the fact that Bromhead was almost a personal friend
with whom Boole could afford to be quite candid.
The following extracts may serve to give something of the flavour of the
correspondence between the two men.2
January 7th, 1839: Dear Sir, I have received your additional loan of
books and heartily thank you for it. I have not found in any of them
any extensions in the theoretical portion of Dynamics beyond what is
effected by Lagrange. The results of my investigations which I have

now embodied in a memoir I will very briefly communicate to you and
request your opinion as to whether they are likely to prove of use and
to be well received or not. Having in the first place established certain
views on the relation of the Calculus of Variations to the Differential
Calculus, I have investigated two general theorems of the science.
These are symmetrical and easy of application and I may add by the
way that they lead to a third remarkable theorem unfolding a condition
which every result obtained in whatever way from the Calculus of
Variations must necessarily satisfy and which may therefore act more
as a negative test of the accuracy of such results. In the application of
the above theorems to the general purposes of analysis I have
succeeded in obtaining very varied investigation of the following
cases:
1st: Laplace’s and Lagrange’s theorems for the development of
functions.
2nd: Some important developments in the application of the theory of
maxima and minima to indeterminate integral forms.
3rd: All the general results which Lagrange has obtained from the
differential equation of motion together with a demonstration of
the principle of least action from the general transformed
equation. This result is not given by Lagrange, who has confined
himself to the consideration of rectangular coordinates in
deducing that principle – it appears necessary to the analytical
completeness of the subject and concludes my researches.
The volumes I shall shortly return and request your candid opinion on
the subject of this hasty communication. With great respect, yours
faithfully,
G. Boole
Waddington, March 21st, 1839: Dear Sir, Herewith you will receive
the Ms. which you have been so good as to promise to look over. In
doing so it will perhaps be advisable to compare it with any former
investigations on the same subject which you may have at hand …
… I beg to thank you heartily for the volumes still in my possession
and to assure you that they have been of the greatest possible service

to me. I am, your faithful servant,
Geo. Boole
Waddington, July 24th, 1839: … Several of the most important results
of the paper have recently been obtained by French writers (among
them a M. Lebesgue). All the advantages appear however to attach to
the method of investigation which I have adapted and which consists
in a new and curious application of the Differential Calculus …
…I have just obtained by the principle of the separation of symbols
a series of very important results leading to a direct and uniform
method of integration for linear equations both in the Differential
Calculus and in the Calculi of finite and mixed differences. The
method is so remarkable both as respects the form of the process and
its facility of application that had I not fully tested it both in principle
and in practice I should feel disposed to question its truth. I have some
thoughts of sending it to the Philosophical Magazine.
You will receive this letter enclosed with two volumes of Lagrange.
I have kept them a long time but hope that you will excuse me. They
have been of very great service to me and I beg to thank you again for
the loan. I am, very respectfully yours,
Geo. Boole
Later in 1839, Boole sent some more of his original investigations to Bromhead.
Again he asked: ‘Perhaps you will favour me by giving your opinion whether the
method of my paper possesses any advantages in practice over the one alluded to
and that of Lagrange’s. The cases of equal and imaginary roots are the most
important …’
May 30th, 1840: Sir, I return the accompanying volume (Monge) for
which I beg to thank you as for the mathematical tract which you were
so kind as to send with it. The latter I have read with great pleasure
and intend at a future period to peruse with more particular attention
…
… At present I have but little time for mathematical pursuits and
intend in a great measure to relinquish them for objects of a different
nature. I am however endeavouring at occasional intervals to clear up
the theory of some very curious and important transformations relative

to Definite Integrals and which may lead to very great extensions in
that branch of analysis and throw considerable light upon Fourier’s
theorem and many others of a similar nature …
Another hallmark of a mathematician – indeed of any creative scientist, author
or artist – is his desire to communicate his work to others in published form.
Several factors motivate this desire, including perhaps a subconscious longing
for fame and the acclaim of others, but more often than not it is based on a
genuine desire to share one’s discoveries with others and to add to mankind’s
store of knowledge. Perhaps many scholars have been driven too far by the
‘publish or perish’ mentality into which academics of the modern times have
been pushed, but the basic motivation behind the desire to publish one’s findings
is essentially a praiseworthy one.
In 1838, when Boole was 23, he wrote his first paper for publication. This
would nowadays be about the age when a young mathematician, having
completed his doctoral thesis, would begin to publish his results, but it was quite
an early age at which to begin publishing in the nineteenth century. The paper
was inspired by his reading of Lagrange’s Mécanique Analytique and he entitled
it On Certain Theorems in the Calculus of Variations. The credit reads ‘By G.
Boole, Waddington, near Lincoln’, and he begins by remarking that it would
perhaps have been more just to entitle the paper Notes on Lagrange. In this
paper, Boole proposes some improvements in the methods of Lagrange and a
shortcut in the derivation of the Principle of Least Action from a generalised
equation of motion.
More important from our point of view, however, is the following extract
from the introduction:
As the basis of these investigations, I suppose the symbols d and δ to
imply two independent differentiations, performed on one variable
quantity, supposed to be a function of two others. This being laid
down, it is easy to establish the following principles:
1st: The symbols ∫, d,δ, are mutually transposable, together with the
symbols d/dx, d/dy, δ/δx, δ/δy, etc., when the denominators of
these latter are relatively constant.
2nd: If U and V represent functions of u, then dUδV = dVδU.
This extract shows that Boole had already made the difficult conceptual leap of
regarding mathematical operations as separate entities to be considered in their

own right. However, there is evidence that he had taken this step as early as
1835 when he was only 19. In that year, in a letter to a friend he used the terms
commutative and distributive, and to allay his friend’s doubts about the validity
of symbolic methods, he added the following significant remarks:
As to the lawfulness of this mode of procedure, it may be remarked as
a general principle of language, and not of the peculiar language of
Mathematics alone, that we are permitted to employ symbols to
represent whatever we choose that they should represent – things,
operations, relations, etc., provided 1st, that we adhere to the
signification once fixed, 2nd, that we employ the symbols in
subjection to the laws of the things for which they stand.
Though the paper to which we have referred was the first one which Boole wrote
for publication, it was not in fact the first of his papers to be published. In 1839,
he communicated to the Cambridge Mathematical Journal a paper entitled
Researches on the Theory of Analytical Transformations, with a Special
Application to the Reduction of the General Equation of the Second Order. This
paper, which was his first publication, dealt with the transformation of
homogeneous functions by linear substitutions and the topic was again inspired
by Lagrange’s Mécanique Analytique. Though the methods of this paper were
soon to be superseded by later papers, nevertheless it shows the paths along
which his mind was progressing as early as 1839.
Boole’s first two papers appeared in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal,3
which had recently been founded and the existence of such a journal in England
at the time he commenced to produce original research was a happy coincidence.
The changes in British mathematics that resulted from the policies of the
Analytical Society meant that enough original research material was being
produced in Britain to support a journal. Thus in 1837, the Cambridge
Mathematical Journal was founded. In the beginning, almost all the contributors
were Cambridge men and among the illustrious names to appear in the first
series were those of Ellis, de Morgan, Thomson, Cayley, Sylvester and Stokes.
Curiously, in the first volume of the journal the names of the authors did not
appear, each contribution being signed by a letter or symbol which gave a hint as
to who the author was. It seems that this procedure was adopted because in
Cambridge at that time it was felt that to do scientific work of any sort was a
suitable diversion for a gentleman, but that to append one’s name to its
publication smacked of blowing one’s own trumpet! However, by the time
Boole’s papers appeared in the second volume, this convention had been

disregarded.
The first editor of the Cambridge Mathematical Journal was Duncan F.
Gregory, a man whose contributions to mathematics have been seriously
underestimated.4 Gregory was born in Edinburgh in 1813, a direct descendant of
James Gregory (1638–75) who had given his name to the famous series for π:
D.F. Gregory took his degree in mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge in
1837 and immediately began to devote himself to research in mathematics.
Indeed, had prolonged illness not led to his premature death at the tragically
early age of 30 in 1844, he would definitely have made many further important
contributions to mathematics. As it was, in the few papers he published in the
early numbers of the Cambridge Journal, he led mathematics significantly
further along the road to abstraction. In the notation of Leibniz, he noticed that
the formula governing repeated differentiation
an exact analogy with the law of exponents of numbers am+n = am an, where m
and n are positive integers.
In geometry, he noticed that if L represents the identity transformation of the
plane, then Ln = L for any positive integer n and L  can be made to represent a
rotation of the plane through an angle of 
 degrees, since (L )n= L1 = L. He
remarked that such transformations of the plane behave exactly like numbers
under addition and he was bold enough to write statements such as:
Many people had been involved in the slow movement of the gigantic iceberg
of mathematics to the great sea of abstraction, but surely Gregory brought it to
the boundaries of that sea. Had he lived, it is not unreasonable to suggest that he
might have brought about that heady plunge unaided because he was one of the
few people of that age with the courage and insight to see beyond mere analogy
and recognise the true essence of mathematics. His ideas and plans were almost
precisely the same as those of Boole and it is perhaps not unfair to suggest that

Boole completed the work which they both initiated.
While one can question the importance of Gregory’s contributions to
mathematics, there can be no doubt that he had a profound influence on Boole,
both mathematically and otherwise. Early in 1839, Boole visited Gregory in
Cambridge and they discussed Boole’s results on the calculus of variations.
Later that year, Boole submitted his paper on Analytical Transformations to the
Cambridge Journal, but Gregory did not immediately accept it for publication.
Boole was of course totally inexperienced in the writing of mathematical papers
for publication and Gregory did him a valuable service by suggesting how he
might improve his style and remove obscurities from the text. The suggested
corrections were duly made and the paper was published in the number for
February 1841. Three months later, in the following number, Boole’s earlier
paper on the Calculus of Variations appeared, together with a third paper entitled
On the Integration of Linear Differential Equations with Constant Coefficients.
Boole experienced the thrill which every young mathematician feels at seeing
his results in print and his feelings of pleasure must have been increased by the
fact that he had overcome so many obstacles. About this time, he wrote to a
friend:
You will feel interested to know the fate of my mathematical
speculations in Cambridge. One of the papers is already printed in the
Mathematical Journal. Another, which I sent a short time ago, has
been very favourably received and will shortly be printed together with
the one I previously sent.
Boole contributed some twenty-four mathematical papers to the Cambridge
Journal, twelve to each series. These papers covered a wide range of
mathematical topics including differential equations, integration, logic,
probability, geometry and linear transformations. However, the importance of
these contributions lies not so much in their content, but in the fact that they
stressed the importance of the manipulation of symbolic operators in various
areas of mathematics.
Gregory soon realised that, by publishing Boole’s papers, he had brought to
the notice of the mathematical world an unorthodox genius and it is to his credit
that he displayed no trace of envy. On the contrary, he strove to encourage Boole
in every way, both mathematically and personally. The letter to follow reflects
something of the relationship between the two men and shows, incidentally, that
Boole had already had one of his papers rejected by the more conservative

Philosophical Magazine on the grounds that it is safer to reject papers by new
authors.
Boole was now beginning to feel the effects of his isolation as a schoolteacher
in Lincolnshire and to appreciate the value of contact with mathematicians such
as Gregory. Though he appreciated the advantages of self-education, he soon
realised that he must now draw on the resources of living mathematicians if his
research was to prosper. Perhaps inevitably, Boole was attracted to the idea of
going to Cambridge to take a degree in mathematics. On the surface, it seemed
like the right thing to do and for a time, he pursued the idea enthusiastically. He
was as yet only twenty-four and for anyone else in his position, the idea would
possibly have been quite feasible. However, as Gregory pointed out, there were
several snags. If Boole went to Cambridge, he would have to put aside all
thoughts of original research, limiting himself with his fellow students to the
conventional course, and this would have been unbearable to a man of his
intellect and hunger for research.
There was also the thorny question of finance because Cambridge was a very
expensive place for a student in those days. In addition to this, Boole’s aged
parents and his family were now almost totally dependent on him financially so
that he could not, in conscience, give up his career as a teacher, thus cutting off
their only source of income. It was this last consideration that finally swung the
balance and Boole did not go to Cambridge or to any other university as a
student. Gregory very gently put the facts of the matter to him in a letter from
Trinity College, Cambridge, dated 29 March 1840:
Dear Sir, I have considered what you say in your last letter about your
intention of coming up here – I suppose with the intention of reading
for a fellowship – and do not see any objection to your doing so from
your age. A very considerable number of men who have taken high
degrees of late years must have entered the University quite as late in
life. I may mention Earnshaw, Kelland, Green, Potter. If you do
determine on entering the University with the intention of reading for a
Fellowship, you must be prepared to undergo a great deal of mental
discipline, which is not agreeable to a man who is accustomed to think
for himself. A high degree here is due quite as much to diligent labour
in certain appointed paths as to mathematical capacity. If a person
cannot bring himself to devote his whole energies to the training for
the degree examination, he is likely to find himself much thrown out at
the end of the course. I mention this particularly because when a

person takes such an important step at a more advanced time of life
involving a sacrifice of three or four years – he should be fully
prepared to submit to all that his younger rivals endure, otherwise he
has little chance of success and it is in this I think that such men are
apt to fail. From what I have seen of your mathematical acquirements,
I should certainly say that you might turn them to good account by
trying your fortune: at the same time you must know that success here
is a little like a lottery, and it is not always the best plan to stake
everything on a single throw of the die. The expense of a University
education depends almost entirely on the personal habits of the
student, and it is a difficult thing to fix any precise amount for it. As
far as my own experience goes, few pensioners, even of those who live
economically spend one way or another less than £250 a year, and I
doubt whether any keep within £200. If a person come up as a Sizar, or
receives assistance from the College as Scholar, of course his expenses
will be less – how much so I could not well say. In this matter,
however, I cannot pretend to be a very sure guide, as I know nothing
of the habits of men in the other Colleges. In some at least I think the
expenses must be considerably less than Trinity, as for instance in the
rent of rooms. You mention nothing as to the College which you
thought of belonging to. Trinity offers great advantages to one who has
talents and ambition, and for many reasons is the one which I would
always recommend; at the same time, you must be aware that it is
much easier to get a fellowship at a small College than here, and that
in them the degree is all that is required, whereas here you have to
undergo another examination. If, however, you will specify the points
on which you desire information, I shall be glad to give you as much
as lies in my power. If you have any more communications for the
journal we shall be glad to see them as soon as you find it convenient
to prepare them. We like to have communications sent early, as we are
then better able to judge how the number is to be made up. I remain,
yours truly,
D.F. Gregory
Gregory’s attitude towards Boole’s coming to Cambridge, though kind, was
quite firm and reflected the realities of the period. The social class to which
Boole belonged was offered no great scholarships or special inducements to
enter higher education and the conclusion must be that the state of affairs was

designed to preserve the academic caste system. One is inevitably reminded of
the relationship nearly a century later between the great mathematical analyst
G.H. Hardy and the Indian genius Ramanujan. Hardy realised that in Ramanujan
he had uncovered a talent of the highest order and this at once became the only
consideration he allowed to influence his actions. In the more enlightened
atmosphere of the twentieth century, Hardy’s voice was listened to and money
was made available so that Ramanujan could come to work at Cambridge.
Furthermore, he was not fitted with the academic straitjacket of first having to
take an undergraduate degree while at the same time turning away from
research. For Ramanujan, going to Cambridge to work with Hardy was the
making of him; for Boole, going to Cambridge a century earlier might have been
his undoing.
Perhaps to make up for his disappointment, Boole tore into research with
renewed vigour. It was in the year 1841 that a paper of his gave rise to a new
branch of mathematics – the algebraic theory of invariants. It does not seem to
be widely known that Boole was the discoverer of invariant theory, but his paper
entitled Exposition of a General Theory of Linear Transformations (which
appeared in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal for November 1841) contains
without doubt the beginnings of the subject. In his introduction to the paper, we
see once again that it was Boole’s early reading which inspired his new
discoveries:
The transformation of homogeneous functions by linear substitutions
is an important and oft-recurring problem of analysis. In the
Mécanique Analytique of Lagrange, it occupies a very prominent
place, and it has been made the subject of a special memoir by
Laplace. More recently it has engaged the attention of Lebesgue and
Jacobi … A memoir on this subject has also been given to the world
by Cauchy and there is an ingenious paper by Professor de Morgan on
its geometrical relations.
In this paper, Boole perceived the significance of a fact first noted by Lagrange
which later appears in the arithmetical works of Gauss. Consider a binary
quadratic form, that is a homogeneous algebraic expression of the second degree
of the form ax2 + 2hxy + by2. Now apply a linear transformation to this form by
substituting pX + qY for x and rX + sY for y, to yield the binary quadratic form
AX2 + 2HXY + BY2. Slightly tedious, but elementary, calculations show that the
original coefficients a, b and h and the new coefficients A, B and H are related in
the following way:

H2–AB = (ps – qr)2 (h2 – ab).
What Boole pointed out is that the only change that has taken place in the
value of h2 – ab is that it has been multiplied by a factor which depends only on
the values of p, q, r and s which define the linear transformation. The expression
h2– ab is called the discriminant of the equation ax2 + 2hxy + by2 = 0 and it
arises when we solve this equation using the quadratic formula. In fact h2–ab = 0
is a necessary and sufficient condition for the two solutions of this equation to be
equal. What Boole had shown therefore was that the discriminant of a quadratic
homogeneous equation in two variables is a relative invariant under a linear
transformation, that is invariant up to multiplication by a constant which depends
only on the particular linear transformation in question. Boole also found the
absolute invariants under the transformation in this situation: those expressions
which remain precisely the same before and after the transformation.
When a mathematician founds a new branch of the subject, it is to be expected
that he will be in the forefront of those involved in its early development, but for
some strange reason, Boole played little or no part in the extensive development
of invariant theory which took place in the second half of the nineteenth century.
He did however produce a further paper on the subject, entitled Notes on Linear
Transformations and published in the Cambridge Journal of 1845, in which he
produced two invariants for the general equation of the fourth degree, having
first asked the question whether or not there might be invariant expressions other
than discriminants which could be constructed from the coefficients. In this
paper, there is perhaps a clue to the reason why Boole did not pursue his early
interest in invariant theory: he describes a certain invariant, a homogeneous
polynomial of degree six having sixteen terms, as having been found ‘after a
tedious process’ and it is quite possible that he found this branch of mathematics
somewhat dull and boring. It was rather far removed from his interests in logic,
philosophy and calculus, and of course the early results he discovered were
isolated and gave little indication of the important applications of invariant
theory which were later to be discovered. It must also be recalled that Boole had
no systematic method for producing invariants and perhaps the haphazard nature
of this branch of the subject did not particularly appeal to him.
Other mathematicians, however, were quick to jump on the bandwagon. The
German, Eisenstein, in 1844 following up a result of Boole’s, discovered a new
class of invariants and, in 1845, Arthur Cayley published a fundamental memoir
entitled On the Theory of Linear Transformations, which put the subject on a
firm foundation as a branch of mathematics. Cayley ambitiously set himself the

task of finding general methods which would produce all the invariant
expressions of a certain kind. He was later to be both the founder of matrix
theory and the originator of abstract group theory and, in both these
developments, he relied heavily on the theory of linear transformations. Boole
therefore had an indirect but important hand in these fundamental developments
of mathematics. Cayley was later joined by another Englishman, the stormy
James Joseph Sylvester, and together they developed the theory of invariants to
such an extent that they became known as ‘Invariant Twins’. This appellation
was later extended by Hermite after the Irishman George Salmon (1819–1904)
became a major contributor to invariant theory. Hermite dubbed Cayley,
Sylvester and Salmon the ‘Invariant Trinity’. It has been claimed that they
actually overdeveloped the subject because, by the turn of the century, it had
ceased to be an active area of research largely as a result of the great progress
they had made. Nevertheless, invariant theory has found important applications
within mathematics, notably in geometry and applied mathematics, and the
concept of invariance played a crucial role in the development of the theory of
relativity by Einstein in the early twentieth century. Sylvester, apart from one
minor point, acknowledged Boole as the founder of invariant theory and Cayley
opens his fundamental paper of 1845 with the words: ‘The following
investigations were suggested to me by a very elegant paper on the same subject,
published in the Journal by Mr Boole.’
Cayley was at once excited by Boole’s ideas and as a result they corresponded
frequently during this period.5 Their letters were concerned mostly with the
technical details of proofs in invariant theory, but a number of interesting facts
emerge. In the first letter, Cayley expresses his admiration for Boole’s work as
follows:
June 13th, 1844: My Dear Sir, Will you allow me to make an excuse
of the pleasure afforded me by a paper of yours published some time
ago in the Mathematical Journal On the Theory of Linear
Transformations’ and of the interest I take in the subject for sending
you a few formulae relative to it which were suggested to me by your
very interesting paper. I should be delighted if they were to prevail
upon you to resume the subject which really appears inexhaustible …
November 11th, 1844: I have been quite delighted with the results you
have just sent me … I have just finished a paper on linear
transformations for the next number of the Journal which I believe is

to be printed soon. I shall be very anxious to have your opinion of it …
December 11th, 1844: I must apologise to you for having miscorrected
so hastily your coefficients for the function of the fifth order. Those
you sent me were perfectly correct … Do you see any way of
calculating, in rough, the degree of labour that would be necessary for
forming tables of elimination and transforming functions, etc? If one
could get to any practical results about it, and they were not very
alarming, it would be worthwhile I think presenting them to the British
Association … suppose one ascertained a result would take a century
to calculate, it would be rather a hopeless affair.
Here one can see that Cayley was anticipating something of the spirit of the
mathematical theory of effective computability by asking how long it might take
to calculate a table of functions of a certain kind. This notion has become
increasingly important in recent times where many calculations are performed by
computers whose time is extremely expensive. It would be interesting to know if
this idea was mentioned by any mathematician before Cayley. The concept
certainly motivated Charles Babbage in his quest to build a calculating machine,
but it is doubtful if he or any of his contemporaries ever attempted to formalise
the notion of effective computability.
However, what is by far the most interesting item in the Cayley–Boole
correspondence occurs in a letter of 7 September 1844. Cayley writes:
I was very much interested lately by a short paper of Sir William
[Rowan] Hamilton’s in the Philosophical Magazine on a new system
of imaginary quantities. He considers what he terms quaternions,
expressions of the form x + iy + jz + kw, i,j,k being imaginary symbols
satisfying i2 = –1 = j2 = k2, ij = k = – ji, jk = i = –kj, ki = j = – ki, the
remarkable part of which is evidently that the factors of a product are
not convertible, but as he observes, why should they be? The results
that the supposition leads to are certainly quite consistent with each
other and some of them very remarkable. The properties of
determinants for instance are modified most curiously. But like I
forget what Jewish writing it was said of, the idea would require camel
loads of commentaries for its development; every theorem would be
required to be rewritten and the new version would be ten times as
long as the original, if all the formulae of analysis had to be adapted to
the cases of the symbols it contained denoting quaternions.

Cayley was clearly very excited by Hamilton’s discoveries and two phrases in
the above paragraph deserve special attention – ‘Why should they be?’ and ‘the
results are certainly quite consistent with each other.’ Cayley realised that there
was nothing sacrosanct about the commutative law or any other law of
mathematics and that consistency of results within a given axiom system was the
central issue. Indeed, it is tempting to conjecture that the following sequence of
events may have taken place. Hamilton became interested in abstract algebra
when, using ordered number pairs, he put the complex numbers on a firm
algebraic basis. Later, when attempting to generalise his system to ordered
triples and quadruples, he decided that he must sacrifice the commutative law of
multiplication to achieve consistency and the result was that he discovered
quaternions. Cayley then realised that non-commutative multiplication made
matrix multiplication, or equivalently omposition of linear transformations, a
mathematical possibility. Finally, Cayley realised that the laws of combination
of quaternions could be generalised and abstracted to yield the notion of an
abstract group. Incidentally, Hamilton’s mind was also working along these lines
because he invented what he called the ‘Icosian Calculus’ which we would
nowadays recognise as a system of generators and defining relations for the
alternating group, A5. Boole stood at the apex of a triangle whose base points
were Hamilton and Cayley. He too asked the question ‘Why should they be?’
and, when it came to the invention of his new algebra of classes, he was bold
enough to demand of his new system laws which were not satisfied by number
systems. Thus, while Cayley and Hamilton lifted existing restrictions, Boole
imposed further restrictions and the result was a further freeing of mathematics
from the tyranny of number systems. It is at least plausible to suggest that
Boole’s actions in this area were strongly influenced by both Cayley and
Hamilton and that together, the three men largely brought about the rebirth of
innovation in algebra over a relatively short period of time.
Boole and Cayley became personal friends and Cayley came to visit and stay
with Boole in Lincoln. Cayley did his best to persuade Boole to become more
involved in invariant theory and though Boole was to produce a few more results
in this area, his interest waned and he turned his attention to other things.
However, he had not yet abandoned all thoughts of going to Cambridge; so,
remembering Gregory’s rather cool response to his overtures, he broached the
subject rather more indirectly with Cayley. He wrote saying that ‘a friend’ was
thinking of studying engineering mathematics at university and asked for advice
as to which university he should choose. Of course such a friend may very well
have existed, but the letter looks suspiciously like a probe which might lead to

an offer of help of some sort from Cayley to enable Boole to go to Cambridge.
Whatever the facts of the matter, Cayley failed to rise to the bait and his reply
has all the appearance of having come from someone in a privileged financial
position whose main worries about going to university were concerned with
details:
Trinity, March 14th, 1845: My dear Sir, I must beg your pardon for
having so long delayed answering your letter; but I am afraid even
now that I am doing it, I have hardly any advice to offer on the subject
which can be of much service to you. I should think that the studies of
neither university had much direct reference to your friend’s future
profession – at least, I can hardly fancy the necessity of much
Mathematics even for Engineering which would I suppose require
more of it than Architecture, and what would be required be very
much sui generis and different from what would be gained here. It
would be the last thing in the world I should think of to attempt to
dissuade anybody from coming up to the University. All I mean to
deduce from my premises is that under your friend’s circumstances, a
person might fairly let his own taste or any reasons of external
expediency decide for him as to which university he would choose.
But I know next to nothing about Oxford, so that I am very
incompetent to draw any comparisons between them. I should
decidedly, in case Cambridge be the one fixed upon, recommend one
of the large Colleges, Trinity or St Johns – but especially Trinity – in
preference to any of the others. I do not think there would be any
difficulty about entering, for there are always after the nominal
number is filled up a long string of more last admissions and it is a
considerable time yet from October. I believe all that is necessary
about entering is to have a recommendation from some M.A. or to
write to the tutor of the College or side of the College in which one is
to be. Believe me that if I had anything more definite to have sent you,
I would have done so … Believe me my dear Sir, Yours faithfully,
A. Cayley
This seems to have been the last forlorn attempt that Boole ever made to pursue
a university course and it is probable that around this time he finally abandoned
the idea altogether.
We now turn our attention to an incident which was to have a strong influence

on Boole’s subsequent career and which brought him to the notice of the
scientific public. The Cambridge Mathematical Journal was essentially a journal
for shorter publications, so when Boole in 1843, while investigating the theory
of differential equations, invented what he called ‘a general method in analysis’,
he quickly realised that the long paper he had written on this weighty topic could
not be published in that journal. At first he considered having it published
privately at his own expense, but it was suggested to him that he might send it to
the Royal Society for publication in their Transactions. He wrote at once to
Gregory for advice and received the following reply:
5, Manchester Square, London, June 19th, 1843: Dear Sir, I have been
prevented from answering your letter by a severe attack of illness,
from which I have not yet recovered. My advice certainly is that you
should endeavour to get your paper printed by the Royal Society, both
because you will thereby avoid a considerable expense and because a
paper in the Philosophical Transactions is more likely to be known
and read than one printed separately. If you know any member of the
Society, you may ask him to communicate it to the Society, but in the
event of your not knowing any such person, I can ask Mr Airy to do
so. Of course he cannot be in any way answerable for getting it
printed; that must depend on the report of those to whom the paper
will be referred. I may just remark that a paper for the Transactions
ought to contain fewer illustrations and examples than one which you
might print yourself. My own solution of the equation of differences in
my problem paper is much simpler than that which you propose: but I
am not in a fit state to enter on the subject at present. Yours truly,
D.F. Gregory
The last sentence of this letter is a poignant one; when a mathematician of the
stature of Gregory cannot summon up the enthusiasm to investigate a question in
which he was greatly interested, it is a sign that he is indeed seriously ill. In fact
he had less than a year to live, because he died on 23 February 1844, mourned
by all who knew him, in his thirty-first year. This letter seems to have been the
last communication he had with Boole.
Boole had introduced himself to Augustus de Morgan in 1842 by a letter
concerning de Morgan’s Differential and Integral Calculus, then recently
published, and this contact led to a lifelong friendship, both mathematical and
personal. De Morgan was an extraordinary character whose role in the

development of mathematics has been much underrated and sadly neglected.6, 7
He was born of British parents in India in 1806 and brought up in England. From
an early age, he was inculcated with a great variety of religious dogmas and
practices by many of his relatives, with the result that he developed quite a
complex about religious beliefs. He eventually became a Unitarian though he
refused to describe himself as such and, while he never formally joined any
church, he liked to describe himself as a ‘Christian unattached’. He lost an eye in
early childhood and was ostracised by his cruel playmates, but he found
consolation in reading novels, drawing caricatures, playing the flute and reading
algebra. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1823 and showed
exceptional mathematical ability. He headed the class in his second year, but in
1827 graduated only as fourth Wrangler, though he was clearly superior to any
of his contemporaries. It is probable that his indulgence in reading innumerable
novels, playing the flute and endless religious controversy may have contributed
to his lack of success; but his intense dislike of competitive examinations may
also have been a factor.
His mother wished him to take holy orders, but he refused and his scruples
also prevented him from accepting the MA degree or a fellowship. For a time, he
considered a career in medicine but finally settled on law. However, about this
time, the University of London was founded and its dissident nature appealed so
much to de Morgan that he abandoned his increasingly unsatisfying legal career
and accepted an invitation to become the first professor of mathematics there.
His professorship was a stormy one and at one stage he resigned for a period of
five years on a matter of principle. He died in 1871.
While at Cambridge, de Morgan came into contact with those who were
reforming British mathematics and became friends with many of them, including
Herschel, Baily and Airy. Boole and de Morgan had a great deal in common and
they shared an interest in a wide variety of topics such as astronomy, the
introduction of decimal currency, the writing of mathematical textbooks and the
scientific education of the working classes. The abiding interest they had in
common however was mathematical logic and, by coincidence, their interest in
this area seems to have stemmed from calculus and functional notation. Like
Aristotle and Leibniz before them, both men felt that it should be possible to
express the fundamental laws of logic in mathematical form and they differed
mainly in their choice of notation. In fact, it was the controversy between de
Morgan and the Scottish logician and metaphysician Sir William Hamilton that
inspired Boole to write his first book on logic in 1847. De Morgan’s book
entitled Formal Logic appeared on the very same day.

Late in 1843, Boole sent his paper On a General Method in Analysis to de
Morgan for a final vetting before submitting it for publication. De Morgan’s
response was immediate and generous, as Boole’s reply to his letter shows:
Lincoln, December 8th, 1843: Dear Sir, For your kindness in
examining my paper I can only express to you my most sincere thanks.
Your suggestion respecting a change of notation I shall attend to
should I have to print the paper on my own account or to send it to a
journal after its possible rejection by the RS. As however I shall in the
first instance lay the paper before the Society and as before doing this I
shall have to trouble a friend here to make a copy for me, being too
much engaged at present to transcribe it myself, I shall not be able to
make the alterations proposed in the copy presented to the Society.
Perhaps you will do me the favour to give me the requisite address
which I have vainly sought in the Transactions.
You do not say whether the method which I have given for the
solution of differential equations by series is original otherwise than in
form. I am anxious to ascertain this point. If the method merely
enables us to do what there was an organised and general method of
effecting before, I should not think the paper so far as respects this
particular application worth sending to the RS.
The postage on the MS having been rather heavy I beg that you will
permit me to return the amount in stamps. I remain Your faithful and
obliged servant,
George Boole
Boole now felt ready to submit his paper8 for publication, so on 10 January
1844, he wrote the following letter to S. Hunter Christie, Secretary of the Royal
Society:
Sir, In accordance with your directions I hereby forward to you the
mathematical paper which I am desirous to lay before the Royal
Society. I have only to observe that should the committee appointed to
decide upon its claims think the examples too numerous, it will be at
their discretion to strike out such as they may think superfluous. I
remain Your Obedient Servant,
Geo. Boole

It is fair to assume that Boole realised the paper he had written was an important
and original contribution to mathematics. In the letters just quoted, we see a
certain lack of confidence from time to time, but this is a lack of confidence in
the judgement of others rather than a lack of belief in the merits of his own
work. As it turned out, Boole’s fears were quite justified and the paper had a
stormy passage through the Royal Society before it was eventually published.
What follows is a good example of the fact that while mathematicians may claim
some degree of infallibility with regard to the correctness of their subject, they
are by no means infallible when it comes to expressing an opinion about the
merits of a particular piece of mathematical research. There are at least two
conflicting accounts concerning the treatment Boole’s paper received and neither
of these accounts reflects very much credit on the Royal Society of the day.
One version of the story is that the Council of the Royal Society, consisting of
fifteen fellows, had virtually rejected the paper, even without examination, but
that one of them – Thomas Davies of the Mathematics Committee – maintained
that the fact that the author was poor and unknown was no reason to dismiss his
efforts out of hand. Davies suggested that the paper should be referred to two
experts in the field and given precisely the same treatment as a paper written by
an established figure. After a great deal of argument, this motion was agreed to
and some claim that this incident set a precedent which ensured that anyone,
however obscure, who afterwards communicated a really valuable paper to the
Royal Society could at least be guaranteed a fair hearing.
Another version of the story is that the paper was immediately referred to two
fellows of the Society for a report on its merits. The first version is probably the
correct one, but there is no doubt that the paper was eventually given to two
referees. One of them could see little of merit in the paper and therefore
recommended its rejection. It is quite possible that he did not understand Boole’s
results and that rejection was probably the safer policy. Luckily, however, the
other referee – Phillip Kelland, Professor of Mathematics at the University of
Edinburgh – was a more competent judge and his opinion carried more weight
with the members of the Council. On his strong recommendation, the paper was
accepted for publication in the Transactions. Astonishingly, the paper that had
been rejected by one referee was recommended by Kelland for a special prize. A
little earlier, the Royal Society had announced their intention to award one of
their gold medals, for the most significant paper on mathematics communicated
to them in the period June 1841 to June 1844. There is no doubt that Boole knew
this and was so convinced of the importance of his discoveries that he aspired to
this prize which was, at very least, the nineteenth-century equivalent of today’s

coveted Fields Medal in mathematics.
Thus it came about that Boole was awarded the first gold medal for
mathematics ever presented by the Royal Society and this event was
undoubtedly a turning point in his career. He received the Royal Medal, as it was
called, at the anniversary meeting of the Society in November 1844, with the
Marquis of Northampton, as President, in the chair. In a testimonial, the Council
described the paper as ‘containing matter as useful as it is original in classifying
and comprehending analytical operations.’ They also expressed the hope that Mr
Boole’s method would find a permanent place in science.
Later, in 1858, when Boole was being presented with the slightly less
prestigious Keith Medal by the Council of the Royal Society of Edinburgh,
Kelland recalled the circumstances of the earlier award thus:9
My first knowledge of Mr Boole commenced in 1844, about the
beginning of which year he sent to the Royal Society of London a
memoir On a General Method in Analysis. Many problems of no very
great 
apparent 
complication 
had 
baffled 
the 
ingenuity 
of
mathematicians. Solutions were, it is true, obtained, but the processes
were so indirect and unsatisfactory, that they were something like
excrescences on the smooth face of science. Of this class of problems
is an equation which occurs in the theory of the figure of the earth. Mr
Airy, in his Tracts, gives simply the result, without the slightest
indication of a process. Mr Gaskin and Mr Leslie Ellis had attacked
this individual problem with partial success. But Mr Boole’s ‘New
Method’ not only set the logical question of dealing with separation of
symbols in a clear light, but completely effected the solution of all that
class of problems, of which this was a particular example. The Royal
Society did me the honour to refer the paper to me and I had the good
fortune at once to perceive its importance and to recommend the
Society to bestow on it a mark of approbation.
Boole opens his paper On a General Method in Analysis by remarking that much
attention had been paid to a method in analysis known as the ‘calculus of
operations’ or the ‘method of separation of symbols’. He acknowledges his debt
to the books and papers of Gregory, where the principles on which the method
had been founded had first been stated, and in a footnote he adds:
Few in so short a life have done so much for science. The high sense

which I entertain for his merits as a mathematician, is mingled with
feelings of gratitude for much valuable assistance rendered to me in
my earlier essays.
Boole also cites the names of Servois and de Morgan as among those prominent
in the development of this particular branch of analysis. However, he also
mentions another name, that of Robert Murphy, as a strong influence on his
ideas and quotes copiously from his papers. As Murphy has been somewhat
neglected by historians of mathematics, a short outline of his life and work may
not be out of place here.10
Born in Ireland in 1806 at Mallow, Co. Cork, Murphy was, like Boole, the son
of a shoemaker. At the age of eleven, he was run over by a runaway cart and
subsequently confined to bed for over a year with a severely fractured thigh
bone. During this confinement, he studied Euclid and algebra unaided and with
no previous knowledge made such rapid progress that by the age of thirteen he
was already an accomplished mathematician. At the age of eighteen, he
published a remarkably mature paper refuting a pamphlet entitled A Method of
making a cube double of a cube, founded on the principles of elementary
geometry, which had been written by a local priest. Murphy correctly showed
that the good father’s principles were erroneous and that the required solution
had not in fact been obtained.
He applied for permission to enter Trinity College, Dublin, but was refused.
However, the people of Mallow were so impressed by young Murphy’s
mathematical prowess that they raised a subscription to send him to university.
He became a student at Cambridge in 1825 and, in 1829, he took a BA degree in
Mathematics, graduating as third Wrangler. Soon he was elected a fellow of his
College and was admitted to Orders in the Church of England. Unfortunately,
about this time, he took to drinking heavily to the detriment of both his health
and career. He fell into debt and returned to his friends in Ireland but was back
again in London by 1838. He died, broken in mind and body, in 1843 at the early
age of 37, a brilliant meteor that flared intensely but all too briefly. In an
obituary tribute, his friend Augustus de Morgan said that he had a true genius for
mathematical invention and that his works on the theory of equations and
electricity and his other papers were all of extremely high calibre.
Murphy is nowadays mostly remembered for his textbook on electricity and
heat, and for ‘Murphy’s Formula’ – Pn(μ) = 2F1[–n, n + 1, 1, ½ (1 – μ)] – which
expresses the Legendre polynomial as a hypergeometric function. It is less well
known that he wrote extensively on definite integrals, algebraic equations, finite

differences and differential equations – the very topics that concerned Boole.
Incidentally, when Boole later took up residence in Cork, he promised de
Morgan that he would investigate Murphy’s early life but the results of his
researches, if any, do not seem to have survived.
Murphy’s paper A First Memoir on the Theory of Analytical Operations,
published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society for 1837, had a
very important influence on Boole’s paper of 1844 and therefore on his
subsequent work. In his paper, Murphy had gone considerably further down the
path of abstraction and separation of variables in algebra than many of his
predecessors. He had for example the following:
He also shows that if y, i, and x are three operations connected by x = i-l y i, then
xn = i-1yn i – a remarkable little piece of abstract algebra which he needed for an
application to differential equations. However, what was perhaps the most
important feature of Murphy’s paper was his free use and general treatment of
the differential operator and it was this aspect of his work that most influenced
Boole.
The ‘fundamental laws of combination’ quoted by Boole in his paper
are:
He remarks that these laws are satisfied when π and ρ represent such symbols as
d/dx, Δ, etc, in combination with each other or with constant quantities, and he
goes on to quote a symbolical version of Taylor’s theorem in the form f(x + h) =
єh(d/dx) f(x). He says
It is only in linear (differential) equations with constant coefficients
that the operative symbols combine in subjection to the laws we have
supposed … The object of this paper is to develop a method in
analysis which, while it operates with symbols apart from their

subjects, and may thus be considered as a branch of the calculus of
operations, is nevertheless free from the restrictions to which we have
alluded.
The basic idea behind Boole’s method is a thorough examination and
exploitation of the solution of differential equations by means of the substitution
x = eθ and an extension of the method of solution by series. In mentioning the
names of Euler, Laplace, Lacroix, Peacock, Herschel, Mossotti, Paoli, Ellis,
Poisson, Poinsot, Legendre, Dirichlet, Cayley and Green, Boole shows his vast
knowledge of the literature of the calculus and its applications. In the space of
some sixty pages, he displays a bewildering variety of applications of his method
to differential equations, ordinary and partial (including those with variable
coefficients), difference equations, generating functions, solutions in series, the
classification of integrable forms and summation of series.
The following example is typical of the power of his approach and shows his
willingness to use mathematical symbols formally:
Effecting the integrations and determining the constants by comparison with the
original series:
Some would claim that, in this paper, Boole was the first person to define clearly
the concept of an operator, one of the most central notions in mathematics,
though there is no doubt that he was leaning heavily on the groundwork done by
Cauchy and Fourier. Certainly, the eccentric Oliver Heaviside, founder of the
operational calculus, was strongly influenced by Boole’s paper of 1844 and by
his subsequent work.

Before we leave aside this paper, which was undoubtedly a major turning
point in Boole’s career, it may be of interest to quote a summary of its merits,
printed in the minutes of the Royal Society. It is probable that the author was
Kelland.
The object which the author proposes in this paper is to illustrate the
importance of conducting processes of reduction through the medium
of separation of symbols by the assumption of an exponential form for
the principal quantity operated on. The method, therefore, consists in
the transformation of given forms, from x to θ, by means of the
relation x = єθ, and operating on the results by certain refined
processes. Although the facilities which the exponential form affords,
under certain circumstances, have long been known to analysts, in no
investigation does the importance of this form appear in the manner in
which it is exhibited in this paper. Here the author has shown a method
which classifies and comprehends operations and which has the
advantage (in some cases at least) of showing their limits.
The author applies his method to the solution of differential
equations and of equations of differences. In the finite solution of
differential equations, the beauty and utility of the method are
strikingly exhibited. Certain forms of equations, the solutions of which
have been effected by transformations or by a happy assumption, are
made, by the author’s method, to exhibit their solutions in dependence
on a law. Both the processes by which the transformations are effected
and the results obtained by them are of the highest interest and
importance; and this part of the paper is so valuable that, alone, it
would entitle the author to honorary distinction.
In the application to equations of differences, under which head are
included generating functions, series and the author’s miscellaneous
theorems, the advantages of a general method must likewise be fully
recognised; and the Council are satisfied that the author has done good
service in the applications which he has made of his method in this
branch of analysis.
Anticipating that Mr Boole’s method will find a permanent place in
science, the Council have not hesitated to award to him the Royal
Medal.
The importance of Boole’s paper of 1844 lies not so much in the results he
proved (though undoubtedly they constituted quite a significant contribution to

mathematics) but rather in the influence it had on his subsequent ideas and
development. He was now on the threshold of his greatest discovery – namely,
that the essence of mathematics consists in the study of form and structure rather
than content, and that ‘pure mathematics’ is concerned with the laws of
combination of ‘operators’ in their widest sense. This paper gave Boole’s
confidence in his own understanding of the true nature of mathematics an
enormous boost and, as time went on, he became firmly convinced that he had a
mission to explain to the world the nature of logic, thought and, ultimately, the
workings of the human mind.
In a postscript to the paper, dated 31 August 1844, Boole thus sums up the
position to which he had come at this time:
Fearful of extending this paper beyond its due limits, I have abstained
from introducing any researches not essential to the development of
that general method in analysis which it was proposed to exhibit. It
may however be remarked that the principles on which the method is
founded have a much wider range. They may be applied to the solution
of functional equations, to the theory of expansions and, to a certain
extent, to the integration of non-linear differential equations. The
position which I am most anxious to establish is that any great
advance in the higher analysis must be sought for by an increased
attention to the laws of the combinations of symbols. The value of this
principle can scarcely be overrated: And I can only regret that in the
absence of books, and circumstances unfavourable for mathematical
investigation, I have not been able to do that justice to it in this essay
which its importance demands.
The contents of this paper and the award of the first Royal Medal for
mathematics brought Boole’s name to the attention of many mathematicians and
indeed many scientists in Britain. He now felt confident enough in his own
abilities to submit and read a paper entitled On the Equation of Laplace’s
Functions, based on his most recent researches, to the annual meeting of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science at Cambridge in June
1845.11 The first British Association meeting had been held in York in 1831 and
from then on, it was held annually in various cities throughout Britain, as well as
in Dublin (1835) and Cork (1843). The British Association had a very important
influence on the development of science in western Europe in the nineteenth
century: it had sections covering mathematics, physics, astronomy, chemistry,
geology, biology, mechanics, statistics and medicine. Of particular interest were

its lengthy commissioned reports on topics in the various branches of science
and the shorter technical papers read to the various sections.
The British Association meeting had an equally important function as a
meeting place for mathematicians and men of science. Council members over
the years included such men as Airy, Babbage, Faraday, Hamilton, Herschel,
Peacock, Whewell and many other eminent mathematicians. Among those who
met in Cambridge in 1845 and with whom Boole may have made acquaintance
were several people who were to have a strong influence on his subsequent
career. The Reverend Charles Graves, Professor of Mathematics at Trinity
College, Dublin, read a paper on triplets; Sir William Rowan Hamilton spoke on
quaternions; William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) entitled his paper The
Elementary Laws of Statical Electricity; Lieutenant Colonel George Everest (the
uncle of Boole’s future wife), recently returned from India, read a paper on the
measurement of two arcs of the meridian in India. Everest had been the first man
to successfully survey the world’s highest mountain, which now bears his name.
It is tempting to speculate that this was Boole’s first contact with the Everest
family, but there seems to be no evidence to support this speculation.
Boole, no doubt still conscious of his social and academic background, was
more than a little overwhelmed by personal contact with such eminent men. His
feelings can best be appreciated by considering an extract from a long poem he
wrote to celebrate his visit to Cambridge:
’Twas something on the banks of Cam, to see
Men known to Science, known to History;
Airy, who trod the subtlest paths of light,
And Herschel, worn by many a watchful night,
Whewell and Brewster, Challis, large of brow,
And Hamilton, the first of those to know.
One of the most important contacts that Boole made at Cambridge was William
Thomson.12 Thomson, who was born in Belfast in 1824 of Scottish ancestry, was
the son of James Thomson, Professor of Mathematics at the University of
Glasgow. When young William was eight, the family moved to Glasgow where
he matriculated to the University at the age of ten. He was a child prodigy and
had a brilliant university career in pure and applied mathematics at both
Glasgow and Cambridge. He and Boole shared an interest in the mathematical
theories of electricity and gravitation, and in the applications of calculus to what
is now called potential theory.

While at Cambridge, Thomson was strongly influenced by Green and Murphy
on the theoretical side and by Michael Faraday on the practical aspects of
electricity. After returning as Professor of Natural Philosophy to the University
of Glasgow, Thomson pursued a wide variety of interests and activities,
including such diverse topics as investigations into the mechanical equivalent of
heat, fluid mechanics, the age of the earth, the laying of the trans-Atlantic cable
and various areas of pure mathematics. Thomson was a true mathematical
physicist – the perfect meeting point between theoretical mathematics and
practical physics.
At the time Thomson and Boole first met, Thomson had become the Editor of
a new mathematical journal and was anxious to obtain original papers to fill its
pages. He decided to call it The Mathematical Journal and asked Boole to
submit his most recent paper on Laplace’s Equation to the new journal rather
than to the Royal Society. Cayley, Ellis, Hamilton and Hargreave were others
who supported the new venture. Boole was happy to submit his paper and many
more followed. He and Thomson became close friends and lifelong
correspondents on mathematics and other matters. There is no doubt that
Thomson stimulated Boole to produce more papers at this time and, perhaps
more importantly, increased considerably Boole’s new-found confidence in
himself. Thomson also helped to introduce him to many other mathematicians
and many new ideas. For example, from their correspondence we learn that
Boole was in close communication with Charles Graves as early as 1845 and
that he was then considering problems such as the nature of media capable of
transmitting vibrations.
However, it is likely that Boole’s almost pathological shyness and modesty
around this time cost him dearly. In a letter to Thomson he writes: ‘I rather
regret that I did not accept an offer of Graves to introduce me to Sir W.R.
Hamilton, but I did not at the time feel I had any claim to his notice …’
Boole refused introductions to men such as Hamilton on the grounds that his
work could not compare with their’s and that someone of his non-university
background had no right to mix with established professors. These
understandable but short-sighted attitudes were at least partly responsible for his
later isolation in Ireland.
The years 1845–46 represent a rather quiescent period in Boole’s
mathematical activities. During this time he published a mere three papers,
concerning the theory of developments and Laplace’s functions – not much more
than twenty printed pages in all. He did not correspond with de Morgan during

this period and though there was considerable correspondence with Thomson,
this was mostly concerned with the technical details of Thomson’s new journal
and Boole’s application for the Professorship of Mathematics to the Queen’s
University, being established in Ireland. In one letter, Boole describes himself as
‘much occupied, with little time for mathematics’. Of course his many social
activities kept him busy and he was still enthusiastically pursuing his teaching
career. The administration of his school was as demanding as ever and he had
also to spend a great deal of time correcting scripts. In addition, he prepared
private pupils for examinations such as the Cambridge Entrance. There is also
record that he was host at his home to some eminent mathematical guests,
notably Cayley.
We now come to what was perhaps the most important and complex aspect of
Boole’s entire life – his interest in the mathematical theory of logic. Throughout
the history of thought, from Aristotle to Leibniz, it had been the dream of
philosophers and logicians to make of logic a precise science. That is to say, they
hoped to understand the precise principles governing logical thought, formalise
and symbolise them and, finally, apply them in a more or less mechanical or
automatic way to the analysis of a wide range of human, linguistic, ethical and
scientific situations. Some had come a long way along this path; Leibniz, for
example, did considerable work in classifying the many different types of logical
possibility but lacked a suitable notation in which to express his results.
When, where or indeed why Boole became interested in logic is by no means
certain, but there are many theories and a few tantalising pieces of evidence to
support them. In his early youth, he had been an enthusiastic student of German
and one of his textbooks was a grammar by Becker which laid strong emphasis
on the similarity between the processes of reasoning and language formation.
Boole studied several other languages also and in so doing, he was forced to
think deeply about the structure of language and the ways in which the various
cultures express thoughts. The mathematics in which he was most interested was
the theory of operators, which involved at times an almost semantic use of
symbols.
Throughout his life, Boole was a profoundly religious man and we have
already recounted his ‘mystic experience’ in which he felt called to express the
workings of the human mind in symbolic or mathematical form. No doubt he
regarded the human mind as the finest example of divine creation and his
concept of God is perhaps best expressed as a personification of knowledge and
understanding.

A factor which must be taken into account is the fact that Boole spent a great
deal of his life teaching elementary classes. It is fashionable nowadays for
academics to look down on the teaching profession, but there is no doubt that the
task of having to impart basic information to young minds forces the teacher to
think deeply about the processes involved.
Finally, consideration must be given to the theory that Boole was the meeting
point of several historical traditions, notably those of Newton and Leibniz. He
was in the unique position of being a fellow countryman of Newton’s while
following the tradition of Continental mathematicians in the wake of the
Cambridge Reformers. His knowledge of Greek made the works of Aristotle
accessible to him in the original and Boole’s strong sense of history gave him an
advantage over many of the British empiricists who were unanimous in their
condemnation of formal logic.
Early in the spring of 1847, Boole’s long-dormant interest in the connections
between mathematics and logic was dramatically reawakened. At this time, a
furious controversy was raging between the supporters of de Morgan and those
of Sir William Hamilton, the Scottish philosopher and metaphysician (not to be
confused with Sir William Rowan Hamilton, the Irish mathematician, as all the
books warn). Hamilton was a logician who distrusted mathematics, but he was
an innovator in logic and had, about this time, introduced the notion of
‘quantification of the predicate’ which was to lead to a widening of the scope of
logic. Classical logic had concentrated on the ‘four forms’ of statement – all A
are B, no A are B, some A are B, some A are not B. In Hamilton’s approach, the
predicate, or second term B, is quantified by considering statements of the type:
all A are all B, any A is not some B, and so on. De Morgan too was at this time
working on a more mathematical theory of logic which included a notion
equivalent to quantification of the predicate. Hamilton at once accused de
Morgan of plagiarism, despite the fact that the notion in question was not
original to either of them nor, as it transpired, of any great significance per se in
the development of logic. Hamilton’s charges were unjust, even absurd, but
controversy raged for many years and attracted a great deal of attention.
Boole of course followed the affair from a distance and though his sympathies
naturally lay with de Morgan, he remained publicly neutral, at least in the
beginning. In 1847 he wrote: ‘Of Sir W. Hamilton it is impossible to speak
otherwise than with that respect which is due to genius and learning.’
From his neutral position, Boole was able to judge the merits and defects of
the approaches of both Hamilton and de Morgan. Though Hamilton disliked

mathematics and even poured scorn on the subject, yet his approach seemed to
suggest that logic should concentrate on ‘equations’ connecting ‘collections of
objects or classes’. De Morgan’s approach, on the other hand, seemed to
concentrate on a purely symbolic representation of logical processes, yet his
notation was cumbersome and unwieldy. Why not, thought Boole, synthesise the
two approaches by representing each class of objects by a single symbol and
allow relations between classes to be expressed by algebraic equations between
the symbols? This devastatingly simple but ingenious notion intrigued and
excited him and he set to work at once on a book expounding a new
mathematical theory of logic.13 The fact that in the course of developing his
theory he uncovered equations such as x2 = x (which in the ordinary algebra of
numbers is valid only when x = 0 or x = 1) worried him not in the least because
his background in the theory of symbolic operators had prepared him for such
contingencies.
In the preface to his book, Boole acknowledges his debt to Hamilton and de
Morgan and makes a number of penetrating observations:
In presenting this Work to public notice, I deem it not irrelevant to
observe that speculations similar to those which it records have, at
different periods, occupied my thoughts. In the spring of the present
year, my attention was directed to the question then moved between
Sir W. Hamilton and Professor De Morgan; and I was induced by the
interest which it inspired, to resume the almost-forgotten thread of
former inquiries. It appeared to me that, although Logic might be
viewed with reference to the idea of quantity, it had also another and a
deeper system of relations. If it was lawful to regard it from without,
as connecting itself through the medium of Number with the intuitions
of Space and Time, it was lawful to regard it from within, as based
upon facts of another order which have their abode in the constitution
of the Mind …
… There are two conditions which I may venture to require of those
who shall undertake to estimate the merits of this performance. The
first is that no preconceived notion of the impossibility of its objects
shall be permitted to interfere with that candour and impartiality which
the investigation of Truth demands; the second is, that their judgement
of the system as a whole shall not be founded either upon the
examination of only a part of it, or upon the measure of its conformity
with any received system, considered as a standard of reference from

which appeal is denied. It is in the general theorems which occupy the
latter chapters of this work – results to which there is no existing
counterpart – that the claims of the method, as a Calculus of Deductive
Reasoning, are most fully set forth …
… To supersede the employment of common reason, or to subject it
to the rigour of technical forms, would be the last desire of one who
knows the value of that intellectual toil and warfare which imparts to
the mind an athletic vigour, and teaches it to contend with difficulties
and to rely upon itself in emergencies.
Boole wrote his book at a furious pace and it was ready in a matter of months.
He entitled it The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, being an Essay Towards a
Calculus of Deductive Reasoning and when the first draft was written, he sent it
to Charles Graves, Professor of Mathematics at Trinity College, Dublin. Graves
was most enthusiastic and even suggested some additions. Some of these were
ingenious but unfortunately, he also made the suggestion that the equation x = vy
should express the proposition that ‘All Xs are Ys’ and this proved to be one of
the main drawbacks of Boole’s system. The book was then published by
Macmillan, Barclay and Macmillan of Cambridge, with a preface dated 29
October 1847. Tradition has it that by a happy coincidence the book appeared in
the shops on the very same day as de Morgan’s Formal Logic.14
Boole, perhaps chastened by de Morgan’s row with Hamilton, kept a low
profile while writing his book. He confined his letters on the subject matter of
his work to Graves, the Reverend E.R. Larken and the Reverend G.S. Dickson.
Indeed, de Morgan wrote to Boole on 31 May 1847:
… But you are another sort of person. I would much rather not see
your investigations till my own are quite finished; which they are not
yet for I get something new every day. When my sheets are printed, I
will ask for your publication: till then please do not send it. I expect
that we are more likely to have something in common than Sir W.H.
and myself …
Later, when both books appeared, de Morgan was so worried that the ideas they
contained were nearly identical that he feared further accusations of plagiarism;
luckily, good sense prevailed and there were none. Boole’s system of notation
was obviously superior to de Morgan’s, but the latter’s concentration on the
‘probable syllogism’ may have been one of the reasons why Boole later
developed an intense interest in probability.

Boole later acknowledged that The Mathematical Analysis of Logic was
written too hastily and with twentieth-century hindsight, it is easy to see that it
contains a number of flaws. For example, if he had been prepared to write ‘some
X are not Y’ as x(1-y) ≠ 0, rather than using the non-elective v in the equation
x(1-y) = v, he could have saved himself a great deal of trouble. His use of ‘or’ in
the exclusive sense of either, but not both, was unnecessarily restrictive and, in
addition, his use of the ‘indeterminate’ symbol 0/0 caused a great deal of
difficulty.
There are some who would claim that Boole had merely rediscovered and
extended the earlier results of Leibniz, but there is absolutely no doubt that
Boole was totally unaware that Leibniz had produced results of a similar nature.
The more orthodox view is that Boole’s work was totally original and that The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic marks the beginning of symbolic logic in the
modern sense. Boole showed that classical logic was actually a branch of
mathematics which gave rise to a hitherto unconsidered type of algebra. Boole’s
book however went considerably further. It threw a great deal of light on the
nature of pure mathematics; it opened up possibilities of an extension of the
subject into totally new and unexpected areas – classical mathematics had
concentrated on the notions of shape and number and even when symbols were
employed, they were generally interpreted in terms of number. Boole had now
introduced the notion of interpreting symbols as classes or sets of objects, a
concept breathtaking in its scope because it meant that the study of all well-
defined sets of objects now came under the realm of mathematics. Indeed, it is
not extravagant to claim that much of the content and method of today’s so-
called ‘New Maths’ stems directly from Boole’s book of 1847.
By enlarging the horizons of mathematics so enormously, Boole unwittingly
(but perhaps subconsciously, wittingly) highlighted a topic that has come to
influence virtually every aspect of present-day life – the storage and processing
of information, which in turn has led to the development of computer science.
Not alone is Boole’s algebra the ‘correct’ and most economical tool for handling
information, but the electronic machines which now do the work actually operate
according to principles determined by that self-same algebra. Boole has been
called the ‘Father of Symbolic Logic’ and the ‘Founder of Pure Mathematics’,
but he is just as deserving of the title, ‘Father of Computer Science’.
Boole quickly became aware of the inadequacies of his book of 1847 and took
various steps to remedy them. In 1848, he published an excellent explanatory
account in his Calculus of Logic in the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical

Journal and it is likely that this account was read more widely in the
mathematical world than his book had been. It contains little that is new, but the
closing paragraph shows that he was now preparing to extend his system to
present a theory which might be applied to the laws of thought by which the
human mind operates. Over the next seven years, he rewrote and developed his
ideas, culminating in his book An Investigation of the Laws of Thought,
published in 1854. What precisely Boole achieved in his books of 1847 and 1854
is the subject of a later chapter.

T
CHAPTER FIVE
The Cork Professorship
he year 1846 was a turning point in Boole’s life. While previously he had
allowed family responsibilities to take priority, he now felt that the call of a
full-time commitment to mathematics could no longer be ignored. He therefore
resolved to apply for a professorship at one of the Queen’s Colleges then being
founded in Ireland. His Cambridge friends enthusiastically encouraged his
application and may even have suggested the idea in the first place. In a letter
from Lincoln to William Thomson, dated 17 August 1846, Boole explains his
position and also his reasons for desiring a University post.
My dear Sir, A letter which I yesterday received from Mr Cayley
contains, after a due measure of linear transformations and elliptic
functions, an extract from a letter of yours in which you are so good as
to suggest that I might possibly succeed in obtaining one of the new
Irish professorships. I was very much gratified to think that you were
interested for me and venture on this assurance of your good will and
friendly feeling to explain to you my present views and situation.
I should certainly prefer an appointment of the kind you name to the
mastership of a private school – partly because it might I think be
made a position of greater usefulness, partly because it would be more
congenial to my tastes, and partly because, while not without its due
responsibilities, it would be free from that uncertainty and dependence
which are inseparable from the profession of a schoolmaster at least in
the present state of society. I suppose that as respects the prosecution
of mathematical studies I might look for advantages also which I do
not at present enjoy. Indeed it has often been with me a matter of grave
and serious reflection whether I ought not in my present situation to
relinquish those studies and I regard it as a weakness that I have not
been able to carry out my convictions in this respect. These are reasons
why I should aim at some more congenial occupation. On the other
hand, my position, could I but quietly confine myself to the duties of
it, is one of sufficient comfort and respectability to satisfy moderate
wishes. My parents, both aged and infirm, are living with me and it

behoves me to consider how far a change might affect them. Still, I
think that on balancing the probabilities, should there be a fair chance
of obtaining a mathematical professorship by honorable competition in
an open field, it would be my duty to make the attempt.
In estimating the chances of success it ought to be remembered that
I have not taken a university degree. Perhaps you did not duly consider
this. At a time when I had an offer of being supported to the University
and was, so far as inclinations went, most anxious to avail myself of it,
it became through family circumstances an imperative duty that I
should forego the advantage and open a school. This I only mention
that you may see that it is through external causes alone and not
through reluctance or disapproval that I have not availed myself of the
benefits of college discipline. Still, it may not the less be a
disqualification. I may however mention that I have been in the habit
of lecturing to classes and of setting papers in the way of the
Cambridge examinations. I have also a student of St John’s reading
with me for the second time, so that I am not quite unacquainted with
college business.
Perhaps you will be able to give me some information on the nature
of the appointments – the periods and the proper mode of application,
etc. Have they been advertised? Any assistance that you can give, I
shall be very grateful for.
Thomson replied to this letter almost at once, giving Boole the information that
application should be made to the Secretary at Dublin Castle. From his next
letter to Thomson, dated 26 August 1846, it is clear that Boole had by this time
cast aside his doubts and had made a definite decision to apply. Here one can see
the enthusiasm of a man who feels he has made the right decision:
My dear Sir, I am very sincerely obliged by your ready kindness in
answering my letter. I have decided to become an applicant for one of
the professorships and have followed your directions in writing to the
Secretary at Dublin Castle but of course have not yet received an
answer. I shall be very grateful for any assistance you can render me
and venture to ask you for a testimonial if you think that from what
you have seen of my papers you can give me one. I suppose that the
number which I shall be able to procure will be very small. Cayley
who is here will give me one and Ellis will I think be disposed to assist
me also. Perhaps too I may get something from Graves, Kelland and

De Morgan, with whom I have had some little interchange of letters. I
rather regret that I did not accept an offer of Graves’ to introduce me
to Sir W.R. Hamilton but I did not at the time feel that I had any claim
to his notice.
In another letter to Thomson a few weeks later, Boole writes:
I shall get such evidence of my success as a teacher agreeably to your
suggestion as I am able to do, but from the fact of my school having
been chiefly a commercial one and from my teaching having been
more given to classics than to mathematics it will be impossible for me
to bring that species of evidence which is most wanted, and the open
and the manly course seems to be to meet such difficulty at once by a
plain acknowledgement of its truth. I have a pupil with me who is
doing exceedingly well at St John’s and he could speak, were it of any
use, to my skill in explaining difficulties and ability as a teacher so far
as his experience goes. He had six months training with me, dividing
his time between classics and mathematics, and at the end of his
freshman year was 19th in the first class of about 40. He knew nothing
of mathematics when he first came to me. I have thought that it might
be desirable for me to spend a month in one of the Universities if it
could be arranged. I fear that I have tired you – Believe me, Yours
truly,
Geo. Boole
The Secretary at Dublin Castle replied that applications should be addressed to
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Boole then submitted his formal letter of
application.1, 2
Lincoln, September 15th, 1846: My Lord, I desire to offer myself as a
candidate for a Professorship of Mathematics or Natural Philosophy in
any of her Majesty’s colleges, now in the course of being established
in Ireland. I take the opportunity of enclosing such testimonials, with
reference to my qualifications for an appointment, as I have, up to the
present time, received, and I shall forward others, with copies of the
whole, and a statement of particulars at an early period.
I have the honour to be, My Lord, Your Lordship’s most obedient
servant,

George Boole
Meanwhile, Boole awaited the other testimonials he had requested and
Thomson’s was among the first to arrive. Boole’s letter of thanks shows that
while he was enthusiastic about his application for a university post, nevertheless
he was not prepared to allow the running of his school to suffer as a
consequence.
Lincoln, September 30th, 1846: My dear Thomson, I yesterday
received your very kind testimonial and lose no time in writing to
thank you for it and to assure you not only that it is in every way
satisfactory but that it expresses far more than I could have flattered
myself that I had any right to expect. I shall continue to set a high
value upon it whether my present application is successful or not.
I do not see, on mature consideration, how I can get to Dublin at
present. My school is large and though I have two assistant tutors I do
not think that I should be acting in accordance with the spirit of the
agreement which I hold myself to have virtually entered into with the
parents of my boys if I were to leave the school in my assistants’
hands. If I should get the appointment in the beginning of the next year
and there should be time before the opening of the Colleges, I should
avail myself of the opportunity to the fullest extent. But in saying this I
wish you not to understand that I am indulging in any sanguine hopes
of success and that I shall be disappointed and surprised if I fail …
On 8 October, Boole submitted his completed testimonials to Dublin and these
were accompanied by a personal account of his career and qualifications. It
seems clear that his statement is designed to convince the authorities of his
fitness to hold a post in either mathematics or natural philosophy. This would
suggest his great anxiousness to obtain a university position.
STATEMENT ACCOMPANYING Mr BOOLE’S TESTIMONIALS
I am 30 years of age and unmarried.
I have been engaged in tuition 15 years, first as an assistant tutor
and subsequently as a private schoolmaster.
Speaking generally, I have been more concerned in the teaching of
Classics, than of Mathematics, but I have been accustomed to the
delivery of scientific lectures in my school and have occasionally had
pupils from the University of Cambridge.

I am familiar with the elementary and the practical as well as the
higher Mathematics.
My knowledge of Natural Philosophy is more theoretical than
experimental, and its acquisition has been for the most part, but not
entirely, associated with the study of Mathematics.
I am able to read scientific papers in the French, German and Italian
languages.
I am not a member of any University and have never studied at a
college.
Signed: George Boole
One wonders how the last sentence of Boole’s statement would be greeted in a
present-day application for a university professorship in mathematics!
Boole’s testimonials were as impressive a collection as one could wish for. In
them he received unqualified praise from many of the leading British
mathematicians of the day, together with excellent character references from
some of Lincoln’s most eminent citizens. In addition, he did not disdain a
testimonial from his student Charles Kirk, a precaution that shows the
importance he attached to the teaching duties of a professorship. The
testimonials themselves were printed in an attractive twelve-page booklet which
also included a list of Boole’s mathematical publications, fifteen in number. The
booklet was printed by the brothers W. and B. Brooke of High Street, Lincoln.
We quote Boole’s testimonials in full.
From Augustus De Morgan, Esq., Professor of Mathematics in
University College, London
September 1st, 1846: Mr Boole, now of Lincoln, having requested me
to state what I know of him, with reference to his application for an
appointment in one of the Colleges to be established in Ireland, I very
readily comply with his request.
My acquaintance with Mr Boole has consisted in knowledge of his
Mathematical Writings and correspondence on Mathematical Subjects.
From these sources, I can speak confidently to the fact of his being not
only well-versed in the highest branches of Mathematics, but
possessed of original power for their extension which gives him a very
respectable rank among their English Cultivators of this day. In
support of this opinion, I refer to his paper in the Philosophical

Transactions (which I believe obtained the Royal Society’s Medal)
and which is of itself, I say most positively, sufficient to justify every
word of the opinion which I have given. It gives very important
extension to one of the most recent, and most abstruse, of
Mathematical Speculations. Mr Boole’s other writings and his
correspondence confirm me in my impression.
If Mr Boole had to submit his pretensions to a board of
Mathematicians, he ought simply to send in the paper above-
mentioned, which does credit to the state of Mathematics in this
country.
From the Rev. Phillip Kelland, Professor of Mathematics in the
University of Edinburgh, and late Fellow of Queen’s College,
Cambridge
September 2nd, 1846: It is with the greatest satisfaction that I offer my
testimony to the very high merits of Mr George Boole. My attention
has been the more closely directed to his writings from the
circumstances that, about two years ago, a paper of his ‘On a General
Method in Analysis’ was referred to me by the Council of the Royal
Society. This paper appears in the Philosophical Transactions for
1844, and the Royal Society awarded one of their Medals to its author.
Since that time I have carefully examined all that Mr Boole has
written, and have no hesitation in assigning him a place amongst the
very foremost rank of the Mathematicians of the present time. From
the originality of his conceptions and the extent and accuracy of his
knowledge, I conceive he has few superiors in Europe; certainly none
of his own standing. I may add that I know nothing whatever of Mr
Boole except through his writings, and can therefore speak only to one
point, his eminence as a Mathematician.
From the Rev. Charles Graves, Professor of Mathematics and Fellow
of Trinity College, Dublin
September 9th, 1846: My Dear Sir, It would give me much pleasure to
hear that you were placed in some station where you could apply
yourself to Scientific pursuits under circumstances more favorable
than those of your present position. Our personal acquaintance has
been so slight and of such short standing that you will pardon me if I

say that I desire this not more on your account than for the sake of
Mathematical Science itself. Your contributions to the Cambridge and
Dublin Mathematical Journal would be sufficient to establish your
claim to a place in the foremost rank of English Mathematicians: but I
would specially point to those of your papers which have reference to
the Calculus of Operations, as proving your capacity to enrich
Analysis with new and powerful methods.
It seems to me that much further progress in Mathematical Science
can hardly be made, unless its very foundations be enlarged. That you
are able to take a very considerable part in this great work I feel quite
assured.
From Arthur Cayley, Esq., Fellow and Assistant Tutor of Trinity
College, Cambridge
September 1st, 1846: I am persuaded, from all I know of Mr G.
Boole’s Mathematical acquirements (as well from his published
Memoirs in the Philosophical Transactions and the Cambridge
Mathematical Journal, as from my own correspondence and personal
intercourse with him) that they are such as cannot fail eventually to
insure him a high place among those who have devoted themselves to
these studies – and that his appointment to a chair of Mathematics, at
the same time that it placed him in a more favourable position for the
pursuits in which he is so likely to distinguish himself, would be a sure
means of adding to the efficiency and reputation of the institution in
which he held. The principal subjects to which Mr Boole has applied
himself have been multiple definite Integrals, and ordinary and partial
differential Equations, subjects (it is almost needless to mention) of the
highest interest and importance, for their own sakes and in reference to
physical science (with a view to which in a great measure Mr Boole
has been studying them) and from the amount of attention which
modern Mathematicians have bestowed upon them; but I may also
notice the general theory of Symbolical operations, to which many of
Mr Boole’s researches (in the memoir which obtained the gold medal
of the Royal Society, and elsewhere) relate, and his very original and
ingenious investigations on Linear Transformations.
From Robert Leslie Ellis, Esq., Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge

Mr Boole has informed me that he intends to become a candidate for a
Professorship in one of the Colleges about to be established in Ireland.
I have much pleasure in stating that Mr Boole’s earlier contributions to
the Cambridge Mathematical Journal, of which I was for some time
editor, convinced me that his Mathematical abilities were quite of the
first order and that the opinion which I had thus been led to form has
been fully confirmed by his subsequent researches, among which I
may particularly mention his Essay on a New Method in Analysis, for
which he received a gold medal from the Royal Society.
I have recently had the pleasure of becoming acquainted with Mr
Boole and from what I have seen of him, believe myself justified in
saying that he is not merely an excellent Mathematician, but that while
his attention seems to have been chiefly given to Science, his
conversation bears manifest traces of varied and original talent and of
a mind at once active and well-cultivated.
From William Thomson, Esq., Fellow of St Peter’s College,
Cambridge, Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of
Glasgow, and Editor of the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical
Journal
Mr Boole, of Lincoln, has established a high reputation among
Mathematicians by his numerous and valuable memoirs on various
subjects in pure Mathematics, and in the Mathematical Analysis of
many of the most important questions in Natural Philosophy. These
papers have been published in the Cambridge Mathematical Journal,
and its continuation, the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical
Journal, and in the Philosophical Transactions; and for one of them he
obtained the gold medal of the Royal Society. Nothing that I can say
could add to the testimony afforded by such works to Mr Boole’s
Mathematical genius, and to his high acquirements. I may, however,
be allowed to state my opinion, founded on personal acquaintance and
on much correspondence with him on scientific subjects, as well as on
the knowledge that he has had much valuable experience as a Teacher,
that Mr Boole is highly qualified for a Professorship of Mathematics
or Natural Philosophy. His appointment to such a situation would be
highly desirable for the sake of Science, to which a devoted cultivator
would thus be secured. On this account, as well as for the prosperity of
the College which would be fortunate enough to obtain him for a

Professor, I most earnestly hope that he may be successful in his
present application.
From the Rev. George Stephens Dickson, Perpetual Curate of St
Swithin’s, Lincoln
My Dear Boole, I think it very unlikely – I had almost said I trust it is
wholly impossible – that anything that so humble an individual as
myself can say in your favor, will weigh with those who have to
decide upon the Mathematical Professorship which you are applying
for; for I believe your claims (if I may use the word) rest on more solid
foundations than letters or testimonials. As the Minister, however, of
the parish in which you were born and in which, a few years back, you
resided, I have the utmost pleasure in penning anything that you think
may be of the slightest use to you.
You ask me to speak to your moral character: I do so unhesitatingly;
and further, I believe you have discharged all the duties of life most
uprightly and honorably; and in the very trying vocation of a
Schoolmaster, have succeeded in earning an independent livelihood
amidst much surrounding competition. Far be it from me to attempt to
draw your character; but I may say that admiration of your attainments
– literary and scientific – and of a certain simplicity of mind and
unaffectedness of manner, with a total absence of all pedantry and
ostentation, is amongst the principal causes that have (on my part)
cemented my intimacy with you.
I meant this letter to have reference entirely to what I know of you
in private life. In reading, however, your testimonials, I observe but
one that refers to any other than your Mathematical acquirements. This
is, perhaps, what might naturally be expected. Permit me, however, to
say that the gentleman who supposes your information to be of a more
varied and general character is not mistaken in his opinion, which I
have thus alluded to for the sake of making it appear more prominent
and worthy of attention. With every wish for your success.
From the Rev. Edmund Robert Larken, Rector of Burton by Lincoln
September 11th, 1846: My Dear Sir, As you have mentioned to me
your intended application for an appointment in one of the Colleges
about to be established in Ireland, I can only say, as your friend and

neighbour, that if any testimonial offered by me is of the least use to
you, you are most welcome to it.
Of your first-rate attainments in Mathematics and Natural
Philosophy my own deficiencies do not permit me adequately to
speak, and doubtless you will be furnished with sufficient expressions
of opinion upon them, from persons whose dicta on such subjects are
of weight and influence; but if high classical and general
acquirements, urbanity of temper, and comprehensive views on the
most important subjects – unwearied application to study and
scholastic employment, and aptness to teach – are qualifications for
the post you desire, I can bear willing testimony to your possessing
them to the fullest extent.
I sincerely wish, for the sake of Education in Ireland and for your
own sake, that you may be successful in obtaining the appointment.
Were I to follow the dictates of selfishness, or of regard for the less
extensive interests of your own neighbourhood, I should hope for your
failure, as involving your remaining among us for a further period.
From the Mayor and other Inhabitants of the City of Lincoln
We, the undersigned Inhabitants of the City of Lincoln, understanding
that our fellow-citizen, Mr George Boole, is about to become a
candidate for a Professorship in one of the new Colleges intended to be
established in Ireland, have much pleasure in bearing our unaffected
testimony to the great respectability and correctness of Mr Boole’s
private character and habits.
We have been acquainted with him nearly from his childhood, and
can without hesitation state, that in respect of correctness of
demeanour and moral rectitude of conduct, he is highly qualified for
the important and responsible position which he seeks to occupy.
James Bruce, Mayor
Henry Moss, Sheriff
Rd. Mason, Town Clerk
Henry Blyth, Alderman
Wm. Gresham, Alderman
W. Rudgard, Magistrate
Richd. Whitton, Magistrate
Jno. Stevenson, Magistrate

Edwd. Jas. Willson, Magistrate
Wm. Brooke
From Charles Kirk, Esq., Student of St John’s College, Cambridge
I have read during the present long vacation, and on previous
occasions, with Mr George Boole, and can testify with entire
confidence to his unvarying kindness and attention as a Teacher, and
to the great ability which he possesses in the explanation and removal
of difficulties.
On the basis of these testimonials, it would be difficult to imagine any of the
other candidates for a mathematical professorship seriously challenging Boole’s
application for the position. It is said that the testimonial written by de Morgan
carried most weight with the Board of Electors. In her Memoir of Augustus de
Morgan, de Morgan’s wife Sophie relates:3 ‘My husband was, I believe,
instrumental in some degree in obtaining the appointment at Cork, where Sir
Robert Kane, who had married our friend Mr Baily’s niece, was principal.’ The
Mr Baily referred to is Francis Baily, the distinguished astronomer who was
President of the Royal Astronomical Society, but it is unlikely that this indirect
friendship with Kane helped Boole to any significant degree.
Equally influential must have been the testimonial given by William
Thomson, one of the most eminent scientists of the day and Editor of the
Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, in which Boole had published
many of his papers. It is coincidental that shortly before Boole applied for the
Irish professorship, Thomson had applied for the chair of natural philosophy at
Glasgow. Thomson received testimonials from, among others, Peacock, Ellis, de
Morgan, Cayley, Whewell, Rowan Hamilton, Sylvester, Stokes, Liouville and
Boole – a formidable list by any standard. The testimonial written by Boole is
noteworthy for its careful balance of enthusiasm and reserve.
Hornsea, Yorkshire, June 30th, 1846: My dear Sir, In answer to your
request that I should express my opinion on your qualifications as a
candidate for the professorship of Natural Philosophy, now vacant in
the University of Glasgow, I have great pleasure in stating that,
judging from your mathematical investigations on various departments
of physical science, I conceive that you are qualified in an eminent
degree for the discharge of all the higher duties of such an
appointment. Your researches on the subject of the equilibrium of

fluids generally, and their applications to statical electricity and to
magnetism in particular, appear to me to be likely to lead to
considerable advances in our knowledge of these subjects. I should
rejoice to hear of your election, because I should confidently anticipate
that it would open to you a career of honorable exertion, not less
conducive to the interests of Science, than advantageous to the
University with which you would stand connected. Believe me to
remain, My dear Sir, Yours sincerely,
George Boole
The testimonial given to Boole by Charles Graves (an ancestor of the poet and
novelist Robert Graves), Professor of Mathematics at Trinity College, Dublin,
was a particularly valuable one, as Graves had an intimate knowledge of the
Irish educational situation and although his personal acquaintance with Boole
was slight, he was nevertheless in a strong position to comment on Boole’s
suitability for the post.
The remaining testimonials are a very positive indication of the high esteem in
which Boole was held by the clergy, civic authorities and citizens of Lincoln.
Having complied with all the formalities of the application in the autumn of
1846, Boole waited anxiously for an announcement of the professorships to the
Queen’s Colleges. However, he was to be frustrated by the extreme slowness
with which the authorities acted. The proposals for the foundation of the
Queen’s Colleges (or the ‘Godless Colleges’ as they were soon to be dubbed by
the Catholic Hierarchy) had provoked a storm of controversy in Ireland which
further aggravated the delicate religious position there. Diplomacy, therefore,
demanded slow progress. In addition, there were financial and political
complications. Moreover, the country as a whole was suffering from the ravages
of the disastrous potato famine which was responsible for the deaths of several
million people. In a letter to Thomson on 22 December 1846, Boole states: ‘… I
hear nothing from Ireland. The wretched state of the country physically and
morally is I suppose quite enough to tax the energies of any government. What is
to be the end of it all, God knows …’
All through the year 1847 and most of 1848, Boole awaited news of the
outcome of his application but received no communication whatsoever from the
authorities in Dublin. In evident frustration, on the 2 October 1848, he addressed
to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland a letter, the contents of which were tantamount
to a withdrawal of his application.

Lincoln, October 2nd, 1848: My Lord, I became a candidate in the
year 1846 for a professorship of Mathematics or Natural Philosophy in
one of Her Majesty’s Colleges in Ireland. The result of this application
I have not yet heard, nor under the circumstances could I have
expected that any steps would hitherto be taken with reference to the
appointments. My own circumstances and the circumstances of others
dependent on me are however now such that I may be placed under the
necessity of forming engagements which may interpose a difficulty in
the way of my accepting an appointment in one of Her Majesty’s
Colleges, should one hereafter be offered. In entire ignorance of what
may be doing towards a settlement of the educational question in
Ireland, I feel it right to state the above circumstances and to ask to be
permitted so far to withdraw my application as to be left morally at
liberty to decline an appointment, in the event of my receiving one at a
time when things as yet contingent and uncertain may prevent my
accepting it.
I am induced to make this request because on the one hand, if
appointed without such prior understanding I should feel bound to
accept the appointment at whatever inconvenience, and on the other
hand, to remain bound by an application for a long period (now
exceeding two years) is detrimental to the interests of those who have
no other fortune than their industry.
If however the request is such as cannot be granted, I must beg
permission to withdraw my name entirely from the list of candidates
for professorships in Her Majesty’s Colleges.
I have the honour to be, My Lord, Your Lordship’s most obedient
and faithful servant,
George Boole
Very soon however, Boole had second thoughts and was persuaded by his
friends, particularly Charles Graves, to resume his application. In Boole’s own
words, in a letter to Thomson dated 8 December 1848: ‘… I am about to resume
my application for a professorship of Mathematics in one of the Queen’s
Colleges. I believe that I should not have decided on doing this but for Graves
who has shown himself the most generous of friends.’
He was encouraged by rumours that the long-awaited professorships were
about to be announced. In a letter to de Morgan, also dated 8 December 1848,

Boole described his feelings at the time and his plans to overcome what he felt
was the major obstacle to an appointment – his lack of knowledge of the running
of a university department.
My dear Sir, The Irish professorships with reference to one of which
you were so good as to give me a testimonial a year to two ago, are
now about to be filled. I had a short time since withdrawn my name
from the list of candidates but I have been induced to resume my
application. My hopes of success are not very sanguine, although in
one quarter I have lately met with all the encouragement which the
most generous friendship could suggest. Still I do not disguise from
myself that men equal to me in mere attainments and possessed of
other recommendations than I can lay any claim to may enter the field
of competition. Happily for myself I feel that I can bear a
disappointment without either looking at myself as an injured man, or
taking fee with those pursuits from which I have already derived far
more real and solid gratification than any outward successes can
afford. However if one does resolve to enter the field it is the pearl of
wisdom to provide for weak points and it has accordingly occurred to
me that it would do some thing to supply a defect in my claims and
also be right in itself that I should state my intention of spending some
time (in the event of appointment) at one or some of the Universities
so as to see the practical working of different systems of instruction. If
circumstances should make it convenient for me to spend a week in
London, I may venture to ask you whether there would be any
difficulty as to my seeing something of the state of instruction in your
college – I do not mean Mathematical merely – though this is of
course the most important to me. I should give you no other trouble.
Accept my apologies for thus troubling you and believe me to be,
My dear Sir, Yours faithfully,
Geo. Boole
Boole also asked Thomson if he could join him for a short time in Glasgow in
order to experience the working of the university system there. Thomson’s reply
was most accommodating:
… I hope you will give our University the visit you propose. My father
and I would have great pleasure in seeing you daily in our classes, and

in giving you any information you might desire regarding the working
of the system we follow. In the course of a week or fortnight, you
would be able to see a good deal of our practice (and that of other
professors also, should you desire it) and to make yourself acquainted
with the principal features of the University system here; which as you
are aware, differs most materially from that of Cambridge and Oxford
…
Then, on 12 December 1848, an event occurred that radically altered Boole’s
family circumstances and must have convinced him that his best hope for the
future lay in an Irish professorship. That event was the death of his father, John
Boole, after a long illness. In a letter of sympathy to Thomson (whose own
father died a month later), Boole states:
I cannot forbear writing to offer you the tribute of my sympathy in that
domestic calamity which you have just caused to be announced to me
– and I do this with the more sincerity because a similar loss has lately
befallen my own home. On the 12th of December, exactly one month
before the day of your father’s decease, I lost mine. Death was in his
case, however, an event long looked for and even ardently desired and
I suppose that when it came it was with as few circumstances of awe
and terror as can ever accompany a change so great and so solemn.
Boole was now convinced that adequate provision could be made for his
widowed mother in her old age, so he resubmitted his application for a
professorship to the Chief Secretary at Dublin Castle with renewed confidence.
Lincoln, December 22nd, 1848: Sir, I desire again to become a
candidate for a professorship of Mathematics in one of the Queen’s
colleges in Ireland and enclose a copy of my testimonials.
It may be necessary to add the following particulars for the
information of the examining board.
I am thirty-three years of age and have followed no other profession
than that of a teacher. I am conversant with every branch of practical
mathematics and have been in the habit of lecturing from the
blackboard on many of the subjects named in the prospectus of the
course of studies to be pursued in the colleges. I am accustomed to
examinations by papers, both in my own school and in connexion with
a public institution and have at different times had private pupils
among the undergraduates of Cambridge.

But I deem it right to add that I am not personally a member of any
college or University. Opportunities have however been offered to me
of making myself practically acquainted with different University
systems. In the event of my appointment, I should prefer Cork or
Belfast as the sphere of my labours – but I do not wish strictly to limit
my application by any such considerations.
I have the honor to be Sir, Your most obedient faithful servant,
George Boole
It is interesting to compare this letter of application with the one of two years
previously. This time there is no mention of the fact that he had been concerned
with the teaching of classics rather than mathematics, nor is there any reference
to the possibility of a professorship in natural philosophy. The admission that he
had never been a member of a college or university is qualified by an expression
of his anxiety to acquaint himself with different university systems. The
preference for Belfast or Cork rather than Galway was in all probability a purely
geographical one, based on ease of access by sea.
To Boole’s great delight, in August 1849, the Board of Electors announced his
appointment to the first professorship of Mathematics at Queen’s College Cork,
which was due to open its doors to students in November 1849.
The citizens of Lincoln shared Boole’s delight at the news of his long-awaited
appointment. A committee was formed and met at the house of B. Brooke, the
honorary secretary, at 3.30 on the afternoon of 16 October 1849, to ‘take into
consideration the time, etc. of presenting the testimonial to Mr Boole’. After this
meeting the following bulletin was issued:
TESTIMONIALS TO PROFESSOR BOOLE
The Committee beg to announce to the Subscribers and the Public, that
the presentation of the above Testimonials will take place after a
Supper on Friday Evening, the 28th instant, at the White Hart; at
which the Worshipful the Mayor will preside.
Tickets, including malt liquor 2s.6d. each, may be had of Messrs.
Brooke, High Street; at the Mechanics’ Institution, and the Bar of the
Inn. An early application is desirable.
SUPPER ON THE TABLE AT EIGHT PRECISELY

The public supper was well supported and presided over by James Snow, M.D.,
the Mayor and Chief Magistrate of Lincoln. Among the many gifts with which
Boole was presented were a handsome silver inkstand and a valuable collection
of books. The members of the Mechanics’ Institute, anxious to show in some
special way their appreciation of all Boole had done for them, raised a
subscription among themselves with a view to the presentation of a testimonial.
Hearing of their plans, Boole, with characteristic generosity and practicality,
endeavoured to have them use the money for the good of the Institute, by
proposing that they purchase either a complete copy of Newton’s works or a
larger astronomical telescope. Finding, however, that they were determined to
mark the occasion by the presentation of a substantial gift, he finally accepted
from them a copy of Johnston’s Atlas of Physical Geography, a valuable and
costly work.
Boole’s farewell dinner and testimonial were reported at great length in local
newspapers and many interesting points emerge from these accounts.4
It was revealed that:
Professor Boole was invited to receive the books and splendid silver
inkstand which have been raised by public subscription, that our
honoured townsman may possess some memorial of the high esteem
which his real goodness, more almost than his great accomplishments,
have secured for him. Few men in fighting their way to honourable
distinction have more maintained true simplicity and sterling quality of
character than Mr Boole …
Of course some of the speakers compared him to Newton, quoting Newton’s
famous dictum of being like a child wandering along the seashore picking up a
few pretty shells and pebbles while the great ocean of truth lay before him
undiscovered and unexplored. The Mayor, Dr Snow, charmingly revealed that he
had known Boole even as an infant and in fact might call him one of his own
children, as he had been the medical attendant at the time of his birth. He then
presented Boole with the silver inkstand (valued £20) and the beautifully bound
philosophical books (valued £30). Boole gave a suitably sentimental reply:
He could not tell how often the recollection of the familiar scenes of
his youthful days would come upon him when sitting in his room with
his books around him in a distant part of the kingdom. There was
something unspeakably grateful to his feelings in the quiet of the old

city of Lincoln and the rural scenes which surround it; and if it was
permitted to him to form a wish for the future of his days it would be
that, after serving his country and his generation in more active scenes,
his last days might be spent where his first were, amid those familiar
associations consecrated to him not only by affections, but also by the
reverence of those who were now no more.
Boole’s wish of course was not to be granted. He continued his reply by
outlining the advantages of the proposed Queen’s University in Ireland with
respect to its academic and religious arrangements and it is quite clear that he
had made a very thorough study of the system even at this early stage. He
heartily approved of the Government’s policy of founding a college for the
diffusion of a cheap, high and sound education; in particular, he approved of an
inter-denominational education policy.
… Another object was the bringing together and associating of the
Catholic and the Protestant youth of the higher classes, at a time when
the feelings were warm and generous, and when those favourable
impressions of character were formed which often lasted through life.
This, he believed was a good object …
… If that charity which was the essence of true religion was lost
among the turmoil of theological disputation, the college of which he
was a member would be no place for him.
The Reverend E.R. Larken, in a proposal of success to the Queen’s University,
said that Boole had shown in his own life that the utmost liberty to individual
conscience was compatible with the most careful supervision in religious
matters; he had shown how the most excellent supervision might be combined
with the toleration of the utmost diversity of private opinion. Larken also
revealed that one of his own sons would be a student of the Queen’s University
in Ireland.
In the excitement of his appointment, Boole did not forget those friends whose
excellent references had been largely responsible for his success. The testimonial
of de Morgan perhaps carried the most weight and Boole wrote to him on 13
August 1849:
I received last week the official announcement of my election to the
Professorship of Mathematics in Queen’s College, Cork.
When I became a candidate for the appointment, you were so good
as to give me a testimonial. I feel it right therefore to inform you of my

success and to say how much I am indebted to you for the assistance
which you so willingly rendered me. I shall at least endeavour to
justify your good opinion and kind wishes.
De Morgan replied at once, expressing his delight that the Electors had had the
sense to accept Boole’s offer of joining the Irish Colleges. Wittily, he remarked
that he did not know whether he should congratulate him or not on being sent to
Ireland, but expressed a hope that Boole would be able to live in peace by
keeping out of the squabbles of the Irish.
Boole’s only concern now was for the welfare of his aged and widowed
mother. As she could not be prevailed upon to cross the Irish Sea, he made good
provision for her well-being and comfort during the remainder of her days. Then,
late in October 1849, just before he celebrated his thirty-fourth birthday, he set
out to begin a new life in Ireland.

T
CHAPTER SIX
Queen’s College Cork
he official opening of the Queen’s College in Cork, which took place at
noon on Wednesday, 7 November 1849, was the culmination of nearly half
a century of agitation for the institution of a university in the Munster region of
Ireland.1 The concept of the Queen’s Colleges, to be founded in Cork, Belfast
and Galway, was the brainchild of Sir Robert Peel, the Conservative Prime
Minister, and formed part of the Irish University Bill which was partly
responsible for his fall from power. Since Trinity College, Dublin, the country’s
only other secular university, was traditionally a Protestant stronghold, the
Queen’s Colleges were intended primarily for the Catholic laity. Peel, however,
proposed a scheme that for nineteenth-century Ireland with its complex religious
problems was an extremely daring one – namely, that the Colleges were to be
non-denominational in character, with denominational Deans of Residence to
cater for the spiritual needs of the students. Many of the prominent Irish
politicians, together with the majority of the Catholic Bishops, denounced the
scheme and demanded the provision of a Catholic university.
Notwithstanding the religious controversy, the opening ceremony, as far as
one can judge from newspaper reports of the day, was one of pomp and
splendour. The great new Examination Hall was packed with upwards of a
thousand guests consisting, in the words of the President, Sir Robert Kane, ‘of
those who in the province of Munster and the city of Cork are most exalted in
authority, in intelligence and in rank’. There was unbounded admiration for the
College’s magnificent limestone buildings which had been designed by the Cork
architects Woodward and Deane and which Lord Macaulay was later to describe
as ‘a Gothic college worthy to stand in the High Street of Oxford’. A short
description of the scene is given by the Cork Examiner:2 At twelve o’clock the
dais, which was covered with crimson cloth, and arranged with seats for the
public bodies and the college committee as well as the most distinguished of the
visitors, was densely crowded. As the President of the College, Sir Robert Kane,
and Dr Ryall, the Vice-President, entered with the professors who had assembled
previously in the library, the appearance of the hall was imposing and beautiful
in the extreme.’ The awed reporter adds: ‘Several of the professors are very

young men, but all marked with an expression of thoughtful intelligence and
well-developed in the frontal region, as a phrenologist would say.’
We cannot leave the opening of the College without recounting an amusing
incident. Sir Robert Kane, in an effort to influence ecclesiastical policy, had his
inaugural address, in which he had endeavoured to meet clerical criticism,
translated into Italian and sent to Rome. The translation was the work of Signor
Basilio Angeli, Professor of Spanish and Italian at Trinity College, Dublin; it
was so incompetently done that it merely gave rise to hilarity in the Roman
Curia. Kane had intended to convey to Rome that the opening ceremony had
been attended by ‘both Ladies and Gentlemen’. This had been rendered in
translation as ‘Gentlemen of both sexes’, which led a cardinal to remark that
Cork must be a decidedly queer city. The incident led to an investigation of
Signor Angeli’s competence and he was subsequently dismissed from his
professorship.
The Academic Staff of the College consisted of the President and twenty
professors. The following is the statutory declaration which Boole, as Professor
of Mathematics, had to sign upon entering office:3

We do hereby promise to the President and Council of the Queen’s
College, Cork, that we will faithfully, and to the best of our ability,
discharge the duties of professors in said college and we further
promise and engage that in lectures and examinations and in the
performance of all other duties connected with our chairs, we will
carefully abstain from teaching or advancing any doctrine, or making
any statement derogatory of the truth of revealed religion, or injurious
or disrespectful to the religious convictions of any portion of our
classes or audience. And we, moreover, promise to the said President
and Council of the Queen’s College, Cork, that we will not introduce
or discuss in our place or capacity of professors any subject of politics
or polemics tending to produce contention or excitement, nor will we
engage in any avocations which the President and Council shall judge
inconsistent with our offices, but will, as far as in us lies, promote on
all occasions the interests of education and the welfare of the College.
The strong emphasis on religion in this declaration reflects the tense religious
situation in which the Queen’s Colleges were founded.
It may be of interest to quote the salaries of some of the people who were later
to play important parts in Boole’s life. Sir Robert Kane received an emolument
of £800 a year and a residence in the College. The Vice-President and Professor
of Greek, Dr John Ryall, received £500 a year and a residence in the College.
Boole himself received an annual salary of £250. Raymond de Vericour,
Professor of Modern Languages, received £200 and Dr Denis B. Bullen,
Professor of Surgery, £100. It must be remembered, however, that these amounts
were supplemented by ‘class fees’ which were paid by the students directly to
the professor of the subjects they were studying.
Boole soon settled down to his duties as Professor of Mathematics. He had
neither lecturers nor assistants to help him but he seems to have found ample
time for research and browsing in the new library, which contained some 4,300
volumes. Boole’s first class consisted of some 62 students and the first name to
appear in his roll book was that of Richard Bullen, son of the Professor of
Surgery. For the second and subsequent sessions, there was in addition a second-
year class in mathematics. After the first session, numbers attending Boole’s
classes fell somewhat and his total number of students stabilised at about 60.
Boole’s department belonged to the Science Division of the Faculty of Arts and
lectures were held on Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 12.00 to 1.00 pm for
the Junior Class and from 2.00 to 3.00 pm for the Senior Class. The following

extract from the College Calendar gives an outline of the courses given:
JUNIOR CLASS: Fractional and Decimal Arithmetic; the Elements of
Euclid, with deductions from the propositions; Algebra, including the
Theory and Solution of the Higher Equations; the Binomial and
Exponential Theorems, &c. Plane and Spherical Trigonometry, with
their principal applications to Mensuration, Geodesy, Astronomy, & c.
The Elements of Solid Geometry and the Conic Sections.
SENIOR CLASS: Analytical Geometry and the Conic Sections, the
Differential and Integral Calculus, together with the subjects named in
the previous Course, as far as recapitulation may be needed. The
special object designed in these Lectures will be to prepare the
Students for the pursuit of Mathematical Physics and Astronomy.
In addition, weekly exercises were set to all classes and written answers were
expected to be submitted.
The class fee which Boole received directly from his students was £2.10s
from Matriculated students and £2 from Non-Matriculated students. His annual
income was supplemented by an average of £100 from this source.
Boole’s first place of residence in Cork was the boarding house of Mrs
Knowles in Strawberry Hill. He next lived at 5 Grenville Place, in a pleasant
town house facing the northern channel of the River Lee. Here, he shared
lodgings with Raymond de Vericour, Professor of Modern Languages, an old
friend from his Lincoln days. Grenville Place is situated about halfway between
Queen’s College (now University College) and the centre of Cork City and
within convenient walking distance of both. Judging from Boole’s
correspondence during this period, he seems to have been relatively content in
his new position. In a letter to Augustus de Morgan, dated 8 November 1849, we
read:
… I find myself very comfortable here. At present everything seems to
promise harmony. I have met with nothing like intolerance among the
Roman Catholics with whom I have conversed. It is understood here
that the priests are favorable to our views, but are witheld by the
peculiar position which the forward zeal of such bigots as MacHale*
and O’Higgins has placed them in from manifesting their sympathies
with us. I have met with but one or two of the hierarchy myself but
what I saw of them confirmed the opinion which I had before heard

expressed by lay members of their church.
Indeed they have good reason to be satisfied. Our statutes bind us
from introducing politics and divinity into our lectures (not that a
professor of Mathematics, however sound a Protestant, would be likely
to impugn the doctrine of transubstantiation, however likely a chemist
might be) and deans of residence have been appointed for the three
denominations. The bearing of the local authorities of the college has
been conciliatory in the extreme, more so indeed, I think than was
called for. It were better to rest on the truth and justice of our
principles and leave them to make their way.
Judging from the Mathematical examinations which are just over,
elementary scientific education is in a low state here. I am desirous of
starting a class for schoolmasters. You have something of this kind in
connexion with your University. Could you give me any hints or
information? …
* A remark to which the present author takes good-humoured exception!
As the session wore on and the Queen’s College settled down to the routine of
academic life, Boole began to enjoy his new-found freedom and financial
independence. In a letter to Thomson, dated March 28 1850, we read:
… You will I am sure be gratified to learn that our college is
progressing in numbers and, as I have good reason to believe, in real
usefulness and public favor. For my own part I can say with perfect
truth that I feel a daily increasing delight in my new duties …
Despite the religious controversy, the first half of the session 1849–1850 had
been relatively uneventful as far as Queen’s College, Cork, was concerned. The
only incident of note in Boole’s activities during the period was a negative one,
namely his non-attendance at a public banquet given on 8 April 1850, in honour
of Sir Robert Kane. All the other professors of the Queen’s College were present
and unless Boole was indisposed, which seems unlikely, the only other possible
explanation for his absence would be that some personal dispute had already
arisen between himself and Kane.
Then, in August 1850, came the Synod of Thurles, an important meeting of
the Catholic Bishops of Ireland. Largely as a result of pressure exerted by
Archbishop John MacHale of Tuam, the Queen’s Colleges were condemned as
merely an extension of the proselytising Charter Schools. Catholic clerics were
forbidden to take any part in the work of the Colleges and while the laity were

not actually forbidden from attendance, they were warned against them. The
decrees of the Synod of Thurles were approved in Rome in the following year,
much to Kane’s disappointment.
Part of the problem seems to have been the undoubted imbalance in the
number of Catholic professors appointed. Of an academic staff of twenty-one,
only two (Sir Robert Kane and Dr Denis Bullen) were Catholics. A Cork book of
the day gives a description of the citizens’ suspicious attitude towards the new
professors and shows some of the cultural barriers that confronted Boole:4
The comparatively backward position of the Queen’s College is
traceable, lastly, to the unsatisfactory mode of appointment to the
professorships, which in many cases have been obtained by men
comparatively unknown, while candidates of acknowledged ability and
high reputation have been overlooked. Undoubtedly, including the
President, a few able and eminent men occupy chairs in the Cork
College; but without questioning the competency of any of the
professors, we repeat that many of them were appointed over the heads
of better men. Advertising for candidates for a vacant chair in the
Queen’s College is of late years a mere farce; and in looking for it, an
able Irishman, with the highest testimonials, will have little or no
chance against a mediocre Englishman or Scotsman who had never
been previously heard of.
In the meantime, an incident had occurred in the College which brought to a
head the religious controversy and must have confirmed the worst suspicions of
the Bishops. Raymond de Vericour, Boole’s friend and colleague, published a
book entitled An Historical Analysis of Christian Civilisation and was so rash as
to write the name ‘Queen’s College, Cork’ on the title page beneath his own
name.5 In addition, he recommended the work as a textbook for students of
history. The book was critical enough of the Papacy’s involvement in secular
affairs as to merit an immediate place on the Church’s index of forbidden books.
De Vericour, in his absence, was suspended from his professorship on 24 July
1850, and from the deanship of the Faculty which he was to hold for the second
session, on the grounds that his book was calculated to produce polemical
contention. An intense controversy followed, much of which was fought in the
correspondence columns of local newspapers.6 It was claimed that de Vericour
had been ‘sacrificed to the Synod of Thurles’ in an attempt to placate the
Bishops and that since his offence was a purely technical one, he should be
restored to his former position.

When de Vericour returned from Bonn, where he had spent the summer
‘cultivating a more intimate acquaintance with modern languages’, he was
summoned before the Council of the college and asked to account for his
behaviour. Having apologised for what had happened, he proposed to remedy
matters by removing from the next edition any reference to the college and
cancelling the recommendation of his work as a textbook. While he was
reinstated as professor, he declined to accept the deanship of the Literary
Division of the Faculty of Arts on the grounds that it would not be advisable for
him to take part in the government of the college under the circumstances.
Boole was among those who sided with de Vericour in this affair and although
he did not openly enter into the controversy, it was the first of many occasions
on which he was to support the rights of his fellow professors against the
authorities in general and Kane in particular.
Boole returned to Lincoln for the summer of 1850 and seems to have
thoroughly enjoyed himself among his family and friends there. In addition to a
vacation at Hornsea in Yorkshire, he took a walking tour through the Isle of
Wight and amused himself by writing a good deal of poetry. He seems to have
suddenly appreciated, as many people are apt to when they leave home, the
familiar friends and places that he had taken for granted in England. The contrast
with the loneliness he experienced in Cork and the distress he felt at having to
play any part in controversy filled him with nostalgia and there is no doubt that
the decision to return to Ireland was a difficult one to make. In a letter to the
Registrar of the College from Lincoln, dated 6 August 1850, Boole states that
the subjects for the forthcoming scholarship examination of the second year
were to be algebra and spherical trigonometry and ends his letter thus: ‘… I hope
you are enjoying the delights of home. There are none like them …’7

He returned to Cork early in October 1850, but soon began to doubt the
wisdom of his decision. In a letter to Augustus de Morgan, dated 17 October and
marked ‘Private’, we see an untypical state of desperation:
My dear Sir, I think that you and I are sufficiently acquainted with
each other to justify me in asking you if you should hear of any
situation in England that would be likely to suit me to let me know of
it. I am not terrified by the storm of religious bigotry which is at this
moment raging around us here. I am not dissatisfied with my duties
and I may venture to say that I am on good terms with my colleagues
and with my pupils. But I cannot help entertaining a feeling to which
perhaps I ought not to give expression, that recent events in this
College have laid the foundation of a want of mutual trust and
confidence among us which would be to me far more painful than any
amount of outward hostility. For my own part I no longer feel as if I
could make this place my home. Perhaps it is the state of feeling which
I ought to endeavour to repress but it is not easy to do so. I dread that
the love of our mutual intercourse and regard may henceforth be
wanting in the cordiality and trust which seemed before to prevail.
This is all I can say to you on the subject at present but sincerely do
I pray that the anticipation which I have expressed may not be
realized.

Do not suppose that I have quarreled with anybody here and am
anxious to get away on that account. In the affair of de Vericour I took
his part but temperately and maintained throughout a friendly
correspondence with the President and Vice-President. It is what I see
around me and what I cannot but anticipate in the future which causes
me to think that I might consult my peace of mind and my real utility
in the world by quietly withdrawing to another sphere of labour.
Now this is what I would not say to anyone in whose good feeling
and discretion I could not place entire confidence. What I ask of you is
not to mention these circumstances but to inform me at any future
period of what you suppose might suit me in England. No one else
knows my present views and feelings …
Boole, however, had a large number of interesting matters to distract him from
this bout of depression. He greatly increased his research output, especially in
the area of probability, and with characteristic vigour began to prepare for the
production of his masterpiece, The Laws of Thought. In his spare time, he
collected information for a short biography of John Walsh, the extraordinarily
eccentric mathematician who had died in Cork some years previously. Boole’s
account of Walsh, which took the form of a letter to Augustus de Morgan, will
be reproduced in Chapter 8, on the Cuvierian Society.
On the teaching front too there were hopeful signs. In a letter to Francis
Albani, the Registrar, Boole reports on 19 October 1850: ‘I have examined the
students who presented themselves for Matriculation during the present week
and found the answering much better than on the previous entrance.’
From the commencement of his duties as professor, Boole showed an intense
concern for the welfare of his students and the facilities provided for them. A
letter written on 8 February 1851, to Professor Murphy, Dean of the Scientific
Division of the Faculty of Arts for the session, provides us with a perfect
example of that concern:
Dear Sir, I am desirous of representing through you to the Council the
great injury which the College is suffering from the defective or faulty
condition of the chimneys of the lecture rooms. The Mathematical
lecture room is so full of smoke that it is scarcely possible for me to
conduct my lectures there. How much greater must be the
inconvenience to the students who have to attend a series of lectures
on the same day all of them delivered under the same circumstances.

I feel assured that if the evil is not speedily remedied the prosperity
of the College will be seriously affected. The discomfort to which the
students are subjected will become a matter of public report, if it has
not done so already.
We turn now to Boole’s involvement in the administrative side of college
affairs.8 He was a regular attender at meetings of all the committees in which he
was involved and the most important of these committees was undoubtedly that
of the Scientific Division of the Faculty of Arts. Although he was not present at
the first meeting in October 1849 (because he had not yet arrived in Ireland), he
was present at the next meeting held early in February 1850. The minutes record
that the following motions were proposed by Professor Boole and were carried
unanimously:
1. That the Literary Division of the Faculty of Arts be invited to a
conference with a view to such an arrangement of the work
imposed on the students as shall prevent the interference of the
business of one Professor with that of another.
2. That it be recommended that the examinations be held at the close
of the session – each examination being in writing or viva voce
according to the views of the Professor of the particular
Department and the examination being employed not only to
ascertain distinguished merit for reward but to determine the
fitness of each student to enter the higher class the following
session.
At the next meeting on 2 March, Boole was again present and on his proposal
the following motion was unanimously adopted:
That the wishes of the Faculty be communicated to the Council – that
such of the lecture rooms as require it be heated and especially that the
Mathematical lecture room be furnished with hangings or other more
effective means of preventing the echo which at present interferes
much with the business of classes.
The month of May 1850 was a busy one for the Faculty and three meetings were
held, all of which were attended by Boole. He was not present at the final
meeting of the session on June 3rd as he had already left for England, but he
submitted, through the Dean, what he wished to be included in the prospectus for
the following session.

In the next session, 1850–1851, the Faculty met rather infrequently but on 15
March 1851, a meeting was held to discuss a controversy that had arisen
between Christopher Lane, Professor of Civil Engineering, and Sir Robert Kane,
who was inclined to interfere in the internal affairs of the various departments.
Kane complained to the Lord Lieutenant that Lane was guilty of ‘Neglect of
Duty and Inattention to Official Remonstrance’ because he had failed to give the
agricultural students under his care a sufficient number of field trips and classes
of practical instruction in the use of surveying instruments and in map-making.
Kane himself was a scientist of some distinction who was concerned, almost to
the point of obsession, with the practical applications of scientific principles.
The Faculty, however, supported Lane’s point of view and the following
motion, proposed by Boole, was unanimously adopted:
That Professor Lane’s report upon the state of the Engineering School
as now read be approved and that it be entered upon the minutes and
transmitted to the Council, that with reference to the general subject of
field practice in the teaching of Surveying, the Faculty accepts the
principle stated by Professor Lane, namely, that field practice to some
extent is a necessary part of instruction but chiefly so in order to
illustrate the principles which the student has learned in class lectures.
Lane added that although he was paid class fees by the agricultural students,
these were for classroom instruction only and that the calendar made no mention
of field instruction for such students. While in the first session he had given
practical instruction over and above what his duties called for, he had no
intention of continuing this extra work for which he was not paid. It is likely that
Boole (who on several occasions afterwards was to complain about the
smallness of his salary) and his fellow professors would have fully supported
Lane’s point of view. There is equally no doubt, however, that while Kane was
motivated by the spirit of enthusiasm for the practical application of theoretical
subjects that should certainly characterise a university, Lane was determined to
carry out his contract merely to the letter of the law. It was probably the fact that
Lane felt he was threatened by outside interference in what he considered were
the internal affairs of his department that allowed the matter to become a full-
blown controversy and further sow seeds of dissension between President and
professors.
The affair led to a rather unusual incident of some independent interest. The
Dean of the Faculty for the session 1850–1851 was Edmund Murphy, Professor

of Agriculture, and it was customary for him to represent the Faculty at meetings
of the Council. In reporting to the Council on the Lane affair, however, Murphy
partially disregarded the decisions of his Faculty and put forward many of his
personal opinions in an attempt to induce Lane to resume field instruction to
agricultural students without further discussion. Boole was among those who
supported a motion expressing severe censure on Murphy.
The upshot of the whole business was that Lane resigned his post in disgust on
9 April 1853, and presumably, in order to put as many miles as possible between
himself and Queen’s College, Cork, took up a position with the Brazilian
Government. On 21 March 1851, Boole was again present at the Faculty meeting
and proposed a motion that was clearly motivated by his experiences with the
Mechanics’ Institute in Lincoln. The motion, which was carried unanimously,
throws considerable light on Boole’s ideas of the role of the university in society
and the responsibility of the students to put their scientific knowledge to
practical use:
That this Faculty thinks it desirable that Mr Quin should at times
prescribed by the Council be permitted to open a mechanical workshop
for such of the students as may desire to gain some knowledge of
working in metals, the use of the lathe and other practical arts,
provided that this be done without compromising their attention to the
regular lectures and studies of the College.
That this Faculty is of the opinion that it will contribute to the
success of the measure recommended in the foregoing resolution if the
arrangement of the workshop be left to the practical instructor who
should alone be held responsible to the Council for its proper working
and should be entitled to a small fee from each student attending it.
It was further decided that students attending the workshop should provide
materials consumed therein. On 9 May 1851, it was resolved, again on Boole’s
proposition:
That in the opinion of this Faculty it is desirable that the Museum be
opened under proper restrictions of the College; but that they deem it
inexpedient to grant this privilege until a porter shall have been
appointed by the Council who shall be subject to the direction of the
Curator of the Museum.
It almost seems as if Boole wished to share the advantages of his unorthodox
scientific background with the students of Cork.

On 30 May 1851, Boole was elected by ballot to the Deanship of the Science
Division of the Faculty of Arts. This position does not seem to have been the
great honour that some who have written short accounts of Boole’s life have
suggested, because in 1854 the Professor of Chemistry, John Blyth, refused the
position on the grounds that he had quite enough work to do already in looking
after the affairs of his own department. It is likely that the position rotated
among the professors involved, as the Dean had to attend the time-consuming
meetings of Council.
Nevertheless, Boole took his position as Dean of the Faculty with great
seriousness and carried out his duties in a most conscientious way. It fell to him
as Dean to address the Faculty at the beginning of the session 1851–1852. His
address, which he later had printed at his own expense, was entitled The Claims
of Science, especially as founded in its Relations to Human Nature.9 From a
letter to Augustus de Morgan on 17 November 1851, we can see the importance
which Boole attached to the address:
Will you oblige me by asking Messrs Taylor and Walton if they will
print and publish for me a lecture which I delivered at the opening of
the College Session here and which some of those who heard it,
including my colleagues, are desirous of seeing in print. I publish the
lecture at my own expense and fees here being few and small I should
prefer that the lecture should be printed in a not very expensive form. I
took considerable pains over the matter of the lecture thinking while I
wrote it that it was possible I might be called on to publish it, beside
which I felt as I have always done unwilling to labour for a merely
temporary object. This I mention that you may not think that it is
solely on account of a few compliments that I design to publish the
lecture, though at the same time it is possible that I may have
misjudged the fitness of the matter for publication …
The address has several passages that are worthy of note and the references to
the laws of mental thought are significant in the light of the fact that Boole was
at this period preparing his major work The Laws of Thought. We reproduce a
selection of the principal ideas in the address, which ran to nearly thirty printed
pages.
… I remark in the first place that all scientific truths are founded upon
the observation of facts that experience, though not the only element,
is yet an essential element of their existence. The truths of the natural

sciences, as of astronomy, or optics, or electricity, are made known to
us by the observation of natural phenomena, and by reflection upon the
results of that observation. Nor can our knowledge of them be derived
from any other origin. Thus every science is, as to its actual progress, a
gradually increasing system of knowledge which, beginning with
experience, advances ever onward through successive stages towards
that perfection which no science has yet reached, which none perhaps
ever will reach, but of which the idea becomes clearer and brighter,
with every approach that we make …
… But if science begins with experiment and observation, it does
not end with them. All the knowledge which the senses have ever
communicated to man, has been a mere collection of facts; and were
there in the human mind no powers beyond those to which the senses
make their direct appeal, that knowledge would never have advanced
to any higher condition than that of facts. With such a state of
information, however, the mind does not rest satisfied. It feels the
pressure of impulses, it is conscious of the existence of powers and
faculties which urge it to reduce the scattered details of its knowledge
into form and order. It begins to compare and to classify, and to
arrange. It examines in what respects different facts agree and in what
respects they differ; and it inquires how far those differences and
agreements are constant; how far they are the results of circumstance
or accident. Thus, from the contemplation of facts, the mind rises to
the perception of their relations. While in the former stage it is little
more than a passive recipient of the impressions of the external world,
in the latter it exercises an unborrowed activity. The faculties of
judgement, of abstraction, of comparison, of reason, are an agency of
strength and power from within, which it brings to bear upon the
lifeless elements before it, shaping them into order, and extracting
from them their hidden meaning and significance …
… The inquiry is twofold, and we may consider it as involving the
following questions:
First, whether there exist, with reference to our mental faculties,
such general laws as are necessary to constitute a science; for we have
seen that it is essentially in the recognition of general laws, not of
particular facts, that science consists.
Secondly, supposing that such general laws are discoverable, what
is the nature of the relation which the mind sustains towards them? Is
it, like that of external nature, a relation of necessary obedience, or is it

a relation of some distinct kind having no example and no parallel in
the material system? These I conceive to be questions of a perfectly
definite character, and it seems to me that they admit of an equally
definite answer.
First, we are to inquire if the mind is a proper object of science.
That in some sense the moral and the intellectual constitution of
man are proper objects of scientific inquiry, must be conceded by all
who recognise the existence either of general truths in morals, the
knowledge of which may be drawn from our own consciousness, or of
any fixed principles in the right operations of human reason. Neither of
these can be derived from a merely external source. How varied soever
the materials which are brought before the mind, there exist within,
principles of thought and reason, which are of common application to
them all, and are borrowed from none. There are also certain other
principles which are of a more special character, yet, equally with the
former, have their seat in the mind. In these principles together are
involved the laws of our intellectual nature, even as in the final
generalisations of physical science, we discern the laws of the material
universe. If it is asked whether out of these common principles of the
reason we are able to deduce the actual expressions of its fundamental
laws, I reply that this is possible, and that the results constitute the true
basis of mathematics. I speak here not of the mathematics of number
and quantity alone, but a mathematics in its larger, and I believe, truer
sense, as universal reasoning expressed in symbolical forms, and
conducted by laws, which have their ultimate abode in the human
mind. That such a science exists is simply a fact, and while it has one
development in the particular science of number and quantity, it has
another in a perfect logic. Now in this view of the laws of our
intellectual nature are seen proofs of its relation to science, not less
convincing than any which are written upon the physical universe.
Similar evidence, though of a less formal kind, is presented in the
survey of our moral constitution. Though we are conscious that we
often do that which our calmer judgement condemns, not as
inexpedient, but wrong; in the very fact of this condemnation we read
the existence of some internal rule of right, which indeed we have
power to disobey, but which we cannot ignore. To this secret
testimony of the heart must be added not only the consenting force of
the positive deductions of moral science which are based upon other
grounds, but also the full weight of that confirmatory analogy which is

drawn from the proved existence of law in our intellectual constitution.
The study of Ethics thus becomes an essential part of the study of
human nature. We conclude that the mind both in its intellectual and in
its moral character is a proper object of science …
… Careful inquiries assure us that there is a real connection of cause
and effect between an undrained, uncleansed condition of our towns,
and the prevalence of fever and a general high mortality. I suppose that
there are few conclusions better established than this. Every now and
then it receives fearful confirmation, when some epidemic disease,
making head against all the resources of medical art, emerges from the
dark lane or the noisome alley, and sweeps away the rich and the poor
in one indiscriminate destruction. Men are, however, for the most part,
so reluctant to admit the reality of that which they do not see with their
eyes, that this teaching of science, and this confirmation of experience,
are sometimes alike void of effect. They cannot perceive with their
bodily senses the connection between impure air and disease, and they
refuse to believe in invisible laws; or, if they acknowledge them in
words, they do not give them any hearty assent. And so the scene of
desolation is renewed from year to year.
Nor much unlike the above is the moral scene. No conclusion seems
to rest upon a greater weight of cumulative evidence, than that a
course of life governed by a consistent regard to the principles of
rectitude, is the most favourable to public and private happiness. To
carry this conviction into effect, requires that men should in some
instances do that which is contrary to their personal interest as judged
by common standards. It demands, therefore, that there should be on
the part of the individual some trust in unseen principles, strong
enough to resist the ever present importunity of appearances …
… Accordingly, it has been thought by some that the results of
science, conjoined with other agencies, open before the human race a
career of indefinite progression. They anticipate a period when the
physical evils which afflict our present state shall exist no longer, or
exist in such measure only as is inseparable from a condition of
mortality; when painful toil shall have been replaced by the appliances
of mechanism; when the most prolific sources of disease, as crowded
cities, undrained swamps, pernicious indulgences, shall have
disappeared before a more enlightened study of the conditions of
health, and a truer appreciation of the ends of life; when the excessive
inequalities of wealth, and the miseries which they entail, shall have

yielded to a better moral or social economy; and when the effects of
those casualties which prudence cannot avert, as earthquakes,
tempests, unfriendly seasons, shall either be reduced to a minimum of
amount, or shall be so distributed as to fall with the least oppressive
weight upon the community at large. They anticipate that in this happy
state of things to come, relieved from the oppressive bondage of
physical wants, man shall be at liberty to accomplish, and actually
shall accomplish, the higher ends of his being; that while the earth
shall shine with more than its pristine beauty, the human family shall
not only be clothed with the fair assemblage of the moral virtues, but
shall add to them that crown and safeguard of knowledge which has
been won from the hard experience of ages of error and suffering.
Speculations of this kind are abused, if they only minister to the
sense of human power and pride. They have their use when they
instruct us, by the comparison of our actual attainments in the
measures of a just and happy life, with that ideal standard to which
reason and religion point. Let us ask ourselves why that better
condition of things is so far from being realised. The probable
conclusion will be, that the impediment is not in any invincible
repugnancy in the laws of material nature, nor in any want of power
and energy in the human intellect. There seems in the present day to be
even a superfluous activity of invention, busying itself to accomplish
ends that are not valuable, and ministering to a fantastic vanity. Here,
then, we are brought again to that position around which all
speculations concerning the true welfare of our species seem to
resolve, viz. that it essentially contains a moral element …
After the period of his deanship, Boole was not a regular attender at Faculty
meetings and the only significant mention of him in the period between 1852
and 1857 is his appointment to a committee set up to prepare the courses of
study for the degree of Master of Arts for the Queen’s University in Ireland. For
the remainder of Boole’s life, the Faculty met infrequently and there is no record
of his having played any significant part in Faculty affairs. From 1860 onwards,
the minutes peter out and simply record an annual meeting for the election of
Dean, which by that stage seems to have been a position of little importance.
Boole was elected Dean for the session
1862–1863, but there is no record of any noteworthy happenings during his
second term of office.

Boole’s other significant contribution to the everyday running of the College
was his service on the Library Committee. He was present at its inaugural
meeting on 30 October 1850, and at the next meeting on 9 November he was
elected chairman and convener of the Committee. He was requested to draw up a
plan embodying his own ideas and those of the Committee respecting the
manner of keeping accounts of books lent. On 28 November, Boole presented
his scheme for the issuing of books:
1st. That each volume be described by a proper combination of letters
and numbers to be called its mark according to a plan, hereafter to be
explained, by which any record of it may be entered without writing
the title in full.
2nd. That two books for the lending account be kept, to be called the
Lending Book and the Index Book respectively and that these books
be used in the following manner:
The Lending Book to consist of two parts – the first appropriated to
the Professors and Officers and the second to the Students. In the first
part, the names of the Professors and Officers to be entered in a
column at the left hand of the page, each name being preceded by a
number appropriated to it. The successive days of the month to be
entered in a row at the top of the page and the whole page to be
divided by vertical and horizontal lines so as to leave a space opposite
to each name and to each date. In the space thus formed, the mark of
the books taken out of the Library to be entered.
A similar arrangement is to be made for the students’ department of
the Lending Book, the magnitude of the spaces in the respective
departments corresponding to the number of volumes which a
professor and a student are respectively permitted to take.
The Index Book to contain in its first column on each successive
page the marks of the book, opposite to which shall be entered in the
successive squares the numbers designating the persons taking out the
books. It is not intended that this book should contain any registry of
dates.
The following plan of marking books is recommended. Each book
shall have a label on the inside cover and on the back containing a
letter and two numbers as 4 D/27, in which 4 is the number belonging
to the case or set of shelves in which the book is to be found, D the
letter of the shelf in that set, and 27 the number of the volume
according to its place.

As it is contemplated that all the books shall be designated by
proper marks the above system of labelling is recommended to be
carried out uniformly for all the books in the Library. But it is only
intended that the marks of those books which belong to the lending
department of the Library should be entered in the Index Book.
It is recommended that printed dockets be provided as in the British
Museum on one of which a student desiring to procure a book from the
shelves for perusal in the Library shall enter the mark of the work with
his own name and shall give it to the porter in attendance, receiving it
again on returning the volumes.
The other members of the Library Committee (Professors Darley, de Vericour
and Lane) were obviously impressed by Boole’s scheme. They passed it without
any changes and submitted it to the Council where it was soon ratified. The
scheme reads a little like a mathematical theorem, where all possibilities are
discussed and fit neatly into place. Boole would have had some experience of the
library of the Mechanics’ Institute in Lincoln and, in all probability, based his
scheme on a system that he had seen to be a practical one.
On 11 December 1850, Boole was again in the chair when a motion was
passed which reflected the practical difficulties of the period. It was decided that
for the months of November, December and January, the Library would close at
4 pm instead of 5 pm because of the poor light on winter afternoons.
On Wednesday, 12 March 1851, there was a report from the Librarian stating
that some books had been in the hands of individual professors for a long time –
a situation not exactly unknown in present-day universities. On 21 May, Boole
chaired a meeting at which it was proposed that the Library be closed from 14
July to 1 September each session. The reasons put forward were that the
Librarian needed some time in which to relax and that the average attendance in
the Library had been one per day during this period in the previous session.
Incidentally, the Librarian of the day seems to have been subject to some pretty
stringent restrictions. For example, he was required to be present at his desk
between the hours of nine and five, and in addition he was responsible for the
replacement of any lost or stolen books.
The minutes of meetings about this time were written in Boole’s own hand
and when the Committee resolved to adjourn to an indefinite day in June, he
records the date as ‘June 0/0’ – an indication of his preoccupation with symbolic
logic at the time, but scarcely a convention that would be understood by any of
his colleagues.

Boole did not serve on the Library Committee for the session 1851–1852, but
on the 9 March 1852, the Committee received a strongly worded letter from the
mathematics students complaining about the ‘paucity of Mathematics books in
the library’. The letter was signed by twelve students, one of whom was Richard
Bullen, son of the Professor of Surgery. Boole soon wrote to the Committee
agreeing with the students and recommending that the following books, among
others, be acquired for the library:
Salmon’s Conic Sections and Higher Plane Curves
Mulcahy’s Modern Geometry
Hemming’s Differential Calculus
Wilson’s Dynamics and Solutions of the Cambridge Senate House
Problems
Salmon was at Trinity College, Dublin, and Mulcahy lectured at Queen’s
College, Galway.
Boole again served on the Committee for the year 1852–1853, but seems to
have suddenly grown tired of library affairs. On 2 November 1852, he addressed
the following letter to Francis Albani, the Registrar:
Sir, Will you oblige me by stating to the Council that I shall esteem it a
favour to have my name transferred from the Library to the Museum
Committee. My reasons for this request are that I have already served
on the Library Committee and am desirous of becoming acquainted
with a new department of my collegiate duty in which I feel
considerable interest and which is connected with some pursuits in
which I was formerly engaged in the management of a public
institution. I beg to add that having spoken with two members of the
Museum Committee I have reason to believe that the transfer which I
solicit would not be disagreeable to themselves or to their colleagues.
His request it seems was granted because his name appears on the list of those
present at the first meeting of the Museum Committee on 11
November 1852.
After this period, Boole attended only a few meetings of the Library
Committee, which by 1856 had fallen into a state of inactivity. He was elected
chairman for the session 1863–1864, but there seems to have been just one
meeting for the whole year.

We end our account of Boole’s involvement with the Library Committee with
an extract from the minutes for the session 1852–1853, which gives an
indication of the extraordinarily narrow views of even the most liberal professors
of the College concerning the course of reading to be followed by the students:
Three students, Cunningham, Shea and Swanton, borrow the novels of
Sir Walter Scott more frequently than is compatible with due attention
to their collegiate duties. In addition, one student, Fahie (non-
matriculated), has borrowed books of an objectionable nature, the
tickets of which (collected from the porter) have been submitted to
Council.
One wonders what books of ‘an objectionable nature’ were doing in the library
in the first place!
The governing body of Queen’s College, Cork, was the Council and Boole, as
a professor of the University, was entitled to attend its meetings. The following
items from the Minute Book of the Council give a good indication of his
contributions to college affairs at this level:
May 9th, 1851: Resolved that Mr Boole’s offer to deliver a course of
lectures on Astronomy open to the public be accepted and that thanks
be communicated to Mr Boole; that he be informed that the Council
are of the opinion that the interests of the College will be most
promoted by the delivery of the above course at the commencement of
the session 1851/52.
March 7th, 1854: Resolution moved by Professor Bullen and seconded
by Professor Darley: Resolved that the Council in acknowledging the
presentation of Professor Boole’s Laws of Thought desire to express
their gratification that a work of such high merit should have emanated
from a member of their body, whose reputation has already conferred
so much honour upon the College.
Boole was a good committee man, an earnest believer in the essential democracy
of decisions arrived at by small groups of people who have carefully studied the
relevant facts. He spent many hours of his life sitting on rather humdrum
committees and there is no record that he ever expressed any objection to the
boredom that must inevitably have afflicted him at times.

M
CHAPTER SEVEN
Love and Marriage
ary Everest, who was to become George Boole’s wife, was born in the
village of Wickwar, Gloucestershire, in 1832, the eldest child of the
Reverend Thomas Roupell Everest, Rector of Wickwar.1 Her uncle, Lieutenant-
Colonel Sir George Everest, was Surveyor-General of India and the man after
whom the world’s highest mountain is named.
When Mary was five years of age, her father became one of the victims of the
influenza epidemic which swept Europe in 1837. He was suspected of having
consumption and was advised to give up work and live abroad. Since at the time
he had private means, he left a curate in charge of the parish and moved to
France together with his family and servants, in order to be near Samuel
Hahnemann who, around the end of the eighteenth century, had founded
homoeopathic medicine. Homoeopathy is that branch of medical science which
treats diseases by prescribing minute quantities of drugs that, in a healthy person,
would produce symptoms like those of the disease.
The family lived in lodgings near Paris and because of her father’s medical
condition, Mary spent much of her childhood in the company of servants and
private tutors. She grew up speaking both English and French, but in later life
confessed in a letter to her sister-in-law:
… I don’t think you realise – I never did until lately – some of the
consequences of living habitually in a country the language of which
one has never learned to think in. “When we finally left France I was
just at my eleventh birthday, whereas George [her brother] still lacked
some months of being eight. I suppose he learned to think in English. I
have never done so. The English language contains no terminology in
which it would be possible to express my kind of thought.
Thomas Everest was not only a patient of Hahnemann’s but also a devoted
disciple, and may even have allowed himself to be used as a guinea pig for
Hahnemann’s homoeopathic experiments. The children’s upbringing was a strict
one and in later life Mary acknowledged the suffering which she, her brother and

her mother had endured because of her father’s mistaken devotion to
Hahnemann’s draconian regimen. Walks before breakfast and ice-cold baths on
dark winter mornings were some of the miseries the young Everests had to
endure. Nevertheless, their childhood was a happy one and Mary grew up in an
atmosphere of great intellectual stimulation. Her father, though an eccentric, was
a man of learning and a friend of the Cambridge mathematicians Babbage and
Herschel. Mary soon interested herself in mathematics and at the age of eleven
was reading Bonnycastle’s Algebra. She was devoted to her mathematics tutor
M. Deplace and recounts an incident that took place during one of his lessons:

The next thing I remember is a sum in compound proportion, or what
used to be called ‘double rule of three’. The master told me nothing, he
asked me a succession of questions and made me write down each
answer as I gave it, and then let me perceive that the answer to the
complicated question on which we had started came out of its own
accord in my own handwriting. After the lesson I showed the
performance to my father and an uncle who was staying with us. They
seemed simply staggered at my sum. Uncle declared that it was
impossible that a child of my age could understand such a sum. I did
another in their presence. There appeared to be considerable
excitement over the performance.
This incident formed the basis of her approach to the psychology of teaching
mathematics in later years.
The family returned to England in 1843, by which time Thomas Everest’s
health had improved enough for him to resume his parochial duties at Wickwar.
Mary continued her study of mathematics and in particular algebra under the
direction of her father. She recounts that she once finished the solution of an
equation in her bedroom by herself and then discovered that her feet were deadly
cold and her head was aching and burning – she had been oblivious to her own
sensations until she had come to the end of the problem. Mary helped out with
parish work by organising Sunday school and choir practice and became an avid
reader of religious books. Thomas Everest was a collector of books on ancient
occult science and his daughter’s leanings towards mysticism in later life may
have been due to this fact.
In 1844, Mr Everest’s elder brother, Sir George Everest the explorer, finally
came home from India. His tales of adventure were a never-ending source of
stimulation to the children and his passionate sympathy with the persecuted and
oppressed was transmitted to his growing niece. At one time, he even wished to
adopt her but she would not leave her parents.
Mary Everest was a niece to John Ryall, Vice-President and Professor of
Greek at Queen’s College, Cork, and in 1850, she was on a visit to her uncle
who lived at the Vice-President’s residence on the College campus.2, 3 Here, for
the first time, she met George Boole. At the time, he was 35 and she was 18, so
the relationship in the beginning was an avuncular one. Boole and Ryall had
become close friends and already young Mary had heard of the learning and
genius of the Professor of Mathematics. She was disappointed to find him unlike
her pre-conceived notion of what a scientific author should be like. In Home Side

of a Scientific Mind, written many years later, she gives an interesting account of
her first impressions of Boole:
He was considered a great acquisition at picnics and balls. Though he
did not dance himself he liked seeing dancing; he was a special
favourite with ladies and seemed willing and able to talk to anyone on
his or her special subject. I heard a great deal about him before I knew
much of him. The students used to say ‘You can’t quote a line of
doggerel from anywhere but Mr B. can tell you the next.’ ‘Mr De
Vericour knows everybody and Mr B. knows everything’ was a
proverb among them. Mr D. was a professor who had mixed in literary
society all over Europe. A lady was once giving a description of the
different college officials to a friend. ‘And what is the Professor of
Mathematics like?’ asked the friend. ‘Oh, he’s like – the sort of man to
trust your daughter with’ was the reply. I called one day on a lady and
asked for her children (who were all under seven years old). The
abstruse mathematician had taken them for a walk she said, adding that
she was always happy when he had them. ‘What a favourite he seems
to be’, I remarked. ‘He is no favourite of mine’, she said, ‘at least, I
don’t enjoy his society. I don’t care to be with such very good people.’
I observed that I never should have suspected him of being too good to
be agreeable. ‘Oh no,’ she said, ‘he never shows you that he thinks you
wicked, but when you are near anyone so pure and holy, you can’t
help feeling how shocked he must be at you. He makes me feel very
wicked; but I am always at ease when the children are with him; I
know they are getting some good.’
During that first visit of mine, an English clergyman used in
conversation several droll Irish expressions. Mr B., after looking
nervous for some time, gave him a gentle reproof. The clergyman
appeared as much astonished as the rest of the party and remarked that
such expressions meant nothing and were no harm, and that he had
only used them in fun. Mr B. said very decidedly that if people would
only think from what they were originally derived they would never
use them; and proceeded to explain the meaning of two or three of
them. Few things have ever given me so strong a feeling of never
belonging to oneself for a moment – of being responsible for every
word one utters – as that little lecture on etymology did.
A friend of Mary’s asked Boole to give Mary a little instruction on the subject of

acoustics and he readily complied. He did not seem to wish to encourage her
special taste for mathematics however, but took every opportunity of pointing
out to her the beauties of nature and of poetry. In the years from 1850 to 1852,
they corresponded regularly on mathematics and science and a deep friendship
blossomed between them.
In July 1852, Boole visited the Everest family at Wickwar and it was during
this period that he began to give Mary informal lessons on pure and applied
mathematics. She recounts an incident concerning the teaching of calculus, a
problem that still causes controversy in mathematical education.
He was very kind and fatherly to us younger members of the family;
and used to teach us Mathematics, not as a lesson, but as a matter of
interest. I wanted him to teach me the Differential Calculus. When I
first began to read it, it had seemed to me not right somehow – not
satisfactory; till I found an old book on Fluxions, which I plunged into
by myself and which seemed to me as clear as crystal. After about a
week’s enjoyment of my treasure I spoke of it to my teacher who said
that it was antiquated and considered at Cambridge as incorrect. He
made me put it aside and go on with the Calculus, which now seemed
clearer to me. When I told him of this he replied that the fluxion
method though clumsy and inconvenient, was the more original and
logical of the two; and that no one ought ever to read the Calculus in
its modern form until he had become familiar with the idea of the
fluxion.
The first incident approaching intimacy in their relationship is the following,
recounted in Mary’s own words:
One day I said to him that I never dared talk to any of my teachers
about certain things which were matters of feeling rather than
knowledge, as they would be sure to think I meant something
irreligious. The instantaneous change from his usual manner was
wonderful. I felt that for the first time in my presence he had taken off
some sort of mask. He begged me in a nervous, eager way, never to
talk about such things to anyone but himself, as people would be sure
to misunderstand me. Next day he put me through a long catechism as
to what I intended to do with my life and ended by saying that as he
was too old ever to think of marrying, he would, if I liked, be my
friend and direct my education.

From 1852 to 1855, they saw little of each other and corresponded only about
mathematics. Boole was, during this period, writing his book The Laws of
Thought, but he always found time to act as the young girl’s confidant and
adviser. Mary suffered from weakness of the lungs and also seems to have been
given to bouts of loneliness and depression. She describes an incident of the
period which seems to sum up her feelings:
I spent some of the time, when I ought to have been in bed, standing or
kneeling by the window, looking out towards the churchyard a little
way off, flooded with moonlight. One night when so engaged I was
prompted to write some blank verse. It began thus:
‘Oh I am tired, tired even unto death,
Of this incessant struggle with myself.’
Then came these lines:
‘If I could only always will,
as now To do thy will, O God,
Then might consumption lay its icy hand
Upon my fevered brow.’
The closing words were:
‘Bear me to heaven’s sweet shore.’
Then, in 1855, Thomas Everest died, leaving Mary ill and destitute. Boole
immediately proposed to take responsibility for her and her affairs. Friends tried
to dissuade her from the marriage and warned her about the many obstacles that
lay in their way: about the difference in their ages (she was 23, he 40); about his
ill-health and about her own; about his small income, his irritable nervous
system and overworked brain. Boole too had many doubts and scruples about
‘imprisoning a young girl’s life’. But their deep feelings for each other prevailed
and they made arrangements to be married as soon as possible. A letter written
by Boole from Cambridge on 15 August 1855, contains several passages that
illustrate their closeness during the short engagement:
… It is delightful to me to feel that I can tell you anything that
concerns myself without the least reserve, and that things which it
might be vanity for me to tell to other people, may, without any
scruple of the kind be told to you …
… You will, I am sure, read with interest these little details which I
pour out to you just as if I were only speaking inwardly to myself.

You, I know, will rejoice to help me carry out those designs which, if
Providence spare my life and health, I hope to see realised for the good
of learning and the cause of truth …
At this point, it is natural to ask why a man as sociable and seemingly eligible as
Boole had never married. Up to 1849, of course, he was probably not in a
position to do so financially because of his parents’ dependence on his income
from school-teaching. However, Boole by all accounts was a romantic at heart
and fell in and out of love quite easily. The Reverend E.R. Larken’s son,
Edmund, who was a pupil of Boole’s both in Lincoln and Cork, wrote in a letter
to his parents, ‘Mr Boole is reported to have lost his heart again’, so one can
only assume that it was a matter of frequent occurrence.
However, very much earlier in his life, Boole had fallen deeply in love with a
lady but the relationship did not proceed because of religious differences. Many
years later Boole’s youngest daughter Ethel wrote:
… I think the initials which end in ‘P’ probably refer to a family
named Parry or Porter – some name beginning with ‘P’. There were
two sisters, Mary Anne and Mary Jane, with one of whom – I forget
which – Father was from his youth up so deeply in love that he never
married anyone else till he was over 40. He told my mother about her.
Apparently Mary Anne (or Mary Jane?) was also too much in love
with him ever to marry anyone else but she refused to marry him
because he could not bring himself to accept one (or more?) of the 39
Articles of the Church of England (I hope it was the damnatory clause
of the Athanasian Creed!). He seems to have taken it desperately hard.
At this stage too, it may not be out of place to comment on some of the reasons
that have been given for Boole’s marriage in published accounts of his life. In
E.T. Bell’s Men of Mathematics, we read: ‘… still subconsciously striving for
the social respectability that he once thought a knowledge of Greek could confer,
he married Mary Everest, niece of the Professor of Greek in Queen’s College.’
There is not a shred of evidence to support this statement which seems to have
been pure speculation on Bell’s part. Even if the statement were true, it would be
impossible to decide whether or not a subconscious thought existed in the mind a
given individual. As William Kneale has remarked, it would be at least as
plausible to suggest that Boole was striving for eminence through an alliance
with Mount Everest, which was called after another of the lady’s uncles.4, 5
Equally improbable is the suggestion made by MacFarlane in his Ten British

Mathematicians:6 ‘Prefixed to The Laws of Thought is a dedication to Dr Ryall,
Vice-President and Professor of Greek in the same College. In the following
year, perhaps as a result of the dedication, he married Miss Everest, niece of that
colleague.’
George and Mary were married, by licence, at the Parish Church of Wickwar
according to the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England on 11 September
1855.7 The witnesses were Elizabeth Anne Copleston and George John Everest,
Mary’s uncle. The ceremony was performed by the Reverend W.J. Copleston,
who ministered in a nearby parish. It is likely that Elizabeth Anne Copleston was
a relative of the Everest family who married a Copleston, probably an Indian
friend of George Everest’s.
At the time of her marriage, Mary Everest was a shy young girl of twenty-
three who had little real knowledge of the man with whom she was about to
share her life. She recounts a charming incident which conveys perfectly the
atmosphere of an English country wedding:
There were in the village four handsome women, sisters, supposed to
be of gipsy origin. One of them, a very poor woman, who at fair time
kept an unlicensed whisky shop, had a daughter who left the school, at
the age of fourteen, a few weeks before my marriage. I asked this girl
and a friend of hers of the same age whether they would like to
undertake the job of making (by hand, of course, in those days; they
had no sewing-machines) the smaller articles of my trousseau. They
willingly accepted. The village schools taught few subjects, but what
they did teach, including sewing, was done to perfection; at least, that
was the case with our little endowed free school.
When the work was completed I was going to pay them, but they
sturdily refused to accept payment and, when I remonstrated, one of
them (I think the half-gipsy) remarked in a tone of wounded pride and
affection, ‘You didn’t charge us nothing for all the time as you’ve a-
spent-a-teaching o’ we.’
Since both bride and bridegroom had each lost a parent so recently (Boole’s
mother having died in August 1854), the wedding was a quiet and unostentatious
one. Even de Morgan, who now counted himself a very personal friend of
Boole’s, was not informed that the marriage had taken place. Having heard the
news through a third party, he wrote to offer his congratulations and received the
following reply from Boole:

Cork, January 8th, 1856: My dear Sir, My wife and I are both much
obliged to you for your kind congratulations. You see the information
was perfectly correct. I have been a married man for some nearly four
months. If wedding cards and the usual ceremonies on such occasions
had been observed you would have known of the event at the time.
You have heard doubtless of that division of our sex into ‘happy men’
and ‘lucky dogs’ which some wit proposed to substitute for that of
‘married men’ and ‘bachelors’. Well I have long felt that the
distinction was a real one and that to be a ‘lucky dog’ was not to be a
happy man. And this will in some degree explain my migration from
the one category to the other …
The honeymoon was spent in the Wye Valley, an area of great natural beauty
near the border between England and Wales. On 3 October 1855, Boole wrote to
William Brooke from Tenby in Pembroke, South Wales:8
My dear friend, … We spent a week at Tintern and saw much to
admire. You really ought to go there. If you do, stay at the George Inn
and board there by the day. You will find it not expensive, scarcely
more than a lodging. Go especially to the old churchyard on the hill
side – the sweetest spot I think that I know. We were both charmed
with it. Tenby is a very pretty place but we have had a good deal of
bad weather. Yesterday was unnaturally bright and calm for the time
of year and at night the sea was intensely phosphorescent, so that on
throwing in a stone the falling drops seemed like a shower of fire. In
the night a sudden and violent storm of wind and rain set in, and this
prevented us from going as we had intended to Milford today and
thence setting sail for Ireland. We now remain here till next Tuesday,
when ‘we shall take the steamer for Waterford – thence to Cork by
rail.
The couple returned to Cork to begin a life together that, in Mary Boole’s words,
‘to look back over most of it seemed like the remembrance of a sunny dream.’
But George Boole was not just a romantic dreamer – one of his first acts, on the
birth of their first child, was the making of a will with his wife and her heirs as
the sole beneficiaries:9
This is the last will and testament of me George Boole, LL.D.,
Professor of Mathematics in Queen’s College in the City of Cork. I
direct that all my just debts and funeral and testamentary expenses

shall be paid as soon as convenient after my decease and subject
thereto I give and bequeath all my furniture, copyrights, shares, life
policy, money, securities, effects and personal estate whatsoever unto
my dear wife Mary Boole. And I give and devise all my messuages,
lands, hereditaments and real estate whatsoever unto my said wife
Mary Boole, her heirs and assigns …
Boole’s happy marriage sets him in sharp contrast with Sir William Rowan
Hamilton, who also had an unhappy love affair in his youth. Hamilton however
never really recovered from his early disappointment and allowed the
consequent depression to dominate his feelings for the remainder of his life.
When Hamilton did marry, his choice of partner was a disastrous one and he
drifted further into depression and near-alcoholism. It is a tribute to Boole’s
stability of character that he was able to sublimate his early disappointment in
love and afterwards make an excellent marriage.

I
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Cuvierian Society
t is interesting to examine the state of scientific knowledge in Cork in the
years prior to Boole’s arrival there.1, 2 Despite the lack of success of the
continued agitation for the founding of a university in the city, popular interest in
scientific matters flourished. In 1807, the Royal Cork Institution (RCI) was
founded, modelled largely on the Royal Institution of London which had been
founded in 1799. It had the distinction of being the first and only provincial
scientific institution in early nineteenth-century Ireland and was the forerunner
of Queen’s College, Cork. It conducted public courses of lectures on a wide
range of scientific topics, including natural philosophy, chemistry, natural
history, agriculture, astronomy and archaeology. In addition to housing a fine
library of scientific books, it had valuable collections of mineralogical and
natural history specimens. A scientific journal, the Munster Farmer’s Magazine,
was published and there was an astronomical observatory on the South Mall.
Communication with the inhabitants of the city at large was further promoted by
the existence of a collection of scientific equipment which was made available
on loan to medical men and for demonstrations at the Cork Mechanics’ Institute.
The most notable scientist connected with the RCI was undoubtedly Edmund
Davy (1785–1857), cousin of Sir Humphrey Davy and the discoverer of
acetylene. Edmund had been Humphrey’s assistant at the Royal Institution of
London between 1808 and 1813, during which time they made several important
contributions to the development of chemistry.
In 1828, Dr Denis Bullen, who was later to play such an important if tragic
role in the history of Queen’s College, was elected Professor of Chemistry of the
RCI. He was to become a close friend of Boole’s and their relationship casts
considerable light on Boole’s character. Bullen, a Catholic, was active in the
scientific life of Cork and was to become the first Professor of Surgery at the
Queen’s College.
The RCI had originally started in 1803 as a rather informal body for the
delivery of public lectures, but in 1807 it was incorporated by Royal Charter.
Thereafter it had the financial security of an annual government grant of up to

£2,500 which gave it sufficient freedom to concentrate on the development of
the scientific and cultural life of the city. But in 1830, it received a severe
setback when its grant was cut by half. It is difficult to understand why this
decision was taken and the answer is possibly to be found in the complex party
politics of the day. The RCI made a few desperate attempts to survive, but public
subscriptions could no longer meet its ever-growing financial needs and so its
activities had to be curtailed. In consequence, it began to suffer an immediate
decline from which it never recovered. By the time the Queen’s College was
opened in 1849, the RCI still existed but only in name. It had, however, achieved
many of the objectives of its founders and, in particular, Cork by then could
boast of a permanent government-financed institute of higher education.
In 1835, many of those who realised that the RCI was quickly becoming at
best a private cultural society decided that something would have to be done
about the continuation of popular scientific education in Cork, and so in that
year, the Cuvierian Society for the Cultivation of the Sciences was founded.3 It
was named after the distinguished French naturalist, zoologist and geologist,
Baron Cuvier (1769–1832), whose reputation then was much greater than it is
now. The choice of a French scientist caused the raising of eyebrows in some
circles, especially as his theological opinions were probably in conflict with
those of the majority of the Cuvierian Society. It even had to be pointed out to
prospective supporters that Cuvier’s writings had nothing in common with the
dangerous Theory of Evolution which was then beginning to cause alarm. It has
been suggested that the name of a French scientist was chosen as a mild
retaliation for the niggardly way in which the government had treated the RCI.
The following selection from the principal regulations of the Cuvierian
Society provides a good summary of its aims:4
1. The object of the Society is the promotion of a friendly
intercourse between those persons who feel a pleasure in the
cultivation of Science, Literature and the Fine Arts, and by
personal communications, and occasionally, by courses of
Lectures on particular branches, to diffuse more generally the
advantages of Intellectual and Scientific Pursuits.
2. In addition to the Council, consisting of a President, two Vice
Presidents, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and five ordinary members,
to be elected annually, there shall be Sectional Committees for
the better regulation of specific subjects, viz:
1st Natural History

2nd Physical and Experimental Science
3rd Statistics and Political Economy
4th Antiquities and the Fine Arts
3. No subject which is either political or polemical shall be
introduced in papers read before the Society.
The Society met on the first Wednesday of every month from October to June
and the annual subscription was ten shillings. Members of the Cuvierian Society
contributed a flora and fauna of the Cork district to the annual meeting of the
British Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cork in 1843. By
1849, it was in a flourishing condition, both intellectually and financially, and
the opening in that year of the Queen’s College gave it a further impetus because
many of the newly appointed professors became enthusiastic members. On 27
November 1849, the Council of the Cuvierian Society gave a soirée at the
premises of the Royal Cork Institution for the professors of the Queen’s College.
Boole, who was among those present, met and conversed with some of Cork’s
leading scientific and literary figures of the day, including Francis Jennings,
John Windele, Denny Lane and Richard Dowden. Boole’s experiences with the
Mechanics’ Institute in Lincoln had stimulated his interest both in the
popularisation of science and the exchange of knowledge with those engaged in
other scientific disciplines, so it was only to be expected that he would become
an enthusiastic supporter of the Cuvierian Society. He soon became a regular
attender at its meetings and in the records of the Society for the session 1849–
1850, we find the first reference to his name.
Mr Denny Lane – Young Ireland poet, railway enthusiast and founder of the
Cork Gas Company – had inherited a distillery at Glanmire near Cork and
described in a paper to the Cuvierian Society his attempts to utilise to the best
advantage the fall of 15 feet of water at his command, by employing the
principle of the Barker Mill. He brought to the meeting a number of complicated
diagrams, together with a proposal for a machine having ‘curvilinear flexure,
thus providing a gradual curve instead of the several right angles of the older
wheel’. Boole, who was present at the meeting, there and then offered to work
out the difficult calculations arising from Lane’s ingenious plan. One can only
speculate on his delight at having come across a kindred spirit such as Lane and
a problem so interesting from both a practical and theoretical point of view.
On 6 November 1850, Boole was elected by ballot to full membership of the
Society. Early in 1851, he delivered his first paper – a truly remarkable
biographical account of John Walsh, a mathematical eccentric and crank of
heroic proportions, who had lived in Cork until his death in 1847. This paper

was later published in the Philosophical Magazine (for November 1851) in the
form of a letter to Augustus de Morgan.5 De Morgan later referred to Walsh in
his book A Budget of Paradoxes, where he describes Boole’s account of his life
as ‘the best biography of a single hero of the kind that I know.’ De Morgan
expressed a wish that some day Walsh’s life would be made known to a wider
audience. Perhaps now is the time for de Morgan’s wish to be granted. This is
Boole’s sympathetic account of Walsh’s life:
John Walsh was born at Shandrum, on the border of the County of
Limerick, probably about the year 1786. His parents were small
farmers; and the only education which he appears to have received was
from itinerant schoolmasters, a class of teachers of humble rank who
resided, while imparting their little stock of knowledge, with the
parents of their pupils, and thus may have contributed to foster that
respect for learning which still characterises the Irish peasant. Of his
mother, Mr Walsh always spoke with great affection, attributing to her
influence his first love of letters. He also held in kind remembrance
one of his early schoolfellows, John Harding, to whom in later life he
dedicated a little tract on The General Principles of the Theory of
Sound.
When about 28 years of age, John Walsh, in company with Harding,
removed to Cork. Necessity, however, compelled the friends to
separate. Walsh, who wrote a fine hand, an accomplishment which he
stated that he owed to his mother’s instruction, obtained employment
as a teacher of writing in ladies’ schools. He also received private
pupils, and at a subsequent period was engaged as writing-master in
two respectable boys’ schools in the city. The teaching of writing and
arithmetic appears to have been his chief source of subsistence; for
although he sometimes obtained pupils in the higher mathematics, this
was not a frequent occurrence. Mr Walsh is said to have been a careful
and diligent writing-master, and to have succeeded in making his
pupils in arithmetic understand and like the subject. The few
testimonies which I have heard of his abilities as a teacher of the
higher mathematics would not lead me to think that he was equally
successful there. He is stated to have been too intent on enforcing his
own peculiar views. Indeed there can be little doubt, from an
examination of his papers, that upon this subject he laboured under a
peculiar mental hallucination.
At what time Mr Walsh began to write on mathematical topics I am

not able to determine. By degrees, however, this class of speculations
appears to have absorbed his entire interest. He became convinced that
the differential calculus was a delusion; that Sir Isaac Newton was a
shallow sciolist, if not an impostor; and that the universities and
academics of Europe were engaged in the interested support of a
system of error. Whether this was a sudden conviction, or whether it
was the gradual result of the successive disappointments which he was
destined to endure in his attempts to convince the world how
misplaced its confidence had been, it is not easy to determine; but the
latter is the more probable view. However this may have been, Mr
Walsh was for a series of years engaged in a constant endeavour to
induce the principal learned societies of Europe to print his
communications. His posthumous papers show that he was thus in
frequent correspondence with the French Academy, the Royal
Societies of London and Edinburgh, the Royal Irish Academy and
other similar bodies.
Failing in every effort of this nature, he published at his own
expense a large number of tracts, in which he endeavoured to establish
his views, and denounced in no measured terms the unjust and selfish
opposition which he thought that he had met with. Of a considerable
number of these tracts, and also of the original manuscripts of them, I
have found copies among his papers and a brief account of them may
be interesting.
The printed tracts and papers are for the most part occupied with the
announcement of some discovery which was designed to supersede the
differential calculus in its application to problems respecting curves.
The method in question consisted in transferring the origin of
coordinates to a point upon the curve, developing the ordinate y in
terms of the abscissa x, and making use of the coefficients of the
expansion just in the same way as the ordinary principles of the
differential calculus would direct us to do. The titles of some of Mr
Walsh’s papers will serve to throw light on the particular objects
which he had in view. The equation of a curve transformed as above
Mr Walsh calls its ‘partial equation’.
Memoir on the Invention of Partial Equations; The Theory of
Partial Functions; Irish Manufactures: A New Method of Tangents;
An Introduction to the Geometry of the Sphere, Pyramid and Solid
Angles; General Principles of the Theory of Sound; The Normal
Diameter in Curves; The Problem of Double Tangency; The

Geometric Base; The Theoretic Solution of Algebraic Equations of the
Higher Orders.
The mere list of titles above given, and it is far from being
complete, affords evidence of considerable industry, and Mr Walsh’s
unpublished papers confirm this testimony. The following is an
account of the principal ones:
The Elements of Geometry, by John Walsh (Folio). This merely
contains a series of definitions and axioms, etc., beginning with the
‘doctrine of ratio’.
The definitions are headed by the motto ‘Space is Space, Time is
Time, Truth is Truth’, and the first of the so-called definitions is
‘Space and Time are infinite, coeternal, and cannot be increased or
diminished.’ For the rest, the propositions appear to be those of Euclid
expressed in another form, the word ‘angular plane’ being used for
angle.
Memoir on the Calculus of Variations, showing its total unreality. In
these, and in nearly all of Mr Walsh’s speculations which I have taken
the trouble to examine, one peculiarity of his mental procedure is very
observable. He takes up some known method or formula of analysis,
makes in it a slight and quite unimportant change (for every theorem
admits of some variety in the mode of its expression) and views the
result to which he is led as an original discovery. Thus, in a page
headed Cubic Equations, he writes the name of Cardan opposite to a
well-known algebraic solution, that of Walsh opposite to the same
result put under another and less convenient form, and below these he
gives a formula headed For a Complete Cubic by Walsh only. It is
related of the dramatic poet Wycherley, that in his old age, the
functions of memory and of genius were so strangely mingled and
confused that if verses were read to him in the evening he would
reproduce them the following morning with all the effort of original
composition, quite unconscious of the source of his borrowed
inspiration. Mr Walsh committed similar errors without the
intervention of a sleep.
What importance Mr Walsh attached to his supposed discoveries
will appear from the following extract which I make from the MS.
notebook above referred to. It is not a solitary example.
‘Discovered the general solution of numerical equations of the fifth
degree at 114 Evergreen Street, at the Cross of Evergreen, Cork, at
nine o’clock in the forenoon of 7 July 1844; exactly twenty-two years

after the invention of the Geometry of Partial Equations, and the
expulsion of the differential calculus from Mathematical Science.’
Besides Mr Walsh’s own papers, there remain a large number of
letters which had been received by him, in reply to his applications,
from different learned societies. The most interesting of these conveys
a report by Poisson and Cauchy on one of his papers submitted to the
Academy of Sciences. That report points out clearly what I have
already had occasion to remark in other instances, that Mr Walsh’s
supposed discovery, in so far as it was true, was not original. In a
subsequent report by Poisson upon another communication, that great
analyst, referring to the former one, stated explicitly that Mr Walsh’s
papers did not merit the attention of the Academy.
Mr Walsh continued to pursue his avocation as a writing-master in
Cork until the year 1845, when a paralytic seizure threw him almost
helpless upon the charity of those who had known him in better days.
Among his papers is a subscription list, testifying that the appeal made
for him to the benevolence of his fellow citizens was not unheard. I
have however been informed upon credible authority that the first use
which Mr Walsh made of the sum put into his hands was to rush into
print. It will not be surprising to learn that about this period he was for
some time confined in the city jail for debt and that shortly after he
was an inmate of the Union.
It is a happy circumstance, that, never having married, he had no
family cares to weigh upon his spirits. What time poor Walsh spent in
the Union in this his first visit to it I have not ascertained; but before
long he was removed, chiefly through the benevolent intercession of
Dr Finn, one of the physicians of the North Infirmary, to that
Institution, where he remained for some months. It is not improbable
that at this period, his disease may have been accompanied by cerebral
excitement, for he is described as having been a rather intractable
patient. Peculiar notions which he had formed on the subject of
religion led him to attempt to convert some of his fellow-patients to
the same views. I have been informed by one of the physicians who
was then in attendance at the infirmary, that he would rise at night
from his bed, and addressing the other patients, declaim in the most
earnest manner against the belief in the immortality of the soul. The
particular argument upon which he relied is stated in a paper which a
short time before he had printed under the title of Metalogia. It is, in
his own words, as follows:

‘The Deity is coeternal with Time and Space, and has all his
attributes infinite. He cannot confer any of these attributes on thinking
beings; for if the Divine Being could confer anyone of his attributes,
viz. immortality, for example, therefore inductively he could confer all
his attributes on mankind, and make them coequal to himself in every
respect, which would be contradictory and absurd. Therefore, etc.’ In
the same paper, which is interesting as being probably his last
performance, he thus defines the science of Metalogia, and describes
its claims: ‘Metalogia, which signifies beyond reason, is the name I
have given to a new branch of knowledge which inquires into the
causes of such phaenomena as ignorance would persuade us had been
beyond the power of human reason to investigate. Already it has
opened the way for three great movements in human affairs.’ These
movements he describes with a simplicity which would excite a smile,
if the whole history did not too deeply draw upon the sources of pity,
as, First: ‘The falsehood of the Greek method of exhausted quantities,
so celebrated throughout all ages, even in our own times, by the
mathematicians, astronomers and philosophers of the world, as an
admirable and refined invention. And the falsehood of the offspring of
that method, namely, the no less celebrated doctrine of fluxions,
differentials, limits, etc., the boast and glory of England, France and
Germany, demonstrated by the great invention of the geometry of
partial equations which has superseded them, at least in my hands, and
indefinitely surpassed the old system in power.’
‘The second great movement in human affairs is in physical science,
viz. the falsehood of Newton’s law of gravity.’ ‘The third of these
great movements’ is the above argument against immortality which, he
says, ‘because it is based upon demonstrated truth will ultimately
overspread the earth, and banish superstition from its surface’.
Observe the admirable candour of the admission ‘at least in my hands’
with which poor Walsh is forced to qualify his harmless boast of the
triumphs of his system. ‘Whether’, he confesses in another part of the
same paper, ‘it is owing to the prejudices of the philosophers or to the
actual irrational bearing of the human species,’ his most important
discoveries had been ‘completely sent to Coventry’.
The remainder of poor Walsh’s story is soon told. After remaining
without benefit for some time in the North Infirmary, he was received
into the house of a brother, the Rev M. Walsh, parish priest of Sneem
in the County of Kerry. There, however, he did not remain long.

Restless and unhappy, he returned at his own desire, to Cork, and
resided on Patrick’s Quay, where he endeavoured again, but vainly, to
obtain pupils in his favourite science. The paralysis from which he
suffered had moreover destroyed the beauty of his hand-writing, which
from one specimen that I have seen of it appears to have been once
remarkable, and thus cut off all hopes of subsistence from his former
employment. Doubtless it was by the aid of benevolent friends (and in
generous sympathy for misfortune, Cork is not wanting) that he was
able to subsist.
It was at the commencement of an awful period that John Walsh
sought an asylum in the Cork Union. The autumn of 1846 and the
whole of the following winter and summer will long be remembered in
Ireland. The food of a nation had perished, and a desolation
unexampled in modern times came down upon the land. At the time of
Mr Walsh’s admission, the Union house built for the accommodation
of 2,000 persons was already crowded. Ere long, the number of its
inmates exceeded 7,000 and, despite all endeavours to provide
accommodation for the continually increasing throng by the erection
of sheds and temporary hospitals, all the avenues of approach were
thronged with the dying and the dead. Amid this scene of national woe
and calamity in the famine year of 1847, poor Walsh breathed his last.
He had been for some time before his death insensible and unable to
recognise his pupil. I have been informed by Dr O’Connor that he did
not die of the fever which was carrying off the inmates of the Union
house at the rate of two or three hundred weekly, but of the paralytic
affection under which he had for some time laboured.
Mr Walsh was a man of agreeable address, and, when treated with
the respect which he thought due to himself, of friendly and courteous
manners. In the affairs of the world he was a child and was apt to
become the dupe of interested persons. With proper economy he might
have saved sufficient to support himself in old age; but the easiness of
his temper, and, I fear during the latter years of his life, a too great
fondness for social enjoyments kept him poor. The freedom of his
opinions upon religion operated also unfavourably upon his temporal
interests. I have reason to think, from an examination of his papers,
that the looseness of his sentiments upon this subject was not the result
of any desire to release himself from the restraints of moral obligation,
but of an exaggerated self-esteem, and a too great confidence in his
own not very exalted powers of intellect, the source probably of nearly

all his errors and misfortunes. To this cause we may attribute the
intemperate tone of his remarks whenever he is discussing the merits
of those whom the world has consented to make its guides in science.
Upon his favourite topic of discourse, it is said that he was quite
unable to bear contradiction.
Mr Walsh is an extreme instance of a class of persons, who, without
having mastered the very elements of received science, spend their
lives in attempting its subversion and in the vain endeavour to
substitute in its place some visionary creation of their own fancy.
Whether such persons would not in the earlier stages at least of their
career be accessible to the conviction of their error is worthy of
consideration. A little judicious kindness at that period might in some
cases prevent the misspending of a life. But when that which was
originally but a fond and foolish notion has been fostered into a
disease of the mind, the cure is generally hopeless. Trisectors of an
angle, squarers of the circle, discoverers of perpetual motion,
constitute a class of mankind whose peculiarities deserve the attention
of the student of human nature, and whose personal history is often
calculated to awaken the deepest commiseration. Providence seems to
have in some measure vindicated the equality of its dispensations by
assigning to them a double measure of hope, which serves them in the
stead both of ability and of success.
But there is a class superior to these whose history is far more
affecting; men who with both genius and competent knowledge devote
themselves, perhaps in the over hours of labour, to the improvement of
some mechanical invention, and either through want of means, or
through legal impediments, or because they have miscalculated the
requirements of the age, find themselves doomed to ceaseless
disappointment. If they are unburdened with family ties, the case is not
so distressing. Amid the greater sorrows of the times, we may permit
ourselves to forget theirs. But if they have wife and children looking
up to them for support, yet destined to see their comforts depart and
their hopes grow less; if, in addition to this, sickness follows in the
train of toil and disappointment, and unstrings the skilful hand and
quenches the fire of the inventive mind, then I confess that, guilt and
its consequences apart, I know of few sadder spectacles in the varied
drama of human life.
Boole’s short biography of Walsh is skilfully written and its author shows a

kindness and humour rare in his printed works. The Secretary of the Cuvierian
Society recorded: ‘The writer of this memoir, while pointing out the fundamental
errors of reasoning which led poor Walsh to his false conclusions, yet feelingly
drew a veil of sympathy over the enthusiastic but profitless performances of an
uninstructed and aberrant genius.’ Sadly, the era of the mathematical eccentric
seems to have passed, possibly as a result of the highly technical nature of
modern mathematics and its notation.
Boole made an immediate impact on the Cuvierian Society and his talents
were soon appreciated. On 19 September 1851, he was elected to the Council
and on 24 September, he was elected to the Society’s Sectional Committee on
Statistics and Political Economy. This led to his being appointed as a member of
the Dublin Statistical Society who wished to forge links with the Cuvierian
Society at the time. Eventually it was arranged that a member of the Dublin
Society would come to Cork and deliver a course of lectures on statistics to
interested members.
On 30 September 1852, Boole was elected one of the two vice-presidents of
the Cuvierian Society. He was a faithful attender at meetings and in the session
1852–1853 presented two further papers. The first of these was entitled On some
Astronomical Figures, from a manuscript of the 14th century, representing the
Earth’s Motion, but unfortunately no further details are available. The second
paper, delivered on 11 May 1853, was of more significance. Its title was A
Memoir of Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, who died in 1253 and Boole
was clearly commemorating the 600th anniversary of his death. He had earlier
delivered an address on the same subject to the Archaeological Institute in
Lincoln and a lengthy account of his talk had been published in the Lincolnshire
Advertiser in August 1848.
In this highly interesting memoir, Boole tells of his discovery in the British
Museum of a tract by Grosseteste (1168?–1253), Concerning the physical lines,
angles and figures, according to which all natural actions are accomplished.
Boole states that the tract comprised the sum of Grosseteste’s conclusions on the
constitution of the physical universe, with particular reference to the reflection
and refraction of light, and that it contained some of the most ingenious
examples he had come across of scientific investigation in the manner of
Aristotle. Grosseteste, it seems, had the courage to go beyond the boundaries set
by Aristotle with regard to ‘reasonable assumptions’ and in some cases even to
contradict the great philosopher. Thus Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln, showed
himself to be as creative and independent in scientific matters as he later proved

to be in theological controversy. Boole goes on to claim that Grosseteste
anticipated by several hundred years the important Principle of Least Action in
physics, when he stated that ‘the virtue or active force exerted by a natural agent
is more powerful the shorter the distance it has to traverse, and so nature
operates in the shortest method possible.’
Grosseteste strongly influenced Roger Bacon (1219–1292), another man of
independent judgement, and together they can claim a large share of the credit
for popularising the inductive method in physical science and insisting upon
experimental verification of all theories. There is little doubt that Boole admired
Grosseteste immensely and it is interesting to speculate on whether Boole was
attempting to bring about the same changes in mathematics and logic that
Grosseteste brought about in physical science. Boole was also proud of
Grosseteste’s connections with Lincolnshire, so he held him in the same high
regard as he held Sir Isaac Newton.
On 21 September 1853, Boole was re-elected Vice-President of the Cuvierian
Society for the year 1853–1854. His attendance at meetings during this session
was rather erratic, but it must be remembered that about this time he was busily
engaged in completing The Laws of Thought. However, at the monthly meeting
of the Society on 5 April 1854, Boole occupied the chair in the absence of F.M.
Jennings. There was a communication from Sir Robert Kane, President of the
Queen’s College, concerning the introduction of decimal currency and metric
weights and measures to the British Isles. Kane requested that the Cuvierian
Society petition Parliament with regard to the subject and this was unanimously
agreed. Boole, who was a keen supporter of decimal coinage, was among those
appointed to draw up the petition, which was submitted to Parliament some time
later. Many of the leading mathematicians and scientists of the day (including de
Morgan, Peacock, Airy, Babbage, Rowan Hamilton and Herschel) were
advocates of decimalisation of currency and also of weights and measures, and
the agitation for change reached a peak about this time. Unfortunately, it was
unsuccessful and Britain and Ireland had to wait for over a hundred and twenty
years before the politicians and bureaucrats changed their minds.
At the same meeting, Boole read a paper entitled A Remarkable Echo and the
minutes contain the following summary of this curious address:
Dr Boole gave an account of a remarkable echo which he had observed
at the Washingborough station in the Fens of Lincolnshire. He
observed a number of rails opposite to him, six feet high and two

inches in breadth, for a considerable distance on one side, and on
striking the ground opposite them with a stick he heard a distinct
whistle. The rapid succession of separate echoes from the rails serves
to account for this. According to the law of musical tones this echo
was produced by the travelling of the tones from one rail to another
and the greater the distance of the rails the sound was heard with less
rapidity. He entered into a more lengthened statement showing how
such an echo could readily be produced, so that the echo of any sharp
…
Here the minute comes to an abrupt end, to leave the matter hanging forever in
mid-air.
On 24 May 1854, Boole was elected to the highest office of the Cuvierian
Society – the Presidency – for the following session. That year was an important
milestone for the Society and Boole took his office very seriously, occupying the
chair at almost every meeting. As was the custom, he delivered no papers of
academic interest during his term as President, but the minutes record him as
showing two beautiful photographs of the Cathedral at Lincoln to the meeting of
7 February 1855.
To commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of the Cuvierian
Society, it was decided to hold a number of conversaziones at the Athenaeum
towards the end of May 1855 and Boole was among those appointed to the
organising committee. The first conversazione was intended for the ‘educated
classes of the city’ (1,400 in number it seems), while the second, held two days
later, was specially designed for the working classes and was still more
numerously attended. A short extract from the official account of the
proceedings may be of interest:
On the evening of May 31st, the Halls of the Athenaeum were thrown
open to the public, and the working classes, at the charge of threepence
a head. About 1,700 people were present. Of those over 400 were in
the employment of Sir Thomas Tobin of Ballincollig, the President of
the Athenaeum, who not only paid for their admission, but generously
had them conveyed into the city and back, in the most comfortable
manner, on carts used for the purposes of his extensive gunpowder
mills.
If the official reports are to be believed, then the display of objects of scientific,
archaeological and artistic interest was undoubtedly a magnificent one. In the

experimental sciences section, there were exhibitions on frictional and galvanic
electricity, together with hydrostatics, optics and the motion of the earth. It is
noted that the experiments were viewed with great interest and that the
wonderful force exerted by an apparently insignificant machine, the hydrostatic
press, was a matter of no small astonishment to the uninitiated. The exhibitions
relating to natural history and art were equally elaborate and spectacular, and
Boole is mentioned among those showing a number of daguerreotypes in the
display of the Department of Art. Many of the other professors of the Queen’s
College were also involved in the exhibition.
It fell to Boole as President of the Society to deliver the main address at the
conversazione for the educated classes on the evening of 29 May. The address
was long and elaborate and shows signs of extremely careful thought and
preparation. The following extracts are typical of the tone of the address, as
indeed they seem to be typical of Boole’s outlook on life:6
… The members of the Society, which I have the honour to represent,
sought not, when they issued their invitation to you, for any occasion
of display. But they felt that it was a good thing that men should meet
together in amity. And they believed that in the present instance that
spirit of amity and of mutual satisfaction would be promoted, if they
should succeed in collecting together a few of those objects which
exemplify the progress of the peaceful arts, or open up to us the life of
other times, or are in some way connected with the interests of
humanity. In how kind and liberal a spirit their desires have been
seconded by all those who have been asked to render their assistance
upon the occasion, I need not describe. The evidences of it are before
you. But this you will feel with me, that such a spirit of co-operation
both deserves our thanks and commands our esteem. It bears the stamp
of a genuine benevolence, when they who possess objects upon which
they set more than a pecuniary value, and from the contemplation of
which they derive pleasure, are willing to lend them in order that
others may participate in their enjoyment. And here I cannot but notice
that such benevolence meets with the reward which it deserves, but
which it does not directly seek. For the pleasure which we derive from
the contemplation of any great, or curious, or beautiful work, is
essentially of that kind which is the most remote from selfishness. All
such pleasures are enlarged by sympathy. I think that this is more
eminently true with respect to the productions of art, than with respect

to the great works of nature. And perhaps that scene which is the most
august of all, demands for its realisation the silence and solitude, as
well as the darkness of the night. With the productions of human skill
or genius we stand, however, more on a level. We can better
understand their purpose and more fully realise the idea which they are
intended to convey. Whether, however, these observations are just or
not, it remains, I apprehend, an undoubted truth that the pleasure
which an occasion like the present inspires, rests very much upon the
union of the social feelings with the enjoyment of the presence of
those objects which, as they are the fruit, so they are the symbols, of
peace and goodwill among men …
I would begin by asking you what we mean when we speak of the
human race. Is it merely so many men and women, isolated units of
humanity; some dwelling in this quarter of the globe and some in that;
some enjoying their brief tenure of existence under one of the great
planetary cycles, and some under another? You may have stood on a
summer’s day by some placid lake, and observed, as a light breeze
swept by, raising its surface into ripples, how, in obedience to a
physical law, each wavelet pursues its own course without interfering
with, or in any way influencing, the others. You may, in particular,
have noticed how, when reflected back from the shore, they cross and
override those which they meet, but still without mutual disturbance,
until they are finally lost and no trace of them is left. Now, can this be
taken as a just emblem of human life? Are we who are assembled here,
and all who in past ages have felt the joys and sorrows of humanity,
but mimic billows upon the sea of time which follow in perfect
independence their several tracts, and then dying away leave its
surface as if they had never been? I suppose you will agree that this
would not be a true picture of our state and condition here. You will be
conscious of the existence of bonds by which each age and each
country stand connected with all others. You will feel that there is such
a thing as humanity. I would beg most distinctly to say that I do not
use this term in a sense in which it has sometimes been employed of
late, and which seems designed to imply that there is nothing higher
and greater than the collective race of man. Perhaps it is in the thought
that there does exist an Intelligence and Will superior to our own – that
the evolutions of the destinies of our species is not solely the product
either of human waywardness or of human wisdom; perhaps, I say, it
is in this thought that the conception of humanity attains its truest

dignity. When therefore I use this term, I would be understood to mean
by it the human race, viewed in that mutual connexion and dependence
which has been established, as I firmly believe, for the
accomplishment of a purpose of the Divine Mind. And having said
this, rather with a view to prevent any possible misconception, than
because I think such a theme proper to be discussed upon the present
occasion – I remark that one eminent instance of that connexion and
dependence to which I have referred is to be seen in the progression of
the arts and sciences. Each generation as it passes away bequeaths to
its successor not only its material works in stone and marble, in brass
and iron, but also the truths which it has won, and the ideas which it
has learned to conceive; its art, literature, science, and, to some extent,
its spirit and morality. This perpetual transmission of the light of
knowledge and civilisation has been compared to those torch races of
antiquity in which a lighted brand was transmitted from one runner to
another until it reached the final goal. Thus it has been said do
generations succeed each other, borrowing and conveying light,
receiving the principles of knowledge, testing their truth, enlarging
their application, adding to their number, and then transmitting them
forward to coming generations – Et quasi cursores vitai lampada
tradunt.
Now, this connexion between intellectual discovery and the
progressive history of our race, gives to every stage of the former a
deep human interest. Each new revelation, whether of the laws of the
physical universe, of the principles of art, or of the great truths of
morals and of politics, is a step not only in the progress of knowledge,
but also in the history of our species. Could we trace back our
intellectual pedigree, if you will permit me to use such an expression,
we should find ourselves connected by that noblest of all lines of
descent, with every nation and kindred of men that has occupied a
place in history, and with many others, of whose names and deeds no
record survives. We should see the picture writing, most probably, of
some forgotten Asiatic tribe, passing through successive stages,
analogous to those which are still preserved in the monuments of
Egypt, until among the Phoenician people it gave birth to our present
system of letters. We should behold the first principles of our science
and much more than the first principles of our literature and
philosophy, emerging into light among those isles of Greece, which
seem to have been the chosen home of freedom and of genius in the

ancient world. To the same source we should trace back whatever is
most refined in the art of the sculptor and no small portion of the
science of the architect. To the Romans, above all others, we should
find ourselves indebted for the principles of government and law.
Theirs was even less the genius of conquest than of empire and rule;
and the system of jurisprudence which they left is still, in the opinion
of some, their noblest monument. To the Arabians we owe our
numerals, and through this the science of arithmetic. And beside these
more distinct portions of the inheritance which has been transmitted to
us from ages past, and of which the enumeration is far from being
complete, how many customs, thoughts, and opinions, how many
silent influences for good or for evil, do we not unconsciously owe! As
respects the larger and more definite accessions to which I have
referred, it would almost seem as if the law of human progression were
this – that to different sections of the one great family of man, different
measures of special capacity were assigned, so that each, while
fulfilling its own destiny, should also add to the common stock of
intellectual wealth. I conceive the Greek art to be an eminent
illustration of this principle, though others, scarcely less signal, might
be adduced. Thus, it has been doubted whether we could, in the
present day, originate that union of wildness and romantic beauty, of
grotesqueness and grandeur, which constitutes the predominant
character of Gothic architecture. I can well conceive that it was only
from a certain order of mind, the ground of whose character was
formed amid the pine forests of the north, and whose later stamp was
received from the stately but decaying monuments of Imperial Rome,
that such a product could have arisen. But, having come into being, it
remains, through its work and its conceptions, the parent of solemn
thoughts to all succeeding times. There is, I need not remind you, one
special task which these later ages seem destined to accomplish, a task
of the highest importance, but which it would be a fatal error to regard
as an end, and not as a means; it is the extension of man’s dominion
over the material world. I will not attempt to examine here the various
aspects of that much-disputed question, why so subtle and inquisitive a
people as the Greeks made no advance in physical science? It has been
said that it is because they did not possess a proper method. But the
difficulty is thus thrown back and not solved – for the question
immediately arises: Why did they not possess a proper method? The
principles of that method are so obvious as to be almost axiomatic, and

in other departments of speculation, they were understood and applied
by some of the great thinkers of antiquity. I suppose that we must
conclude, with an eminent writer on the history of the inductive
sciences, that the time for this development was not come, that there
were other problems to be solved first, more intimately connected with
human freedom and happiness. In confirmation, however, of the fact
that the extension of human sway over the material world is an actual,
whether or not it is a special business of these times, we have only to
consider what is going on around us and has been exemplified in this
room. Take, for instance, that science of chemistry, which imitates, by
its processes, the products of organic life, or those improvements in
metallurgy, and those applications of the wonderful power of
electricity to the arts, some of which have been elucidated by my
friend and colleague, Dr Blyth, this evening. Or reflect upon those
recent advances in the science of optics which have brought to its
present state the achromatic microscope, an instrument which enables
us to survey some of the most secret processes of nature, and which,
aided by that peculiar modification of light which is produced by the
action of certain crystals, permits us in some instances almost to look
into the chemical constitution of bodies. Or take that latest birth of
science, the art of Photography, which makes its pencil of the solar
beam, and delineates, with a faithfulness to which no human limner
can approach, not merely the repose of nature, but her aspects of
change, the waves breaking on the shore or the human countenance lit
up by some momentary gleam of thought or feeling. These examples
have been suggested to me by objects in this room. I forbear to
multiply them, or to refer to the mechanical triumphs of the age, lest in
the multitude of the illustrations you should forget the principle which
they are designed to exemplify …
The conversaziones of 1855 marked the climax of Boole’s involvement with the
Cuvierian Society and significantly enough, they also marked the zenith of the
Society itself. Although Boole was a member of the Council for the next session,
he rarely attended meetings and read no further papers to the Society. From 1856
on, he was more concerned with his young family and perhaps he felt that he had
made more than his fair contribution to the popularisation of the sciences in
Cork. He does not appear to have attended any monthly meetings of the Society
during the period 1856–1863 nor does he appear to have been a member during
this time. It is a surprise therefore to find that on 4 November 1863, just a year

before his death, Boole was again admitted by ballot as a member of the Society.
The minutes however make no mention of any further activities or contributions
on his part.
Several accounts seem to indicate that Boole contributed some mathematical
papers to the Cuvierian Society, but no further details are given and there is no
mention of this in the official minutes. It is unlikely that Boole attempted to
popularise the sort of mathematics in which he was most interested because in
those days symbolic logic, probability and differential operators were considered
to be very advanced mathematics indeed. In addition, the Cuvierian Society does
not seem to have regarded mathematics as being of central importance to science
in the way that it is considered today. Finally, it must be remembered that the
Sectional Committee on Statistics on which Boole served dealt with a subject
which bore little or no relation to the present-day discipline of mathematical
statistics.
Boole does not appear to have been involved in the activities of another
important society which was active in the Cork of his day – The Literary and
Scientific Society, founded in 1820, and happily still flourishing. Possibly he
attended some of the many interesting lectures which they presented and no
doubt he was present on the evening of 6 February 1851, when his friend,
Professor de Vericour, spoke on the poetry of the Portuguese. The Literary and
Scientific Society was also active in the agitation for metrication and decimal
currency.
Boole must have been severely disappointed when he arrived in Cork to find
that the Mechanics’ Institute, which had been founded in 1825, was in a state of
collapse, having virtually ceased to function from 1845 onwards. Although the
Mechanics’ Institutes thrived in Ireland in the nineteenth century (the Galway
Institute for example was still going strong), the Cork Institute was an exception.
Many reasons are given for its failure, but perhaps the most important is that it
was never truly representative of the working-class people whose cause it
pretended to foster. Boole, perhaps, was happier devoting his energies to the
Cuvierian Society which had a fine tradition of sharing cultural activities and
scientific knowledge with the working-class population of Cork.

B
CHAPTER NINE
The Laws of Thought
oole had often regretted the fact that his first book, The Mathematical
Analysis of Logic, had been so hurriedly written. Further reflection and the
reactions of other mathematicians, sometimes adverse, to his earlier book had
convinced him of the possibility of extending his algebra of logic and, moreover,
he began to suspect that probability might also be analysed in a similar fashion.
When the euphoria of his appointment to a professorship had worn off, he
suffered from a combination of mild depression and loneliness, so naturally he
turned once again to mathematics and research, if only to distract himself. He
devoted much of his spare time to what he felt should be his major contribution
to the subject, namely a study of the reduction of logical operations and
statements to a purely symbolic form in which logical conclusions would
become simply mathematical consequences of hypotheses. This had been the
dream of many philosophers and logicians from Aristotle to Leibniz, and Pascal
and Babbage had contemplated other aspects of this dream in mechanical form.
Boole however was the first man with that peculiar combination of courage and
genius, and perhaps a little luck in his choice of notation, capable of the
realisation of the dream.
Extracts from Boole’s letters after his arrival in Cork give an indication of his
intention to devote himself to a major work on mathematical logic from a more
philosophical point of view. On 8 November 1849, he wrote to de Morgan:
‘Following your advice and that of my friend Graves I intend again to enter the
lists on the side of Mathesis against the logicians …’ In a letter to Thomson on
28 March 1850, we read: ‘My own course of reading and of study has been
somewhat desultory of late but not I trust without fruit. I am busily engaged in
preparing a work for publication, the chief subject of which will be probabilities.
You are probably aware that I have a new theory of the science …’
In a letter to de Morgan on 17 October 1850, shortly after his return from
Lincoln to Cork for the start of the new session, we see Boole’s reaction to de
Morgan’s suggestion that he should write a more elaborate book on logic:
… I am following your advice and diligently preparing a work on

Logic and Probabilities for the press. Some of my most recent
speculations in this direction would I think interest you. There is a
point at which my theory of the Laws of Thought comes to bear on the
question of Human Liberty – with reference to the Intellect directly –
and with reference to the Will by analogy and also by connexion with
the former. My conclusion is thus: there is a real phenomenon in the
mind whether rightly called Liberty or not which distinguishes it from
the system of external nature and which admits of being exactly
defined by its properties as any other phenomenon. When the
introductory chapter is printed you shall have a copy of it and then if
you care to see the others you may do so …
This extract confirms the suggestion of some commentators that much of
Boole’s motivation for writing The Laws of Thought was epistemological rather
than mathematical. Unfortunately, Boole’s work has had little impact on
philosophy and other areas outside of mathematics. Boole himself, however, had
no doubts about the importance of the task he had undertaken and felt that any
claim he might have to a lasting reputation would stem from the book in
progress. In a letter to Thomson, dated 2 January 1851, there occurs a passage
betraying an uncharacteristic lack of modesty:
I am now about to set seriously to work upon preparing for the press
an account of my theory of Logic and Probabilities which in its present
state I look upon as the most valuable if not the only valuable
contribution that I have made or am likely to make to Science and the
thing by which I would desire if at all to be remembered hereafter …
Having little to divert him in Cork outside of his professorial duties, Boole
worked feverishly all during the year 1851 on his book, all the time deepening
and perfecting his algebra of logic, while at the same time giving an analogous
development of the theory of probability. He kept in close and continual touch
with de Morgan throughout this period and there is no doubt that he was strongly
influenced by de Morgan’s Essay on Probabilities of 1838 and the chapter on
probability in de Morgan’s Formal Logic of 1847. By July 1852, Boole was able
to report that he had five hundred manuscript pages ready for final revision and
on 27 September of that year, he wrote to de Morgan: ‘I am going up to London
tomorrow to make arrangements for the publication of my book on Logic and
Probabilities. It has occurred to me that you may be able to give me some
information which may be useful …’

De Morgan, who throughout his contact with Boole displayed enormous
generosity and a complete lack of envy, made every effort to ensure that Boole’s
book would be printed and published in a suitable form. On 29 September 1852,
de Morgan wrote to Sir William Rowan Hamilton, a close acquaintance:1
… Please send me the name and address of your printer. My publisher
will, perhaps, have to ask him for an estimate for a work – not of mine.
It is, in fact, Boole who is meditating typography on his mathematical
logic, which is a very original thing, and, for power of thought, worthy
to be printed by the printer of the Quaternions. As he has Hibernicised
himself, it is fit he should have an Irish printer, and I rather suspect
that the Dublin man prints more cheaply than the London ones …
From the tone and content of this extract, it is tempting to speculate that de
Morgan may have been the mysterious ‘friend’ who shared the expenses
involved in the printing and publishing of The Laws of Thought. However there
is no direct evidence to substantiate this speculation. Some time later, de Morgan
again wrote to Hamilton: ‘I shall forward the printer’s name to Boole. I shall be
very glad to see his work out for he has I think, got hold of the true connexion of
algebra and logic …’
By 8 December 1852, Boole was able to write to de Morgan: ‘I have agreed
with Gill to print my book and hope to get a good deal of the MS to press before
the end of the year. I have chosen a tinted paper something like yours and hope
that our joint example may do something to reform public taste in this matter …’
Incidentally, the use of tinted paper is a refreshing and surprisingly modern
notion of Boole’s in relation to the presentation of mathematical material.
The full title of Boole’s book was An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on
which are founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities and the
preface, dated 30 November 1853, was addressed from 5 Grenville Place, Cork.
Some at least of the book was written at this address because, as an illustration
of the theory of probabilities, he gives the following example:
Opposite the window of the room in which I write is a field, liable to
be overflowed from two causes, distinct but capable of being
combined, viz. floods from the upper sources of the River Lee, and
tides from the ocean. Suppose that observations made on N separate
occasions have yielded the following results: on A occasions the river
was swollen by freshets and on P occasions it was inundated, whether

from this cause or not. On B occasions the river was swollen by the
tide, and on Q occasions it was inundated, whether from this cause or
not. Supposing, then, that the field cannot be inundated in the absence
of both these causes, let it be required to determine the total
probability of inundation.
The book was dedicated to ‘John Ryall, LL.D., Vice-President and Professor of
Greek in Queen’s College, Cork, in Testimony of Friendship and Esteem’. The
two men had by this time become close friends, united in their criticism of the
way in which the affairs of the college were being handled by the President, Sir
Robert Kane. Ryall is something of a mystery man and little or nothing of his
background seems to be known.2 He was born in Devonshire and graduated in
classics from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1825. He spent some time as a
schoolmaster in Birmingham and seems to have been rather undistinguished
academically, having no publications to his credit except for a collection of
Greek exercises for translation intended for students. Why he was given the
sensitive post of Vice-President of the Queen’s College remains something of a
mystery, unless perhaps he was considered a ‘safe’ Protestant counterpoint to
balance the Catholic President Kane. Ryall of course was the uncle of Mary
Everest with whom Boole was by now closely acquainted, albeit on a platonic
level. When Boole visited the Everest home in Gloucestershire, he read to the
young girl extracts from the work in progress and she must have been impressed
by the importance of the task he had undertaken. She confessed that she felt
comforted by the fact that the laws by which the human mind operates were
governed by algebraic principles! Perhaps the dedication was a subtle attempt to
consolidate the developing relationship. The preface of the book begins as
follows:
The following work is not a republication of a former treatise by the
Author, entitled, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic. Its earlier
portion is indeed devoted to the same object, and it begins by
establishing the same system of fundamental laws, but its methods are
more general and its range of applications far wider. It exhibits the
results, matured by some years of study and reflection of a principle of
investigation relating to the intellectual operations, the previous
exposition of which was written within a few weeks after its idea had
been conceived.
For a knowledge of the most important terms of logic, the reader is referred to
Whately’s Elements of Logic or to Thomson’s Outlines of the Laws of Thought,

from which Boole possibly drew his title. For a background in probability, the
sources cited are the works of de Morgan, Lubbock and Quetelet. Passing
reference is made to the fact that the final chapter of the book is designed to
illustrate the author’s view of the history of philosophy and the preface
concludes with the following note of thanks:
To his valued friend, the Rev George Stephens Dickson of Lincoln, the
Author desires to record his obligations for much kind assistance in the
revision of this work and for some important suggestions.
The Laws of Thought was an immediate success and, still in print today, it is
considered a classic work of nineteenth-century mathematics and one of the
most influential books of that period. Many years later, Bertrand Russell
described it as ‘the work in which pure mathematics was discovered’ and though
he afterwards stated that he had not intended this description to be taken
absolutely literally, nevertheless the statement is true in essence.3 Like many
another discoverer and creator, Boole was certainly not fully aware of the
implications of his discoveries and would have been astonished by the
developments both in the form and content of mathematics which have resulted
from his ideas. As Garrett Birkhoff has stated:4
The ‘Boolean Algebra’ of classes, largely originated in this classic
book, has had an ever-increasing influence on all branches of
mathematics. Today its generalizations play an important role in
general topology, in projective geometry, in the theory of the structure
of abstract algebras, in functional analysis and general ergodic theory
and in the design of electrical relays, as well as in the applications to
logic for which it was originally devised. Who can say what further
uses will be discovered during the next century.
In Boole’s own words, the design of The Laws of Thought is to investigate the
fundamental laws of those operations of the mind by which reasoning is
performed; to give expression to them in the symbolical language of a calculus
and, upon this foundation, to establish the science of logic and construct its
method; to make that method itself the basis of a general method for the
application of the mathematical doctrine of probabilities; and finally, to collect
from the various elements of truth brought to view in the course of these
inquiries some probable intimations concerning the nature and constitution of the
human mind. Hitherto, Boole’s reputation has rested on the merits of his 1844
paper On a General Method in Analysis, in which he had freely used the calculus

of operators or the method of separation of variables. In The Laws of Thought, he
progressed a further step along the road to abstraction by performing algebraic
operations on symbols representing entities not hitherto considered as
mathematical objects at all. Thus if the symbol x represents the class of all
‘white objects’ and the symbol y, the class of all ‘round objects’, Boole used the
compound symbol xy to represent the class of objects that are simultaneously
white and round. He saw that since the class of all objects that are white and
round is precisely the same as the class of all objects that are round and white,
his symbols obeyed the commutative law xy = yx under this particular law of
composition. Many of the other laws of ordinary multiplication of numbers are
also obeyed.
In the case where every member of the class x is also a member of the class y,
the law of combination of classes gives xy = x, and in the special case x = y, an
allowable possibility, this equation becomes xx = x. By analogy with the
multiplication of numbers, this is written x2 = x, an equation which is not in
general satisfied by numbers, and this equation marks the point where Boole’s
algebra of classes parts company with traditional numerical algebra.
Again, if x and y are mutually exclusive classes (that is to say, there is no
object which is simultaneously a member of x and y), Boole defines x + y to
represent the class of all objects which belong to class x or to class y. Thus, if x
is the class of all men and y is the class of all women, x + y is the class of all
people. One immediately sees that x + y = y + x and that other laws resembling
those of addition of numbers are valid. Furthermore, the two operations on
classes thus defined are connected by a law which exactly mirrors the
distributive law connecting addition and multiplication of numbers, namely z(x
+ y) = zx + zy. For example, if z represents the class of all Europeans, we see that
the class of European men and women is exactly the same as the class of
European men and European women.
Boole remarked that the laws of thought which he had stated were
incorporated as laws of everyday language, which he regarded as the product
and instrument of thought. The examples he quoted to illustrate the principles
were quite colloquial and when one reads these examples, it is astonishing to
realise that no one previously had fully appreciated the mathematical nature of
everyday language. Boole made a further important discovery that strengthened
this link between language and mathematics – namely, that there is a perfect
analogy between the calculus of classes and the calculus of simple propositions.
Thus, simple propositions such as ‘snow is black’ or ‘London is a city’ could be

manipulated and analysed in combination in precisely the same way as classes
could.
However, it was in the purely symbolic manipulation of classes that Boole’s
book made its greatest impact. Consider, for example, the classical implication
‘all As are B, all Bs are C; therefore all As are C’. In Boole’s notation, the
hypothesis could be written a = ab, b = bc. By substitution, a = ab = a(bc) =
(ab)c = ac, which gives the desired conclusion. Boole, incidentally, did not
appreciate the need for brackets in this type of analysis. By analogy with
numerical algebra, he assigned the symbol 0 to the empty class and the symbol 1
to the universal class. Further, if the class y contains the class x, he found it
natural to represent the class of all objects in y but not in x by the notation y-x.
Thus 1-x is the class of all objects not in x. The fundamental relationship on
which Boole’s results rested, x2 = x, is now easily seen to be algebraically
equivalent to x(1-x) = 0 by the following sequence of steps all of which are
covered by the axioms he stated:
Boole had therefore demonstrated in a very simple fashion the rather
extraordinary fact that the classical principle of contradiction (viz. nothing
simultaneously can have the properties p and not p) is algebraically equivalent to
the perhaps more intuitive principle of idempotence (viz. the class of all objects
with property p and property p is simply the class of all objects with property p).
Aristotle had regarded the principle of contradiction as the fundamental axiom of
all logic – Boole relegated it to the place of just another axiom.
The Laws of Thought contained a great deal more than the important
innovations just referred to. Boole introduced the concept of the development of
any function f(x), where x is a logical symbol, writing it as f(x) = f(1)x + f(0)(1-
x); this concept was clearly motivated by his earlier interest in how Taylor’s
Theorem applied to entities other than the usual symbols representing numbers.
He also gave rules for the development of expressions such as f(x, y) and f(x, y,
z), which forced him to introduce the symbols 0/0 and 1/0. Other topics treated
include the solution of logical equations, methods of abbreviation and reduction,
and the symbolical expression of secondary propositions.
The second half of The Laws of Thought is devoted to the theory of
probabilities, a subject in which Boole had become intensely interested after the
publication of his book of 1847. No doubt he was intrigued by the fact that de
Morgan had included a great deal of material on probability in his book of 1847

and wished to see what he could contribute in this area. In fact, Boole discovered
the close analogy between logic and probability and his work provided the
motivation for the important contributions to the general theory of probability
made by the logicians who followed him. We shall examine more closely
Boole’s contributions to probability in Chapter 15, on his later mathematical
work.
Boole’s correspondence about this time sheds interesting light on his frame of
mind. On 23 February 1854, he remarked in a letter to de Morgan:
… But at any rate satisfy yourself on this point – whether the solutions
my principle gives are ever false. If you find one instance in which
they are, I give it up. Are you satisfied with this declaration? I am sure
if there is any quality that I think you have in preeminence, it is
integrity in pursuit of the truth – but that is a quality in which I should
be sorry to think myself your inferior. I don’t think any man’s mind
ever was imbued with a more earnest desire to find out the truth and
say it and nothing else, than mine was while writing that book. And
the very consciousness of this would make it not painful to me to give
up half my book if it were proved to be unfounded …
Some time earlier, in May 1852, while busily engaged in preparing his book,
Boole had received from Sir William Hamilton, the Scottish philosopher, a
volume of his collected essays. He took the opportunity of pouring a little oil on
troubled waters by replying, but nevertheless, he firmly put Hamilton in his
place and refuted his narrow outlook on mathematics.5 The letter is a
masterpiece of tact and might very well be addressed to those present-day
philosophers who ignore and dismiss mathematics.
My dear Sir, I beg you to accept my cordial thanks for your kind and
valuable present of your new volume of collected essays.
Though I have long been familiar with several of the essays and
reviews, it has afforded me sincere pleasure to read them again, and
there are portions of them to which I yet purpose to recur. For whether
I agree with you in opinion or not (and there are far more points upon
which I do agree with you than upon which I differ), it is impossible
not to be instructed by the very learning and ability with which you
support and adorn your cause … Will you forgive me for adding that I
do not think that upon all points you have manifested that freedom
from prejudice which is essential to the formation of a right judgment?

Much of what you say upon the study of mathematics appears to me to
be only applicable to an exclusive study of the science. The evils of
which you speak are due, I conceive, not to the direct and positive
influence of the study of the relations of quantity and of the methods
proper to that study upon the mind, but to the absence of those
influences of general literature and human intercourse which the very
preoccupation of the mind in extreme instances occasions. Would not,
then, the very same, or a strictly parallel observation, apply to the
exclusive study of any other department of knowledge, psychology for
example? Are not all onesided men (intellectually speaking) deficient
in general strength and aptitude of mind? I think so. The sole question
which remains is whether there is anything in the nature of
mathematical science which specially tends to make the study of it
exclusive. Is there anything in the interest attaching to mathematical
pursuits and objects which is specially unfriendly to other interests –
which demands to rule alone?
Now, while I admit it to be true that many minds have been
absorbed to a very injurious extent in mathematical pursuits, I cannot,
judging from the nature of the case and from individual experience,
believe that such is a necessary or a proper result. I do not see why a
man, because he feels an interest in mathematical speculations, should
therefore not feel an interest in moral, or philosophical, or social
inquiries. I should rather suppose that the effect of the former study
would be, not to destroy the intellect in question, but to add to it a
disposition to pursue the particular studies with a reference to general
laws, as the end of investigation. And such a disposition is not in itself
to be reprehended. Undoubtedly it may, however, be carried too far –
the immediate value of facts may be too little regarded; but all this
only brings us to the same position as before – viz. that any mental
disposition suffered to gain an undue predominance becomes
injurious.
I have in my own case (which I mention only by the way) observed
that every period of sustained mathematical effort has been followed
by, and has been, I believe, productive of, an opposite state of mind – a
state in which the mind appeared to assert its unwillingness to be too
long subject to one set of ideas, and to demand for itself ‘fresh fields
and pastures new’. I cannot doubt that whenever this indication is
neglected, this call refused, great mental injury must result. And in this
way it seems to me probable that the rewards which universities hold

out to ambitious minds for special attainments may often be productive
of irreparable and most melancholy evils. But the result is not properly
chargeable upon mathematics as a study, nor is it solely chargeable
upon the abuse of mathematical studies. Some men have been warped
by philology, some crazed by metaphysics; and the whole history of
the pursuit of learning stimulated by other incentives than the love of
learning, would, I suppose, if truly written, tell of the ruin of many
noble minds, and make large deductions from the general benefits
which the world owes to academical institutions.
Boole’s seminal work in logic was extended, improved and corrected by a host
of subsequent authors including Venn, Peirce, Schröder, Peano, Frege, Russell
and Whitehead. However, though The Laws of Thought was the last work on
logic that Boole published, it was certainly not the last he intended to publish.
Among his papers found after his death were a number of manuscripts which
were clearly intended for a book in which his discoveries in logic were to be
included in the more general framework of his personal view of philosophy.6
Mary Boole stated: ‘I think this was meant as the beginning of a work intended
to put the principles of The Laws of Thought into non-mathematical language.
Mr Macmillan wished G.B. to write such a work and he often attempted it, but
always failed …’
The question at once arose as to whether this attempt at the popularisation of
Boole’s work should be published posthumously or not. De Morgan read the
relevant papers and wisely decided they should remain unpublished lest they
might detract from the greatness of Boole’s earlier work. De Morgan gave the
following justification for his action:
After much consideration I am satisfied of two things. First, the author
himself would have objected to their publication as they stand. He
would have introduced much change of expression and allusion to his
higher views, or rather, preparations without allusion.
Secondly, a false impression would be produced. A posthumous
book by George Boole on Logic would be taken for his latest and
highest view. Those who would know better when they come to open
the book, would have all the bias of disappointment; but those who
would not find out how the matter stood would really believe they
were in possession of all Boole’s intentions. And as 100 copies would
sell for one of The Laws of Thought, a very wide misapprehension of
the contents of The Laws of Thought would get about.

Boole’s excursions into the realms of philosophy were clearly not of the same
quality as his writings on logic and mathematics, and de Morgan’s decision not
to recommend their publication was completely justified. The material was very
probably written in the last few years of Boole’s life, between 1860 and 1864,
and it survives only in draft form. Nevertheless some interesting, if surprising,
features emerge. Astonishingly, in those later years, Boole felt that it should be
possible to make logic self-contained, or in his own words:
… It must be possible to interpret within the purely logical sphere and
by purely logical ideas and conceptions all the processes, methods and
results to which analogy has led. Now such an interpretation is the
object of the present work. I seek to bring into light and prominence
the philosophical elements which in my former exposition were too
much hidden beneath the veil of symbolical notation …
… I wrote the former book for mathematicians … This is intended
for the general public and Mathematics will not appear except in the
notes … However curious and exact these formal analogies between
the science of Logic and that of Algebra, it is desirable that the former
science should be developed independently … I am ready frankly to
admit that in writing that work I was far too much under the dominion
of mathematical ideas.
It is exceedingly difficult even to postulate an explanation for these statements of
Boole’s which seem to represent a complete turnabout from his earlier ideas. In
his previous work, he had shown clearly and for the first time the beautiful
connections between logic and mathematics; now it seems he was attempting to
cut logic adrift again. It is possible that for reasons more personal and perhaps
more religious than scientific, he felt that psychology and philosophy were
subjects more significant than mathematics and therefore more deserving of his
attention. Perhaps he had been irritated by the criticisms of those logicians and
philosophers who scorned mathematics and wanted to show them that he could
write a book on logic in their style. It is possible too that he felt that there was a
large class of people, such as his own wife, who found mathematical concepts
difficult to understand and that such people were thereby prevented from
appreciating his work. He felt that in some way his theories had been presented
as a philosophical system in The Laws of Thought, in an ‘imperfect mode’, and
that a more popular book would give him the opportunity to present the
psychological aspects of his theories.
Boole’s proposed book exists only in draft form and the table of contents lists

four chapters, though there was also an unfinished paper which may have been
intended as an introductory chapter. The first chapter on ordinary logic of the
day covered such topics as the nature of logical propositions and the principles
of identity, contradiction and excluded middle, as well as the syllogism. The
second chapter was largely devoted to the operations of thought in relation to
ordinary numbers and symbolic algebra as a generalisation of arithmetic. The
third approached the laws of thought in logic in a particularly interesting way.
The laws of logic were given simply as the laws satisfied by the numbers 0 and 1
in ordinary arithmetic. The fourth and final chapter covered the main purpose of
the book – a description of the laws of logic in non-mathematical language.
Though Boole’s proposed book raised quite a number of interesting questions
about the nature of logic, language and the workings of the mind, it is clear that
it would have contributed very little either to philosophy, psychology or even
logic itself. Boole was no closer to a deep understanding of the workings of the
human mind and the nature of thought than any of his contemporaries and his
proposed book would have jettisoned the one important contribution he had
made on the mathematical mechanics of logical thought. There is no doubt that
de Morgan made the correct decision in suppressing its publication, if only to
concentrate attention on the merits of The Laws of Thought. However, there is of
course the possibility that Boole himself decided against publication and that this
is the reason why the book did not appear in his lifetime.
Boole’s published books, The Mathematical Analysis of Logic of 1847 and
The Laws of Thought of 1854, stand as a monument to his creativity, ingenuity
and greatness of intellect. In a moment of undeniable genius, he had put his
finger on several of the most fundamental of all mathematical concepts. Within
mathematics and logic the Boolean algebra, which grew out of his work,
encompasses and unifies such topics and concepts as sets, binary numbers, truth
tables, probability spaces, syllogisms, two-state systems, electronic circuits and
computer technology. Wittingly or unwittingly, Boole had discovered a new
kind of mathematics – a kind of mathematics suitable for, and indeed essential
for, computers, information storage and retrieval, and a wide range of other
applications intimately involved in the technology of the second half of the
twentieth century. Boole had no way of knowing what his discoveries would
lead to, but perhaps in some mysterious way he sensed the fundamental
importance of his algebra of classes.

T
CHAPTER TEN
Controversy
he picture of Boole that has emerged in previous chapters is that of a gentle,
courteous and sensitive person. It is, in a sense therefore, fortunate that
there is a well-documented incident which exhibits a more vitriolic side of his
character.1 Mary Boole said of him that giving pain was a thing from which he
shrank with a sort of morbid terror. In an obvious reference to the incident we
are about to consider, she continues:2 ‘He had on one or two occasions to expose
the wrong-doing of persons with whom he was officially connected. He spoke
out boldly enough at the time, but suffered terribly for the next few days, and
had to be watched and tended like an invalid so great was the nervous strain.’
Boole, it seems, was so imbued with a spirit of justice and fair play that he
was prepared to risk the extreme discomfort that is inseparable from controversy
in order to right what he felt was an intolerable situation. Again in his wife’s
words: ‘The affairs of the College had been for years in a very uncomfortable
condition; and the maladministration and general misdoings of the authorities
formed, as I have observed in my visits there, the stock subject of conversation
among the professors, and not one conducive to health or harmony. My husband
had been the general referee of all parties. Soon after our marriage I requested
him never to talk of College affairs to anyone if he could help it. I had reason to
know, afterwards, that he carried out my instructions to the letter, until an
occasion arose when we agreed that it was his duty to interfere …’
The occasion in question was the culmination of the general dissatisfaction
among the professors concerning the way in which the affairs of the college
were being handled by the President, Sir Robert Kane. Before the incident can
be examined objectively, however, it is necessary to outline Kane’s background
and scientific career.3 He had been born in Dublin in 1809, of a Catholic family.
Having qualified as a medical doctor, he turned to chemistry and in 1831, while
still an Arts undergraduate at Trinity College, Dublin, he was appointed
Professor of Chemistry to the Apothecaries’ Hall. He thus shared with Sir
William Rowan Hamilton the distinction of becoming a professor while still an
undergraduate. In 1832, he founded the Dublin Journal of Medical and

Chemical Science and two years later, he was elected to the Lectureship in
Natural Philosophy of the Royal Dublin Society. In 1841, he was elected a
Fellow of the King and Queen’s College of Physicians in Ireland. He soon came
under the notice of Sir Robert Peel, the British Prime Minister, who in 1845
appointed him Director of the Museum of Economic Geology, in conjunction
with the newly founded Irish Geological Survey.
In the meantime, Kane had been exceedingly active on the scientific front. In
1831, he published a textbook, intended for students, entitled Elements of
Practical Pharmacy, and during the period 1831 to 1837 he published a series of
ten original papers in the journal he had founded. These papers are remarkable
both for their depth and the wide range of topics they covered. Kane’s interests
ranged from the composition of urine and blood to the structure of the iodides of
platinum; from the ethyl radical to ammoniacal compounds of mercury, copper
and zinc. He had close contact with the foremost European chemists of the day
and won high praise from Berzelius, Dumas and Bunsen for his chemical
investigations. In 1842, he was awarded the Cunningham Gold Medal for his
researches by the Royal Irish Academy. The award was presented by Sir
William Rowan Hamilton who spoke of ‘that combination of genius and

industry, which has already caused the researches of Kane to influence in no
slight degree the progress of chemical science, and has won for him a European
reputation.’
In 1840, Kane presented his fundamental researches on the colouring matter
of lichens, for which the Royal Society conferred upon him their Royal Medal.
Two years later he became a Fellow of the Royal Society. Between the years
1841 and 1843, he published a monumental Elements of Chemistry which ran to
1,204 pages and was widely used as a textbook both in England and America.
Even Faraday adopted it as a text at Woolwich.
But it is as an industrial pioneer and practical scientist that Kane is most
remembered. Despite the fact that he had become Editor of the Philosophical
Magazine in 1840 and Secretary of the Royal Irish Academy in 1841, Kane
found time to publish a truly remarkable book in 1844, entitled The Industrial
Resources of Ireland.4 The book is a masterly survey of Irish industrial and
economic resources, treating in great detail such topics as fuel supplies from
wood, peat and coal; water power from rivers and tidal waters; and mineral
deposits of all kinds. One cannot fail to be amazed by the vast accumulation of
scientific and economic data on natural resources and the large number of
chemical analyses of minerals that he had personally carried out. The spirit of
the book is definitely that of modern times, rather than the nineteenth, century
and a present-day politician in search of an energy policy could do worse than
consult it.
This then is a short sketch of Robert Kane, the somewhat neglected Irish
scientist who had been selected to become President of Queen’s College, Cork,
by the Government – a decision influenced perhaps by the fact that he was a
Catholic. Kane was undoubtedly a great scientist but, perhaps inevitably, he was
not a success as a diplomat or as President of a turbulent institution.
We have already referred to the first major controversy in Queen’s College,
Cork, when de Vericour, Professor of Modern Languages, was suspended in
absentia from his post in July 1850, as a result of certain anti-Catholic
statements contained in his recently published book on the historical analysis of
Christian civilisation. Here the Council of the College, under Kane’s direction,
acted hastily and in error, because the relevant statute referred only to statements
made in lectures and examinations or in the discharge of any other part of
collegiate duties and, even then, only to his class or audience. Furthermore, the
statute specifically stated that the accused professor be summoned before the
Council to give evidence and to receive at worst a warning and a reprimand.

Suspension could only result from a repetition of the said, or a similar, offence.
It seems therefore that Kane, in a moment of panic, had decided to sacrifice de
Vericour to stem the tide of controversy that he felt sure would result.
De Vericour, of course, appealed against the decision and was successful in
retaining his position. In a letter to the Council, he expressed extreme regret that
any inadvertence on his part should have militated against the interests of the
college and offered to repair any injurious effects which might have resulted
from his actions. Boole kept a very low profile throughout the controversy and
remained friendly with both sides, but his sympathies must have been with de
Vericour, with whom he was sharing lodgings. In addition, Boole’s feelings on
religious freedom must have made it difficult for him to remain silent on the
matter, but he realised that the whole future of the Queen’s Colleges might very
well hinge on this controversy, so in the end common-sense prevailed.
The de Vericour affair quickly blew over and was forgotten. But Kane, instead
of being relieved that the matter had been settled so amicably, soon became
immersed in another major controversy – that with Christopher Lane, Professor
of Civil Engineering. (This incident has been treated in detail in Chapter 6.)
Kane accused Lane of ‘neglect of duty and inattention to official remonstrance’
and now a more serious academic principle was at stake, namely the right of the
President to dictate to individual professors as to how they should carry out their
academic duties and run their departments. Kane seriously misjudged the
feelings of the professors on this matter and the Faculty, including Boole,
strongly supported Lane’s stand. However, perhaps fortunately for the college,
Lane could take no more and decided to resign his post.
Nevertheless, great damage had been done to the Queen’s College and a
distinct tension had arisen, resulting from the polarisation of the President on
one side and very many of the professors, including the Vice-President Ryall, on
the other. Lane submitted a detailed memorial on the matter to the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland and the affair became public knowledge. The memorial
contained the following passage which is of independent interest:
I have introduced the French system of Descriptive Geometry into the
Engineering department of education in the College; I devoted
considerable time, last summer, to translating Monge’s Geometrie
Descriptive, which is a standard work on that subject; and placed the
manuscript some months ago at the disposal of the President, for
publication, for the uses of the College.

The Lane affair too soon blew over but it was quickly followed by the Alcock
affair.5 An intense dispute arose concerning Benjamin Alcock, Professor of
Anatomy and Physiology, as to whether he should have control of the
Department of Practical Anatomy or not. Alcock was a distinguished anatomist
whose name has survived in the subject because of his work on what is now
called ‘Alcock’s Canal’, a part of the female pudendal anatomy. The dispute in
question was a technical one concerning Alcock’s right to certain fees, titles and
other privileges. Once again, there was a headlong confrontation between Kane
and one of his professors, and this time Boole had to become involved because
he now, in 1852, held the office of Dean of the Faculty. It must have been
obvious to all, save to those directly involved, that the statutes of the college
were now sorely in need of revision and detailed interpretation in order to
prevent technical disputes from arising, yet this possibility was never even
considered. Dispute followed dispute, with Kane in each instance enforcing the
letter of the law and on many occasions insisting that his ideas on the running of
the college and its departments should be followed. Personal relationships with
professors deteriorated rapidly and the academic life of the college suffered
greatly.
The Alcock affair came to a head at the first Triennial Visitation of the college
in May 1852.6 The Board of independent visitors was chaired by the Archbishop
of Dublin, Dr Whately, the logician; the college administrators, professors and
students gathered to report on the state of the institution and to register any
complaints that might have arisen. There were no complaints from the 147
students, though there may have been murmurings about the way in which their
studies were being affected by the puerile behaviour of the staff of the college.
Surprisingly, the President had no serious complaint to make and it must here be
emphasised that he acted with genuine if misguided sincerity throughout. Vice-
President Ryall said he had no complaint to make but he believed that some of
his colleagues had. The minutes then record:
Professor Boole said he had to present a memorial upon the part of
certain members of the Faculty of Medicine, which memorial,
although its real object was the determination of a point of law, was in
the form of a complaint against the President.
Boole was most reluctant to involve himself in this personal and public
confrontation as representative of the professors against the President, but he did
not shirk the responsibility. However, the affair caused him very great distress,
as the following extracts from newspaper accounts of the hearing indicate – his

behaviour is nervous and untypically jumpy.
The business was opened by Professor Boole, who proceeded to read a
memorial, the greater portion of which was quite inaudible where the
Press was placed …
… Sir Robert Kane said he would beg in the first instance to ask the
Dean of the Faculty of Science to mention to the visitors the authority
under which he had come forward.
Professor Boole – ‘Under the authority of a resolution of the Faculty
…’
… The President then stated that the statute required that no
resolution of the Faculty should come into operation until it had
received the sanction of the Council.
Professor Boole then made an observation to the visitors across the
table which was totally inaudible …
… Professor Boole (who as usual was almost totally inaudible in the
place appointed for the Press) was understood to admit that
irregularities had occurred in the Faculty with which he was
connected, but they had arisen without any intention of violating the
rules or regulations of the College.
Archbishop Whately said they were not imputing any intentions.
The President – ‘The Professors of the Faculty of Science ignored
the existence of the governing body of the College.’
Professor Boole (hurriedly) – ‘Never, never’.
Several of the professors here stood up and seemed to repudiate
rather indignantly the statement made by the President …
Professor Boole – ‘I really must protest against this.’
Boole was further involved in the controversy in that his letters to Alcock were
quoted as evidence in a document submitted by Alcock to justify some of the
many accusations and counter-accusations it contained. An example is the
following:
March 23rd, 1852: My dear Dr Alcock, In reply to your question I
have to say, that I do not recollect that the Council ever refused
admission to any document of yours, though I remember objections
being raised to the title of Professor of Anatomy adopted in some of
your communications. My impressions of the case are supported by
those of Dr Ryall. I am, my dear Dr Alcock, Yours truly,

George Boole
This letter contains a direct contradiction of some of Kane’s statements. The
verdict of the visitors, backed up by legal opinion, was largely in favour of
Alcock and the stand of the other professors in supporting him was vindicated.
However, in 1854, Alcock resigned his post owing to other disputes concerning
the working of the Anatomy Act, but not before he had submitted the following
strongly worded statement:
I complain that my position and rights as a Professor of the Queen’s
College were illegally and vexatiously assailed, and great pecuniary
loss inflicted upon me; that I have been condemned upon groundless
allegations not communicated to me until I had been condemned; and
that my solicitation for an opportunity fully to vindicate myself has
been disregarded. That Her Majesty’s statute has been repeatedly
violated by the President of the College, Sir Robert Kane, MD, FRS,
preferring grave charges against me to her Majesty and her executive,
without communicating them to me, and my appeals were disregarded.
Incidentally, one of the unfounded accusations against Alcock was that he had
obtained cadavers for dissection from the poorhouse, by claiming bodies in the
capacity of a friend of the deceased. After Alcock’s resignation, there were a
number of others and by 1865, nearly half of the original professors had either
resigned or been dismissed. Perhaps the root cause of the trouble was that Kane
had largely been responsible for the content and construction of the statutes for
all the Queen’s Colleges in Ireland and therefore regarded every challenge to the
rules as a personal attack on his competence as a legislator.
We have noted that Boole’s dissatisfaction with the state of affairs at Queen’s
College was evident as early as October 1850. He was clearly unhappy about the
religious controversy that surrounded him and the consequent controversies in
college affairs had certainly aggravated matters. But it was probably Kane’s
interference in the internal affairs of Boole’s own department that precipitated
the release of his pent-up criticism of Kane’s administration. Kane had received
from Colonel Portlock, Superintendent of Woolwich, a letter claiming that
students who went to Woolwich from Cork were not properly instructed in the
elements of geometry. He placed the letter in Boole’s hands but took no official
action. The message however was clear: Kane, the practical scientist, considered
the applications of elementary geometry of more consequence than the niceties
of abstract algebra. There is no doubt that Boole greatly resented Kane’s

criticism. He countered by saying that he had never neglected to impart
instruction in elementary geometry, but added that his personal opinion was that
general geometry received far too much attention in university courses. Boole’s
mathematical interests and background were such that he would prefer the
analytical method to the geometrical – a preference which mathematicians of the
modern times take almost for granted. Boole further added that he could recall
only one of his students who had gone to Woolwich and that student, a Mr Shea,
had received the lowest possible mark at the sessional examination.
Looking at the question from a more objective point of view, it is difficult to
sustain Kane’s criticism of Boole’s teaching of geometry. The criticism was
founded on the evidence of a distant third party who, in turn, seems to have had
the flimsiest of evidence at his disposal. The mathematical courses in the college
calendar clearly mention the ‘Elements of Euclid, with deductions from the
Propositions’. Examination papers set by Boole during the period 1849–1856
contain a fair share of questions on elementary geometry. The following
selection of problems may be of independent interest:7
1. Prove that the sum of either set of the alternate angles of a polygon of 2n
sides inscribed in a circle is equal to (n-1)π.
2. Define a rhombus. Show that the diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other
at right angles.
3. Explain what is meant by the locus of a point. Determine the locus of a
point, the sum of the squares of whose distances from two given points is
constant. What is the limiting case of this problem?
4. Supposing a triangle to be equilateral and to have area a2, find an
expression for the area of the circumscribed circle.
5. Find the locus of the centre of a circle which passes through a given point
and touches a given straight line.
6. Explain the nature and object of the science of Geometry and define the
following terms, viz. Axiom, Postulate, Problem, Theorem; also the terms
Line, Angle, and Surface.
7. Give Euclid’s definition of proportion and show that it virtually involves
the arithmetical definition.
8. The difference of the perimeter and the perpendicular of an equilateral
triangle is d; find a side.
It would be difficult to imagine a student lacking a thorough knowledge of
elementary geometry attempting to answer these questions.

But whatever the rights and wrongs of Kane’s accusations, Boole’s pride was
hurt. Possibly for the first time in his career, his professional integrity and
academic competence had been called into question. Accordingly, he decided
that he would no longer hide his feelings about Kane’s administration. Towards
the end of 1855, he addressed the following letter to Professor Jack, the
Professor of Engineering, who was organising a dinner in the college in honour
of, among others, Sir Robert Kane:8
Cork, December 14th, 1855: Dear Sir, I am sorry that I shall not be
able to add my name to the memorial now in course of signature,
inviting our President and Vice-President to a dinner in the College.
I do not undervalue the blessing of peace and good-will among the
members of an Academical Body, and if the step which is proposed
could be viewed with reference to this end alone, it is, I trust, needless
for me to say that I should give it my cordial support. You know that
when the subject was mentioned to me, my first feeling was one of
pleasure. It would indeed be an evil state of things if public differences
were permitted to interrupt the kindly relations of private life.
But beside the reason which then occurred to me for questioning the
propriety of the step, another of graver moment exists, which leaves
me no doubt as to my own course of duty. An invitation to dinner
given to official persons, by a public Body, is generally understood to
imply an approbation of their official conduct and policy. Now, it is
well known that the conduct and policy of our President, in his official
character (a character quite distinct from that of private life) have not
only not been generally approved by me, but have, in some instances,
been regarded by me with strong feelings of disapproval. Nor do I
think that it is a time for permitting any mistake as to one’s real
opinions to arise, when changes are understood to be in contemplation
which threaten the destruction, not merely of all superior education,
but I will venture to add, of all solid instruction whatever, within the
College.
I beg you, while communicating to those with whom you are acting
my sincere regret that I cannot join them, to assure them that I am far
from presuming to offer any censure upon their proceedings, and that I
fully appreciate the excellence of their motives. I beg, at the same
time, on my own part wholly to disclaim any private motive or feeling
in the course which I now take. I remain, dear Sir, yours truly,

G. Boole
The changes referred to in this letter concerned proposed alterations in the
curriculum, one of which was the total abolition of the study of Greek. Some
time afterwards, Boole sent the following curt reply to a suggestion of Kane’s,
which indicates the steadily worsening relations between the two of them:
Dear Sir, I am scarcely prepared to give an opinion as to the
advisability of establishing special courses of study in the College for
the examinations of Woolwich and the East India Board, seeing that
our students have at present much difficulty in preparing for
University examinations.
But if it should seem fit to the Council to establish such courses, I
am ready to carry out their view to the best of my ability and will
provide a recommendation as to the best mode of effecting the object
in my own department.
On 7 November 1856, the Cork Examiner carried a letter from Kane, addressed
from Dublin. In this letter, Kane attempted to answer some criticisms that had
been directed towards his administration by Dr O’Connor, Dean of the Faculty
of Medicine, in his inaugural address for the session. Kane added that although
he had returned to Dublin a week after the session commenced, he had inspected
all the departments and consulted with, and received the report of, every
professor. Furthermore, he claimed that no injury to the business of the college
had ever resulted from his absence in Dublin.
Boole was immediately stung into action. Just a few days later, on 10
November 1856, he submitted to the Cork Daily Reporter the following
anonymous letter containing a bitter attack on Sir Robert Kane’s administration:9
… The time has come when it is no longer possible to remain a silent
witness of the course of affairs, without a dereliction of public duty;
and I thus feel, because the letter of Sir Robert Kane, while it appears
to me to convey a false impression of the actual state of the College,
seems, also, to be calculated to throw an undeserved censure upon an
honorable man and most conscientious public servant, Dr Ryall, the
Vice-President of the College. Nor does it, in my opinion, lessen the
necessity of the step which I now take, that the censure to which I have
referred is conveyed rather by insinuations (of no doubtful import)
than by direct charges …

… Referring to your observations on the shortness and infrequency
of his visits to the College, Sir Robert Kane says, ‘The College Session
commenced on Tuesday, 21st October. I arrived at the College before
that time, on the same day with the Vice-President, who had been
travelling, whilst I had to carry on in Dublin all the Cork College
business of the Queen’s University during the vacation.’ I cannot but
think that this passage, while literally true, conveys an impression the
reverse of true. It certainly does, if it implies that Sir Robert Kane has
had any additional labour imposed upon him by the Vice-President’s
absence from Ireland. It certainly does, if it implies that one tittle or
iota of Dr Ryall’s personal duties has been left for others to do. It
ought to be known that the Vice-President has been practically
excluded from the University Senate. If Sir Robert Kane does not
intend to make the above implications, wherefore his gratuitous
allusions to the mode in which the Vice-President employs his
Summer vacation? How far that allusion is in accordance with good
taste and gentlemanly feeling, I will leave it to the calm reflection of
the President to determine.
But there are other points in Sir Robert Kane’s letter which demand
notice. His statement that he ‘consulted with, and received the Report
of, every Professor and made, in concert with those gentlemen, all
necessary arrangements for the business of their classes’, is
contradicted both by my own recollection and by those of the
Professors with whom I have conversed. It is simply untrue. Some of
the Professors never even saw him during his stay. His statement that
the College has not suffered from his ‘absence’ (habitual absence
would be the more proper term) is opposed both to truth and to
common observation. There exist departments in the College over
which the absolute and undivided control is vested in the President,
and these never have been, and never can be, properly managed by
delegation. Thus, the appointment, control, and dismissal of all the
College servants and porters is attached to the office of President. Will
anyone affirm that the College rooms were, in the last Session, in the
condition, as respects cleanliness, in which they ought to have been?
Will it be denied that there have existed disorders, connected with the
presence of a most unfortunate family in charge of the College, which
at length became intolerable? – or, will it be affirmed that those
disorders could have reached the height which they did reach, had
there been an active President on the spot? The remedy for some, at

least, of the evils which have long been deplored, would be, either to
compel the President to perform his duties in person, or to transfer
elsewhere some of the exclusive powers which he possesses. There is,
indeed, much, both in the constitution and in the actual working of the
College, which calls for amendment – not for the sake of freedom and
internal purity alone – but for that of public economy. They who see
and lament the evils are utterly without power; and, in the Senate, the
Professorial element is unrepresented. I trust that it is no treason to the
Institution to which I belong, no disloyalty to the Government of this
country, to express my conviction that this is a condition of things
under which it is impossible that any University, worthy of the, name,
can take root in the soil and spring up into a natural and vital growth.
Scholarships and bounties may preserve in it a languid existence, but
that is all.
The closing part of Sir Robert Kane’s letter reads like a challenge.
‘Since the College opened’, he says, ‘not a single instance of injury to
the business of the College, arising from my absence, has been
discovered, although many and clever observers have been at work to
find out such, and to proclaim them, if any had occurred.’ I do not
presume to inquire how far such language as this is sanctioned by the
Government, at whose ‘request’ (I use the President’s own words) he
‘consented to discharge’ the functions of his office. But, I confess, that
I have not been able to read the above passage without feeling that the
writer of it must have presumed upon a total absence of manly
independence in those to whom has been intrusted the higher
education of a province of the empire. He seems to say to the
Professors of the College over which he presides, ‘Speak the truth if
you dare.’ I have dared to do this, or, with stricter accuracy, I have not
dared not to do this. I have felt that the time, long dreaded and
deprecated, has come, when the path of quiet and reserve would be
that of dishonor, when to hold my peace would be to suffer myself to
be drawn into a complicity with a state of things which I think evil and
immoral. I will not pretend to be indifferent to the personal
consequences which this step may entail upon myself, but I am
prepared, calmly, to meet them. I am, Sir, yours,
A Professor
P.S. I enclose my name and address.

This letter clearly shows that Boole was very much annoyed by what he
considered were unfair allegations aimed at Professor Ryall, his wife’s uncle,
and there is evidence to show that he took the step of making his attack on Kane
a public one only after due consultation with his wife.
Sir Robert Kane lost no time in replying at length to the charges against
himself and his administration. He was undoubtedly aware of the fact that Boole
had been responsible for the anonymous letter. In the opening paragraphs, he
comments rather pointedly and, in the light of the evidence that we have
presented about Boole’s teaching of geometry, rather unjustly on his lenient
attitude towards Boole following the complaint made by the Superintendent of
Woolwich. In contrast with the aggressive and bitter tone of Boole’s charges, the
tone of Kane’s reply is defensive and almost hurt, possibly an indication of the
validity of Boole’s accusations. The following are extracts from Kane’s letter to
the Editor of the Cork Examiner:
Queen’s College, Cork, November 18th, 1856: Sir, I am again
compelled, most reluctantly, to request permission to refer in your
columns to attacks upon my public character, to which the Cork Daily
Reporter has given insertion. I should not have thought it necessary,
but a letter, signed ‘A Professor’ and known to emanate from a
gentleman really holding that honorable office, has been published, in
which definite charges of a most grave nature are set forth and strongly
argued …
… The Professor terminates his letter with a pathetic period, saying,
‘I do not pretend to be indifferent to the personal consequences which
this step may entail upon myself; but I am prepared, calmly, to meet
them.’ I appreciate fully the stoical fortitude with which the Professor
awaits consequences which he perfectly well knows will never arrive;
as he will recollect how, notwithstanding fully equal impropriety of
conduct in regard to me on former occasions, yet, at a time when his
neglect of Professorial duty had seriously compromised the interests of
our students and the character of the College, I interposed to prevent
an official reference, and saved him the mortification of formal
censure. His sentiment, therefore, in the present case, is thrown away.
In considering and refuting such grave charges, it is of more
importance to be perfectly clear and exact, than to be brief – although,
therefore, I shall risk trespassing unreasonably upon your space, I shall
notice every distinct charge in the Professor’s letter, but in as few

words as possible. The Professor charges me:
1. That I attempted to force a Professor to resign because he did not wish to
deliver public lectures.
2. That my statement of having received Reports from, and consulted with
every Professor, and made all necessary arrangements in regard to their
classes, is untrue.
3. That the College rooms were not as clean as they should have been last
Session.
4. That there existed a most unfortunate family in charge of the College,
producing disorders which at length became intolerable.
5. That in referring to the Vice-President’s absence, travelling during the
vacation, whilst I was compelled to perform duty for the College, I implied
what was not true, and that my reference violated good taste and
gentlemanly feeling …
… The Professor asserts that the statement that I received the
Reports of, and consulted with and arranged for, the requirements of
every Professor is untrue.
I have before me now the list of the College Professors, who are
twenty in number. Of that twenty, I find that, during my stay in Cork, I
had personal meetings on College business and consultations with
sixteen, and made all the arrangements for them, in which my
functions were concerned. Of the remaining four Professors, two did
not come to the College personally, during my stay; but I had
previously received from them their requisitions; I examined how far
their wants had been supplied; I gave the proper instructions for
having their wishes carried out, and even since that time I have been,
in Dublin, occupied expediting the delivery of objects required for the
lectures of one of those Professors. The third of the four was in the
College only a few hours. He did not then call on me as his wants had
been all supplied, and he was in constant communication with me
otherwise.
The twentieth Professor is the gentleman who is understood to be
the writer of the letter. I do not know whether he means to say that he
did not see me in the College. But if so, it was on his part a voluntary
blindness. I visited the Hall where he was examining. I spent some
time observing the progress of the Examinations. I spoke to most of
the Examiners, but, although I remained for a short time close to the

Professor in question, I did not succeed in attracting his notice. But I
made inquiries as to whether a requisition for books, and another for
lecture-room fittings which he had sent to me, had been complied
with. I found that his books had arrived, but that the fittings were
incomplete and I arranged for having them supplied. I did not
afterwards seek an interview with that Professor and he did not seek
any communication with me.
It can now be judged how far the Professor is justified in describing
my statement as untrue …
… The writer of the letter is acknowledged to be the Professor of
Mathematics, Dr Boole, who is a near family connexion of the Vice-
President, and is in the most intimate and continual intercourse with
him. The Professor’s letter, while accusing me of tyranny, falsehood,
and neglect of duty, is an elaborate eulogium on the Vice-President,
whom he describes as ‘an honorable man and a most conscientious
public servant’. This imprudent panegyric by the Professor upon his
relative, the Vice-President, forces me to relate one or two facts to
show whether Dr Ryall has acted as an honorable and conscientious
man towards me …
… On Thursday, 3rd of March, the Vice-President gave orders to
the Registrar, about one o’clock, to call a special meeting of Council
for five o’clock, on that evening, to ‘consider the general
administration of the College’. As another member of Council, besides
myself, was absent, there were only in the College the four members
of Council required for a quorum; but at five o’clock these four
gentlemen met, the Vice-President presiding, and a ready prepared
Memorial of seventeen folio pages of manuscript was read, addressed
to the Queen, and accusing the President of abuse of power and
neglect of duty. The meeting lasted scarcely half an hour. The
Memorial was adopted unanimously by the four gentlemen. The Vice-
President, as Chairman, confirmed the proceedings; and after the
meeting broke up, the summons to me to attend the meeting of Council
to consider the general administration of the College, was sent to the
Post Office. But more – the Vice-President, with the three Professors
assisting, without having even the decency to wait until the Memorial
could have reached the august personage to whom it was nominally
directed, caused several hundred copies of it to be printed, and
circulated them among the Members of Government and of
Parliament, through the public in Cork, London and Dublin, and sent

them to the newspapers, by a number of which it was reprinted and
circulated still further. I need not refer to the amount of attention
which that Memorial excited at the time, and the amount of public
censure thrown upon me for my supposed conduct. I do not blame the
press or the public. They could not imagine that a document emanating
from the Council of a College, under the guidance of the Vice-
President, addressed to the Queen, and impeaching the conduct of the
President, could be, as it was, a tissue of misstatements and
exaggerations; that the facts were falsified; my letters garbled and
misquoted; my opinions misrepresented; and that this Memorial was
prepared behind my back and adopted when I was purposely kept out
of the way, and at a meeting designedly held at an unusual hour, on an
unusual day, without any regard to the notice required by law for
special business, and when it was known that the Registrar had written
to me that nothing had occurred at the previous Council that could
require my presence at the College.
In this secret combination, the Vice-President was the ringleader
and the chief. I leave it to be judged whether his conduct was that of an
honorable man and a most conscientious public officer …
One remark more will close this disagreeable duty. The Professor
declares the College unsuccessful and incapable of being successful
owing to my maladministration. I regard not his attacks, as to myself,
but I must protest against his slanders on his brother Professors. His
statement is untrue and he cannot be ignorant of its untruth. The only
department of the College in which students have been found to fail, is
that of which he has charge. The only branch of instruction, the defects
in which have drawn upon the College formal notice and censure, is
that of which he is Professor. The untiring exertions, the enlightened
zeal, the talents and the harmonious co-operation of the Body of
Professors, have secured to the Cork College that success, beyond
either of the other Queen’s Colleges, which it will be my pleasing duty
before long publicly to demonstrate; and I would advise the Professor
that when he calls attention to my conduct, and prepares the
impeachment of my acts, he should, at the same time, give his
attention to those points in which he has been already, although
unofficially, advised, that his performance of duty will require
improvement.
Hoping you will excuse the length to which I have been obliged to
occupy your paper, I remain, Sir, yours,

Robert Kane
Although Kane had attempted to give a comprehensive reply to Boole’s
accusations, his letter lacks conviction and, whatever the rights and wrongs of
the matter, the fact clearly emerges that the fundamental cause of the unrest in
the college was Kane’s non-residence in Cork. He had placed upon himself an
intolerable burden by continuing his interests in Dublin and there is no doubt
that he seriously underestimated the amount of time and attention that were
needed to carry out the duties of the Presidency of a university. His position was
further complicated by Lady Kane’s reluctance to reside permanently outside
Dublin and there is a tradition that Lady Kane was an extremely strong-willed
woman.
Within a few days Boole had prepared a fresh attack on Kane in the form of
another letter to the Cork Daily Reporter. An interesting feature of this second
letter is the method in which Boole analyses the content of Kane’s letter – a
method reminiscent of The Laws of Thought. Firstly, he delineates ‘the Universe
of Discourse’ and refuses to reply to those points which he feels have nothing to
do with the questions at issue. Secondly, he accuses Kane of a tactic beloved of
politicians, namely, of giving a perfectly acceptable answer to a different
question. Finally, he produces concrete evidence of his success as a teacher in
order to refute Kane’s rather wild accusation that he had neglected his duties and
had brought disgrace upon the college.
… Sir Robert Kane does not sufficiently conceal a well-known artifice
of the rhetor which Aristotle has very happily described. I ask pardon
for a digression for which I feel that the subject is entirely too serious,
and proceed to observe that I never represented Sir Robert Kane’s
maladministration of the College as the only cause of its want of
greater success. But, as the question has been raised by Sir Robert
Kane himself, I will not now shrink from declaring that I think it has
been a very important cause. The time, thought, and energy, that have
been expended in quarrels between him and the Professors – in
enforcing Presidential rights Sir Robert Kane would perhaps say, in
resisting despotism and oppression, others might say; but I prefer an
unexceptionable word and say, quarrels – the time, thought, and
energy thus expended would have sufficed to establish the College in a
far higher and securer position than it now occupies. Add to this the
loss of esprit de corps, of proper Academic feeling, of united, cordial,

and generous supervision over discipline and morals, and the amount
of injury for which Sir Robert Kane is, in my opinion, in a very serious
degree accountable, cannot be esteemed slight.
The one person who is excepted from all share in that meed of
honeyed praise which Sir Robert Kane bestows upon the body of
Professors is, as I need scarcely observe, myself. I can, without
difficulty, pardon my exclusion, but I cannot, without injustice to my
position and positive injury to the students whom I instruct, pass
unnoticed the language in which Sir Robert Kane has thought proper
to attack my professional character …
… It was some time after I had read these passages before I could
imagine upon what basis of fact Sir Robert Kane had built up this
calumny – for a calumny I felt it to be. At length I remembered the
following circumstance: Sir Robert Kane, some time ago, directed my
attention to a letter from Colonel Portlock, the governor of Woolwich
Academy, pointing out the fact that a student of Queen’s College,
Cork, who had obtained, by examination, a cadetship or some similar
appointment there, was defective in his Mathematical knowledge. I
immediately referred Sir Robert Kane to my report of the last
Sessional Examination at which the student in question had presented
himself, and showed him that the mark which I had then attached to
his name was the lowest that it was possible for me to give – a mark
which, as the printed form of the Report declares, indicates
disqualification, i.e. the loss of College standing. I showed him, by
further reference, that the student had only saved his position in
College by a Supplemental Examination for which he read, I believe,
with a private tutor. The documents I suppose are still in the
Registrar’s office. I have a clear and positive recollection of what Sir
Robert Kane then said. ‘I will write’, he replied, ‘to Colonel Portlock,
and show him that Mr – is not to be considered as a sample of the
teaching of the College.’
I conceive that it must be to this circumstance that Sir Robert Kane
alludes, because I can remember absolutely no other which could
possibly form the basis of an accusation against me, unless it be, as a
colleague has suggested to me, that the ground of the charge of neglect
of Professorial duty is that I, some years ago, mistook a day of
Examination for one of lecture and went to the College at a late hour.
In either case, I am at a loss to conceive what Sir Robert Kane can
allude to when he speaks of his having ‘interposed to prevent an

official reference and save him the mortification of public censure’.
I enclose for your inspection a copy of a list which I have obtained
from Dr Ball, of all the Honors in the Mathematical Sciences, i.e. in
Mathematics and the application of Mathematics to Natural
Philosophy, gained by students of the Queen’s Colleges in the
Examinations conducted in the Queen’s University in successive
years. It appears from that list that out of a total of thirteen such
Honors, seven have been gained by the students of Queen’s College,
Cork. In analyzing the list I find that of nine Honors gained in my own
special department of Mathematics, five have been gained by students
of Queen’s College, Cork. They may be distributed as follows: viz. to
Cork, two first class, two second class and one third class Honor; to
Belfast, two first class and one second class Honor; and to Galway,
one second class Honor. The list includes the present year, in which it
is well known the Cork students failed in every department.
And yet Sir Robert Kane holds me up to public reprehension as the
man who has neglected his duties – who has brought disgrace upon the
College. To himself I will address but one observation upon the
subject. If he should ever be able to read such an attack upon himself
with as perfect a calmness, founded, I will not shrink from saying it,
upon conscious rectitude, as that with which I have read his attack
upon me, he will understand something which in his present frame of
mind he does not appear to be capable of understanding.
Sir Robert Kane brings against me a charge of ‘fully equal
impropriety of conduct’ in regard to him on a former occasion. To this
I find it difficult to reply, as it involves the assumption that I am acting
with impropriety now. In its plainly intended meaning I beg leave to
give to it an emphatic denial. Sir Robert Kane further accuses me of
making ‘vague references’ and begs me to prepare a statement of
them, and submit them to the proper Authority without delay. He adds
‘If he does not do so, or if having done so, he is unable to substaniate
the charges he brings against his colleagues, he must be content to
suffer the imputation of having, by anonymous accusations, sought to
destroy the character of those whom it was his duty to support.’ I have,
as I have already said, made no charges against my colleagues. But as
touching the question of an appeal to authority, I will take the
opportunity of stating plainly what my views of my present position
and duties are. As a Professor, I think myself bound to teach my class
to the best of my ability; to preserve my Academic rights; to vindicate

my professional character. As a man, I think myself under an
obligation to defend, as far as in me lies, those who are wronged or
oppressed. The latter is a duty for which they who feel it to be such
have had abundant occasion for exercise in the Queen’s College. In
both characters I am bound to keep myself free, by public protest if the
need be extreme, from any connexion with things which I morally
disapprove. But I am not bound to do more. It is for the Government to
inquire, if they think that sufficient ground for Inquiry exists, into the
state of the College, and into the causes of that state. I will add, that I
think the Government will not discharge its duties if it does not
institute such an Inquiry. I should say this if I were sure that the
Inquiry would lead to my own separation from the College. For even
the system which prevails might, perhaps, be less productive of evil –
certainly it would of public scandal – if it were entirely conducted by
men who thoroughly approved of it, or steadily acquiesced in it.
Of Sir Robert Kane’s last attack upon Dr Ryall I have said nothing.
It condemns itself. In fact, in inference and in spirit, it is equally
remote from truth, from logic and from propriety. I am Sir, yours,
George Boole
Mercifully, Kane did not reply to Boole’s second letter. But the controversy was
not to end there. The spectacle of the President and a professor of one of the
Queen’s Colleges washing their dirty linen in the public press was too much for
the Government to stomach. An official inquiry was ordered and a Royal
Commission set up to report into the progress and conditions of all three
Queen’s Colleges.
When called upon before the Commission to justify his non-residence in Cork,
Kane claimed that his continued presence in Dublin was essential because of the
fact that the Senate meetings of the Queen’s University were held there and that,
in fact, he had been of more benefit to Cork by not residing there. He added that
permanent residence in Cork would have placed him in an uncomfortable
position of conflict with the Professor of Chemistry, had he attempted to
continue his personal researches in that subject.
It is interesting to note that Kane assured the Commissioners that he believed
Boole had acted from the purest motives in writing to the newspapers and had
made no serious attempt to conceal his identity. Moreover, when the charges
made by Boole came up for discussion, Kane clearly contradicted, at least in

part, the replies he had given in his letter to the newspaper. He admitted that the
wife and daughter of the head porter could possibly be described as an
‘unsuitable’ family and that the presence of a ‘dressy fifteen-year-old girl’ in the
cloisters of an all-male establishment was an undesirable situation. Boole was
then called upon to give evidence before the Commissioners. He stated:
I did not resort to the extreme measure of addressing a letter to the
public newspapers without the most serious consideration. I did so
upon the following grounds:
Sir Robert Kane had put forth statements which it appeared to me if
I had been silent respecting, I should have been decidedly guilty of
falsehood. I have long felt most deeply the evils under which the
College has been suffering from Sir Robert Kane’s conduct. I can
refer, if the Commissioners so desire it, to instances in which I have
shown in former years, and during the last two or three years, my
sense of the evils the College has suffered by the President’s absence. I
believed that the existence of the College was threatened by that
absence, and by the discussions which were perpetually arising
respecting the powers and authority of the Council.
The remainder of Boole’s evidence was largely a restatement of what he had
written in his newspaper letters. In conclusion, he stated:
While I am fully sensible of the evil, under ordinary circumstances, of
the course which I have taken, I do not regret that course. I regret the
circumstances accompanying it, but I do not regret the course itself. I
do not repent what I have done; and I would receive with joy dismissal
from my Professorship, if that dismissal led to a more wholesome state
of things in this College.
The following is a summary of the Commission’s findings in relation to the
controversy between Boole and Kane:
… To the reasons relied on by Sir R. Kane, as supporting his view of
non-continuous residence, we cannot for a moment give our assent.
We regard the non-residence of a President of a College as a serious
bar to its well-being and progress. He should be an intelligent observer
of the working of the different parts of the Collegiate system, in order
to sustain and counsel the Professors in the discharge of their
functions. It should be his study to bring the various members of the

College into friendly and harmonious intercourse and to guide, exhort,
and advise the students in the various difficulties and phases of their
College career. From the nature of his office, he must be presumed to
be qualified to take a leading position in the society of the great town
in which the College is situated. Being resident, he must have better
opportunities of becoming acquainted with the Academical wants of
the Province from which the College draws its students, and better
enabled to suggest how these wants should be supplied …
… We, therefore, consider that residence should be a condition of
holding the office of President, and residence in the sense that the
College shall be the President’s home …
… We may here state our conviction, that if the President had been
resident at Cork and personally engaged in the discharge of his duties
in the College and of those kindly offices to those associated with him
which we consider are as important in the proper government of such
an institution as mere administrative duties, all these calamitous
occurrences, and the distrust towards the President, which we must
regard, perhaps, as the main cause producing them, could never have
arisen.
Both Kane and Boole received severe censure for conducting their dispute in the
public press rather than using official channels.
Many interesting and significant details emerge incidentally from Boole’s
evidence to the Commission, especially concerning his attitude to his
professorial duties and the teaching of mathematics to third-level students. For
example, he claimed that his department had been shamefully neglected for
many years and his requests for repairs and fitments ignored. His
accommodation had been insufficient and he claimed that a number of years
previously, upon returning from vacation, he had found his lecture room divided
in half without ever having been consulted on the subject. On the content of his
teaching, he gave the following sworn evidence:
The study of Geometry was never neglected; but I did not devote,
during the earlier years of my Professorship, so much attention to it as
I have lately done, in consequence chiefly of a change in my opinion
as to the relative value of the two studies, Geometry and Analytics, as
an intellectual discipline – or rather, in my opinion, as to the
importance of the due combination of the two studies with a view to
intellectual benefit …

… I have given instructions in the Principia of Newton; but
Professor England made some objection to my giving instruction in the
Principia except in those parts which were purely Mathematical and
related to the doctrine of Limits.
Chairman: The study of the Principia as illustrating the Newtonian
method of dealing with the doctrine of Limits is a totally distinct kind
from the Differential Calculus?
Boole: The instruction which I now give in the Principia, is with the
view to give the student a distinct notion of Limits. The notion of
Limits may be communicated in various ways, and I endeavour to
introduce my students as early as I possibly can to this study in the
teaching of Arithmetic, and in the teaching to some extent of
Elementary Geometry; but I think the most valuable illustrations of the
doctrine, and at the same time the most philosophical exposition of it,
are to be found in the Principia …
… The more advanced students understand Arithmetic, theoretically
as well as practically. Their practical knowledge is tested by examples
numerically worked out, at almost every interval between the lectures.
At every lecture I give out examples for the following lecture; I do not
think I ever gave out an example to the students of the higher class,
which did not contain some amount of numerical calculation. The
students I speak of are thoroughly acquainted with the use and theory
of Logarithms – their practical knowledge being founded entirely on
their theoretical knowledge. They are able to effect the necessary
calculations in Mensuration and Land Surveying, and to demonstrate
the forms upon which the calculations depend. They know Algebra up
to the higher Equations, and also a good deal of the theory of
Equations …
… The tail end of the class are not able to derive much benefit from
having Mathematics forced upon them. The majority of them would
know well Vulgar Fractions, and the working of them by processes,
which involve some degree of reasoning. They are able to work them
out in Algebraical form, using the signs of Algebra and applying the
axioms …
… I connect the Physical with the Mathematical Sciences, because I
think the Mathematical Sciences pursued alone would produce too
onesided a character of mind …
… I merely express an opinion that Logic might be taught with
advantage for one Term if the application of Mnemonic rules were

dispensed with and if the direct application of principles were the
object sought. I would teach the Logic of Induction – those principles
of reasoning which form the basis of Inductive Science …
… I think, as a matter of observation, it is found that those who have
intellectual tastes, go off in these three directions – the direction of
Language and History, or that of Deductive Reasoning, or that of
Classification and Observation …
In his evidence John England, Professor of Natural Philosophy, expanded on the
incident involving his objections to Boole’s giving instruction in the Principia.
England told of how he had seen a notice on the gate of the college which stated
that Boole intended lecturing to his extra class in dynamics and said that while
there was a perfect understanding between them as to what were mathematical
dynamics, he was afraid that the term in a notice of that kind might lead to a
misunderstanding on the part of the students. Incidentally, one might add that
such academic demarcation disputes are not unknown in universities even today.
From the evidence of Professor Jack, Professor of Engineering, it seems that
Boole was required to lecture to engineering students on spherical trigonometry
and its applications in astronomy, but Boole protested that many such students
would be incapable of benefitting from such a course.
However, by far the most important piece of evidence from Boole’s point of
view came when he asked Kane, in the presence of the Commissioners, to bring
forward any charges he might have against him with regard to neglect of his
professorial duties. Amazingly, Kane’s reply amounted to a glowing testimonial
for Boole, with only slight reservations:
I beg, in the first instance, however, to bear testimony in the strongest
manner to the excellence of Professor Boole’s instruction, and the
diligence with which he discharges his Professorial duties, almost
universally, within the scope of his department; and that the pupils
trained under him have been in many respects eminently successful
and have done credit to the College … Professor Boole is a
Mathematician of European celebrity, and, as a Mathematician, this
College has always boasted of him … Dr Boole, although a gentleman
of such eminent distinction in Mathematics, has, as every great
Mathematician has, peculiar tastes. Some men of eminent distinction
in this branch of study manifest a partiality for the Analytical method,
others for the Geometrical method.

Kane and his family came to reside in Cork and life at the Queen’s College
returned to normal. Relations between the two men remained frigidly polite for
the remainder of Boole’s career in Cork.
But let us end this unhappy chapter on a lighthearted note. The issue of the
Cork Examiner which carried Kane’s letter also carried the following
communication from one Mathew Collins, King Street, Kilkenny – clearly a
mathematical eccentric in the John Walsh mould:
EVENING AMUSEMENTS OR ARITHMETICAL RECREATIONS
For the approaching Christmas Holidays and long Winter Evenings
To The Editor of the Cork Examiner: Dear Sir, I would feel much
obliged if you would insert in the next number of the Cork Examiner
the following curious arithmetical questions:
QUEST. 1
If a square number, increased by unity, be still a square number, prove
it cannot also remain a square number when increased by 12.
QUEST. 2
If a square number, decreased by unity, be still a square number, prove
that it cannot also remain a square number when decreased by 12.
As these questions are intended solely for the amusement and
recreation of the learned it is hoped that no angry or abusive reply
shall be made to them by uneducated persons, who cannot solve them.
Indeed I would not notice, nor answer any such reply. But any
Professor or teacher of Mathematics in Cork, or within 100 miles of it,
who shall be the first to send me a correct solution of them before this
day week, shall receive from me, by return of post, £10, as a reward
for his labours and ingenuity.

T
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Family Life and Social Attitudes
here is no way that an outsider can tell if a marriage is a truly happy one,
although sometimes one can tell if it is a truly unhappy one.1 By all
accounts, the marriage of George and Mary Boole was a very happy one indeed.
The large gap in their ages seemed to count for nothing because they were
kindred spirits with an almost complete unity of purpose. Family ties and home
life had meant a great deal to them before they married and the fact that each of
them had lost a parent soon before they married increased their desire for a
family life of their own. Our account of their family life is based largely on an
article entitled Home Side of a Scientific Mind, which appeared in the University
Magazine in the spring of 1878. It had been written by Mary Boole some years
earlier, in fact soon after her husband’s death in 1864, and while we must allow
a little for the natural exaggeration of a devoted wife who is looking back on a
happy marriage soon after her husband’s death, there can be no doubt that her
account is honest and authentic.
In October 1855, the couple returned to Cork for the opening of the academic
year at Queen’s College. For the first two years of their marriage they lived,
probably in rented accommodation, in a house called ‘College View’ on
Sunday’s Well Road, a lovely area of the city looking southward from the high
ground on the northern bank of the River Lee.2 Here Boole was within ten
minutes’ walking distance from college in an area much favoured by the rich
merchant classes of the city.
Mary Boole’s first concern was for her husband’s health and to see that he did
not overtax himself with work in college. She relates that a few months after
their marriage, he hurt his eye and had an attack of acute ophthalmia as a
consequence and, in addition, that he had ‘hereditary disease of the lungs,
aggravated by residence in a damp climate, with a nervous system sensitive in
the highest degree’. On 10 November 1855, Boole, no doubt prompted by his
wife, addressed the following letter to the President and Council of the college:3
Gentlemen, I request leave to discontinue my lectures delivered on
Saturday to my class in the College. These lectures were voluntarily

undertaken by me about two years ago, but I found at the close of the
last session my voice somewhat affected by the delivery of so many
lectures in the weekend and think it necessary to diminish their
number.
It seems that his request was rejected by the college authorities because over a
year later, in November 1856, he made a similar request asking that his two
hours of lecturing on Saturday morning be discontinued, this time on the
grounds that he wished to examine his classes weekly by printed papers and that
this extra work would otherwise prove too much of a burden for him.
On 19 June 1856, nine months and one week after they had married, the
Boole’s first child, a daughter, was born at Sunday’s Well. They named her
Mary Ellen and she was baptised at St Mary’s Church of Ireland, Shandon, on 3
July. It seems that Boole was delighted at becoming a father so soon and an old
lady, who in her youth had known him in Cork, later told of the following
incident:4
One day in June 1856, I went into a slum alley behind the College to
engage a chimney sweep to clean my flues. As I was walking down the
alley, I saw Boole ahead of me, knocking at one door after another. I
came past him in time to see him passionately shaking hands with a
ragged and barefoot man, and saying ‘I had to come and tell you dear
friends; I’ve got a baby and she is such a beauty.’
Early in 1857, the Booles decided that their expanding family needed more room
so they moved to a modest rented house in Castle Road, a short distance from
the village of Blackrock, some four miles from the Queen’s College. The house
stood overlooking the sea with a good view of Cork’s magnificent harbour,
while a few hundred yards eastwards was one of Cork’s most notable landmarks,
Blackrock Castle. Their decision to move to Blackrock was probably influenced
by the fact that the Cork to Passage West railway line had opened for service in
1850 and the little Blackrock station was about half a mile from the house.5
There were frequent trains to and from the city which left Boole within easy
walking distance of the college. However, catching trains from Blackrock to
Cork sometimes presented difficulties because, early in 1858, Boole wrote to the
Dean of the Faculty of Sciences suggesting that the college clock be put a
quarter of an hour behind the clocks in the city! This change, he claimed, would
be a great convenience to students (and himself presumably) who were forced to
travel by earlier trains or miss the first quarter hour of lectures. The Faculty,

predictably enough, rejected his request, probably with mutterings of ‘eccentric
mathematicians’.
In 1858, Mary Boole gave birth to a second child, another daughter. They
named her Margaret and she was baptised on 15 September at St Michael’s
Church of Ireland, Blackrock.6 Boole’s fatherly reaction to the arrival of his new
baby is well illustrated in the following extract from a letter to William Brooke:
September 3rd, 1858: … We intend to call the baby Margaret. She is a
very fine child but so different from your friend Pussy (Mary) that no
one would suppose them to be related. We think she will be of a more
grave and serious character than the volatile Pussy. She has longer
limbs and her features are much more marked. She is so quiet that we
could not tell there was a baby in the house. It is idle perhaps to
speculate on the future of a child, and yet I cannot help fancy that if
she lives she will be a child of remarkable character. I never had any
such anticipation about Pussy – so that it is called up by something
real …
On 8 June 1860, a third daughter, Alicia, was born and on 5 August 1862, a
fourth, Lucy Everest, arrived. The Booles’ house in Castle Road, which was not
a very spacious one, was no longer big enough to accommodate them, so they
decided to move to Ballintemple, a village about a mile closer to Cork along the
Blackrock Road. Early in 1863, the delightful Lichfield Cottage (even today in a
beautiful state of preservation) became their new home. However, although
Lichfield Cottage was a mile nearer Cork, it was further away from Blackrock
Railway Station than their previous house had been and this fact may have
contributed to Boole’s final illness and premature death, as we shall see later.
The Booles’ family was not yet complete however. On 11 May 1864, their
fifth and final child, yet another daughter, Ethel Lilian, was born at Lichfield
Cottage. There is no indication that Boole longed for a son to bear his name, but
he must have seen the irony of a man with an interest in probability fathering
five daughters in a row! Though he had the usual nineteenth-century ideas on the
subservient role that women should play, he saw to it that his daughters received
an emancipated education. He encouraged his wife to blaze a trail with regard to
higher education for women and Mary Boole may have been the first woman to
attend a university lecture course in Ireland. She relates:
At one time my husband thought that I should be of more use to him if

I actually attended College classes. For a few weeks I joined the senior
class; but the higher education of women was a new idea in the
country in those days, and a lady who attended mathematical classes
was something quite anomalous. One old lady told me, in a terrible fit
of excitement, that it was ‘quite un-maidenly’ of me to accompany my
husband into his lecture room. To save trouble I desisted. But the
senior class themselves had more liberal views on the rights of
women; they kindly migrated to our house in the suburbs for lectures.
The Boole daughters grew up to be very remarkable people in various ways. The
final chapter of this book will be devoted to them, their mother and their
remarkable descendants.
Boole was a great lover of children but he had strict views on their discipline
and upbringing. On the subject of corporal punishment, he used to say that a
delicate child suffers physically far more from the nervous depression
consequent on hesitating as to whether it should obey or not, than it would from
the whipping that might have settled the question for it. The children were never
allowed to indulge in baby talk or ‘babyish corruption of language’ as he called
it. He would sit for a length of time with an infant on his knee, teaching it to
pronounce its first words with perfect distinctness. When he had his own school,
he used to make his pupils spend a great deal of time simply copying from books
and he made his little girls do the same.
He cultivated family peace as if it were a tender plant, claiming it was one of
God’s greatest gifts and he thought nothing so important to children’s welfare as
harmony between their parents. Outbursts of temper on the part of the children
were not tolerated and if they were obstinate or indulged in repeated
disobedience, he used to tell them that he could not love them if they were
naughty or selfish. When his wife protested that they ought to feel their parents
loved them always, he used to reply ‘I cannot help it, it is true. My love varies
with their behaviour and it is right that they should know it.’ To a
mathematician, this constitutes a perfect example of a function!

Though their income was not large, the Booles had servants and household
help from time to time and during crises, Boole himself seems to have been an
ideal husband. Illness of any member of the family was turned into a holiday for
the others and when his wife Mary was ill, he would serve her breakfast or
dinner in bed, accompanied by as many children as could walk, each carrying
some utensil, while he took the greatest pains to teach each to do her part
carefully and well.
In one of his notebooks, we find a shopping list intermingled with geometry,
optics and number theory. It mentions such mundane items as Yeast Cal., stove,
small spade, buttons, six yards black galloon, pillow to Booths, soap and paper.
On another page we find a partial breakdown of his annual expenditure:7 Food,
wages and washing £132; Rent £36; Local taxes £12; Income tax £21; Coals
£11; Gas £3; Insurance £32; Garden £2; Postal stamps and Stationery £3;
Clothes £25; Self £20; Charity £5; Wine and Beer £6. The cost of living it seems
has not changed much – all you have, plus a little more.
Boole, it seems, was in many ways the prototype of the absent-minded or
eccentric professor. One day he is said to have arrived in his lecture room before
his pupils and started walking up and down in front of the blackboard thinking
out some problem. The students arrived and sat down waiting for him to begin,
not wishing to interrupt his train of thought. After an hour they left him still
walking in front of the blackboard. When he arrived home that evening, he said

to his wife ‘My dear, a most extraordinary thing happened today. None of my
students came to my lecture.’ One of his greatest pleasures was to have people
around him examining a telescope or microscope and his wife complained that
he often invited people home for the evening with no explanation except that he
had met them at a railway station and thought they might like to see his
telescope, or that he had gone into a shop and found the man behind the counter
intelligent so he had asked him to come and discuss optics with him. He once
invited a whole street band from Cork to have lunch in his garden.
He took a great interest in the Blackrock ‘Temperance Band’. He invited the
members of the band to tea to look at his large telescope and offered to teach
them geometry or book-keeping if they had time to spare from their music.
Many of the Booles’ friends suspected that the Irish ‘Temperance Bands’ were
fronts for political meetings and there were some sly references to the
‘Professor’s pet Fenians’. However, Mary Boole wrote that whether they were
Fenians or not, she felt that in the event of a rebellion the bandsmen would have
protected them with their lives.
Boole was not a social reformer in the political sense and he appears to have
been relatively unmoved by the predicament of the thousands of working-class
men and women and the farmers of the south of Ireland. He had arrived in the
country immediately after one of the most disastrous famines the world has ever
known, a holocaust in which millions of people died. He must have known that
the famine, or Great Hunger as it is known in Ireland, was caused in part by an
incompetent and bungling administration, because there was no shortage of food
in the country. Social and political inequality was rife, but there is no evidence
that Boole involved himself in any movement for reform. His personal sense of
social inferiority demanded that the working classes be kept in their place.
Like many of his countrymen, he diverted his feelings from the sufferings of
fellow human beings to concern for animals. His wife wrote that if he observed
any cruelty to animals, he went into a state of nervous tension from which it took
him days to recover. The following are some extracts from a letter he wrote to a
newspaper on the subject:8
… I write in the hope that you will allow me to speak of a subject
which concerns society – the treatment of animals … I express a
conviction in which I believe I am not singular that the treatment of
animals in our streets here and in England is a dark and grievous blot
on our general civilization … Last year a short paragraph appeared in

some of the Irish papers to the effect that three horses had been found
dead or in a dying state from want of food and water in the possession
of a person in Clonmel – the neglect on the part of the owner being
attributed, as so many of the worst crimes and evils are, to
drunkenness. I have not been able to learn that any steps were ever
taken to punish the owner. Yet surely this was a crime which ought to
have brought upon its perpetrator more than moral reprobation.
… I say without hesitation that it is a disgrace that either boys or
men should be permitted to use the kind of sticks or rather clubs which
are used in the streets of Cork for beating donkeys. If I were to
describe what I have seen I should scarcely be believed by those who
have not examined for themselves. But if any person doubt on the
subject let him look at the general condition of the donkeys and
especially those which are employed by the collectors of manure. He
will see poor skeletons covered all over with marks of brutal usage and
tottering with brutal steps along. He may see, for I speak of what I
have myself seen, the evidences of dire cruelty, the ears cut off close
to the head, the tail gone. Let him ask himself how they could have
happened. Every Sunday he may see near the park diseased horses
covered with wounds, turned out to recover sufficiently from one week
of starvation and ill treatment as to enable them to go through another
…
Boole’s concern for animals was admirable, but it is only fair to point out that he
was living in a country where human beings had been and still were suffering
unspeakable horrors. Some fifty miles from Cork city, the town of Skibbereen
had suffered greatly from the famine of 1846. The following is an extract from a
letter to The Times written by Nicholas Cummins, a Cork magistrate, describing
what conditions were like:
… Being aware that I should have to witness scenes of frightful
hunger, I provided myself with as much bread as five men could carry,
and on reaching the spot I was surprised to find the wretched hamlet
deserted. I entered some of the hovels to ascertain the cause, and the
scenes that presented themselves were such as no tongue or pen can
convey the slightest idea of. In the first, six famished and ghastly
skeletons, to all appearance dead, were huddled in a corner on some
filthy straw, their sole covering what seemed a ragged horse-cloth and
their wretched legs hanging about, naked above the knees. I

approached in horror, and found by a low moaning they were alive,
they were in fever – four children, a woman and what once had been a
man. It is impossible to go through the details, suffice it to say, that in
a few minutes I was surrounded by at least 200 of such phantoms, such
frightful spectres as no words can describe. By far the greater number
were delirious, either from famine or from fever. Their demoniac yells
are still ringing in my ears, and their horrible images are fixed upon
my brain. My heart sickens at the recital, but I must go on. In another
case – decency would forbid what follows, but it must be told – my
clothes were nearly torn off in my endeavours to escape from the
throng of pestilence around, when my neckcloth was seized from
behind by a grip which compelled me to turn. I found myself grasped
by a woman with an infant, just born, in her arms, and the remains of a
filthy sack across her loins – the sole covering of herself and babe. The
same morning the police opened a house on the adjoining lands, which
was observed shut for many days, and two frozen corpses were found
lying upon the mud floor half-devoured by the rats.
A mother, herself in fever, was seen the same day to drag out the
corpse of her child, a girl about twelve, perfectly naked, and leave it
half covered with stones. In another house, within 500 yards of the
cavalry station at Skibbereen, the dispensary doctor found seven
wretches lying, unable to move, under the same cloak – one had been
dead many hours, but the others were unable to move either
themselves or the corpse. To what purpose should I multiply such
cases? If these be not sufficient, neither would they hear who have the
power to send relief and do not, even ‘though one came from the dead’
…
But Boole was not entirely oblivious to the conditions that surrounded him in
Ireland. He took many trips in the countryside and mixed with the peasantry. On
one occasion when he had crossed over Bantry Bay, he insisted on walking alone
across Whiddy Island; the result was that he fell into a bog and was nearly
smothered. On one of his periodic trips to Lincoln, he delivered a lecture to the
Mechanics’ Institute on the state of Ireland. The address has a number of harsh
judgements but it also has some poignant passages.9
You may enter a roadside cabin, without window, perhaps without
chimney. Two old women are on the ground, or on stones, stretching
their hands over a fire, composed of the dying embers of two sticks.

No furniture, except a small wooden block; no chair, or table, or vessel
for domestic uses. The only food visible is a couple of turnips, which
have been appropriated, perhaps, but irregularly. A hole in the wall
leads to the bedroom, but it is too dark to see how it is furnished. You
hear the invariable story of the famine, of husbands dead or gone to
seek employment, of deaths of children in the Union, ending perhaps
with a prayer that ‘the Lord would take away the poor out of the
hunger, the misery, and the sin’ …
… In the rainy evenings of November, or in the bitter winds of
January or March, the ear is shocked by the cry of helpless little ones,
left half-naked on the bridges, or shivering in the porches of doors.
There, not infrequently, they spend the night. I am informed by
medical men that after a few months of such exposure they are carried
to the hospitals and die. The whine of the professed beggar I soon
learned to disregard. To rags and filth and mercenary sores I acquired
an indifference shocking even to myself; but it was otherwise to
witness the unmerited sufferings and to think of the premature fate of
these little ones whose early flower of life, like the fabled plant of old,
is inscribed only with woe.
Boole had a genuine compassion for students, especially those who found
mathematics difficult. The following sincerely written passage from the memoirs
of one of his former students, Richardson Evans, gives a good indication of the
down-to-earth work done by Boole behind the scenes, out of pure generosity of
heart with no desire for recognition or gratitude.10
Of all the professors, the only one of whom it could be said that he
enjoyed a European reputation was Dr George Boole. Although he was
not a University man, he received the degree of D.C.L. from Oxford in
recognition of his worth as a mathematician. His metaphysical book A
Mathematical Analysis of the Laws of Thought is still held in high
esteem by metaphysicians. He had in addition, a fine taste in literature
and he was an accomplished Dante scholar. In appearance he was
almost a faithful replica of Rosetti’s picture of ‘the man who had been
in Hell’. But best of all he was one of the sweetest and gentlest of
human beings. He held under control the most unruly members of his
class, while he was telling us truths of his Science which very few
could comprehend. On the blackboard, he was apt to make three and
two equal nine but that endeared him all the more.

I believe I had a distinct taste, though no talent for Mathematics, but
I used to get terribly bemused by figures and so got it into my head
that I could not get through the examination at the end of the session
…
… When the day for the sessional examination came I was at my
very worst. I began with a proposition in Euclid and then did some
answers to the Algebra questions, but when I tried to do some sums on
fractions, the paper swam before me. Dr Boole, as examiner, was
walking about and I told him I must go. He put his hand on my
shoulder, almost lovingly, and looking at the figure I had made for the
Euclid answer, he said ‘Why, but this is beautifully done; take a little
time.’ I went on and I passed.
On one occasion, Boole was called upon to use his mathematical talents in the
service of the community. The task was in fact a particularly gruesome one
because it concerned the appalling infant mortality rate in the Cork Workhouse.
In 1859, John Arnott, MP, Mayor of Cork, published a pamphlet entitled An
Investigation into the Condition of the Children in the Cork Workhouse, wherein
he attacked the Workhouse authorities and claimed that the poor nutritional
quality of the food supplied to the children was responsible for the high death
rate.11 The authorities claimed that the annual death rate was a mere 3.5 per cent,
but Arnott rejected this figure as being based on fallacious methods of
calculation and that the true figure was over 20 per cent per annum, a truly
horrendous figure. Arnott writes:
… The average quoted by the authorities is the average for a year; but
these infants do not live a year; their average length of life is eight
months. You must take the average by the month. In order to keep up
your stock of infants, who are carried out wholesale in their coffins,
you must be constantly getting in a fresh supply.
… The percentage of deaths in the Cork Workhouse average from
72 to nearly 200 per cent. These conclusions are really astounding and
almost past belief.
Arnott’s figures were confirmed by Craig, a Cork banker and noted statistician
of the day. He was also supported strongly by Kane, Ryall and Boole who put
their domestic differences aside in a matter of grave public concern. Boole is
described as ‘one of the most competent statisticians in the country’ and his
evidence is a careful analysis of the mathematical principles underlying the
calculation of the percentages in question. His evidence took the form of the

following letter:
Blackrock, near Cork, June 18th, 1859: My dear Dr Ryall, I know
nothing of the statistics of the Cork Union workhouse, except from the
Mayor’s statement, as published in the newspaper which you left with
me yesterday. In the observations which I have to make, I shall assume
that statement to be correct and the account given in it of reasonings
and conclusions of the Poor-Law Commissioners to be correct also. I
communicate them with this understanding to you, according to your
wish.
The Commissioners are wrong in supposing that the percentage of
deaths among the children in a given period should be calculated on
the whole number of children resident at any time within that period in
the workhouse; and the Mayor is right in asserting that the percentage
ought to be taken on the average number resident in the workhouse
during that period.
But there is a slight error in the Mayor’s deductions from this
percentage. Supposing the deaths in the year to be 18 per cent of the
average number of children in the house, it would not follow that of a
certain number of children, none of whom are removed from the place
alive, 18 per cent would die in a year. The actual number dieing in that
time would be a little under l6½ per cent, and it would take somewhat
more than l6½ years, and not 15 years, to reduce an original number of
100 children down to 5 – supposing the causes in operation, whether
constitutional or dependent on the sanitary regulations of the place or,
as is more probable, on both combined, to continue to act with perfect
uniformity.
Reference has been made to certain years in which the total number
of deaths has exceeded the average number of children in the house.
Thus, in the year 1855, the average number of children in the house
was 139, the number of deaths 167. It has been asked, ‘can the Mayor
explain this?’ I think he gives such explanation of it as to show there is
nothing surprising in it, except the very high rate of the mortality. The
mode of calculation which I applied to the previous case is equally
applicable here, and leads to the conclusion that, of a number of
children subject in all respects to the same conditions, and some of
them removed alive, about 70 per cent would die in the year.
These calculations have reference solely to the question of the
house, and not at all to the question of the causes to which it is due,

e.g. the state of health of the children when entering. Such
considerations are, however, manifestly of great importance, and no
absolute and exact conclusions with respect to the sanitary effects of
the system pursued in the workhouse can be drawn without them.
Unprejudiced medical men, who have the means of observation, would
be the best judges in such a question.
I will just add, that while the number of children passing through the
workhouse in a year does not affect the question of what the actual
mortality within the walls is (which, as the Mayor rightly maintains,
depends on the averages), it does not affect the causes of the mortality.
That mortality, however, is so high that whatever abatement is made
on the ground of external causes, a very large remainder must be left to
be accounted for by the state of things within. Yours truly,
George Boole
Though Boole did not involve himself in Irish politics, there occurred in 1859 a
rather extraordinary incident which was later to have a profound affect on his
family’s political outlook. The incident came about as follows.12 In 1848, two
Italians who had been involved in a rising against the Austrians were imprisoned
in a terrible fortress, the Spielberg. One of them, Carlo Poerio, had been
condemned to twenty-four years in irons. Late in 1859, Carlo and the other man
were being transferred to Naples by ship. A son of one of the prisoners smuggled
himself on board and bribed the sailors to mutiny. The ship set sail for England
but it was driven offcourse by bad weather and took shelter in Cork harbour
quite close to the Booles’ house in Blackrock. The Booles gave refuge to the
sailors and the incident made a great impression on their three-and-a-half year
old daughter Mary. She insisted that the sailors had been imprisoned in their attic
and that she had set them free. The sailors later went on to London to join
Cavour. As Mary grew older, she related the tale to her youngest sister, Ethel
Lilian, who was inspired thereby to write her great novel The Gadfly.
Boole seems to have had a genuine love for children and delighted in their
company. Unlike many adults, he paid close attention to the things that children
said to him and he realised that at times their remarks were profound. He
sometimes used these remarks as illustrations in his writings. For example, in
The Laws of Thought, writing on probability and causality, he says:
As we can neither re-enter nor recall the state of infancy, we are

unable to say how far such results as the above serve to explain the
confidence with which young children connect events whose
association they have once perceived. But we may conjecture,
generally, that the strength of their expectations is due to the necessity
of inferring (as a part of their rational nature), and the narrow but
impressive experience upon which the faculty is exercised. Hence the
reference of every kind of sequence to that of cause and effect. A little
friend of the author’s, on being put to bed, was heard to ask his brother
the pertinent question ‘Why does going to sleep at night make it light
in the morning?’ The brother, who was a year older, was able to reply,
that it would be light in the morning even if little boys did not go to
sleep at night.
He played with his own children and those of others, his favourite role being that
of ‘a good lion who could roar well’. He liked the pleasures of children, such as
childish stories, funny rhymes, pretty flowers, scents and games with wall-
shadow pictures and, according to his wife, he considered indifference to
commonplace sources of enjoyment a sign of an irreverent habit of mind. On the
other hand, he never joked about or even smiled at anything that another held
sacred, such as religious or political beliefs.
He insisted that his children should not be too sheltered from the realities of
nature and life. Though his wife had kept the children from seeing animals
killed, he promised them money for killing snails in the garden. When she
protested, he replied gently that peasant children had to do such things and that
the world could not be cultivated if everyone indulged in such sentimentality; he
did not want any unnatural theories brought into his house. Neither were the
children sheltered from illness or death, and to be a good sick-nurse was always
put before them as the highest ideal after which to seek. He once said, ‘it is in
nurseries and sickrooms, and by deathbeds that women should learn theology.’
He seems to have had premonitions of his premature death and frequently tried
to instruct his family on how to manage their affairs after his death.
Boole believed strongly in the strengthening of ties between neighbours. If a
tradesman of Cork city had a country house in Blackrock, he would deal at his
shop and he invariably employed local workmen whenever he wanted a job
done. During his final illness he sent for Dr Bullen, a local doctor who had been
dismissed from the Professorship of Surgery at Queen’s College because of a
controversy there.
He did a great deal of his mathematical work at home and some of his best

work was done at night, often in the dark and in bed. This was to aid his
concentration and to protect his eyesight which often gave him trouble. At one
stage, he even wrote with a machine like those used by the blind. When he had
finished the manuscript of any mathematical work, he became moody and
irritable with the strain of all the work he had done and he ate and drank very
heartily of whatever was available. These moods however vanished just as
quickly as they had come. Though Boole spent fifteen years, nearly a third of his
life, in Cork, he was never totally happy with life there and he regarded himself
as something of an English exile living abroad. He made frequent trips to
Lincoln, London, Cambridge and Oxford, and he seems to have regarded even
the Anglo-Irish character as rather alien. We have already discussed his
unhappiness with Cork soon after his arrival there and perhaps this can be
dismissed as homesickness, but he did make at least two serious efforts to get a
university position elsewhere. His relative unhappiness in Cork was undoubtedly
increased by the great number of controversies in the college and by the tension
that existed between the professors and the President. On 30 May 1854, Boole
wrote the following letter to de Morgan:

My dear Sir, I thought I might venture to ask you if you could tell me
anything (more than is contained in the pamphlet) about the
Melbourne Professorships. I am in some doubt as to whether I should
apply for one or not. To speak candidly my income from the College
has averaged scarcely £300 per annum and as I have a mother and
sister wholly dependent upon me in England, I see no prospect of
making even the most moderate provision for old age. Do you know if
there are many applicants, if it is likely that I should suit, etc? I believe
that I am pretty successful as a lecturer and I have always been on the
best of terms with the students.
I have now lived long enough in Cork to become attached to the
place and strongly so to some of the people. But I feel that I should not

like to spend the decline of life anywhere but in England, and I begin
to fear that this is a wish of which it is not the design of Providence
that I should attain the fulfilment.
For the best part of a year, Boole thought the matter over and finally decided to
apply for a professorship in Melbourne. He wrote to Sir John Lubbock asking for
a testimonial which he received on 21 February 1855. About the same time, he
wrote to Augustus de Morgan asking if he could use again the testimonial de
Morgan had written for him some years previously, when he was an applicant
for the job in Cork. He concludes the letter as follows:
… As I said, I do not expect to succeed but I think it a duty to offer
myself. I am so out of the way here that all chance of making further
advance is cut off unless I take some opportunity like this of letting it
be known that I should be glad to do more than I am doing…
He also wrote to Thomson asking if he could use his earlier reference but, when
Thomson said that he could, Boole declined to do so for the following over-
conscientious reason:
I think upon again reading over the testimonial that it speaks too
highly of my acquirements in Natural Philosophy. Such testimony
from you now implies more than it did when you wrote the
testimonial. On this account I feel doubtful whether I shall use it. I
certainly am not ignorant of Mathematical Physics, but I feel there are
scores of men who know far more of the subject than I do … I have
acted in a similar way toward another friend who had given me a
testimonial which I thought above my merits …
However, later in 1855, Boole put all thoughts of a professorship in Melbourne
out of his mind and the reason is obvious – he suddenly proposed marriage to
Mary Everest and was accepted. Soon afterwards, in an undated letter to de
Morgan, his mood has become quite different and he seems to have acquired a
certain joie de vivre. All of a sudden, Cork, Ireland and even the Irish weather
have become tolerable!
My dear Sir, I just write to say that I have given up all thoughts of
Melbourne and to thank you for your letter. If you should ever hear of
anything likely to suit one in England, I should be glad if you would
let me know of it. My objections to Ireland are however growing less
and less and I have really very little to complain of besides the

smallness of the remuneration which I receive; I incline to think that
there are few places in Ireland so desirable for residence as Cork and
its environs. That the climate however diffuses a kind of soft langour
indisposing for exertion I feel sure …
Boole continued to live and work in Cork, immersed in the joys of family life
despite the continuing disputes and controversies in the college. However, at the
back of his mind he retained the thought of returning to England to a
professorship of mathematics. He considered that mathematics at Cambridge had
fallen into an unsatisfactory state and that complacency had followed the great
reforms initiated by the Analytical Society in the early nineteenth century. In his
opinion, mathematics there made too little of a training of the mind and had
become a display of mere tours de force. Oxford, on the other hand, had changed
little and he saw the possibility that a mathematical school of a higher order
might develop there.
In 1860, the Savilian Professorship of Geometry at Oxford became vacant and
Boole’s name was mentioned as a possible candidate for the chair. The position
would have suited him in many ways and the idea haunted him like a too-
pleasant daydream. He felt that if he were at Oxford, he would be back at the
centre of the academic world where he could immerse himself in mathematics,
philosophy and science in the company of his peers. However, one major
obstacle presented itself. Oxford at the time was rife with religious controversy
caused by the Tractarian movement and he felt that if he went there, he would be
expected to take one side or the other in the disputes. This he shrank from in
horror. Finally, urged on by his wife, he made the most foolish compromise
possible – he entered his name as a candidate, but did not submit any
testimonials.
The post went to a young Irishman, Henry John Stephen Smith, who had been
born in Dublin in 1826.13 Smith is a good example of a nineteenth-century figure
who was then regarded as one of the world’s greatest mathematicians, but who is
now almost forgotten. He was yet another child prodigy at classics and
mathematics and, at one stage, he looked like becoming a great chemist. He was
the only Oxford man in the list of candidates for the chair, having been a lecturer
at Balliol College since 1850. He is now remembered mostly for a masterly
report on the theory of numbers, which he presented to the British Association in
five parts during the period 1859–1865. His reputation in the mathematical
world of the nineteenth century was immense and it is said that his claims and
talents were considered so conspicious by the electors that they did not even

consider the applications of the other candidates for the post.
Boole was bitterly disappointed at being thwarted in his quest for intellectual
stimulation and companionship but perhaps, on the other hand, he was secretly
relieved to be avoiding further controversy. It was said in Oxford at the time that
his act of submitting merely his name as his application created the impression
that he was not seriously seeking the appointment and, although his wife later
denied this, it may have been close to the truth.

Another ploy by Boole to gain intellectual stimulation, and presumably to

increase his income, was an attempt to import students from England and in
effect set up a small school for third-level pupils. On 21 November 1861, he
wrote to de Morgan:
… I now want to ask you for some advice. I have got my house
enlarged and want to take into it a few pupils. I should greatly prefer to
get a few from England. Communication is now so easy that this ought
not to be difficult. My plan would be for my pupils to attend the
classes in the College here and for me to keep a general supervision
over all their studies and help them in their difficulties in most. Now is
there any objection to my advertising in some such form (I have
obtained the requisite sanction for receiving pupils) as thus: ‘Professor
Boole wishes to receive a few pupils into his house. Terms and
conditions may be known on application’ – or is there a better way?
The mention of my name would perhaps be my best mode of getting
pupils here – for I fear the vague generality of ‘A Professor of the
College’, etc. would not do much for me. I have done nothing yet.
There is no record that Boole did persist with his plan and it is probable that he
dropped the idea of taking pupils into his house. In fact, the whole concept
seems unethical and inconsistent with his feelings that all students should have
equal attention and opportunities.
The Oxford application seems to have been the last attempt Boole made to
move away from Cork and as time went by, he reluctantly became more resigned
to living in Ireland. In 1862, he wrote to de Morgan: ‘Are you ever disposed to
see Ireland? (I have seen enough of it) …’ In a later letter he writes: ‘There is
absolutely no person in this country except my wife with whom I ever speak on
the subject of Logic. I feel that this is one of the many drawbacks of living in
this country and is not the least of them …’
Eventually, however, Boole came to accept every aspect of life in Ireland with
the notable exception of the weather. The rainfall in Cork was (and still is) quite
considerable and spread more or less throughout the year. To the poet, the soft
mists blowing gently over Cork city from the Kerry mountains may indeed be
romantic, but Boole suffered greatly at times from a rheumatic affliction which
he blamed on constant exposure to cold and rain. Ironically, it was foolhardy
exposure to the elements that was to lead to his premature death.

I
CHAPTER TWELVE
Poetry
t is an unfortunate but indisputable fact that mathematics is nowadays almost
invariably regarded as a science rather than an art. Mathematicians are by
implication deemed to be soulless calculating fellows, totally incapable of
appreciating imprecise and beautiful expressions of human feeling such as art
and poetry. Nothing, in fact, could be further from the truth. It was the
mathematician Weierstrass who said, ‘It is true that a mathematician who is not
also something of a poet will never be a perfect mathematician’, and this
probably sums up the attitude of the true mathematician. Much has been written
about the indefinable aesthetic standard called ‘elegance’ which mathematicians
apply to their subject. Elegant mathematics is as impossible to define as a
beautiful woman or good poetry but, as is common in such matters, it can be
experienced more easily than it can be described. However, the eminent
mathematician Polya has attempted to give mathematical aesthetics a
quantitative basis using the following definition: ‘The elegance of a
mathematical theorem is a quantity which is directly proportional to the number
of independent ideas one can see in the theorem and inversely proportional to the
effort it takes to see them.’
G.H. Hardy in his classic book entitled A Mathematician’s Apology wrote:
‘The mathematician’s patterns, like the painter’s or the poet’s, must be beautiful;
the ideas, like the colours or the words, must fit together in a harmonious way.
There is no permanent place in the world for ugly mathematics.’
Nearly a century earlier however, George Boole had anticipated Hardy. Boole
used to say that however correct a mathematical theorem might appear to be, one
ought never to be satisfied that there was not something imperfect about it until
it gave the impression of also being beautiful. His love of beauty made it almost
inevitable that he should love poetry and that he should attempt to express his
feelings in poetic form. As might be expected, his taste in poetry had a leaning
towards the metaphysical. Dante was his favourite poet and Dante’s Paradiso his
favourite work. He also loved the works of Wordsworth and he delighted in
reading Milton aloud to others. His wife relates that Tennyson’s St Agnes’ Eve
used to throw him into a quiver of delight and that he could not tolerate any

irreverent criticism of that poem.
We have seen that Boole himself wrote poetry, albeit verse translations from
the Greek, in his early teens. During the period 1834 to 1849, his writing of
poetry was intermittent, presumably because it took second place to his
newfound love of mathematics; but around the time of his arrival in Ireland, his
interest seems to have been reawakened. Much of his poetry was written,
presumably for relaxation, while he was on holiday at Hornsea on the Yorkshire
coast. His writing continued until about 1856 when his wife, wisely perhaps,
decided that he had better devote his leisure time to other pursuits.
Soon after our marriage I found a sheet of paper covered with blank
verse on some classical subject. ‘What’s this?’ I asked. ‘Some poetry
of mine.’ I read half through the paper. I had been told he was
overworked. I had to preserve his brain from needless exertion, and
save it for science, at least so I thought; and I supposed writing poetry
was hard work. I walked over to the fire and dropped the paper into the
flames, asking him never to write verses, but, if he had any poetry in
his composition, to let it out in talk to me. He promised compliance,
but with a curious smile which puzzled me at the time. These were, I
believe, the only verses of his which I saw during his lifetime. The
treasures which I found in an old box after his death – hymns, metrical
versions of psalms, sonnets, and verses about myself (but all written
before my prohibition) – were a revelation to me of powers in him
which I had not suspected. There was not a line in any of them which
might not have been written by a devout and liberal Jew, acquainted
with Christian literature.
As might be expected, religion, the classics and friendship were among the
dominant themes of Boole’s verses. The following selection of titles taken from
a list of over a hundred poems which he wrote throughout the course of his
lifetime gives a fair indication of the sort of subject which lent itself to his
particular talent for poetic expression: David’s Lamentation; Petrarch’s triumph
on the death of Laura; The departing of the Crusaders; On a Sunday School;
The Council of Constance; He who made light his robe of glory; Ode to Truth;
She leaned her head all gently on my breast; My sage, my venerable friend; To
the Number Three; To a drooping laurel.
One does not have to be particularly well versed in poetry to realise that Boole
was no great poet. His ordered and precise outlook on life made it almost

inevitable that he should adhere to rigid and highly structured verse forms such
as the sonnet. This led to a mechanical form of verse which did not readily lend
itself to the expression of feelings. But first, let us hear the opinion of the late
Professor Seán Lucy, poet and critic, and Professor of Modern English at
University College, Cork, who has made a detailed study of Boole’s poems.
Boole was a very able versifier who sometimes rose to poetry. His
works have an earnest, serious, dutiful quality one expects of the
Victorian period. They are ‘improving’, showing the typical
nineteenth-century moral imperative, the willed optimism, the
insistence on industry and responsibility. These solemnities, with a
fondness for abstraction and a lack of originality of language, make
most of his verses heavy, and many of them dull.
Two sonnets to Ireland show some of his most characteristic habits
of mind and style; here is the first and best, dated 2 November 1849:1
O Ireland! Ireland! though thy tale be told
On history’s darkest page, and to such strains
Of Sorrow’s harp attuned, that there remains
No chord of grief untouched, though Want be bold
And clamours in thy streets, and where the gold
Of plenteous yellow harvests waves, lie plashy plains,
O’er which the bulrush towers, the ragweed reigns;
Yet thou in wisdom still art young, though old
In misery and tears. Oh that thy store
Of bitter thoughts, which brood upon the past,
Were from thy bosom quite erased and worn.
Then in the Future might’st thou live once more
And from the darkness and the stormy blast
Emerge the brightness of thy coming Morn.
The only lines which have any poetic power are those describing the
landscape, which, though unoriginal, have real tactile structure and
force.
Boole believes that nature and art are to teach us lessons. In his most
interesting poem – a verse letter to a friend – he tells how he has been
looking at pictures in the Royal Academy Exhibition in London. He
has been struck by a painting of a brave man before his martyrdom
receiving the sacraments in the presence of wife and friends. He goes
on:
I have not seen

Elsewhere so wondrous, so sublime a scene;
Though others, to a painter’s eye, might be
More strictly beautiful – yet, as to me,
Music is then divinest when some chain
Of thought sublime gives meaning to the strain,
So, in the sister art, a theme which swells
The breast with recollections ever tells
Most on the canvas …
It is not surprising that Boole turns to moralist poets for examples of
how to write. His verse shows wide reading with considerable easy
powers of imitation, but his great master is Wordsworth, particularly –
alas! – the later Wordsworth whose moralistic sonnets follow each
other with thunderous monotony. Behind this Wordsworth, and,
probably known also at first hand by Boole, are the massive loom of
Milton and the ordered voices of the eighteenth-century philosophic
poems. In June 1849, Boole wrote:
Thou that in secret chambers dost portray
The pictures of the past, whence some return,
And some, like ashes in the buried urn,
Lie hid, not lost, till one Diviner Ray
Shall through thy inmost caverns pour the day;
Oh, Memory! if to me thy lessons stern
Sometimes appear, let me not less discern
The deep and wholesome wisdom they convey;
But when the years to vanity betrayed
Rise threat’ning from the gulfs to which they fled,
Give me to see in each reproachful shade
A messenger, on solemn errand sped:
’Tis not with purpose vain that they invade
The nightly pillow and the wakeful bed.
Other influences – mainly of the second generation of Romantics –
are also clear: the more lyrical short poems show clearly the influences
of two other philosopher-poets, Shelley and Keats:
Fellowship of spirits bright,
Crowned with laurel, clad with light,
From what labours are ye sped,
By what common impulse led,
With what deep remembrance bound,
’Mid the mighty concourse round,

That ye thus together stand,
An inseparable band?
This is the first stanza of The Fellowship of the Dead, an obvious
competitive imitation of Keats’ Bards of Passion and of Mirth, in
which Boole celebrates his brother scientists as the immortal
champions of the betterment of human life:
All that to the love of truth
Gave the fervour of their youth,
Then for others spread the store
Of their rich and studious lore,
Bringing starry wisdom down
To the peasant and the clown,
Are with us in spirit-land,
An inseparable band.
Other recognizable voices heard at times are Cowper, Scott, Byron
and Moore, and often in the frequent religious passages we hear the
echoes of the Hymnal. Although he praises his fellow scientists and
scientific endeavour in general terms, he very seldom touches on
specifics of scientific knowledge – this makes it the more interesting
when he does. In a little poem To the Number Three, he speculates on
the fact that the sense world is three-dimensional while thought is
multidimensional, but does not take this any further than to ask
whether this is again a moral lesson in humility – God knows so much
more than we can.
When the great Maker, on creation bent,
Thee from thy brethren chose, and framed by thee
The world to sense revealed, yet left it free
To those whose intellectual gaze intent
Behind the veil phenomenal is sent,
Space diverse, systems manifold to see,
Revealed by thought alone; was it that we,
In whose mysterious spirits thus are blent
Finite of sense and Infinite of thought,
Should feel how vast, how little is our store;
As yon excelling arch with orbs deep fraught
To the light wave that dies along the shore;
That from our weakness and our strength may rise
One worship unto Him the Only Wise?
Everywhere Boole’s style is literate, able, and supple, but it is killed

by its lack of reality. It is not merely that the world of real sense
experience is almost completely excluded – the feelings expressed, the
thoughts expounded are almost always mere literary clichés. The
language and rhythms, though able, are fatally predictable. This is
verse about reading poetry, not about being alive.
Here and there a real feeling strikes through. Here and there in spite
of imitation a fine image pleases the mind and transcends
generalization. Some personal reaction can be stirred by memory or
darkness – a deeper music is heard and sometimes even one senses a
certain sombre mood – an apprehension, a grief – behind the earnest
energetic optimism.
The most attractive poem I have seen is the verse epistle already
mentioned. He wrote this in 1845 to his friend William Brooke, from
Shanklin, the Isle of Wight. It is in the heroic couplet so often used for
the letter in verse and shows far more humanity, flexibility and
humour than the more formal verse. It is in verse except for a few
lines, but it is warm and personal and inspires liking, even affection,
for the man who wrote it.
The poem to which Professor Lucy refers was written on the occasion of Boole’s
visit to the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science held at Cambridge in 1845. It indeed shows Boole at his warmest and
shows the importance he attached to human friendship. Although the poem
(which incidentally seems to bear a curious resemblance to Matthew Arnold’s
The Scholar Gypsy) is rather lengthy, it is worthy of quotation in full:
I did not think that I again should feel
The old enthusiasm through my bosom steal,
Or that my thoughts again would flow in rhyme
Albeit uncouth, but sitting at this time
Alone, in my most quiet hostelry,
With twilight slowly darkening o’er the sea.
My thoughts to you are turned in current strong,
And cannot choose but shape themselves in song.
For, have we not together walked beside
Old streams and classic floods! Have we not pried
Into dim nooks of ancient piles, and read
Memorials quaint of monks and warriors dead!
And, have we not together sought retreat
In Skellingthorpian shades, when the fierce heat

Of Cancer, smiting on the barren plain,
Called to your memory that familiar strain
Of Haemus gelid vales enrapt in shade,
By ivied trunks and boughs innumerous made.
You know I mentioned when you saw me last
That I was going to Cambridge – there I passed
A pleasant week – sometimes with footsteps slow
Musing where Cam’s o’ershaded waters flow,
Sometimes through gardens trim my steps were bent,
And feastful hours in College halls I spent;
In ancient chapels heard the organ swell,
While hues of heaven through pictured windows fell,
Where martyrs, prophets, saints in glory shone,
The judgment hall, the scourge, the cross, the throne.
Nor be quite unremembered in my strain
Those world renowned men who trace the chain
Of nature’s linked wonders to the laws,
Blending harmoniously effect and cause.
’Twas something on the banks of Cam, to see
Men known to Science, known to History;
Airy, who trod the subtlest paths of light,
And Herschel, worn by many a watchful night,
Whewell and Brewster, Challis, large of brow,
And Hamilton, the first of those to know.
Then that stone-cracking miscellaneous rout,
Who seek for monsters’ bones, and peer about,
Reading strange secrets of the beldame Earth;
How, with volcanic throes the first gave birth
To isle and mountain chain, and how the rocks
Are riven and fissured by her earthquake shocks.
With these was many an archimage, whose name
From Gallic chiefs, or northern heathen came;
Boutigny, making fire its power disown,
And Boguslawski – here, the muse breaks down.
At Cambridge too, I met a friend of yore
Bernard, replete with all the Talmud’s lore;
Age has not cooled his warmth of soul, but fanned

The inborn enthusiasm of his Fatherland.
And so we talked old stories o’er again,
Until his daughters roused us, with a strain
Of German words, to German music set,
Listening to which, entranced, I did forget
All time and place, for sooth to say,
That German music steals the soul away.
So with sweet converse and with sweeter song
We passed a summer eve, nor thought it long,
Till, one by one, the stars came out on high,
The assembled council of the northern sky.
I made short stay in London, for I thought
With loss of rest its pleasure dearly bought,
And longed in quiet indolence to be
On some lone shore of the resounding sea,
Where winds blow freely o’er the broad expanse,
And sea-birds stream and rocking billows dance.
But as I wandered idly up and down
The Babylonian streets of this huge town,
A friend, in much compassion, bade me view
The Academicians’ pictures – not a few
Of these were portraits of aldermen renowned
In city feasts, in calipash profound.
But there were some that spoke of higher themes,
Worthy of some great poet, when he dreams
Of the death conquering might of Truth and Love;
There was the patriot Russell, from above
Light streamed into his dungeon and lit up
The face of Tillotson, who held the cup
Of the last sacrament – the heroic wife
Knelt by her husband, dearer than her life,
And looked at him but wept not – while behind
Sat one of rougher sex, with head reclined,
Who could not veil his tears. I have not seen
Elsewhere so wondrous, so sublime a scene;
Though others, to a painter’s eye, might be
More strictly beautiful – yet, as to me
Music is then divinest when some chain
Of thought sublime gives meaning to the strain,

So, in the sister art, a theme which swells
The breast with recollections ever tells
Most on the canvas – well, I ween, shall not
That martyr’s eve of death be soon forgot!
Leaving the world’s great Babylon behind
In quest of health I wooed the southern wind,
Beside Southampton’s sheltered waters stayed,
And mused awhile in Netley’s holy shade,
Viewed her grey walls with matted ivy hung,
Heard the wind murmur where the mass was sung,
And thought, how many a worn unquiet breast
In penance and the cowl had sought for rest,
And found it in the last the narrow cell!
‘After life’s fitful fever they sleep well’.
Today I trod the chalky down of Wight,
That verge on many a cliff and wondersworld height
O’erlooking the broad sea, upon whose face
The impress of the changing heavens we trace;
And as I gaze here on the shingled shore,
And hear the solemn never ceasing roar
Of the white billows, I almost repine,
And wish so fair a solitude were mine,
Where the free mind might exercise her powers,
And place look smiling on the studious hours;
But impious were the wish, for well I know,
That Peace is no inhabitant below
Apart from Duty – little recks it where
Our lot be cast, so that we do and bear
That which to do and bear our souls were made,
All else is but the shadow of a shade.
In August 1850 while on holiday at Hornsea, Boole wrote the following poem
which in many ways is typical both of his style and his sentiments:
Child, rejoicing in the beauty
Of the earth, the sky, the sea,
Happiness to thee is duty,
Living is felicity.
Guileless, simple, free from sadness

Open all thy heart to gladness
Think not, think not, of the morrow,
What hast thou to do with sorrow?
Young man, whom the pride and glory
Of the world’s great scene engage,
Half way on from childhood’s story
To the quiet rest of age:
Scorn the trifler’s aims and manners
Write not Pleasure on thy banners,
Work with might, while day yet shineth,
Soon, how soon, thy sun declineth.
Old man wasted, old man weary,
Whom the waves of life have cast,
Helpless on the margin dreary
Waiting for the next, the last:
Joy of youth is thine no longer,
Nor to struggle with the stronger:
Rest and wait in calm endurance,
Patient hope shall breed assurance.
In the following poem, entitled The Communion of Saints, Boole displays a rare
delicacy and sense of beauty:
When the light of day declineth,
And the fields in shadow lie,
And the dewy Hesper shineth
Fairest in the western sky,
Visions in the twilight rise,
Night unseals the spirit’s eyes.
Then the dead, in thought arriving,
From the far-off regions bright,
Seem to aid our earnest striving
For the holy and the right;
Even they who sailed before
O’er this ocean to that shore.
Yes, the dead of all the nations

Who, in patient hope and sure,
Laboured in their generations,
For the Lovely and the Pure;
Heavenly sympathizing yield
To their followers in the field.
Seeker after Truth’s deep fountain,
Delver in the soul’s deep mine,
Toiler up the rugged mountain
To the upper Light Divine,
Think, beyond the stars there be
Who have toiled and wrought like thee.
Good is even as its Giver,
As the Universal light,
And its time is the For-Ever,
And its space the Infinite;
As a linked chain of gold
All the world it shall enfold.
Unfortunately, little of Boole’s surviving poetry seems to concern love between
men and women. Perhaps he did write such poems but regarded them as being
too personal to divulge. Luckily however, he did write a couple of poems which
portrayed the difference that love can make over a period of time in the life of an
individual and one can only assume that his lines are based on personal
experience.
LOVE
Three Aspects of Nature
Thy outward shape is still the same,
Thy hues as vivid as of yore,
Thy skies as bright, thy fields as green,
Thy waves as sparkling on the shore.
But not to me, O Nature, smiles
With equal joy thy varied face;
A darkness o’er the scene has come,
And dimmed its glory and its grace.
In vain I seek in sunny skies

y
The brighter sunshine of the breast;
In vain I ask the peaceful stars
Where Peace hath built her halcyon nest.
To me their lustre only brings
A vision of those vanished days
When the pure flame that burned within
Robed all without in purple rays.
Oh, golden promise of life’s morn!
Oh, happy days of hope and youth
When Virtue first her shape revealed,
And first I sought the face of truth!
TEN YEARS LATER
The woods and fields did once alone suffice
To fill the heart with joy. I was not nice
To question Heaven’s good gifts, but took the blessing
Just as it came, without or care or guessing.
But with departed youth the splendour fell,
The meads were daisies and not asphodel.
But now the common earth again is bright,
Sweet peace is on the grass and on the flower;
The rainbow spans the fields and gilds the shower,
And sunset glows once more with golden light.
Who hath restored the bright and fairy time?
Who hath lit up the world with morning prime?
Mighty enchanter, Love! the change was thine;
Thou earnest, and the world again did bloom;
A light renewed and glory half divine
Showed even beyond the confines of the tomb.
The interpretation is clear – around the year 1845, Boole despaired of ever
finding happiness and even mathematics had lost a little of its magic. By 1855
however, love had transformed his entire outlook on life and ‘the world again
did bloom’.
What then does Boole’s poetry tell us about his character? It is clear that he

was well versed in the classics and in the romantic poetry of such authors as
Keats, Shelley, Tennyson, Wordsworth and Dante. He valued personal
friendship and family ties enormously, perhaps more so than deeper forms of
passion because he wrote very few love poems even to his wife. He seems to
have been rather humourless and perhaps even a little childlike in his outlook on
what constituted happiness.
Boole’s poetry shows that he was indeed a deeply religious man but that his
God was the sombre taskmaster as conceived by many of his Victorian
contemporaries. Mathematics he regarded as One of God’s most wonderful and
beautiful creations, intrinsically linked with the workings of the human mind and
totally in harmony with nature. He saw the creative hand of God everywhere,
especially in nature. Isaac Newton had said: ‘… but to myself I seem to have
been only like a boy playing on the seashore and diverting myself in now and
then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, whilst the great
ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me …’ And Boole, who strongly
identified with Newton, sensed the same cosmic truth in nature, science and art.
He saw beauty in all creation, the beauty of the spirit, manifest in love,
friendship, truth and knowledge.
Though Boole was no great poet, we are fortunate that he committed some of
his more personal thoughts to paper in poetic form because it is unlikely that a
record of those thoughts would have existed or survived in any other form.
Perhaps the medium of poetry released his inhibitions a little and allowed some
of his deeper and more personal feelings to emerge. Fundamentally, however, he
was interested in structures and for him poetry was simply a metric structure
which he filled with words from time to time. Real poets, it seems, reverse the
procedure by starting with ideas and words and seeking a suitable poetic form in
which to express their feelings.

O
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Boole and Hamilton
SOME UNANSWERED QUESTIONS
ne of the greatest mysteries surrounding Boole’s life in Ireland is
undoubtedly his lack of contact with the man who was Ireland’s greatest
mathematician, Sir William Rowan Hamilton. The two men were
contemporaries, Hamilton living from 1805 to 1865, while Boole lived from
1815 to 1864; yet during Boole’s fifteen years or so in Ireland, they seem to have
almost deliberately avoided any serious contact with each other. Hamilton was
Professor of Astronomy at Trinity College, Dublin, and Astronomer Royal for
Ireland, while Boole lived in Cork, less than two hundred miles away; yet,
despite the fact that communications between the two cities were by no means
bad, there is no evidence that the two men ever even visited each other, either in
a professional or personal capacity.
Perhaps more mysteriously, they seem to have had no mathematical or
scientific contact whatsoever and this is all the more surprising when one
considers that they had a great deal of interests in common – for example,
abstract algebra, dynamics, astronomy, operator methods and differential
equations. Sadly however, one can only describe the relationship between
Hamilton and Boole as an example of the principle of least action!
Details of Hamilton’s life are very well known and he has had three
biographers: Graves in the nineteenth century and more recently, Hankins and
O’Donnell. But nobody seems to have noticed the enormous number of
similarities between Hamilton and Boole. Hamilton’s early education was in the
hands of his uncle, the Reverend James Hamilton, who has been described as ‘an
inhumanly accomplished linguist’ and he insisted that his nephew spoke at least
one language for each year of his age. Boole’s interest in languages came a little
later and was more directly related to his interest in mathematics. Both men
showed an early interest in the classics and were accomplished translators of
Greek and Latin poetry by the age of twelve. Boole took up mathematics for the
strange reason that mathematics books were better value for money than novels

and other books, but Hamilton’s reasons were even more extraordinary. Zerah
Colburn, the amazing American ‘lightning calculating’ boy, was in 1815
attending school in London and he was brought face-to-face with Hamilton in a
competition to match their wits. For a change, the Irish boy prodigy seems to
have come off second-best, but the incident left such an impression on his mind
that Hamilton decided to devote his attention to the serious study of
mathematics. He started with a Latin copy of Euclid and soon progressed to
Newton’s Arithmetica Universalis and Principia. Like Boole, he was extremely
self-reliant and ploughed his way through these difficult books on his own.
Again like Boole, he appreciated the works of Continental mathematicians and
he mastered books on calculus (especially Clairaut) in the original French. Both
men started to publish original research at an early age. Hamilton, in his
seventeenth year, while reading Laplace’s Mécanique Céleste (a book also
eagerly studied by Boole) discovered an error in the reasoning of the great
French author in relation to the parallelogram of forces. He corrected the flaw in
his first publication.
Both Boole and Hamilton had a deep interest in practical science, especially
optics and astronomy. Boole’s interest was rather down to earth and was
concerned with the making of telescopes, although he did write some
unpublished papers on the nature of light while Hamilton’s interest however led
to a whole career. When he was still an undergraduate at Trinity College,
Dublin, Hamilton was appointed Professor of Astronomy, defeating in the
process George Biddell Airy, later to become Astronomer Royal of England.
However, Boole’s feat of being appointed Professor of Mathematics in Queen’s
College, Cork, without either a formal secondary education or a university
degree, is at least comparable with Hamilton’s feat of becoming professor while
still an undergraduate.
Both men were deeply interested in poetry which they used to release their
pent-up feelings. Hamilton had a number of unhappy love affairs and wrote a
great deal of poignant verse on the matter to express his frustration with life,
whereas we have seen that Boole wrote poetry mostly to express his religious
feelings. Hamilton was a close friend of Wordsworth and Coleridge, who took
his work seriously enough to criticise it extensively and, in fact, they attempted
to divert him back into science where his talents undoubtedly lay.
Like Boole, Hamilton had a deep knowledge of philosophy, favouring in
particular Kant and Plato. However, it does not seem to be widely known that
Hamilton too had ambitions in the field of formal logic. In a letter to Augustus

de Morgan in 1851, Hamilton wrote:
At one time I read a good deal of Kant’s works in the German, besides
portions of Plato in the Greek: it is one of my hopes to resume, at what
may be called leisure hours, some of my old studies of that kind, and
to combine with them the reading of some other and more Aristotelian
than Platonic works – including the Formal Logic – although my own
personal temperament of mind is far more Platonic than Aristotelian
… and let me tell you that when I was a boy at College I acquired
some undergraduate renown by a short proof (which I have totally
forgotten, and which would at all events have been since superseded
by one of Mr Boole’s) that in no legitimate syllogism can the
conclusion change places with either of the premises.
Hamilton, however, did not pursue his interest in logic, although he always
retained something of a mystic approach towards mathematics as is evidenced
by his description of algebra as the ‘science of pure time’. Both men were
recipients of the Gold Medal awarded by the Royal Society, Hamilton in fact
receiving the award twice. Even the titles of their award-winning papers were
similar: Hamilton entitled his On a General Method in Dynamics, while Boole’s
was called On a General Method in Analysis. Since Hamilton was awarded his
medal before Boole, it may have been the case that Hamilton’s title inspired
Boole’s. Both Hamilton and Boole were innovators in mathematics and between
them, they contributed to the subject quaternions, the algebraic theory of
complex numbers, the algebra of classes and invariant theory, as well as
important advances in dynamics, optics, differential equations and operator
theory – a formidable list indeed.
However, by far the strongest similarity between Boole and Hamilton was that
they were both pure mathematicians, pure algebraists, in fact, and the tragedy
was that neither of them realised it. Hamilton was convinced that he was a
physicist and that quaternions were the mathematical key that would unlock the
secrets of the physical universe, while Boole on the other hand, believed himself
to be fundamentally a logician whose algebra of classes would unlock the
workings of the human mind. Of course, one must not dismiss the beliefs of
these two great men lightly because, to a certain extent, their dreams have come
true. Hamilton’s ideas, extended into vector analysis and even quantum
mechanics, have helped us make enormous strides in our understanding of the
universe; computer science and cybernetics which grew out of Boole’s work
have certainly thrown a great deal of light on the workings of the human mind. It

is only fair to say, however, that Hamilton’s equation ij = -ji and Boole’s x2 = x
transformed the face of mathematics in general, and algebra in particular, in a
way that they could not have anticipated and many mathematicians would
consider the implications of these equations the greatest contributions that the
two men made.
Despite the large number of similarities between Boole and Hamilton, there
were of course very many differences between them which might possibly
account for their lack of contact. Firstly, there was a huge social gap between the
two men. Hamilton was definitely of the upper classes and was knighted in
1835; Boole, on the other hand, was born in more humble circumstances and
throughout his life retained a distinct sense of social inferiority. While both men
were largely self-taught in mathematics in the early stages, Hamilton had all the
advantages of a university education, direct and personal contact with many
scientists and mathematicians, and access to a vast library of technical books in
any area he wished to pursue. In contrast, Boole had a perpetual struggle against
personal circumstances to complete his higher education, virtually unaided.
There was a contrast too in their personal lives. While both men valued
enormously the joys of family life and seem to have had a genuine love of
children, they suffered different fates as far as love and marriage were
concerned. Hamilton had a series of unhappy love affairs and one in particular
(that with Catherine Disney, later Catherine Barlow) dealt him a blow from
which he never really recovered. “When he eventually married Helen Bayly, she
turned out to be a most unsuitable choice for him because of her chronic ill-
health and a decided clash of temperaments and, while he remained faithful and
devoted to her as long as he lived, he seems to have obtained very little
fulfilment from his marriage. There was a strong undercurrent of depression and
despair in Hamilton’s life and, at one stage, he even contemplated suicide; but
his strong religious feelings prevented him and he diverted his energies into
mathematics in an almost passionate fashion. Boole too seems to have fallen in
and out of love rather easily and, though he had one serious disappointment, he
never seemed to let it get him down. When he did marry Mary Everest, she
appears to have been exactly the sort of wife he needed, giving him a happy
home life, stable family surroundings and even support and understanding for his
creative work.

In the latter half of his life, Hamilton developed a problem with alcohol which
he attributed to the many toasts that needed to be drunk at official dinners but
which in reality was an expression of his despair, stemming from his unhappy
love life. He was at least aware of the problem and made heroic efforts to
conquer it, but he never succeeded and, while alcohol may not have been the
direct cause of his death, it certainly hastened it. Boole, on the other hand, seems
to have been most abstemious in his habits and his taste for alcohol seems to
have been quite limited – if his annual wine and beer bill of £6 is anything to go
by. Both Boole and Hamilton wrote poetry, but from very different points of
view. Hamilton was an incurable romantic who wrote poetry because he felt
compelled to do so by the intensity of his emotions, whereas Boole was a hard-
headed realist who wrote out of a sense of duty to his Maker. Strangely enough,
Hamilton and Boole thus seem to conform almost exactly to the prototype
Irishman and Englishman, beloved of second-rate novelists.
Since both men took religion so seriously, it is quite possible that their very

different outlooks in this area might have made contact between them less likely.
Hamilton was decidedly a High Churchman, a staunch member of the Protestant
Church of Ireland all his life. Admittedly, he did flirt for a short time with
Tractarianism and the Oxford Movement, worried no doubt by the conversion to
Catholicism of his friend the poet Aubrey de Vere, and of John Henry Newman;
but when it came to the crunch, he always returned to observing his traditional
religion ‘by the book’. Boole was a Unitarian and Hamilton was in fact
positively anti-Unitarian. In his religious views, Hamilton was a loyal disciple of
the poet Coleridge and in fact, at one stage, they jointly attempted to dissuade a
potential convert to Unitarianism in the following words: ‘The noiseless sand-
shoal and wrecking shallow of Infra-Gocinianism, yclept most calumniously and
insolently, Unitarianism: as if Tri-unitarianism were not as necessarily Unitarian
as an apple pie must be pie.’ However, it must also be pointed out that Hamilton
was a lifelong friend and correspondent of Augustus de Morgan, another man
with strong Unitarian leanings.
Finally, there are a number of extremely far-fetched suggestions for the lack
of contact between the two men. There is a very remote possibility that Boole
might secretly have supported, at least in theory, the revolutionary Young
Ireland movement, which wanted independence for Ireland, or that Hamilton,
who was a staunch supporter of the Union between England and Ireland, might
have suspected him of so doing. Admittedly, evidence for this claim is rather
thin: in her Collected Works, Mary Boole quotes in full a poem by the Young
Ireland revolutionary leader, Corkman, Thomas Davis – a very strange choice
indeed unless the Booles were familiar with, and perhaps sympathetic towards,
his ideals. Other possibilities are the traditional Dublin-Cork antipathy that
existed (and still exists) within Ireland; the rivalry between Trinity College, the
established University of Dublin, and the new Queen’s Colleges in Belfast,
Galway and Cork; and Hamilton’s friendship with Sir Robert Kane, with whom
Boole had a great deal of conflict.
But all of this is idle speculation and all that can be said is that nobody really
knows the true reasons for the lack of contact between Boole and Hamilton. One
feeling which is little more than a gut reaction is that Hamilton resented Boole
and was perhaps a little jealous of him when he had no need to be. Perhaps he
felt that Boole’s presence in Ireland took some of the limelight away from his
own achievements, or perhaps there was simply a clash of personalities between
the two. Whatever the truth of the matter, we shall see that any blame for the
situation lies firmly on Hamilton’s side.

A mystery which arises in connection with these matters is the following –
why was Boole never elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy? The RIA,
the Irish equivalent of the Royal Society, still flourishes as the most learned
society in Ireland and in the middle of the nineteenth century, its membership
included practically all the men of science in Ireland, with the exception of
Boole. There is no record in the RIA’s minute books that he was ever even
proposed for membership, though possibly the names of rejected candidates may
not have been recorded in the minutes. Yet Boole was elected a Fellow of the
Royal Society (an honour, by the way, not awarded to Hamilton, though perhaps
offered and not accepted) and an honorary member of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society; he had won the Keith Prize offered by the Royal Society
of Edinburgh and the Gold Medal by the Royal Society of London; and he had
been conferred with an Honorary LLD by Trinity College, Dublin, and an
Honorary DCL by the University of Oxford. Membership of the Royal Irish
Academy should have been a formality in the circumstances, yet Boole never
received the honour.
There are two possibilities to be considered, bearing in mind the fact that
Hamilton was President of the RIA from 1837 to 1846 and that until 1865, the
year of his death, he retained a very strong influence among members of the
Council. The first possibility is that Boole’s name was proposed in the usual
manner but was turned down, either because of Hamilton’s influence or some
other unknown reason. The other possibility is that Boole never allowed his
name to go forward for membership in the first place because of some unknown
antipathy towards the RIA or Hamilton. It is impossible to imagine that the
question of Boole’s membership of the Academy did not arise at some stage of
his life in Ireland and the fact that the matter does not appear to have been
mentioned in any account of his life merely adds to the mystery. Incidentally,
during the period 1846–1856, at least four of Boole’s lesser papers were
published in the Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy,
having been communicated to the Editor by his friend Charles Graves.
While the existing correspondence between Boole and Hamilton is scanty, it is
nevertheless very interesting. Boole first seems to have written to Hamilton
around 1843, asking him for an opinion on one of his earlier papers. Then, in
1847, Boole sent Hamilton a work on logic, probably a draft of his book The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, accompanied by the following letter, quoted by
Hamilton’s biographer Robert Graves, as ‘bearing witness to the kindly
relations, entered upon about this time, which subsisted between Boole and
Hamilton’:2

Lincoln, May 24th, 1847: Mr John T. Graves having kindly promised
to examine a Paper of mine on the subject of symbolical logic, and
having further, in reply to a request which I had ventured to make,
informed me that you would undertake to pronounce your opinion on
it also, I cannot, remembering that I have been indebted to you for a
similar kindness before, allow the present opportunity to pass without
offering my personal and very grateful acknowledgment of your
goodness in both these instances. I ought perhaps to state to you, that
the reason of my naming you in my letter to Mr Graves, was not solely
because I set a very high value upon your opinion and was anxious to
obtain it, but because I was led to think, from the tenor of your
researches for some years past, that the subject of my speculations
might independently be of interest to you. Will you accept this apology
for the liberty which I took, and believe me to be, Sir, with great
respect, yours faithfully,
George Boole
Boole’s humility and cap-in-hand attitude as displayed in this letter sound almost
unbearable to twentieth-century ears, but it is clear that he held Hamilton in awe
on both social and mathematical grounds. Hamilton, on the other hand, does not
seem to have taken Boole’s early work on logic very seriously and there is no
record of his having pursued his interest in this area with a view to developing
Boole’s work.
A little earlier, on three separate dates in 1846, Hamilton was present in his
capacity as chairman at meetings of the RIA when Charles Graves read papers of
Boole’s on discontinuous functions and definite multiple integrals. On one of
these occasions, the Proceedings stated: ‘Sir William R. Hamilton made some
observations on Mr Boole’s communication.’ In fact, the paper on which
Hamilton commented was quite a clever little one in which Boole deduces a
theorem of Fourier’s by examining a certain discontinuous function. Along the
way, he exposes a fallacy in the reasoning of certain authors who had claimed
that cos ∞ = 0 = sin ∞.
In 1848, Boole published a short paper entitled Notes on Quaternions in the
London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Hamilton must
have been aware of this, as he monitored all papers on quaternions very carefully
during this period. In addition, Boole had published in 1856, through Charles
Graves, a long paper in the Proceedings of the RIA on the equation of continuity

of an incompressible fluid. In this paper, Boole displayed a surprisingly deep
knowledge of quaternions and their applications, and even went so far as to
correct what he considered was a misapprehension on Graves’ part, finishing
with the following words:
I offer no apology for making these observations. I am sure that your
object, like mine, is the discovery of truth alone. The application of
quaternions to the solution of partial differential equations is a subject
deserving of being thoroughly investigated; partly because of the
analytical interest attaching to the inquiry, and partly because of the
possibility of resolving the function
into two linear factors, seems at first sight to promise material aid in
the solution of a problem of peculiar physical importance. The latter
consideration appears to have been present to your own mind. I have
now stated to you the reasons which have led me to entertain a
different opinion. Believe me to be, my dear Graves, yours very truly,
George Boole
However, it must be admitted that Boole took very little interest in quaternions
as an algebraic system and also showed a surprising lack of interest in
Hamilton’s algebraic theory of complex numbers as ordered pairs.
The mystery of the lack of contact between Boole and Hamilton deepens even
further when one realises that Hamilton was a fairly close acquaintance of Mary
Boole’s uncle, George Everest. As early as 1829, Hamilton had written in a letter
to a friend:
Captain Everest, who has been superintending a great triangulation in
India, and is going out again for that purpose, was in Dublin lately, and
paid me a visit here. He was much delighted with the eight-feet circle,
which he assisted me in putting to some more severe tests than I had
myself done before. The little repeating circle did not please him
equally on examination, since he found, what I also had remarked, that
the altitude screws communicate a motion in azimuth.
Everest valued Hamilton’s opinion so highly that he sent him the manuscript of
his paper On the Measurement of the Great Meridional Arc of India for an

impartial review before publication. He referred to their ‘private friendship’ and
to the ‘mutual esteem’ they bore each other. Actually Hamilton declared himself
unfit to review the paper and passed it on to Airy.
Much later, in 1844, when Everest returned from India, he attended the annual
meeting of the British Association in York, which Hamilton was prevented from
attending by illness. Everest at once wrote:3
As upwards of fourteen years had elapsed since I had the pleasure of
seeing you, I went to the British Association at York in the hope of
reviving old acquaintance and old recollections, and was greatly
disappointed at not meeting you there. You were one of the few who
seemed to me to take an interest in my operations … I am proud to
believe that the execution is of a high order and calculated to entitle
my labours to the applause of all who can appreciate the merits of the
work, amongst whom you will always be found second to none.
Accept the assurance of my highest esteem, and believe me to be
very sincerely yours,
Geo. Everest
Hamilton must have known that Mary Boole was Everest’s favourite niece, yet
there is no record that he made any attempt to contact her during the ten years
she spent in Ireland.
Hamilton and Boole both attended the Annual Conference of the British
Association at Cambridge in 1845, but it seems that Boole refused to allow
Graves to introduce him to Hamilton because he felt unworthy of the honour.
Later on, he was to regret his action because a testimonial from Hamilton would
have carried great weight in the appointment of a Professor in Cork, but Boole
felt he was in no position to ask for one. Of course the two men had a close
mutual friend, Augustus de Morgan, who continually attempted to interest
Hamilton more in Boole’s work, but Hamilton failed to rise to the bait. On 29
September 1852, de Morgan wrote to Hamilton:
Please send me name and address of your printer. My publisher will,
perhaps, have to ask him for an estimate for a work – not of mine. It is,
in fact, Boole who is meditating typography on his mathematical logic,
which is a very original thing, and, for power of thought, worthy to be
printed by the printer of the Quaternions. As he has Hibernicised

himself, it is fit that he should have an Irish printer, and I rather
suspect that the Dublin man prints more cheaply than the London ones.
Hamilton’s reply shows that he met Boole in the flesh on at least two occasions:
It may be a foolish shyness, but although I am much better acquainted
with Boole than with you, as far as talk goes, for he took tea with me
at my temporary rooms in Christ Church, Oxford, in 1847, along with
Adams and (I think) Wm. Thomson, and has since met me (or I him) at
a grand dinner of doctors in Dublin, whereas I think that I have only
met you once in my life; yet still, the habit of correspondence makes
so great a difference in the feeling of freedom, that I should on the
whole prefer your merely sending him the enclosed slip, to your letting
him see this note, however little private in any important sense it can
be.
Here Hamilton shows a curious reluctance to have any direct contact with Boole.
The ‘grand dinner of doctors in Dublin’ referred to is probably the dinner which
took place when Boole was awarded an honorary LLD by Trinity College in
1852. De Morgan replied: ‘I shall forward the printer’s name to Boole. I shall be
very glad to see his work out for he has, I think, got hold of the true connexion
between algebra and logic.’ But again Hamilton did not comment.
In 1854 and 1857, the following extracts occur in letters from de Morgan to
Hamilton:
Of mathematics I have learned nothing – only taught – except reading
some of Boole’s book … All metaphysicians – except you and I and
Boole – consider mathematics as four books of Euclid, and algebra up
to quadratick equations …
But neither comment drew any response from Hamilton. However, when
Hamilton published his great book Lectures on Quaternions in 1853, he
mentions Boole in the Preface as one of his scientific contemporaries in the
British Isles who had taken an interest in his work. Boole must have felt that
Hamilton was at least aware of his existence now, so he sent him a copy of his
magnum opus, The Laws of Thought, in 1854. In 1855, Boole was contemplating
marriage and in need of a little extra money, so he decided to apply for a
position as an examiner. He felt confident that Hamilton would supply him with
a testimonial so he wrote in these words:

Dear Sir, I have decided on offering myself as a candidate for an
examinership in Mathematics under the commissioners for the affairs
of India and on signifying my wish to the secretary of the board have
been called upon to make a statement of my qualifications.
I feel that I can only do this by asking some of those who are
qualified to pronounce a judgement of mathematical attainments to
make a statement of my qualifications. Shall I take too great a liberty if
I ask you to state in the form of a testimonial, or in any other way
which you may prefer, your estimate of my attainments? There is
something to my mind extremely painful, not in having to ask a favor,
but in having to request another to say what he thinks of my abilities –
but it is a necessity in cases of this kind and more especially to those
like myself who are unable to look back upon any career of academic
distinction.
I forwarded to you some time back a copy of my recent book which
I hope you received. With much respect, I remain, dear Sir, yours
truly,
George Boole
One wonders why Boole wrote this letter in the first place. There were many
other mathematicians, admittedly not quite as eminent as Hamilton, who would
have been delighted to oblige him and, in fact, any of his 1846 testimonials from
de Morgan, Kelland, Graves, Cayley, Ellis or Thomson would have been quite
adequate. Perhaps Boole was acting as agent provocateur in order to find out
what Hamilton really thought of him. Hamilton’s reply was rather cruel, though
it was couched in diplomatic language:
My dear Sir, I assure you that my estimate of your general and
especially of your mathematical abilities and attainments is a very high
one and request you not to suppose the contrary in consequence of my
not having answered your letter by return of post.
As Professor Charles Graves has paid more special attention than I
have done to some of your important mathematical publications on the
Calculus of Operations, etc. and I know that he early took an interest
in your speculations respecting the mathematical analysis of logic, I
had wished to converse with him a little on the subject, hoping that I
might thus be enabled to write with more freshness, if not with more
confidence in your favour. But the weather has been very severe here

lately, and since I dined and passed an evening in his company at the
College and Academy a fortnight ago, I have scarcely at all been out of
this house, in which I have been much engaged for some investigations
of my own.
I consider you to be a very learned and a very original
mathematician but do not know whether this slight and comparatively
informal testimony can be of any use. Indeed I would ask you to
regard this hasty note as solely addressed to yourself, were it not that
you may consider it important not to delay in sending forward any
expression of opinion respecting your claims and therefore will not
hamper you by making any request in the matter.
I duly received your Laws of Thought and thought it an able work. It
certainly was my intention to send you a present of my own volume on
the quaternions. If this has not been done by my publishers, please to
inform me and I will endeavour to remedy this omission. I also wish
the Queen’s College at Cork to accept a copy for their library.
You will see that I did not intend this letter to be other than private,
but if time presses, you may show or send it. I am, my dear Sir, very
sincerely and respectfully yours,
William Rowan Hamilton
Boole must have been intensely hurt by this letter which amounted to little more
than a snub from Hamilton. It seems that Hamilton did not have the courtesy to
acknowledge Boole’s gift of The Laws of Thought and his safe description of it
as ‘an able work’ indicates that he probably never even read the book. It is also
unlikely that he ever intended to send a copy of his book on quaternions to
Boole, as his attempt to put the blame on his publishers shows. One suspects that
Hamilton was simply embarrassed by the whole affair and treated Boole as he
would have treated a down-and-out who might have written him a begging letter.
Instead of treating this reply with the lack of response it so richly deserved,
Boole, like an idiot, wrote an embarrassingly placatory reply, thereby displaying
his acute inferiority complex once again and probably making the whole position
worse.
Dear Sir, I have just received your letter and am extremely obliged to
you for what you say. I think I can quite understand the feelings under
which it was written. You would desire to do what is just. You would
not wish to speak of me in any less positive way than a full

acquaintance with my writings would entitle you to do. You state what
your impressions are and I am very glad to think that you entertain
such impressions of me, but you would wish to be able to speak from
more than general impressions, while at the same time the field of
analysis is so wide that our tracks of investigation have widely
diverged. So natural and so just is this feeling that I cannot but respect
it and I write at once to say in the most sincere manner that if upon
further consideration you feel that you are not in a position to speak of
me in a way satisfactory to your own feelings, I not only shall not feel
that I have any right to complain but shall appreciate and admire the
motives of your conduct. Let me beg of you to feel quite at liberty to
do what you think you can with the safest conscience do and to be
assured that I shall never for one moment question the uprightness of
your motives or feel a shadow of a doubt of your good feeling towards
me.
The truth of the matter is that it would have cost Hamilton nothing whatsoever to
have sent Boole a glowing testimony for the work he had done in areas with
which Hamilton was quite familiar – the calculus of operators, differential
equations, integration and the calculus of variations. But for reasons best known
to himself, he chose not to. Boole, by the way, did not get the Indian
examinership and one wonders if he persisted with his application following on
Hamilton’s demoralising reply.
This seems to have been the last recorded contact between the two men,
formal or informal, except perhaps that their paths may have crossed in 1857
when the British Association Meeting was again held in Dublin. However, when
Boole died suddenly and prematurely at the end of 1864, Hamilton was goaded
into action by Augustus de Morgan, who wrote two letters in quick succession to
Hamilton:
December 13th, 1864: There will be no need to tell you that you must
be aiding and assisting in getting a pension for Boole’s wife and
daughters. An application will be made and must be well-backed …
As soon as I get materials from Cork, I intend to draw up something
which I will send you for revision.
December 30th, 1864: It is decided to present a memorial from Cork
College. This is to be backed by testimonies from men of science in
separate letters – testimonies to Boole’s eminence and success. The

letters are to be addressed and forwarded to Dr Ryall, Vice-President
of Queen’s College, Cork. Pray write at once. I think there is fair hope
of success …
Hamilton it seems did send a cheque, possibly out of guilt; but on 3 February
1865, de Morgan again wrote:
Before I did the like [writing a cheque] I wrote to Dr Ryall,
misdoubting that the subscription plan had the sanction of the
relatives. A letter from him crossed mine, repudiating the scheme
altogether and as you may see by a letter in The Times of today the
thing is to be dropped. Accordingly I have crossed your cheque to
Nogo and Co. and return it. Such a thing may be wanted yet, if the
application to Government be unsuccessful; but Mrs Boole is not yet
in want and has good hope of the application to Lord Palmerston. In
the meantime they will all feel your kindness very warmly.
Mrs Boole did get her pension and ironically, within a year, Hamilton too was
dead. The mystery of his lack of contact with Boole still remains.

G
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Religion
eorge Boole was an intensely religious man, but it is a very complex matter
to decide what precisely his religious beliefs were and what form his
religious observance took. What little we know about this aspect of his life was
written by his wife and published in the University Magazine of 1878. Mary
Boole became decidedly eccentric in later life and her writings must always be
taken with a little grain of salt, but her article Home Side of a Scientific Mind
was written soon after her husband’s death as her contribution to a proposed
biography which for various reasons was never actually completed.
Boole’s early religious upbringing was a very orthodox one. He was baptised,
like the majority of Englishmen at the time, in the Church of England and his
childhood religious observance included attendance at church services and
Sunday school and frequent reading of the Bible. He took religion so seriously
that at one stage he even contemplated becoming a clergyman of the Church of
England, but at least two factors prevented him from doing so. The first was a
lack of money and the fact that he had assumed responsibility for the support of
his parents and family from an early age. The second factor was that, even in his
early youth, he developed conscientious objections against the signing of the
Thirty Nine Articles.
Boole then began to look around for an alternative to the religion of his
childhood. Up to this time, he had been convinced of the truth of the Bible as a
whole, but now doubts began to assail him. He began to wonder why in the Old
Testament and Hebrew literature God was always referred to as the great All’ or
‘Unity’. With the help of a learned Jewish friend, a teacher of Hebrew in
Lincoln, he began to formulate independent religious views of his own. His wife
claims that he obtained a ‘flash of psychological insight into the conditions
under which the mind most readily accumulates knowledge’. The implication of
this, again according to Mary Boole, was that ‘man’s mind works by means of
some mechanism which functions normally towards Monism.’
Boole next asked himself the question ‘what instinct in man, what fact in
human psychology, has given rise to the tendency to think of God as a Trinity?’

Rather unconvincingly, he saw the Trinitarian tendency merely as an expression
of the fact that man perceives the physical world in three dimensions. His sonnet
To the Number Three (quoted in Chapter 12) gives a clue to his view on this
matter. In the circumstances, it was inevitable that he should reject Trinitarian
Christianity in any form and perhaps he even felt tempted to convert to the
Jewish faith. However, his strong Christian background and social pressures
prevented him from doing so and he became a Unitarian. This description of his
religious sect, however, is merely a convenient label and it would be more
accurate to describe him as a ‘free-thinking Unitarian with a strong leaning
towards Judaism’.
Boole spent a great deal of time and effort attempting to reconcile various
religious views. He used to say that if the doctrine of the Trinity were in any
sense true, it must be in this sense: not that there are three persons in the
Godhead, but that man is so constituted as to be capable of comprehending three,
and only three, modes of manifestation of God. Strangely enough, Boole had a
horror of actually committing himself to any specific set of doctrines and
frequently used the word ‘idolatry’ to refer to attachment to any particular
doctrine. Referring to his religious activities while they lived in Cork, his wife
wrote:
He occasionally attended a Unitarian place of worship, and sometimes
he talked of formally joining the Unitarian congregation in the town;
but to this there were several objections. Such a step would have been
taken as meaning that he held distinctively Unitarian opinions about
the divinity of Christ; whereas precisely what he wanted to say was
that he had no opinions about the matter at all. Then he disagreed with
the Unitarians whom he knew on some very important points.
The Unitarian community in Cork during the period 1849–1864 was hardly a
thriving one, but it did exist and was active. However, its records contain no
mention of Boole’s name, so his involvement must have been minimal and
perhaps anonymous.
Another incident related by Mary Boole indicates that Boole had no firm
belief in the divinity of Christ.
One of our children looked up from her book one day and suddenly
asked us ‘What is Jesus, besides being a man?’ I had a morbid fear of
the question because it had been preventing friendships and doing
harm in every direction all round my life. I wanted if I could to save

the little creature from singeing her innocent wings on that flame; so I
tried to explain to her that nobody knows, and that she was not likely
to find out in this world; but that, as it was a thing people seemed very
anxious to settle, perhaps the finding out was what was reserved for us
in the next. My husband exclaimed, as if in a rapture, ‘That’s the
answer’.
It is impossible to separate Boole’s religious beliefs from his mathematics. The
title of his great work The Laws of Thought was an inspired one and a careful
reading of the first and last chapters of that book reveal that Boole’s aims in
writing it were not strictly mathematical. In Chapter 1, which he entitles Nature
and Design of this Work, he opens with the following statement:
The design of the following treatise is to investigate the fundamental
laws of those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed;
to give expression to them in the symbolical language of a Calculus,
and upon this foundation to establish the science of Logic and
construct its method; to make that method itself the basis of a general
method for the application of the mathematical doctrine of
Probabilities; and, finally, to collect from these inquiries some
probable intimations concerning the nature and constitution of the
human mind.
The final chapter is entitled On the Nature of Science, and the Constitution of the
Intellect, wherein Boole looks at the implications of his work in philosophy and
religion. Of particular interest is his claim that there is a scientific connection
between the conceptions of unity in number and the universe in logic. He goes
on to point out that from the time of the ancient Greeks right up to the time of
Newton and Bacon, the terms ‘universe’ and ‘The One’ seem to have been
regarded as almost identical. He interprets the first aim of classical philosophy as
‘to assign the nature of that unity of which all existence was thought to be a
manifestation’. Finally, there is the quote from Xenophanes, who ‘surveying the
expanse of heaven, declared that the One was God’. This is clearly what Boole
was leading up to, though he is careful enough not to let the words come from
his own mouth.
He then goes on to point out an ‘equally intimate alliance’ between his
fundamental equation x2 = x, expressed in the form x(1-x) = 0, and ‘those forms
of philosophical speculation which are known under the name of dualism’. As
examples from life he cites, with Pythagoras, right and left, even and odd, rest

and motion, light and darkness, good and evil. Mary Boole seems to have been
quite justified when she claimed:
The hope in his heart had been to work in the cause of true religion.
Mathematics had never been more than a secondary interest for him;
and even logic he cared for chiefly as a means of clearing the ground
of doctrines imagined to be proved, by showing that the evidence on
which they were supposed to rest had no tendency to prove them. But
he had been endeavouring to give a more active and positive help than
this to the cause of pure religion.
However, Boole was reluctant to put together a book in which he would apply
his principles to the analysis of pure religion, though he yearned to do so. It
seems that he would have liked to take the statements of the Bible, consider
them in the abstract as statements in logic and use whenever possible his ‘laws
of thought’ to derive their logical conclusion. This ambitious notion would have
resulted in a sort of axiomatisation of religion, in that if one accepted certain
premises and the laws of logic, then one would be forced to accept certain
conclusions. On the surface, this scheme seems to have a lot to recommend it,
but would seem to conflict with many purely religious concepts such as faith,
divine inspiration, revelation, mystery and infallibility. It was perhaps a good
thing for Boole’s mathematical reputation that he never published such a book.
His papers contain many attempts of a crude nature but, after his death, de
Morgan wisely decided that to publish such efforts would be a disservice to
Boole and that his reputation had better stand or fall on works such as The Laws
of Thought.
The following are typical extracts from one of Boole’s notebooks where he
wrote on religion from the point of view of logic. It must be remembered that
these are merely rough jottings, which at times are extremely difficult to
decipher and certainly not intended for publication in this form; nevertheless,
they convey something of the mental agony which the interaction of religion and
logic must have caused him.1
THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS
The design of the argument developed in this chapter is to show that
Christ is a priest and to compare in certain particulars his priesthood
with that of Aaron. Exhibited in its logical form, the reasoning is this.

He is a priest who is called by God to this office and does not
appoint himself: V4;
Christ was called by God to be a priest after the order of
Melchisedek and did not appoint himself (glorify himself): V5, 6;
Christ offered supplication and through suffering learned obedience
(and thus was made perfect): V7, 8;
Christ being made perfect and being a high priest after the order of
Melchisedek became the author of eternal salvation to those who obey
him: V9, 10.
This is all very well and might simply be the writing of someone attempting to
understand the meaning of a piece of scripture, but further on, we have the
following:
OLD TESTAMENT
1. All actions shall be blessed in Abraham (A).
2. Everyone under the law who transgresseth in anything is cursed (B).
3. The just shall live by faith (C).
4. Everyone who hangeth upon a tree is saved (D).
FACTS
1. Abraham’s faith was counted for righteousness (E).
2. Christ hung upon a tree for us (F).
PAUL’S PRINCIPLES
1. They of faith are Abraham’s sons (G).
2. They under the law transgress in something (H).
3. The law is not of faith (I).
4. If Christ became a curse for us he delivered us from the curse of the law (J).
5. Men are either under the law or under faith (K).
TRAINS OF ARGUMENT
1st DFJBH prove that we are not under the law. Call this L. K,L,G
prove that we are Abraham’s sons.

With A from O.T., we must associate ‘They who are of faith are
blessed with faithful Abraham’. This is equivalent to ‘They who are of
faith receive Abraham’s blessing’ – call this A1.
To E, add ‘Justification was Abraham’s blessing’ – E1.
A1 and E1 give ‘They who are of faith receive justification’ – C1.
C and C1 now give ‘They who are of faith = they who are justified’.
One of the greatest difficulties in human affairs is that when people attempt, in
good faith, to argue logically, even from the same premises, they often come to
different, even contradictory, conclusions. This is not due to any malice on their
part but rather because all but very exceptional human minds soon lose track of
hypotheses, conclusions, contradictions, and of what has been established and
what has not. For example, there is very little room for disagreement in the
classical argument: ‘All men are mortal, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is
mortal’. But consider the following argument due to Lewis Carroll, the author of
Alice in Wonderland. Carroll’s real name was C.L. Dodgson, an Oxford
mathematician and follower of Boole. The hypotheses are as follows:2
1. The only animals in this house are cats;
2. Every animal is suitable for a pet, that loves to gaze at the moon;
3. When I detest an animal, I avoid it;
4. No animals are carnivorous, unless they prowl at night;
5. No cat fails to kill mice;
6. No animals ever take to me, except what are in this house;
7. Kangaroos are not suitable for pets;
8. None but Carnivora kill mice;
9. I detest animals that do not take to me;
10. Animals, that prowl at night, always love to gaze at the moon.
There are very few minds who could see, either at once or even after some
thought, that the logical conclusion of these statements is that ‘I avoid
kangaroos’! Yet when the statements are translated into the language of Boolean
algebra, the conclusion follows rather obviously with very little work.
Another common source of disagreement in everyday arguments about
religion and politics is that the participants are in fact arguing from different
premises. Boole’s method of analysis has the advantage of forcing the

participants to state clearly their assumptions at the outset so that, in theory, the
argument should either not take place at all or degenerate into a philosophical
discussion about the validity of the assumptions.
In the second half of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth,
Boole’s main claim to fame rested on the mathematical implications of his work
in logic and his emphasis on the workings of the human mind were mostly
ignored or regarded as a slightly embarrassing appendage or perhaps even the
ramblings of an eccentric. Modern commentators, however, may be forced to
examine Boole’s less popular ideas a little more closely. We now have computer
simulation of speech, artificial intelligence, cybernetics, information retrieval
and a host of other new disciplines, all of which to a greater or lesser extent use
the type of ideas which Boole was daring enough to conceive. One can just
imagine the great delight with which Boole would have greeted present-day
models of the human nervous system, portraying it as an electronic network
whose components obey his ‘laws of thought’.
It is interesting to observe that in The Laws of Thought when Boole quoted
concrete examples to illustrate his claims, he picked rather neutral classes such
as ‘sheep’, ‘white things’, ‘estuaries’ and ‘Gauls’, wisely avoiding any mention
of religion or religious classes. However, he devotes a chapter of the book to a
very careful analysis in his own notation of the arguments of Clarke and Spinoza
which attempted to establish the existence of God. He comments: ‘It is not
possible I think to rise from the perusal of the arguments of Clarke and Spinoza
without a deep conviction of the futility of all endeavours to establish a priori
the existence of an Infinite being, His attributes and His relation to the
Universe.’
To those who regard Boole’s frequent diversions into religion and mysticism
as mere distractions from his discoveries in mathematics, several answers can be
made if one looks back into the origins of the subject. The followers of
Pythagoras regarded the number 1 as the generator or source from which all
other numbers spring, a concept shared by Peano and contemporary group
theorists who regard 1 as a generator of the infinite cyclic group (Z, +). In the
Bible, the number 1 is regarded as a symbol of God the Creator. Boole
interpreted 1 as a symbol denoting the universal class and if seeing the
connection between numbers and classes even partially stemmed from his deep
interest in religion, which seems to have been the case, then modern
mathematicians have reason to be thankful that Boole was a deeply religious
man.

Leaving logic and mathematics aside for the moment, it is a dauntingly
difficult task to trace the development of Boole’s personal religious beliefs
which seem to have had such a profound influence on his life and work.
We have seen that after he changed his mind about becoming a clergyman of the
Church of England, he drifted towards Unitarianism and, if his wife is to be
believed, even a little towards Judaism. While crossing a field one afternoon
when he was about seventeen, he experienced an intense feeling which he felt
was a religious revelation concerning his function in life. He interpreted it to
mean that he had been called to ‘justify the ways of God to Man’ through his
work on logic, philosophy and mathematics. This thought lay dormant in his
mind for many years but it was to be a subconscious motivating factor in much

of his later work. He gave some religious instruction in his schools but
presumably, this was of a non-controversial type of bible study in order that
parents’ wishes for their children’s education might be satisfied.
In his Plea for Freedom, delivered some time later to the members of the
Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute, it might seem that Boole was displaying
ultraliberal views on Christianity. But it is more likely that he was simply trying
to ensure that Unitarianism would be given a fair crack of the whip in the
Institute:
I dislike Puseyism but I would permit it to speak for itself in Newman
on Development. I am not a Unitarian but I would make room for the
mild and eloquent Channing. I have no moral sympathies with what is
called High Calvinism but would find a place for the unrivalled
dissertations of Jonathan Edwards …
When Boole claims that he was not a Unitarian, he can only be saying that he
never belonged to a formal Unitarian congregation because there is no doubt that
it was in this area of the Christian spectrum that his sympathies and beliefs lay.
Boole’s marriage to the daughter of a clergyman of the Church of England
made his religious position even more difficult. All of their five daughters were
baptised in the Anglican Church in Ireland and for social reasons, he went
through the motions of public worship in that Church, but from time to time, he
attended the churches of virtually every denomination available in Cork, with the
exception of the Roman Catholic of course. When he went to stay with the
Everest family in the period 1852–1855, Boole would presumably have
expressed orthodox Anglican beliefs when wooing the daughter of a clergyman.
However, he hated religious hypocrisy and had great difficulty in concealing his
feelings. His wife wrote:
When I knew him first, he would (when too ill to bear the whole
length of the service) rather not go to church on the Sacrament Sunday
than have to leave before the Communion. Of late years he never
received the sacrament at all. He said that it had originally been
intended as a bond of brotherhood and was now taken as an expression
of belief in certain doctrines, that whether the doctrines were true or
false, this was a perverted use of the rite; and he would have nothing to
do with it … He always seemed to think that belief in dogmas, rather
than in relationships between men, the crying sin of the age … Prayer
and labour, he often used to say, are the salvation of mankind … His

whole theology, so far as it concerned the relation of the individual
man with God, had regard to this life. We might be sure, he said, that
all which is good will be perpetuated in some shape or other. Whether
individuals will live to see it or not, he believed no man knew; and he
for his part, had no desire to know. The immortality he cared for was
not endless existence, but the conviction that while he lived his mind
would be in contact with truths that are eternal.
Some idea of the complexity of Boole’s religious beliefs can be gleaned from the
diversity of those religious thinkers who are known to have had an influence on
him. The list includes Renan, Francis Newman, Gratry, Bishop Colenso and
Frederick Maurice. Evidence for the influence of these men is of course indirect,
coming mostly from his wife’s writings, because Boole was reluctant to write
about his religious beliefs. However, short outlines of their lives and thoughts
show that their outlooks were quite consistent with what is known of Boole’s
religious beliefs from other sources.
Ernest Renan (1823–1892) was a French philosopher and religious thinker.3
Educated for the Catholic priesthood, he rebelled against what he considered its
oppressive intellectual atmosphere and left the Church. He devoted himself to
independent religious research, concentrating on the influence of the Jewish
people on the origins of Christianity. Influenced by the writings of the French
philosopher-mathematician Pascal, he retained a quasi-Christian faith in the
‘hidden God’ though, like Boole, he had serious doubts about the divinity of
Christ. He was suspended from the Chair of Hebrew at the College de France for
referring to Christ merely as ‘an incomparable man’. At one point, Boole told his
wife (who had introduced him to Renan’s works in the first place) that of all
living men, the one for whom he had the most reverence was Renan. However,
Renan fell from grace somewhat when he published Vie de Jésus in 1863.4 The
book caused a storm of religious controversy because of its attitude to Christ; but
it caused great trouble and distress to Boole for a very different reason. He was
quite shocked that Renan should have professed definite beliefs and opinions
about Christ at all because he regarded such definite expressions of belief as
‘idolatry’. Boole had earlier been profoundly influenced by Renan’s Life of Job
and his other writings, but after Vie de Jésus he experienced a crisis of
conscience and consequent great sorrow.
Francis Newman (1805–1897) was a non-conformist, an amateur
mathematician and a brother of John Henry Newman, the Cardinal who was the
first rector of the Catholic University of Ireland.5 Early in life however, the

religious opinions of the brothers diverged and Francis moved towards
Rationalism, influenced by Pusey. In 1830, he resigned his fellowship at Balliol,
being unable to take his MA because of his unwillingness to subscribe to the
Articles. He flirted with the Baptists, espoused Christian unity and pleaded, like
Boole, that theological questions should be left open. In 1876, long after Boole’s
death, he formally became a Unitarian. He published some mathematics and
logic, but his main academic contributions were in the field of Latin translations.
It was written of him: ‘The working of his mind, which had gradually led him to
the rejection of historical Christianity, left his theistic attitude unshaken, though
of immortality he could not speak with certain voice.’ He was considered an
eccentric in his day because he warmly supported women’s suffrage and
vegetarianism, and strongly opposed vaccination and vivisection.
Boole and Francis Newman had a great deal in common. They corresponded
by letter and eventually they met: Mary Boole wrote:
I longed that someone besides myself should know something about
George. There was only one person in England whom he thoroughly
liked the idea of becoming personally acquainted with – Professor
Francis Newman. He did not exactly agree with all Mr Newman said,
but he had intense sympathy with his way of feeling and seemed to
think it would be possible to come to an understanding with him; only
with his usual modesty he doubted whether Mr Newman might care to
know him. I succeeded in overcoming this difficulty and he wrote to
propose an interview. The letter received, as I expected, a most cordial
reply. On his next visit to England he called on Mr Newman, who
afterwards spoke of the interview, in a letter to me, as ‘a vision which
had been shown’ to him.
John William Colenso (1814–1883), Bishop of Natal, was greatly admired by
Boole.6 He had been second wrangler at Cambridge, a mathematical tutor at
Harrow School and had written very good school texts on Algebra (1841) and
Arithmetic (1843). He was an extremely controversial and original theologian
and, while in Africa, had published numerous sermons and commentaries which
were regarded by the Church of England as ‘bristling from end to end with
heresy’. He rejected the sacramental system and all theories of partial
satisfaction of sin and evil, and soon found himself in open conflict with the
Church authorities. Even though he was virtually alone in his opinions, he stuck
steadfastly to them throughout his life and never wavered, despite the social,
religious and even legal pressure brought to bear on him.

Colenso had already had connections with the Everest family. Mary Boole
wrote of her uncle, George Everest:
He helped and befriended Bishop Colenso and everyone else whom he
heard of as trying to reform or broaden the Church of England or any
other Church; but he never allowed his name to be publicly connected
with any movement of reform, because he would not allow himself to
be supposed to belong to any party in particular. ‘I don’t believe in
Colenso’s view more than anyone else’s,’ he said; ‘I back up whoever
is attacked, because I can’t bear to see a man illused.’
There was something about the stance that Colenso had taken which appealed
enormously to Boole. He was greatly angered by ‘common-place and easy going
clergymen’ who criticised Colenso from their safe doctrinal positions. Boole
regarded with reverence avowed heretics of all shades of opinion because they
had bravely plunged into the mêlée from which he had been protected by
circumstances. He said he could feel for the loneliness of a supposed heretic or
unbeliever who was insulted because of his beliefs; Colenso’s position seemed
to be a perfect example of this situation. Boole had met with Colenso in London
and had heard much of his struggles and difficulties. Together they came to the
realisation that the way forward lay in the setting up of a ‘National Church’ and
that this could best be accomplished by ‘making a wedge of one’s body and
soul’. They believed that to do this might be as useful as going to the stake in
defence of, or in protest against, any particular doctrine. One of Boole’s
favourite religious readings was Colenso’s famous sermon on the sacrifice of
Abraham – a perfect example of unwavering belief in the correctness of one’s
own opinions, which some people call faith.
August Gratry (1805–1872) was a French theologian and philosopher and an
Oratorian priest, who at first sight would seem to have little in common with
Boole.7 However, he was a mystic at heart and even something of a rebel within
the Church. Boole was greatly influenced and impressed by his book Logique,
published in 1855. Gratry’s thought has been described as ‘more poetic than
precise, more prayerful than profound’ and even during his lifetime, he was
criticised on the grounds that he assigned an excessive role to emotion and to
‘heart’ in the discovery of truth. In seeking knowledge of God, for example, he
appealed to a ‘sense of the infinite’ which he claimed was superior to man’s
intellect. In the fields of politics and morals, he professed an unorthodox form of
Catholicism, based on movement towards indefinite evolution and the
experience of history, and he was possibly a forerunner of Chardin.

It was perhaps this latter aspect of Gratry’s approach that appealed most to
Boole; but it is also likely that Boole saw Gratry’s mystical and religious attitude
towards logic and philosophy as a perfect complement to his own precise and
mathematical treatment of these subjects. Whatever the truth of the matter,
Boole was deeply interested in Gratry’s book which appeared so soon after his
own major work on logic. Mary Boole wrote:
One of my pleasantest recollections of Mr Boole himself is his
studying with almost rapturous delight the pages of the Oratorian
Father, who had stated with masterly and exhaustive completeness the
fundamental principle which he himself had been vainly endeavouring
to express.
While Boole’s major work on logic was already completed before he came into
contact with Gratry’s work, there is little doubt that both men worked in the
same metaphysical framework. The final chapter of The Laws of Thought
contains many attitudes and doctrines very close to those of Gratry. Among
these might be mentioned the following: the idea of the intuitive source of the
fundamental laws of thought, the absolute importance of the concepts of unity
and zero in all thought processes, and the transcendental nature of the human
mind which causes it to be directed by supernatural powers to seek and find
knowledge of nature and its own constitution.
Gratry seems to have known nothing of Boole’s Mathematical Analysis of
Logic (1847), though he does quote from the works of the logician Sir William
Hamilton. Gratry was fascinated by the occurrence of ‘inductive logic’ in the
history of mathematics. Inductive logic he defines as that process of reason
which does not deduce, but induces, and springs forward; by studying this
seemingly imprecise notion, Gratry hoped to explain and perhaps even
understand fully those rare moments of insight experienced by great thinkers, as
a result of which huge strides of progress were made, especially in science. He
compares such moments to those of prayer and poetic creation, and he uses as
examples the mathematical discoveries of many mathematicians, who
coincidentally played a significant part in Boole’s development, namely Newton,
Leibniz and Laplace.
Gratry’s book contributes little or nothing to the mathematical theory of logic
because he merely discusses the classical moods of the syllogism, but, like
Boole, he does attempt to apply these principles to analysing verses from the
New Testament. However, when Gratry writes of mathematics and its history, he

speaks with great authority and competence, quite unlike some philosophers who
comment on mathematics, and some of the insights he uncovers are quite
profound. Even a quick perusal of Gratry’s Logique shows that it is precisely the
sort of book that would have appealed enormously to Boole, both from a
mathematical and philosophical point of view.
While Renan, Newman, Colenso and Gratry had a great influence on Boole’s
religious and philosophical thought, his religious behaviour was most strongly
influenced by Frederick Denison Maurice (1805–1872).8 Maurice had an
extraordinarily chequered career in religion. His father had intended to become a
dissenting minister but became a Unitarian before graduating from college,
thereby sacrificing the prospects of an estate rather than abandon his principles.
Frederick Maurice grew up in a family split by religious controversy, so that he
acquired a profound desire for religious unity, believing that ‘a society founded
upon opinions had no real cohesion’. He was educated by his father in strongly
puritan principles and it was intended that he should enter the ministry; but by
the age of sixteen, he had rejected formal Unitarianism and was disillusioned
with dissenters generally. He read law at Cambridge and London, but refused his
degree because he felt unable to make the necessary doctrinal subscriptions,
saying that he would not hang a bribe round his neck to lead his conscience.
After an abortive career in political commentary and literature, he finally
resolved to take Orders, entering Oxford in 1830. Maurice remained unmoved
and untouched by the Oxford Movement; he was baptised as a member of the
Church of England in 1831 and subsequently ordained to the Ministry in 1834.
He was almost elected to the Chair of Political Economy at Oxford, but J.H.
Newman and Pusey, having first supported him, afterwards decided that they
had misinterpreted his theological position and suddenly withdrew their support.
Later on however, he became Professor of English Literature and History at
King’s College, London, and in 1848, he founded Queen’s College, London.
In 1837 he published a controversial book called The Kingdom of Christ,
which was bitterly attacked by the religious establishment and he was deeply
hurt by the opposition it provoked. He longed for ‘catholicity’ and church unity,
and the revolutionary movements of 1848 set him thinking about how organised
religion might be reconstructed. He agreed with the revolutionaries that
sweeping changes were needed, but he firmly believed that the substitution of
genuine Christian principles for secularist doctrines supplied the only sound
foundation for the reconstruction of society. Accordingly, he became the
spiritual leader of the ‘Christian Socialists’ as the sect came to be called.
However, he constantly protested against being identified with any party or

collection of dogmatic beliefs because he felt that his ‘National Church’
represented the essence of Christian unity and rested on spiritual facts rather than
intellectual acceptance of definite opinions. Maurice was a friend and supporter
of Colenso, though they drifted apart because of the extreme views which
Colenso expressed in his book on the Pentateuch in 1862.
By all accounts, Frederick Maurice was a gentle, courteous and sensitive man.
Charles Kingsley was moved to describe him as ‘the most beautiful human soul,
the most saint-like, even the most Christ-like, individual’ he had ever met.
Maurice was a mystic, with a truly catholic interest in all religious beliefs, and as
a result he wasted a lot of effort in trying to reconcile contradictory religious
doctrines. He was an incurable optimist in human affairs, a believer in grand
schemes and an enthusiastic controversialist. To his opponents he was little less
than a heretic, but by his followers he was regarded as a revered prophet.
Boole’s religious position seems to have been so close to that of Maurice on
all issues, with one major exception, that it is worth examining what precisely
Maurice’s position was. Fortunately, in 1849, Maurice was involved in a minor
controversy on the nature of eternal life and eternal death, and he summed up his
position in a series of propositions which he uncharacteristically committed to
paper. The propositions read like an illustration in a textbook on logic and this
would certainly have appealed to Boole, though it is unlikely that he would have
approved of such a public expression of definite beliefs in the first place.
Maurice’s propositions were these:9
My duty then I feel is this:
1. To assert that which I know, that which God has revealed, His absolute
universal love in all possible ways, and without any limitation.
2. To tell myself and all men, that to know this love and to be moulded by it is
the blessing we are to seek.
3. To say that this is eternal life.
4. To say that the want of it is death.
5. To say that if they believe in the Son of God they have eternal life.
6. To say that if they have not the Son of God, they have not life.
7. Not to say who has the Son of God, because I do not know.
8. Not to say how long anyone may remain in eternal death, because I do not
know.
9. Not to say that all will necessarily be raised out of eternal death, because I
do not know.

10. Not to judge any before the time, or to judge other men at all, because
Christ has said, ‘Judge not that ye be not judged’.
11. Not to play with Scripture by quoting passages which have not the slightest
connection with the subject such as ‘Where the tree falleth it shall lie’.
12. Not to invent a scheme of purgatory and so take upon myself the office of
the Divine Judge.
13. Not to deny God a right of using punishments at any time or anywhere for
the reformation of His creatures.
14. Not to contradict Christ’s words, ‘These shall be beaten with few, these
with many stripes’, for the sake of maintaining a theory of the equality of
sins.
15. Not to think any punishment of God’s so great as His saying ‘Let them
alone’.
The one major point on which Boole seems to have disagreed with Maurice
concerned the nature of Christ and His mission on earth. Boole did not see Christ
as a mediator between God and man nor did he see His passion and death as an
atonement (which he interpreted as at-one-ment). At a more practical level, he
could not agree with Maurice that it was proper or desirable to pray to Christ and
one can only conclude that Boole did not accept the divinity of Christ. This
particular disagreement partly explains why Boole wrote so little on religion, the
motivation of most of his thoughts and actions. According to his wife, the fact
that he had written nothing on ‘pure religion’ was a sore distress to him:
I pressed him to begin at once on the work on which he had set his
heart, and for which he had been all his life collecting materials in his
mind. He ‘could not see his way’ and he was afraid of doing mischief
… There was one subject, the actual saying of prayers to Christ, which
he could not avoid, and on which he could not speak without
contradicting Maurice. He did not agree with Maurice; but Maurice, he
was sure, meant something which we did not understand; he had the
manner of one who had looked into the invisible world and seen
something there which he could find no words to explain; Maurice was
actually doing a great work, he would put no hindrance in his way. No
work of his could be worth hampering Maurice for. ‘As long as
Maurice lives’, he said, ‘I will never write against an opinion which he
holds’.
Mary Boole also wrote that her husband ‘loved Frederick Maurice more than

anything on earth outside his own house’ and that he could not write freely on
religion for fear of damaging Maurice’s progress towards a national church.
Boole claimed that he would begin to believe in the possible stability of the
Church in England when Maurice became bishop – which of course he never
did. Boole held Maurice in such awe that he felt unworthy, or perhaps even
terrified, to meet him in the flesh. He read Maurice’s many books of sermons
and commentaries on scripture and religion with great intensity. He attended
services and prayer meetings conducted by Maurice in his church in London
whenever circumstances permitted and he was clearly very moved by hearing
him preach, as the following extracts from a letter to his wife indicate:
Heard your friend in Vere Street twice yesterday. The morning
sermon, such as he only of living men can preach … I have just
returned from hearing Maurice. To say that I was pleased is to say
nothing, or what is better left unsaid. To say that I was deeply
impressed is only what you would expect. But I should not express my
real feeling if I said less than that I listened to him with a sense of awe.
The congregation was small, but it seemed to me as if this was the
feeling among them. I sat almost immediately under the pulpit and lost
no single word … The text was ‘Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God’. I
should exceedingly like to read the sermon carefully. The idea even
crossed my mind of applying anonymously for it, but I felt that I had
no right to take up the time of a man who works not for us, but for a
generation and, as I think, for generations to come … I feel with you
that I should not like to leave the Church while Maurice was in it.
Boole was deeply troubled when Maurice attacked Renan’s La Vie de Jésus and
the incident finally put paid to any possibility of his becoming active in religious
affairs or even committing his religious philosophy to paper. He was already
anxious about his position as an usher in his local Church of Ireland parish and
had long since stopped taking communion there. Just a few days before his
death, he gave his wife permission to send Maurice an invitation to visit them in
Cork but, because of his illness, the letter was never posted. While in London, he
had ordered a portrait of Maurice and when it arrived he hung it up, saying he
was ‘hanging out his colours’. One day his wife came into the room and found
him standing by it with his lips quivering and his eyes full of tears. ‘The dear old
Prophet’, he said, ‘I was thinking what it would be to live till one could never
hear him preach again.’ Two days before his death, he asked for the portrait to
be brought into his bedroom. He sank back on his pillows, saying ‘Oh, that is

delightful’, and lay quietly for hours with it beside him. It is probable that he
died without having resolved the crucial conflict between the ‘People of the
Unseen God’ (interpreters of abstract science) and ‘idolaters’ (worshippers of
any concrete manifestation of God, such as Jesus Christ), and despairing because
Renan had suggested that on this earth reconciliation was impossible between
those who approach life from the scientific standpoint and those who look at it
from the theological point of view.
There are many other aspects of Boole’s para-religious beliefs and behaviour
about which little is known. Through his wife’s influence, he became interested
in homoeopathy, herbalism and fringe medicine generally. He read a great many
medical books, especially those written by the Combe brothers, and he was
interested in Barter’s work on non-medicinal therapeutic agents. He
recommended Dr Lydia Fowler, the phrenologist, to his wife and he was
interested in the ideas of hypnosis and mesmerism. But these subjects do not
seem to have had a great influence on his thought and he did not refer to them in
his written attempts to explain the workings of the human mind.
Boole never seemed to tire of reading religious books, hymns, the works of
Eastern and Christian mystics, sermons, Jewish books of devotion, writings of
the Fathers of the Church, the works of Puritan divines and the lives of the
saints, both Catholic and Protestant. He had a particular love for the Old
Testament and some of its characters, such as Abraham, Job and Samuel.
Consequently, he had more than a casual interest in Judaism and his wife
claimed that there was nothing he believed or wrote that could not have come
from a learned and pious Jew. In fact, he had become interested in the cause of
Jewish reform as represented by Professor David Marks, a friend of de
Morgan’s. One of Boole’s favourite stories concerned a German Jew who, on
being offered escape from death if only he would profess Christianity, replied by
leaping into the flames. This story encapsulated the defiant spirit that he admired
in Newman, Colenso, Renan and Maurice. However, it is noteworthy that even
in his moments of greatest doubt and despair he clung steadfastly to the Bible,
which he regarded as the Word of God.
What little we know of Boole’s personal attitude towards Judaism, as distinct
from the accounts written by his wife, is gleaned from his correspondence with
de Morgan. In 1861, Boole sent him an extract about persecution of Jews and the
two of them agreed that the Jewish people had suffered greatly throughout
history. When de Morgan mentioned that the Jews now published their own
newspaper, Boole expressed a desire to see a copy. He remarked that even in

books on mathematics, the Jewish people were persecuted because questions
about rates of interest always concerned cruel Jewish moneylenders taking
advantage of poor Christians. Boole also revealed that he had read a great deal of
medieval Jewish poetry, especially the religious poems written in Spain.
In some ways, it is tempting to describe Boole’s religious position as that of
an agnostic deist, if such can be imagined. Of his deistic tendencies there is no
doubt; while he did not believe in a Christian God and certainly not in the
divinity of Christ, or perhaps not even in a personal God, he did believe in a
unity of knowledge, faith and love which he regarded as God. He held that no
really scientific man could be an atheist in the sense of believing that the world
was made by chance and even those who did not believe in a personal ruler must
believe in a moral rule or even a scientific discipline. However, he took care to
add that he did not think a merely scientific religion sufficient and that the will
of modern man could be crushed by the vastness of science, were it not for the
example of faith set by the figures of the Bible.
Boole’s agnosticism, on the other hand, was a great deal more complex. It
sprang not from the fact that he doubted the truth of what he believed, but rather
because he felt that religious truth was essentially unknowable. He used to say
that the heart of man craves for certainty and definite knowledge about our
relations with the unseen world, but it has been the appointed duty of the people
of God in all ages to sacrifice that craving.
Boole’s attitude towards Roman Catholicism calls for some comment. Despite
his great interest in unity, the catholic nature of the Roman Church does not
seem to have interested him in the least and, though he was surrounded by
Roman Catholics for fifteen years in Ireland, he seems to have regarded them
merely as superstitious heretics. Admittedly, both Renan and Gratry were
Catholic priests, but they were scarcely conventional clerics and probably closer
to French mystics in his view. The religious controversies concerning the Irish
bishops, the de Vericour affair, education and politics certainly helped to sour
even further Boole’s attitude towards the Catholic Church, but on the other hand,
he does not seem to have been either moved or impressed by the simple faith of
the Irish peasants who were enduring such appalling conditions of famine and
deprivation. The following extract from a letter to William Brooke, written just
before Boole’s marriage in 1855, gives a rare insight into his religious feelings at
first hand:
We have got a very decent sort of servant girl, who I verily believe

prays for us both almost every time she goes to the Popish Mass-house
(I know you approve of strongly flavoured expressions and hate
namby-pamby). By the bye what would you think of a grand Protestant
indignation got up here against our good Bishop for inviting the R.C.
Bishop to his table when the Lord Lieutenant was his guest. I heard
yesterday that it got to the length of a meeting of ‘Protestant laymen’
for remonstrance. I rather wish that they would carry it out as I think
the Bishop would read them a much needed lesson on ‘charity’. My
sister is pretty well …
Incidentally, Boole must have had some contact, and even influence, with the
senior Church of Ireland clergy of the day in Cork because his sister, Mary Ann,
became governess to the children of William Fitzgerald, Bishop of Cork, after he
became Bishop of Killaloe. One of those children, tutored by Mary Ann Boole,
was George Francis Fitzgerald who went on to become a famous physicist. He
was the first person to propose an explanation for the negative result of the
Michelson-Morley experiment, suggesting that the motion of bodies relative to
the ether produced a shortening in length of the particles of which matter is
composed. This suggestion inspired Lorentz to investigate the problem from a
mathematical point of view and the concept is nowadays called the Lorentz-
Fitzgerald contraction. Fitzgerald’s thinking marked one of the first departures
from classical physics and it had an important influence on Einstein and his
Theory of Relativity. It is unlikely that Fitzgerald had very much contact with
George Boole since he was only thirteen when Boole died, but invariant theory
is a topic which might have linked the two of them.
George Boole was a religious maverick and it is probably true to say that, like
many Englishmen of the day, he professed a religion which was a purely
personal set of beliefs drawn from a large number of sources. Towards the
established churches he was essentially defiant in his attitude and he greatly
admired several individual thinkers who were regarded as heretical by the
authorities. In a non-pejorative sense, he was a highly self-righteous individual
and he had a very firm belief in the correctness of his position, in as far as he
committed himself to a position at all. His many social activities in connection
with the Mechanics’ Institute, the Female Penitents’ Home, the Early Closing
Association, the Cuvierian Society and animal welfare must be regarded as a
form of religious observance, because he had strong feelings about the social and
cultural evolution of ordinary people by means of education and development,
especially in the scientific and technical areas.

Boole’s position as a mathematician is completely consistent with his
religious attitudes. In mathematics, he was an innovator who challenged existing
and hitherto sacrosanct rules and regulations; he was a free-thinker who stood
where no man before him had stood, yet supremely confident in the validity and
importance of his work. He admired and appreciated trail-blazers in other areas
of mathematics, such as Hamilton, Kelvin and Cayley – men whose discoveries
were not always immediately appreciated or understood by the mathematical
establishment. When one considers the range and scope of twentieth-century
electronic and computer technology, which rely so heavily on Boolean algebra,
one can only be grateful for Boole’s independence of thought, religious and
otherwise.
We close this chapter with a few lines written by Sophia de Morgan in her
Memoir of Augustus de Morgan, which must be looked upon as a summing-up of
Boole’s overall religious position by those who knew him: ‘My husband’s
regard for Dr Boole was founded not only on admiration of his originality and
power, but on sympathy with the moral and religious basis of his psychology; for
Dr Boole, like Mr de Morgan, believed that every system which rejected the
existence of God as a constantly sustaining cause of all mental as well as
physical phenomena, was like a consideration of the nature and growth of a tree
without reference to the root.’

S
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Later Mathematical Work
ince about 1850, Boole had become increasingly interested in the
mathematical theory of probability and more especially in its philosophical
aspects. Between 1850 and 1853, he developed a calculus of probability
analogous to the laws of logic, as well as examining a large number of individual
problems which arise naturally in the study of probability. Surprisingly,
however, Boole has been given very little credit for his contributions in this area
by present-day probability theorists and historians of mathematics; many
textbooks or even history books on the subject do not even mention his name.
Nevertheless, some authors have been lavish in their praise. C.D. Broad stated in
1917:1 ‘I regard this work of Boole’s on probability as being of the utmost
brilliance and importance. I am not aware that the general problem which he
solves has been solved before or since. So far as I can judge, Boole’s solution is
essentially sound …’
In 1976, in his book Boole’s Logic and Probability, Theodore Hailperin
wrote:2 ‘The basic relationship between Boolean algebra and the calculus of
events, now commonplace in treatises on probability, was first fully understood
and exploited by Boole. There is no mention of probability in his The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic of 1847 but, by 1854, in The Laws of Thought,
we have an extensive development. Here Boole not only uses this relationship
but also presents a distinctively new approach to probability making essential
use of his peculiar logical system … Never clearly understood, and considered
anyhow to be wrong, Boole’s ideas on probability were simply by-passed by the
history of the subject, which developed along other lines.’
Boole was of course familiar with the classical theory of probability as
enunciated for example by Laplace, but his specific interest in its development
seems to have stemmed from a paper he came across late in 1850. In a letter
entitled On the Theory of Probabilities, and in particular on Mitchell’s Problem
of the Distribution of Fixed Stars, published in the Philosophical Magazine in
June 1851, Boole remarks:
My attention has lately been directed to a communication by Professor

Forbes, in the Philosophical Magazine for December 1850, entitled On
the alleged Evidence for a Physical Connexion between Stars forming
Binary or Multiple Groups, deduced from the Doctrine of Chances. I
have read Professor Forbes’s observations with great care and interest;
and desire, both because the subject of them is important, and because
it is closely related to a class of speculations in the pursuit of which I
have long been engaged, to offer a few remarks which have been
suggested to me by the perusal of the paper.
However, Forbes’s paper had merely resurrected in Boole’s mind thoughts he
had had in 1849 on reading Mitchell’s paper of 1767, entitled An Inquiry into the
Probable Magnitude and Parallax of the Fixed Stars, from the quantity of light
which they afford to us, and the particular circumstances of their situation.
Boole claims that in questions of probability, he had a general method in his
possession ‘for a considerable period’ which would explain away the fallacies
contained in Mitchell’s paper. He postulates that there are two conditions
necessary for the construction of a perfect method for the calculus of
probabilities:
1. The prior construction of a general method for determining the logical
dependence of any proposition upon another given proposition, or set of
propositions.
2. The deduction from that expression of the corresponding relation among
their probabilities.
It is significant to note once again the close connection in Boole’s mind between
pure mathematics and applied science. His interest in probability seems to have
stemmed from his interest in astronomy – whereas probability itself had its
origins initially in an attempt by gamblers to find methods of beating the odds.
This seems to have been the first mention, by any author, of the close
connection, both in essence and form, between logic and probability and indeed
of the dependence of the theory of probability on an underlying mathematical
theory of logic. However, Boole at once perceived the inadequacies of his early
work on logic and it is likely that the writing of The Laws of Thought was
motivated to a large degree by his desire to construct an elaborate mathematical
system that could cope with the subtleties of probability theory. Thus the modern
concept of events in a probability space can be traced directly to the work of
Boole, though most present-day historians attribute the theory to Kolmogorov. In
his paper of 1851, Boole wrote:

In a hasty and (for this reason) regretted publication entitled The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, and in a paper published in the
Cambridge Mathematical Journal, entitled, The Calculus of Logic, I
have stated certain general laws of Thought, mathematical in their
expression, and constituting, as I believe, the true basis of formal
logic. The actual development of those laws in the works referred to is
far too imperfect to meet the requirements of the case now under
consideration. But that imperfection does not apply to the laws
themselves. The results of subsequent investigations authorise me to
say that there exists a general method, enabling us not only to educe
any of the consequences of a system of propositions, but also to
express in a scientific form and order the connexion which any
proposed proposition bears to any other proposition, or system of
propositions.
Ironically, the only place in which Boole’s name now seems to survive in current
probability theory is in the so-called ‘Boole’s Inequality’:
which is rather trivial and to be found in earlier works.
In the period 1851–1854, Boole developed a new theory of probability in a
series of papers written in Cork and while on holiday in Lincoln. He was helped
and greatly encouraged by W.F. Donkin, Savilian Professor of Astronomy at
Oxford, who had himself written some important papers on the subject of
probability. Boole was gratified that Donkin agreed with his results. Boole
distinguished between two main strands of the subject, one based on numerical
magnitudes and the other based on ‘the persistency of certain forms of thought’,
but he claimed that setting out from either of these fundamental approaches, one
could without difficulty attain a knowledge of the other. One of his goals
therefore was to unify these two strands by means of a combination of algebra
and logic.
However, he was soon to discover that the mathematical theory of probability
bristles with philosophical and logical difficulties, which in turn tend to lead to
controversy between personalities. In 1853, Cayley published the solution to a
problem which Boole claimed was a special case of a problem he had considered
in 1851. Boole wrote in the following rather kindly tone:

I think it to be one of the peculiar difficulties of the theory of
probabilities, that its difficulties sometimes are not seen. The solution
of a problem may appear to be conducted according to the principles
of the theory as usually stated; it may lead to a result susceptible of
verification in particular instances; and yet it may be an erroneous
solution. The problem which Mr Cayley has considered seems to me to
afford a good illustration of this remark. Several attempts at its
solution have been forwarded to me, all of them by mathematicians of
great eminence, all of them admitting of particular verification, yet
differing from each other and from the truth. Mr Cayley’s solution is
the only published one I have seen, and I feel I must extend to it the
same observations. But in doing this, I willingly add that I have two or
three times attempted to solve the problem by the same kind of
reasoning, and have not approached so near the truth as Mr Cayley has
done. To illustrate these remarks, I will first complete Mr Cayley’s
solution, and give one or two apparent verifications, then exhibit the
true solution; and lastly, make a few observations upon the general
subject.
One can only marvel at Boole’s self-confidence in his use of the phrase ‘the true
solution’ with respect to an area of mathematics which he had only recently
begun to study. In concluding the paper, he makes the following remarks which
demonstrate a profound insight into the connections between logic and
probability and which were soon to be sprung on the world in The Laws of
Thought:
Upon the nature of the errors which are most to be apprehended in the
solution of questions in the theory of probabilities, I will only remark
that they are not usually mathematical, in the ordinary sense of that
term, but arise from the necessity of employing a logic of a peculiarly
subtle or highly complex character. When the data are the probabilities
of independent simple events, the method of procedure is sufficiently
easy; but if those data relate to events occurring in combinations, or
connected by causal relations, the principles which suffice for the
former case become either inadequate or inapplicable. Laplace has to
some extent investigated the additional new principles (derivable from
the prior definitions and axioms of the new science) of which it is then
necessary to take account. But all these aids carry us but a short way in
advance; and of this I am fully assured, that no general method for the

solution of questions in the theory of probabilities can be established
which does not explicitly recognise, not only the special numerical
basis of the science, but also those universal laws of thought which are
the basis of all reasoning and which, whatever they may be as to their
essence, are at least mathematical as to their form. Such a method I
have exhibited in a treatise now on the eve of publication, and to
which I must refer for the investigation of the problem, the solution of
which has been exemplified in this paper.
More serious however was the attack on Boole’s approach to the theory of
probability made by Wilbraham in the Philosophical Magazine for August 1854.
Wilbraham made several objections to Boole’s methods, the most serious of
which was that Boole had in many of his examples tacitly introduced certain
additional assumptions, expressible by algebraic equations, over and above the
data of the problems considered, thereby facilitating the solution. Boole was
more than a little shaken by this attack because Wilbraham had put his finger on
a very subtle point, but nevertheless he replied in the next number of the
magazine, sticking firmly to his guns. However, it is interesting to note that he
did not give a direct reply to Wilbraham’s specific objections but argued in more
general terms. In fairness to Boole, it must be admitted that the particular point
at issue is even today a thorny problem in probability theory, involving the
notion of stochastic independence. Incidentally, Boole, in his reply, once again
repeated his now-unconvincing claim that: ‘Controversy is in every way so
disagreeable to me, that it is with the most unfeigned reluctance I feel myself
called upon to reply to the observations of Mr Wilbraham inserted in the last
number of your Journal.’
The only other contribution Boole made to this particular area of probability
was a paper entitled On Propositions Numerically Definite, published
posthumously by de Morgan in 1871.3
The years 1854–1856 represented a very traumatic period in Boole’s personal
life. His mother had died in 1854 and by 1856, he had gone from being a
relatively carefree bachelor to the responsibilities of being a married man and the
father of a young family. In addition, he had to cope with heavy teaching duties
and the ever-increasing pressure of the administrative side of his Professorship at
Queen’s College, which was now rent with religious and political controversy.
Nevertheless, he still found time for original research. He had now become even
more deeply interested in the more philosophical aspects of probability theory
and in the very difficult problems associated with its foundations. During 1855–

1856, he was busily at work on a substantial work (in final form it occupied 56
pages) entitled On the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to the Question
of the Combination of Testimonies or Judgements4. He submitted this paper to
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, not least because that Society was soon to
award its biennial Keith Prize, consisting of a gold medal and up to £50, for the
best original communication on a scientific subject submitted for its
consideration. Boole was also no doubt influenced in his choice of journal by the
fact that the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh had published in
1853–1854 a paper by Bishop Terrot entitled On the Possibility of Combining
two or more Probabilities of the Same Event, so as to form one Definite
Probability — a subject closely connected with Boole’s topic.
The merits of Boole’s paper were immediately recognised by the referees and
it was printed in the Transactions. He was then awarded the Keith Prize, the
highest honour given by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, for the biennial period
1855–1857. The formal presentation took place on 1 March 1858, but as Boole
was not able to travel to Scotland for the occasion, Bishop Terrot was requested
by the Council to ‘take charge of the medal for Professor Boole and to express to
him our wishes for his future success in the career to which he has devoted
himself.’ The chairman of the meeting was Professor Kelland, the Vice-
President of the Society, who had refereed Boole’s prize-winning Royal Society
paper of 1844 and who had subsequently written a glowing testimonial which
helped Boole secure his professorship at Cork. After giving a short outline of
Boole’s career, Kelland gave the following description of the paper in question:5
The problems which the author proposes to solve are these: 1st, That
of combining testimonies whose different values may be regarded as
numerical measures of a physical magnitude. 2nd, The same problem
in which the testimonies are not only expressible, as in the former, but
relate to some fact or hypothesis of which it is sought to determine the
probability. Relative to the former of these, an important element,
now, I believe, first completely discussed, is the determination of the
‘Conditions of Possible Experience’. Suppose, for example, it were
asserted that of all cases of a certain disease, two-fifths of the patients
were affected with shivering and sweating, two-thirds with shivering
and thirst, and four-fifths with sweating and thirst, this very assertion
would be found to contain within itself the elements of its own
condemnation, seeing that it violates the conditions of possibility.
The other problem has for its object, to combine the force of two

testimonies in support of a fact, the strength of each separate testimony
being given. That a complete discussion of this problem is most
valuable in itself cannot be doubted. What has here been written may
rather be regarded as material for a future judgement than as
exhausting the consideration of the question. There are so many
conditions to be taken into account, and such a tendency exists in
writers to adopt one general standard of reference, that a critical
examination like the present, which certainly does much towards
throwing down the buildings of others, cannot fail to have great value,
even should its own foundations not stand. This is not like a discovery
in pure analysis – the opening up of a royal road from one position to
another – so much as a survey of the ground, with a view to the
assertion that the right road lies on this side, and not on that, of some
given obstacle.
Boole extended and developed his ideas in another long paper published in the
Philosophical Transactions of 1862.6 In this paper, he remarks that ‘the
complete development of the theory was attended with analytical difficulties
which I have only lately succeeded in overcoming.’ It is noteworthy that in this
paper he turned, for the first time, to the theory of determinants to solve a
particular set of algebraic equations and, characteristically, expressed a wish that
his discussions in this area would be valuable contributions to mathematical
analysis, independent of the context of probability theory.

Boole’s novel ideas as expressed in these papers are now commonplace in
elementary set theory and probability theory, and represent part of his ongoing
effort to exploit the connections between logic and probability. They now find
application in areas such as legal evidence, insurance claims and medical
diagnosis.
Boole’s reputation was now firmly established and honours were being
showered upon him. On 27 October 1856, he was proposed for admission as a

Fellow of the Royal Society of London, arguably the world’s most illustrious
scientific body.7 One wonders why the honour was delayed so long, but it is
unlikely that Harley’s suggestion that the expense involved had hitherto hindered
Boole from applying is the correct explanation. It is interesting, however, to
consider his certificate of election, completed partly in his own hand-writing and
presumably in his own words. He lists his name as simply George Boole, but
leaves the column headed ‘Title or Designation’ blank. He gives his ‘Profession
or Trade’ as Professor of Mathematics in the Queen’s College, Cork. He
modestly leaves the column ‘The Discoverer of’ blank, though he certainly could
lay claim to being the discoverer of symbolic logic – Bertrand Russell was later
to describe him as the ‘discoverer of pure mathematics’. He is listed as author of
the following papers:
An Exposition of a General Theory of Linear Transformations
[Invariant Theory]
A Memoir on a General Method in Analysis [Operator Theory]
Researches in the Integral Calculus [Calculus]
An Investigation of the Laws of Thought [Logic and Probability] and
other memoirs
It seems therefore that Boole’s contributions to the areas mentioned in
parenthesis were recognised early in his own lifetime. Finally, he was described
in summary as being eminent as a mathematician. However, by far the most
interesting statement in Boole’s application is the assertion that he was
‘distinguished for his acquaintance with the science of Psychology’. This is one
of the few direct pieces of evidence to support the claim that Boole was just as
much a student of the human mind as he was a mathematician and that many of
his discoveries were motivated by his interest in psychology. The certificate
continues: [George Boole] ‘being desirous of admission into the Royal Society
of London, we, the undersigned, propose and recommend him as deserving that
honour, and as likely to become a useful and valuable member.’
The list of proposers is an impressive one. Among those who supported him
from ‘General Knowledge’ were Donkin, Walker, Lloyd, Kelland, Pollock,
Baden-Powell and Tyndall, while John T. Graves, Bartholomew Price, Sylvester,
James Booth, Kelvin, Cayley and Jukes proposed him from ‘Personal
Knowledge’. The proposal was read to the Society on 20 November 1856 and he
was elected by ballot to a Fellowship of the Royal Society on 11 June 1857. In
later years, he wrote his name as George Boole, FRS, with obvious pride.

Further honours followed quickly. Early in 1858, he was elected an Honorary
Member of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and in 1859, the University of
Oxford awarded him the degree of DCL, honoris causa.8 It was Bartholomew
Price who proposed Boole’s name for the second of these awards. Incidentally,
the University of Dublin had been the first to appreciate Boole’s talents in this
way when, probably at the suggestion of Charles Graves, it awarded him an
honorary LLD as far back as 1851 and he used this title in The Laws of Thought.
Boole’s premature death alone prevented him from being enrolled by the French
Academy of Sciences as one of its few and select corresponding foreign
members. Finally, he was honoured indirectly by his own university: when the
Queen’s Colleges of Belfast, Galway and Cork were united to form the Queen’s
University of Ireland, Boole was appointed as one of the public examiners for
degrees. Surprisingly however, he was never honoured with a degree by his own
university.
Mathematically, Boole now had many irons in the fire. He was still working
on logic, probability and operator theory, but gradually he began to be drawn
back to his first love – differential calculus, a subject that had inspired and
motivated many of his discoveries. He had long felt the need for a textbook on
differential equations in which he could bring to a wider audience his distinctive
approach to this subject. Accordingly, he decided to devote his time to the
writing of such a book and, as the work progressed, it inspired him to produce
original research in this and related areas. The book, entitled A Treatise on
Differential Equations, was published in 1859 and in its well-written and
illuminating preface, he set out his aims:9
I have endeavoured, in the following Treatise, to convey as complete
an account of the present state of knowledge on the subject of
Differential Equations, as was consistent with the idea of a work
intended, primarily, for elementary instruction. It was my object, first
of all, to meet the wants of those who had no previous acquaintance
with the subject, but I also desired not quite to disappoint others who
might seek for more advanced information.
In the exposition of methods I have adhered as closely as possible to
the historical order of their development. I presume that few who have
paid any attention to the history of the Mathematical Analysis, will
doubt that it has been, to a great extent, necessary – being determined,
either by steps of logical deduction, or by the successive introduction
of new ideas and conceptions, when the time for their evolution had

arrived. And these are causes which operate in perfect harmony. Each
new scientific conception gives occasion to new applications of
deductive reasoning; but those applications may be only possible
through the methods and the processes which belong to an earlier
stage.
Now there is this reason for grounding the order of exposition upon
the historical sequence of discovery, that by so doing, we are most
likely to present at that stage at which the mind is most fitted to
receive it, or even, like that of the discoverer, to go forth to meet it. Of
the many forms of false culture, a premature converse with
abstractions is perhaps the most likely to prove fatal to the growth of a
masculine vigour of intellect.
The question of the true value and proper place of symbolical
methods is undoubtedly of great importance. Their convenient
simplicity – their condensed power – must ever constitute their first
claim upon attention. I believe however that, in order to form a just
climate, we must consider them in another aspect, viz. as in some sort
the visible manifestation of truths relating to the intimate and vital
connexion of language with thought – truths of which it may be
presumed that we do not yet see the entire scheme and connexion.
Boole cites his main sources of material as Lagrange, Jacobi, Cauchy, Sir W.R.
Hamilton and de Morgan, but adds that in almost every part of the work he had
found it necessary to engage in more or less original research, especially in
relation to Riccati’s Equation, integrating factors, singular solutions, applications
to geometry and optics, partial differential equations and symbolical methods.
He concludes the preface by drawing attention to the importance of the study of
the calculus of variations and theoretical dynamics, which he regarded as growth
areas worthy of consideration by students. The book was written so that the first
part of each chapter was intended for beginners, who might skip the second part
at a first reading, and it was an immediate success with students. To Boole’s
great delight, it was adopted as a textbook at the University of Cambridge and
even today, later editions are still in print and widely read.
Mary Boole relates that it was a publisher at Cambridge who first suggested
that she might help her husband bring his discoveries down to the level of those
who wanted to and needed to understand them. She was the guinea pig on which
the book was to be tried out, despite the fact that initially she did not even know
what the words ‘differential equation’ meant. She wrote:10

As I had not sufficient knowledge to assist my husband in prosecuting
mathematical researches, I would try to make use of my ignorance, by
representing the uninstructed public who waited for enlightenment till
he should make himself intelligible. I was to be a sort of lay figure, or
milliner’s doll, on whom the new book should be tried, to judge of the
effect. We were to begin at once on a textbook of Differential
Equations, which my adviser undertook to publish. To the best of my
recollection I learned the very meaning of the term Differential
Equation from the MS. It was up-hill work for us both. At times the
author jumped à pieds joints over real difficulties; at others he would
write out an elaborate proof of some point so simple that one missed it
altogether. I have often read a paragraph over and over till my head
ached, in the vain effort to find out what it was about, not being able to
believe that he would waste words to prove a thing that was perfectly
obvious from the beginning. All this caused a good deal of delay. The
subject of Singular Solutions had a curious fascination for my
husband, then and to the end of his life. The chapter of the textbook
which refers to them was written in a sort of religious rapture.
Unfortunately, that did not make it easier to read; five times, I think it
was, that unlucky chapter was brought to me ready for the press and
returned as not intelligible. The sixth version of it I allowed to pass. It
has amused me often since to hear Cambridge graduates remark that
‘that chapter does not read like an ordinary textbook …’
… The senior class migrated to our own house in the suburbs for
lectures; and, as soon as the Differential Equations was published, we
all began to work carefully through the examples with a view to
preparing the work for a future edition.
Boole’s book Differential Equations is a comprehensive account of the state of
knowledge of the subject at that time. It contains very many examples worked
out in full detail and a great number of significant exercises drawn from various
sources. Among the wide range of authors cited and quoted are Legendre,
Monge, Lagrange, Poisson, de Morgan, Gregory, Jacobi, Donkin, Stokes,
Cauchy, Euler, Leibniz, Clairaut and Taylor, showing once again the incredible
scope of Boole’s reading in this area.
Though Boole had moved back into the more concrete realm of differential
equations, nevertheless he could not avoid being affected by his experiences in
mathematics over the previous twenty years. While working on problems in
calculus, he realised that many of his methods and techniques had a wider range

of applicability than the topics he was then considering. In particular, he became
interested in difference equations and, finding that there was so little information
available to students interested in this subject, he resolved to write a textbook
entitled A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences in order to highlight the
connections between difference equations and differential equations, and also to
demonstrate the power of abstract operator methods when applied to a new area
of mathematics.11 Mary Boole wrote: ‘Another year, the class and I took up the
subject of Finite Differences. We had no textbook, we created one as we went
on.’
This textbook, which is still in print and even today widely used by students,
has been justly described as a masterpiece. Once again, Boole anticipated the
trends and needs of the twentieth century, because modern computers and
calculating machines are based on the discrete difference equation rather than
the continuous differential equation. However, when The Calculus of Finite
Differences was published in 1860, Boole saw the summation of series as the
chief application of his methods. His approach to the subject is clear from the
opening paragraphs:
The Calculus of Finite Differences may be strictly defined as the
science which is occupied about the ratios of the simultaneous
increments of quantities mutually dependent. The Differential Calculus
is occupied about the limits to which such ratios approach as the
increments are indefinitely diminished …
… In the following exposition of the Calculus of Finite Differences,
particular attention has been paid to the connexion of its methods with
those of the Differential Calculus – a connexion which in some
instances involves far more than a merely formal analogy. Indeed the
work is in some measure designed as a sequel to my Treatise on
Differential Equations, and it has been composed on the same plan.
Representing a function of x by Ux, Boole defines the difference operator Δ/
Δx by:
and remarks that as d/dx is the fundamental operation of the differential calculus,
so Δ/Δx is the fundamental operation of the calculus of finite differences. He
emphasises the fact that ΔUx/Δx is a true fraction, unlike dy/dx, and that
differential calculus is a calculus of limits whereas the calculus of finite

differences is not. He introduces the repeated difference operator ΔnUx and
exploits its use as an abstract operator, deriving analogues of Taylor’s Theorem
and other useful results in differential calculus. He has an interesting chapter
called Interpolation and Mechanical Quadrature, in which he gives an account
of methods which nowadays belong to numerical analysis – Lagrange
interpolation, statistical interpolation and approximate integration. One of his
footnotes has a prophetically modern ring to it:
The problems of Interpolation and Mechanical Quadrature are of the
greatest practical importance, the formulae deduced therefrom being
used in all extended calculations in order to shorten the labour without
affecting greatly the accuracy of the result. This they are well capable
of doing; indeed Olivier maintains that calculations proceeding by
Differences will probably give a closer approximation to the exact
result than corresponding ones that proceed by Differential
Coefficients.
Boole’s chapters on finite integration and the summation of series are beautifully
written and could be followed easily by a present-day high-school student. His
chapters on convergency and divergency are standard material with an emphasis
on rigour, though not in the Cauchy-Weierstrass style. The second half of the
book is concerned with the solution of difference and functional equations using
a theory analogous to that of differential equations. Judging from the authors
quoted, it is obvious that Boole had consulted a great number of authors and read
a great many papers on these topics; but it is also clear that he had to invent
some new methods of solution as the work proceeded to cover cases not
previously considered by others. Of particular interest is the chapter on linear
difference equations with variable coefficients, where Boole develops
symbolical methods for their solution, again making free use of operators. The
book ends with some interesting applications to geometric curves and optics, and
throughout there are many carefully worked examples and exercises.
In the chapter entitled Of the Calculus of Functions, Boole shows that he
recognised the wider context of functional analysis into which the calculus of
finite differences fitted.
The calculus of functions in its purest form is distinguished by this,
viz. that it recognises no other operations than those termed functional.
In the state to which it has been brought more especially by the labours
of Mr Babbage, it is much too extensive a branch of analysis to permit

of our attempting here to give more than a general view of its objects
and methods. But it is proper that it should be noticed, 1st, because the
Calculus of Finite Differences is but a particular form of the Calculus
of Functions; 2ndly, because the methods of the more general Calculus
are in part an application, in part an extension of those of the particular
one.
The Calculus of Finite Differences was very well received by the mathematical
world and it was used as a class-text in Cambridge until the 1920s, when it was
superseded by more advanced books. Even today, it is still highly regarded and
the following tribute, paid by Carver in 1939, is indicative of the high esteem in
which it has been held over the years:12
To my mind, the progress that has been made to date in the
development of the finite calculus has been marked and stimulated by
the appearance of four outstanding texts. The first of these was the
treatise by George Boole that appeared in 1860. I do not mean by this
to underestimate the valuable contributions of earlier writers on this
subject or to overlook the elaborate work of Lacroix. I merely wish to
state that Boole was the first to present this subject in a form best
suited to the needs of student and teacher.
The Open University Foundation Course in mathematics, while describing
Boole’s book as ‘old-fashioned’, states that it is a classic in the field of finite
differences. Many of Boole’s original methods of solution still survive and have
been extended and generalised. Milne-Thompson, in a major textbook on finite
differences published in 1933, has sections on Boole’s symbolic method,
Boole’s iterative method and Boole’s canonical forms, as well as a number of
theorems of which Boole’s are special cases.
Boole’s book was written at a hectic pace and even towards the end of the
final chapter on geometrical application, he remarks: ‘It is only while writing
this chapter that a general interpretation of this equation has occurred to me … I
regret that I have not leisure to pursue the inquiry.’ However, his researches into
differential and difference equations, far from satisfying his curiosity and
forming a completed unit of mathematics to be stowed away, had posed and
created more problems than they had solved. In particular, he became deeply
interested in the subject of singular solutions and gradually he was to become
almost obsessed with this topic. He realised that his early work in this area was
grossly inadequate and resolved to write a new edition of Differential Equations

in which singular solutions would be given pride of place.
He spent a long time collecting materials and continuing his researches on this
topic. In June 1864, he went to London and remained there some weeks working
in the libraries of the Royal Society and British Museum, and was able to write
to his wife, ‘I have made out what puts the whole subject of Singular Solutions
into a state of unity.’ However, the continued strain of study and calculation
were proving too much for him and he was forced to leave the subject in a
somewhat unfinished state. His researches were published soon after his death
by Todhunter in 1865 in later editions of Differential Equations. Todhunter
described the chapter on singular solutions as one of the most valuable and
important in Boole’s work. It is interesting to note that Boole’s deep interest in
singular solutions was in part motivated by his interest in reflection, caustics,
foci and singularities of optical systems – yet another instance of his
mathematics being influenced by experiences in basic science. He concludes his
account of singular solutions with an extensive history of their development
mentioning Leibniz, Taylor, Clairaut, Euler, Laplace, Lagrange, Legendre,
Poisson, Cauchy and de Morgan. Boole looked upon his own work as unifying
the approaches of earlier writers but, in his haste and enthusiasm, he mistakenly
felt that he had achieved a complete state of unity for the theory of singular
solutions.
Boole’s final mathematical work, from 1860 onwards, was almost entirely
devoted to various aspects of differential equations. His original book ran to
about 500 pages, whereas Todhunter’s later editions, including the additional
material of a more advanced nature which Boole had added, ran to nearly 750
pages. During this period, Boole produced at least five major research
publications. One, written entirely in French and entitled Considérations sur la
recherche des intégrales premières des equations différentielles partielles du
second ordre, was published in the Bulletin de l’Academie Imperiale des
Sciences de St Petersbourg in 1862. Then, perhaps just to demonstrate his
versatility with continental languages, he had published in Crelle’s Journal a
paper written entirely in German and entitled Ueber die partielle
Differentialgeichungen zweiter Ordnung Rr + Ss + Tt + U(s2 -rt) = V. He became
interested too in simultaneous differential equations and the differential
equations of dynamics, and published two papers on these topics in the
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society. He was fascinated by the
methods developed by Jacobi for the solution of non-linear partial differential
equations of the first order and spent a great deal of time extending these
methods.

However, in 1864, the very last year of his life, Boole published a paper on a
subject which does not seem to have interested him in the least before that time –
the form of the roots of algebraic equations. His sudden interest in this topic
seems to have been stimulated by a paper written by the Reverend Robert Harley
in the Proceedings of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester for
the session 1861–1862. Harley wrote privately to Boole asking him to
investigate the subject of the paper. He became a close friend of Boole’s in the
final years of his life and was to become Boole’s first biographer. The two men
had many interests in common and Harley too was a student of symbolic logic
and differential equations. In his paper, Harley noticed that any root of the
polynomial equation yn-ny+(n-1)x = 0 satisfied a certain differential equation
and, for n = 2 and n = 3, by solving the differential equation, he was actually
able to write down the solutions of the given algebraic equation. Since all
algebraic equations up to the fifth degree can be reduced to this trinomial form,
this method was of considerable interest to those involved in finding expressions
for the solutions of such equations. Boole became intrigued by this somewhat
unexpected application of differential equations and set about generalising
Harley’s results in a paper of over twenty pages. He writes:
While the subject seems to be more important with relation to
differential than with reference to algebraic equations, the connexion
into which the two subjects are brought must itself be considered as a
very interesting fact. As respects the former of these subjects, it may
be observed that it is a matter of quite fundamental importance to
ascertain for what forms of the function φ(D) equations of the type:
admit of finite solution. We possess theorems which enable us to
deduce from each known integrable form an infinite number of others.
Yet there is every reason to think that the number of really primary
forms – of forms the knowledge of which, in combination with such
known theorems, would enable us to solve all equations of the above
type that are finitely solvable – is extremely small. It will, indeed, be a
most remarkable conclusion should it ultimately prove that the forms
in question stand in absolute and exclusive connexion with the class of
algebraic equations here considered.
The following paper is a contribution to the general theory under the
aspect last mentioned. In endeavouring to solve Mr Harley’s equation
by definite integrals, I was led to perceive its relation to a more general

equation and to make this the subject of investigation.
In fact what Boole was considering was actually a generalisation of an equation
that had appeared in his prize-winning memoir On a General Method in
Analysis, also published in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
some twenty years earlier. In his later paper, Boole remarked that Harley’s
equation for n = 4 had been solved by the use of a definite triple integral by
Russell. Boole had in fact refereed Russell’s paper for the Royal Society and it
was his detailed examination of this paper that caused him to penetrate the
subject more deeply.
This was the last of Boole’s mathematical papers to appear in his lifetime and
it is interesting to speculate what direction his researches would have taken if he
had not been cut off in his prime. His interests remained firmly within pure
mathematics, though he had written and presented one paper on astronomical
observations to the meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of
Science held in Dublin in 1857.13 He published a substantial paper on
probability in 1862, remarking in a letter to Stokes that the mathematical
investigation was the most difficult one he had ever engaged in with success.
Perhaps, at this stage, he felt he could achieve more in other areas of
mathematics and there seems to be no record that he wished to proceed further
with this topic.
More mysterious is Boole’s apparent lack of interest in formal logic after the
publication of The Laws of Thought. In a letter to de Morgan, dated 6 November
1862, he writes:
My dear Sir, I have been studying a bundle of ideas of yours in Logic,
and now that I sit down to write to you I feel that I have nothing to say
about them but that I have been interested in them very much. But it
has been like the reviving of an interest that had died. There is
absolutely no person in this country except my wife with whom I ever
speak on a subject like this. I feel that this is one of the many
drawbacks of living in this country and is not the least of them.
However I do continually look forward to when I shall study Logic
again and begin to hope that it is not far off. I do not so much care
about the mere forms of Logic as about the philosophy of the
connection between thought and speech … I will look at the syllogism
of Hamilton but I will do it for your sake not his. He and all his
followers appear to me to have been trifling when writing about Logic.

The notion that they have mapped out the whole kingdom of formed
thought is a delusion that can only exist through ignorance – a kind of
ignorance that prevails in no other subject.
He devoted more and more time to differential equations but as he did so, the
subject of algebra continually came up for consideration. Towards the end of his
life, he became concerned with linear equations, linear independence and
determinants, admittedly as an aid to his work in differential equations and
probability, but the care and attention he devoted to these topics would seem to
indicate the algebraic direction in which he was heading. Surprisingly, the theory
of matrices seemed to hold no attraction for him, despite his interest in linear
algebra and invariant theory. However, he did act as referee for a paper by
Cayley in the early stages of the development of the subject and his comments
were quite critical of Cayley’s work. Equally surprising is the fact that Boole
paid little or no attention to abstract group theory, also founded by his friend
Cayley, when one considers the close connections of group theory with
differential equations, invariant theory and the algebra of classes. However, in
one of his shorter papers on quaternions, Boole showed that he had both a flair
for and a good understanding of this subject by demonstrating certain
redundancies in the defining relations for quaternions. Another subject which
seems to have left him untouched was the quest for the various systems of non-
Euclidean geometry.
Incredibly, Boole does not seem to have been aware of the work of Hermann
Grassmann 
(1809–1877).14 
Grassmann’s 
epoch-making 
book 
Die
Ausdehnungslehre (1844)15 does not appear on the library lists of Queen’s
College, Cork, during Boole’s professorship and there is no evidence that he
ever read the book. The backgrounds of Boole and Grassmann were rather
similar: both were deeply interested in philosophy, languages and religion, and
both produced highly original research without the benefit of a university
training. Both men were devoted teachers and were influenced strongly by the
original works of Laplace and Lagrange. Grassmann too was struck by the fact
that mathematics is essentially abstract in nature and that its truth and validity
transcend any particular interpretation of the symbols involved. Of geometry he
wrote in 1844:
I also had realised that there must be a branch of Mathematics which
yields in a purely abstract way laws similar to those of Geometry,
which is limited to space. By means of the new analysis it is possible
to form such a purely abstract branch of Mathematics; indeed this new

analysis, developed without assuming any principles established
outside its own domain and proceeding purely by abstraction, was
itself this science.
Grassmann went on to create exterior algebra and he had a profound influence
on the development of linear algebra and universal algebra. Since Boole read
and spoke German fluently, he would have had no difficulty in understanding
Grassmann’s work. If Boole did come across the Ausdehnungslehre, perhaps it
was the strong geometric motivation and interpretation of the results in spatial
terms that did not appeal to his tastes.
The question therefore remains, in which directions in mathematics would
Boole have turned his attentions had he lived? The question is of course a purely
hypothetical one, but several trends are discernible in his later work. Despite his
continued interest in differential equations and in particular their singular
solutions, there is little doubt that he was beginning to approach mathematics
from a more algebraic point of view. Probability theory had taught him to
consider definitions and principles very carefully; logic had forced him to
examine the laws of combination of abstract symbols; differential equations and
difference equations had awakened his interest in operator theory; Harley’s work
forced him to consider the roots of algebraic equations; and his own later work
on probability drew him into the theory of determinants, linear equations and
effectively matrix theory. It is little short of a tragedy that Boole never
recognised his potential as an algebraist; that he failed to develop his algebra of
classes as an abstract algebraic system; that he paid so little attention to
Hamilton’s quaternions, Cayley’s groups and matrices, and Grassmann’s
algebra; and that he abandoned his interest in the theoretical aspects of invariant
theory. Instead, he placed a futile over-emphasis on differential equations and
their solution and, by returning to this topic in the last few years of his life, he
missed a golden opportunity of placing his greatest discoveries in their true
mathematical context of abstract algebra.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
The Final Years
he final years of George Boole’s life were not the mellow and relaxed of ease
and retirement that he and his family might have had a right to expect. He died at
the tragically early age of forty-nine, at the height of his intellectual powers,
long before he could enjoy to the full the honours that were being showered
upon him, the delights of his growing family of young daughters, the happiest of
marriages and the satisfaction of his teaching career. His health had never been
robust and the final strain to which it was subjected proved to be just too much
for his delicate constitution to bear.
The pressures under which Boole laboured during the period 1860–1864 come
under several headings which deserve to be analysed individually and in detail.
First and foremost, there was the pressure of research from which he never really
relaxed after the age of eighteen. During the final years of his life, he turned out
a variety of lengthy and original research papers, most of the spadework for
which was done in his spare time or during vacations. The following account of
his work methods, written by his wife, gives a good indication of the great
mental strain his research activities imposed upon him.
When he was writing a book, or a paper for the Royal Society, he
would at first seem to dawdle over it, and work very little. As it grew
towards completion, and he became more and more absorbed in the
work, he showed an increasing dislike to let anyone be interfered with,
or reprimanded for his sake. He appeared unconscious of noise or
interruptions; when anyone spoke to him he would answer with the
utmost sweetness, but sometimes not in the least to the purpose. He
behaved with more uniform and equal graciousness than usual, but, I
thought, rather lost consciousness of the distinction between
individuals. He seemed to care less and less for anyone in particular.
At such times, his face grew more refined and spiritual; he took very
little food, and what he did take was of the lightest description.
If the dinner was not exactly to his liking he would not grumble but
dine cheerfully on a bit of bread; any fuss about it annoyed him, and

he would not, when in these moods, allow the cook to be reproved.
The only way in which I could get him to eat was to do some bit of
delicate sick-room cookery and bring it to him with a little boast of
having cooked it myself; he would eat then to gratify me, especially if
the recipe was of my own invention.
When the MS was ready for press (and one never could tell
beforehand when that would happen) the mood would suddenly
change. At whatever hour of the day or night he finally laid it aside, he
would come to me and say he was ‘very hungry’. He would eat and
drink heartily of whatever happened to be at hand and seemed able just
then to digest anything. For the next few days he would idle about,
reading novels, and be, for him, really selfish and cross and his face
grew comparatively heavy, or rather, I should say, less refined. A
curious physical irritability accompanied this eating and idling phase;
one could not walk across the room without annoying him. But this
fractiousness did not last long, and it was a relief to me from the
almost pathetic sweetness of his working moods.
A great deal of his best work was done in the night, often in the dark
and in bed. He had acquired this habit, and also that of controlling his
nervous irritability and carrying out a train of thought notwithstanding
interruptions, while an usher at school. He preferred thinking in the
dark to save his eyesight and at one time he wrote with a machine
something like that used by the blind.
No doubt present-day supporters of Catastrophe Theory could easily find a
mathematical model to explain Boole’s sudden change of mood when his
manuscript was ready for the press!
The administrative side of Boole’s duties as professor proved to be a heavy
burden on him in later years. He served on the Library Committee during the
periods 1859–60, 1861–62 and, for the session 1863–64, he was again elected
Chairman, though it must be admitted that the meetings of this committee were
much less frequent than they had been in the early days of the Queen’s College.
For the session 1862–63, he was elected to the position of Dean of the Faculty of
Science, which was not then an onerous position, but during this time his name
appears eighteen times as being present at meetings of the Council. To one
meeting he contributed the following motion: ‘That the prizes and certificates
awarded to Charles Lane and Martin Hughes be stopped for having copied at the
examination in Mathematics.’

His teaching duties were arduous: he had no help whatsoever and he had the
largest number of students (73) of any professor in the college. Then, just when
the various controversies seemed to be dying down and when he might have
expected college affairs to run smoothly, a most extraordinary incident occurred
which was to affect Boole profoundly. On the night of 15 May 1862, the west
wing of the college caught fire and was entirely destroyed, including Boole’s
lecture room and office with their entire contents.1 It soon became obvious that
the fire had been started maliciously because it had broken out simultaneously at
several points and indeed a pile of matches was found under a door which had
escaped the full fury of the blaze. The true culprit was never discovered and
though a porter who had a grudge against the college authorities (because of
what he regarded as an unfair dismissal from service) came under suspicion, no
charges were brought against him.
However, at least two extraordinary stories arose to explain the origin of the
fire. The first concerns Richard Burke, clerk of the Waterford Workhouse, who
had tired of his wife and had an affair with a nurse working in the institution.
Some time later, his wife died and foul play was not suspected until her sister
awoke one night from a nightmare screaming that Burke had poisoned his wife.
Her claims were so insistent that the authorities had the body exhumed and, in
order to ascertain the cause of death, various organs were sent to Dr John Blyth,
Professor of Chemistry at Queen’s College, whose laboratory was in the west
wing. Blyth determined that the cause of death was strychnine poisoning. Burke
was arrested, tried and found guilty, and executed in July 1862. It was strongly
suggested that Burke’s friends and supporters had set fire to the college to
destroy the evidence, but again no charges were ever brought against them. As
Burke had been arrested on 13 May, following Blyth’s analysis on 3 May, the
story cannot be dismissed so lightly.
The other story put forward about the origin of the fire proved to be totally
without foundation but caused a great deal of trouble in the college. Dr Denis
Bullen, Professor of Surgery, was one of the two Catholic officials that Sir
Robert Peel had appointed to the staff of the Queen’s College, the other being
Sir Robert Kane. Bullen had always disliked Kane because of the soft line he
had taken on religious matters and indeed he had more than once suggested to
the Catholic Bishops and to other authorities that it would be a good thing for the
college and the country if Kane were to resign and he, Bullen, become President.
When the inevitable investigation following the fire took place almost a year
later, the matter was raised in Parliament by J. Pope-Hennessy, MP, a former
student of the college who had actually been involved in a controversy with Sir

Robert Kane whilst an undergraduate. Pope-Hennessy stated in the House of
Commons, on the authority of an unnamed professor, that the college had been
set on fire by one of its officials. The professor proved to be Bullen who, when
his name was revealed, wrote to the Lord Lieutenant accusing Kane of having,
shortly after the fire, suggested to him that they should draw up a joint report of
its causes, attributing the crime to the agents of Cardinal Cullen and the
Ultramontanes who would not accept the Queen’s Colleges. Bullen repeated his
accusation that the fire was started by an official of the college and all but
accused Kane of being directly involved.
Bullen’s motives became clear when he added that Kane had also stated his
intention of resigning from the presidency at once because of the continuing
controversy in the college. Bullen took a desperate gamble that his actions would
precipitate Kane’s resignation, but Kane stood his ground and called Bullen’s
bluff because he knew that the accusations were absolutely baseless and that
there was not a shred of evidence to support them. The government then had the
charges brought before the official external Visitors to the college at their
Triennial Visitation of 1864 and Bullen withdrew his accusations without
reservation, claiming unconvincingly that he had been mistaken because his
account of the conversations had been drawn up a long time after they had
occurred.2 Kane was completely cleared, and rightly so, while Bullen – much to
his surprise, but to no-one else’s – was removed from his professorship. He
appealed to the Chief Secretary (Sir Robert Peel, the younger) and to the Lord
Lieutenant, but in vain, and then, foolishly, he took the case to court. Naturally,
he lost his case and suffered the indignity and humiliation of having all the
details of the incident made public.

Boole was deeply involved in the whole affair and suffered great distress
because of it. First of all, Bullen was a fellow professor and the fact that both of
them were antagonistic to Kane gave them much in common. Despite the fact
that Bullen was a Catholic, the two men met socially and there was the further
link that Bullen’s son Richard was a student of Boole’s, in fact one of his best
students and a scholarship-winner in mathematics. From the outset, Boole saw
the folly of Bullen’s course of action and tried to dissuade him, but to no avail.
In Home Side of a Scientific Mind, Mary Boole describes the situation very well:
There was one professor, a doctor in the College, whose conduct was
in some ways considered objectionable. At last a statement appeared in
the newspapers which shewed that Dr — had at last done something
which would cause him to incur both public disgrace and the loss of
his chair. Immediately on reading it, my husband called to consult with
the family as to the means of making the most honourable retreat
possible under the circumstances. His advice was not taken and the
poor man covered himself with disgrace in a public Court. As soon as
the inquiry was over my husband went forward and offered him his
arm to escort him from the hall to his carriage. I believe he suffered far
more than the culprit himself did.

During his last illness, as soon as it became desirable to call in a
second physician, he selected the dismissed professor.
Boole happened to be present at the fire and sent the following report to the
Council:3
Gentlemen, As I was present at the fire in the western wing of the
College last night, arriving there a little before eleven o’clock, I think
it my duty to mention the following particulars.
On expressing my desire that a sufficient guard be left to watch the
place during the night and put out the fire should it break forth again,
the High Sheriff Mr Murrogh said ‘I will leave a constable and two
men’ and Mr John Perrott said ‘I too will leave a man who understands
the management of the hydrant.’ Having told Mr Jolly (of the Library)
that I thought it would be better for him to remain on the watch also,
he at once assented. It is proper for me to add that I promised that the
men thus left in charge should be paid for their services, and I hold
myself responsible for this, unless the responsibility should be taken
from me.
I heard at the time that the turnkeys from the jail had been active in
the suppression of the fire. Mr Perrott’s services were very highly
spoken of. I believe that some of the college servants were very
efficient also.
After this statement, I suggest respectfully to the Council the
propriety of offering their thanks to the High Sheriff and to the Messrs
Perrott and others, and of making some instant arrangement for
likewise compensating the workmen, turnkeys and others who took
part at the beginning not without danger in the extinguishing of the
flames.
I have no doubt that other evidence may be collected but I confine
myself to what I witnessed or heard on the spot at the time of the fire. I
am, Gentlemen, your obedient servant,
George Boole
Boole had been for some time considering the general problem of which subjects
were suitable for a university degree and how the talents and career demands of
students might best be matched to their choice of subjects. In 1858, in
consultation with Ryall, he submitted to the Royal Commission on the Queen’s

Colleges an elaborate scheme to restructure the degrees of BA (the one taken by
the vast majority of students) and the subsequent MA.4 Some of the suggestions
are surprising, for example, neither the English language nor English literature
was proposed as a first-year subject, while others were certainly ahead of their
time and well-worthy of consideration today. For example, all students were to
receive at least one term of logic; English literature or history was to be given to
all students of natural philosophy, while students of mathematical and physical
sciences were to receive a course in the history and philosophy of the inductive
sciences, as well as an ancient or modern language in the second and third years.
Boole argued that intellectual aptitude usually manifests itself in one of three
fields: (a) languages, literature and history, (b) mathematical and physical
science, and (c) natural sciences. He proposed a course in which there was to be
a common first year, consisting of Latin, Greek, French and mathematics.
Naturally, because of his background and his relationship with Ryall, Boole
was keen to see Greek retained by all students, but once again they found
themselves in disagreement with the President, Sir Robert Kane, who held that
Greek should be made optional as it was virtually unnecessary for young men
aiming at a commercial or scientific career. They had an ally however in the
Reverend Professor Henry Cooke of Queen’s College, Belfast, who declared that
the ‘Godless’ colleges were indeed doomed to failure if they also became
Greekless.
The BA degree examination was to be based on the courses of both the second
and third years, and three separate streams were to be recognised:
Boole offered the following comments to justify his choices in the various
streams, which are clearly influenced to a great extent by his own experiences:

(A) Modern Languages are associated with Ancient, because it is believed on
the ground of distinct experience (see the evidence of Dr Ryall) that those
who excel in the latter will also excel in the former; original endowments
being supposed the same, the Classical scholar will, from his accurate
habits of scholarship, beat the modern linguist on his own ground.
(B) A corrective for the exclusive tendency of Mathematical studies is
provided by requiring in the Second Year the study of Natural Philosophy
which at this stage of the course must be in a great measure experimental,
and of an Ancient or Modern Language; and by requiring in the Third
Year the study of the History and Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
which is in some degree a part of Mental Philosophy.
(c) The study of Natural History required in the Second Year is to some extent
renewed in the Third Year in that of Physical Geography. In the Literary
portion of this group a preference is given to French and German, both
little less than indispensable to a Naturalist.
Boole also expressed his abhorrence of the ‘evil practice’ of people obtaining
honours degrees in subjects such as chemistry by relying on a theoretical
knowledge of the subject acquired from books and depending on learned
formulae. Experimental procedures and laboratory experience, he claimed, were
absolutely essential to those studying natural philosophy. Of the MA degree and
examination Boole was also critical, claiming that it resembled the BA degree
too closely. He suggested that postgraduate study should involve some element
of metaphysics and should also include the production of an original thesis.
Boole’s feelings about living in Cork remained quite mixed until the end of
his days there. There is no doubt that the state of affairs in the college was the
major cause of his dissatisfaction and, as early as 1855, he had written to his
friend William Brooke:
Had Ryall been placed at the head of this College, it would have
flourished. As it is I have gloomy anticipations. When a President
systematically neglects his duties, spends here one month in the year,
yet holds powers which are essential to the well government of the
College; when registrars are appointed on the ground of the lowest
class of electioneering services to conduct the correspondence of the
College – or rather to receive the pay for conducting it – their
prominent qualification being a total ignorance of the orthography of
the English Language (e.g. ‘accademic’, ‘grevious’ and, I have been
told, ‘Proffesor’!) and when the most reasonable and temperate efforts

to bring about a better state of things expose a man to the charge of
faction and subject him to the frown of power, I do not see what but
ruin can be expected. The only doubt upon my mind is whether the
enormity of the misgovernment here does not put me under a moral
obligation to expose it and take the consequences …
You ought certainly to come and see me. I most heartily wish that
you would. I think instead of telling you of the pleasantness of the land
and the geniality of its people, I ought to adopt a wholly different
course, reveal to you the miseries of exile and put it upon your
faithfulness as friend and old companion to come over and cheer the
lonely hours of captivity … I adjure you by the ‘fen’ and ‘hayth’, by
Skellingthorpe Wood and the memory of Swanpool, yea finally by the
little hostelry at Fiskerton in which you once read to me ‘Polite
Conversation’ that you come and see me here at Cork – ‘Sweet
Corke’, as Spenser somewhere with imagination more poetical than
true describes it.
However, it must be remembered that Boole wrote this before marriage cured his
loneliness and indeed he also says in the course of the letter: ‘… and truly
whatever Cork may be, it is, I firmly believe, the best place in Ireland.’
Though Boole had by 1863 given up all hope of ever leaving Cork and
obtaining a university post elsewhere, there were others who felt that he should
return to England at all costs. De Morgan continually kept his ear to the ground
in case there was even rumour of a position coming up; and Isaac Todhunter,
now a close friend and later to be Editor of the new edition of Boole’s
Differential Equations, was most anxious for him to obtain a professorship at
Cambridge. On 23 May 1863, Todhunter wrote from St John’s College,
Cambridge:5
My dear Boole, You may perhaps have seen in The Times a notice that
on Saturday June 6th, or before, candidates are invited to send in their
names to our Vice-Chancellor at Clare College, for the Sadlerian
Professorship of Pure Mathematics which is now to be instituted. It is
supposed that Mr Cayley will come forward and be elected. The salary
may be about £500 or £600 per annum. The electors are Professor
Stokes, Professor Adams and Professor Challis, and three heads of
colleges, namely those of Trinity, St John’s and St Peter’s, and the
Vice-Chancellor.
The duty is defined in these words, ‘It shall be the duty of the

Professor to explain and teach the principles of Pure Mathematics, and
to apply himself to the advancement of that science.’ There is no
restriction as to the candidates, as I learn from our Master. Now I
should recommend you to come forward. The money for the
endowment is obtained from some funds left by a Lady Sadler for
Algebra lectures; and I think on this ground the clauses about
explaining and teaching are inserted. I have of course no objection to
Mr Cayley; but it is obvious that he cannot teach or explain anything,
and I do not myself estimate his work I think so highly as you do. Had
I a vote, I should give it for you, and I have told our Master that I
consider that you are the proper man for the post.
I began by saying that Mr Cayley will probably be elected; but still I
think you would do well to put forward your name, as it can I believe
do no harm, and may be of service. It sometimes happens that a
candidate succeeds easily on a second opportunity, from having
already had his claims brought under the notice of influential electors.
I should add that I shall probably send in my name, as some of the
younger men are doing so, and it may be of use for some future
purpose. But I assure you that I have no expectation of coming near
the object, nor have I the vanity to feel myself for a moment in
comparison with such men as yourself and Mr Cayley. I should like
above all to see you in the post and next to you I should like Sylvester,
and next to Sylvester I am willing to have Mr Cayley.
I have put the whole matter now before you, as far as I know it, and
I leave you to take what steps you judge best. It would have been a
subject of regret to me if you had not been informed of it and I feared
that it might not come to your notice unless I wrote.
Boole did not allow his name to go forward and the post went to Cayley, who
filled it with distinction. Perhaps he did not wish to oppose Cayley, who after all
was an old friend, and Boole had a higher opinion of Cayley’s talents than did
Todhunter. Nowadays it is fashionable to denigrate Cayley’s achievements and
dismiss his talents, but it is difficult to ignore the claims of one of the most
prolific mathematicians of all time, who made substantial contributions to group
theory, matrix theory, invariant theory and elliptic functions. On 10 June 1863,
Todhunter wrote:
I wish you had come forward; not that I think the present occasion
would have been favourable in itself, but because it would have

brought your name before the electors, and thus might have been of
service if any other appointment occurs. But I can quite understand
and appreciate your reasons for holding back. I shall however take care
to inform you of any possible opening that I hear of in England; for
nothing would afford me greater pleasure than to see you on this side
of the Channel in a pleasant and remunerative engagement. But
unfortunately mathematical appointments are neither numerous nor
valuable.
We 
have 
examined 
in 
previous 
chapters 
Boole’s 
relationship 
and
correspondence with other mathematicians such as de Morgan, Kelland, Cayley,
Hamilton, Graves, Thomson, Gregory and Todhunter. He also knew and
corresponded with Stokes, Herschel, Ellis and quite a few others, but it remains a
mystery as to why he seems to have had so little contact with Babbage. With
twentieth-century hindsight, it is tempting to speculate what might have
happened if the hardware of Babbage’s analytical engine and the software of
Boole’s algebra of classes had been brought together, but on a more realistic
level, the two men had a great deal in common mathematically. Babbage was of
course one of the original Cambridge reformers and had speculated, even around
1820, on the type of symbolic algebra which was to be developed by Gregory
and Boole. However, Babbage published very little of his early speculations on
this subject and credit went elsewhere. Boole’s interest in the difference engine
arose from his interest in the difference operator, the principle on which it was
based, but he regarded it as a curious mechanical device rather than illustrating
mathematical principles, and at no stage does he seem to have contemplated its
use as a primitive computer. However, he approved strongly of Babbage’s
efforts and actually visited him to see the difference engine and hear an
explanation of its working. On 15 October 1862, Boole wrote to Babbage:6
My dear Sir, It is a source of regret to me that I was quite unable to
avail myself of your kind invitation to call upon you on my return
from Cambridge to London, but in fact I was summoned rather hastily
to Ireland on business connected with the Queen’s Colleges, and I
stopped in London only an hour or two. Circumstances may I hope be
more favourable another time. Meanwhile, I shall endeavour to
acquaint myself with Menabrea’s paper and the principle of the
Jacquard loom.
But I cannot allow this opportunity of writing to you to pass without
thanking you very warmly for the kind explanations you gave me of

the working of the Difference Engine, and without saying that it was a
pleasure and an honour to me to meet you. You will receive with this a
paper On the Theory of Probabilities which I request you to accept
from me.
Mary Boole claimed that Babbage was a friend of her father, the Reverend T.R.
Everest, and if this is the case then it is all the more surprising that there was so
little contact between Boole and Babbage. But it must be remembered that
Babbage was something of an eccentric who found personal relations difficult.
The Booles had a very high regard for Babbage’s book The Ninth Bridgewater
Treatise and it is very significant that, as early as 1868, Mary Boole wrote in her
book The Message of Psychic Science the following prophetic passage:7, 8
Never fancy you believe anything merely on the ground that it is
logically proved. For the upshot of all sound logic is to prove that
nothing can be proved; that every valid conclusion is a re-statement of
the premisses in another form; and that any conclusion, which goes
beyond that is unwarranted. And if I were asked to point out the two
greatest benefactors to humanity that this century has produced, I think
I should be inclined to mention Mr Babbage, who made a machine for
working out series, and Mr Jevons, who made a machine for stringing
together syllogisms. Between them they have conclusively proved, by
unanswerable logic of facts, that calculation and reasoning, like
weaving and ploughing, are work, not for human souls, but for clever
combinations of iron and wood. If you spend time in doing work that a
machine could do faster than yourselves, it should only be for exercise,
as you swing dumb-bells; or for amusement as you dig in your garden;
or to soothe your nerves by its mechanicalness, as you take up
knitting; not in any hope of so working your way to the truth.
Later, in 1884, in Symbolical Methods of Study she wrote:9
Within the last generation we have gained a ‘Calculating Engine’, a
‘Calculus of Logic’ (with many and widespread applications), a
‘Logical Abacus’; and we are fast discovering means of making the
generation of the most complicated and beautiful curves as mechanical
a process as Logic has become. Of what are these inventions a sign?
The 
reasoning-machines 
of 
Babbage 
and 
Jevons 
and 
the
sympalmograph, and other inventions for illustrating the mathematical
genesis of beauty, seem to me to have brought to a reductio ad

absurdum the worship of intellectual power and artistic genius.
Mary Boole seems to be echoing the words of Ada Lovelace who captured the
beauty of Babbage’s concept in the statement: ‘The Analytical Engine weaves
algebraic patterns, just as the Jacquard loom weaves flowers and leaves.’
It was as late as August 1863 that Boole came into contact with William
Stanley Jevons (1835–1882), logician and economist. Jevons was no great
mathematician and in some senses he might actually be described as anti-
mathematical, but in a futile attempt to get a full comprehension of the processes
of reasoning by actually divesting logic of mathematics once again, he actually
uncovered a worrying flaw or at least an incompleteness in Boole’s system.
Jevons’ attitude towards mathematics was a very narrow one and in fact he never
quite got away from the mistaken impression that symbolic algebra is merely a
representation of numerical arithmetic. However, his main concern was with
logic and, as he wrote in his book Pure Logic10 in 1864, he was determined to
expose the real structure of Boole’s logic by ‘divesting his system of its
mathematical dress, which, to say the least, is not essential to it. Boole’s system
is the shadow, the ghost, the reflected image of logic.’ Jevons, to quote John
Passmore, ‘set out in search of the naked body’.11
With the hindsight of modern algebra, it is possible to resolve the controversy
between Jevons and Boole, though it must be stressed that this would have been
impossible in 1863.12 The difficulty arises from the fact that Boole, quite in
keeping with the spirit of his time, did not actually give an explicit list of the
laws and axioms governing his algebra. Though he assumes x2 = x as a
fundamental ‘law of thought’, he admits that some of his symbols (the
‘uninterpretables’, such as a + b) do not satisfy the algebraic law x2 = x. In fact,
as Hailperin has observed, a careful examination of the properties of + and .
which Boole actually makes use of in his algebraic calculations shows that he
was assuming the laws, in modern terminology, of a commutative ring with
unity having no non-trivial additive nilpotent elements and no non-trivial
multiplicative nilpotent elements (SM). In order to use this algebra as a model
for logic, one’s attention must be restricted to the idempotent elements – those
which satisfy the additional condition x2 = x (B). The set B is a Boolean algebra
and if one confines oneself to operations within this set, no difficulties
associated with ‘uninterpretables’ arise. In fact, in his original analysis of the
algebra of classes, Boole had concentrated on the exclusive interpretation of ‘or’
rather than the inclusive interpretation which, while perfectly understandable for
algebraic reasons, is cumbersome when applied to logic. In The Laws of

Thought, he writes:
In strictness, the words ‘and’, ‘or’, interposed between the terms
descriptive of two or more classes of objects, imply that those classes
are quite distinct so that no member of one is found in the other. In this
and all other respects the words ‘and’, ‘or’ are analogous with the +
sign in algebra, and their laws are identical.
However, Boole fully realised the need for, and of course used, the inclusive ‘or’
by means of the expression xy + x(1-y) + y(1-x). Jevons bluntly claimed that x +
x = x is a law of logic and Boole flatly contradicted this, but it does not seem to
have occurred to either of them – or to any supporters and critics of both men in
the following twenty years, except Harley – that they were talking about
completely different operations when they wrote the same symbol +. Jevons’ +
is actually the present-day inclusive union, written U, whereas Boole’s + is not,
as is generally believed, the + of the Boolean ring of idempotents B, but the + of
the ring SM. Thus, as Hailperin wittily remarks, ‘Boole’s algebra isn’t Boolean
algebra’, but of course all the essential ideas were Boole’s and it takes only a
moderately sophisticated knowledge of modern algebra to put things right.
Incidentally, Boole’s algebra SM has an interpretation as an algebra of signed
multisets, which is as yet largely undeveloped but seems to have potential
applications in areas such as operations research.
Boole reacted to Jevons’ attack on his logical system in a disappointing
manner. He had basked in the glory of his discovery for so long that he refused
to acknowledge the possibility of any valid operations other than the ones he had
originally postulated. The fact that Jevons was not a mathematician, and had
made some statements that were clearly false, may have closed his mind to the
possibility that some of his claims might be valid. Venn sprang to Boole’s
defence, though there were others, notably Ellis, who launched attacks from
other directions. Boole and Jevons exchanged a few polite letters on the subject
but after some time, Boole, seeing that they were clearly at cross purposes, gave
up the attempt to make Jevons understand his point of view.13 Nevertheless,
Jevons had an extraordinarily high opinion of the merits of Boole’s work, as the
following extract from his book Principles of Science shows:14
Undoubtedly Boole’s life marks an era in the science of human reason.
It may seem strange that it had remained for him first to set forth in its
full extent the problem of logic, but I am not aware that anyone before
him had treated logic as a symbolic method for evolving from any

premises the description of any class whatsoever as defined by those
premises. In spite of several serious errors into which he fell, it will
probably be allowed that Boole discovered the true and general form
of logic and put the science substantially into the form which it must
hold for evermore. He thus effected a reform with which there is
hardly anything comparable in the history of logic between his time
and the remote age of Aristotle.
Jevons’ criticism of Boole’s system had several important consequences. For a
start, it brought Boole’s work to the notice of a much wider circle of logicians:
up to then, logicians of the day had largely ignored Boole, possibly because of
their dislike of mathematics and algebraic symbols. Also, Jevons’ prosy style
made logic more attractive to the general reader. Finally, it encouraged others to
question and develop Boole’s work on logic and so lay even more deeply the
foundations of modern symbolic logic. Jevons went on to build a working
logical machine which was well before its time and he seems to have been the
first person to introduce the important notion of a truth table.
There are of course several other flaws, inaccuracies, omissions or downright
mistakes in Boole’s work and such phenomena are to be expected in the work of
a trail-blazer. Take for example his attempts to define the ‘division’ of one class
by another in order to solve logical equations. His procedures are at times
inconsistent and in fact downright illegal in the eyes of a present-day algebraist.
And yet, it is a remarkable fact that when the work is tightened up and all the
algebraic flaws ironed out and all the gaps filled in, the results are essentially the
same as Boole’s original conclusions. As Hailperin remarks, we can only stand
in wonder at the genius of Boole’s ingenuity. On the other hand, there is at least
one instance in which Boole seems to have been amazingly blind to the need for
a certain algebraic law – the associative law. Nowhere in his writings does it
seem to appear nor does he seem to have seen the need for it to remove possible
ambiguity in terms such as xyz. This fact is all the more surprising when one
considers the following points:
1. Boole seems to have been one of the first people to use non-commuting
operators, so he should have realised that some operators do not obey the
expected laws of algebra that numbers do.
2. He had at least seen Cayley’s definition of an abstract group in which
associativity is explicitly mentioned.
3. He wrote a paper on quaternions and was familiar with Hamilton’s search
for an algebra of triplets or quadruples, where the problem of maintaining

associativity is a crucial issue. In addition, he was familiar with Hamilton’s
treatment of complex numbers which includes a careful discussion of
associativity for both addition and multiplication.
4. Boole was a close friend of the Graves brothers, John and Charles, and John
Graves had, as early as 1843, constructed a non-associative algebraic
system and drawn attention explicitly to its lack of associativity.
5. The concept of associativity was known to, and mentioned by, Gregory
whose works had such a strong influence on Boole.
Yet, despite all these facts, Boole saw no reason to demand that the symbols
with which he operated obey the associative law.
Having examined the various stresses and strains to which Boole was subjected
in the last few years of his life, we now come to the state of his health which
proved to be the crucial factor in his premature death.15 Boole was tall and thin,
almost like Abraham Lincoln in stature and appearance, but he could never have
been described as robust. Shortly after his marriage, his wife forbade him to
write poetry because she had been told that he was overworked and she wanted
to preserve his brain from needless exertion. Shortly afterwards, he hurt his eye
and suffered an attack of acute ophthalmia as a consequence. She wrote that he
seldom suffered much physically except from pains in the chest or rheumatism,
but that the agony due to the affairs in college and witnessing the suffering of
animals was a much greater source of pain to him.

As early as October 1852, Boole wrote to de Morgan from Lincoln: ‘… I set
out for Ireland in a day or two. I feel doubtful whether I shall be able to remain

there long as I am never well when in Cork – the damp is so excessive.’ Again,
on 8 November 1859, he wrote to Stokes from Cork: ‘… Since I wrote to you
last I have been almost constantly confined to my bed by a rheumatic affliction
brought on by exposure to cold, and now I find so much work before me for
many months to come that it would be wrong to undertake more.’
Boole seems to have had something resembling a premonition of his
premature death. His wife wrote:
He was very fond of picturing in our conversations what my life would
be when the children grew old enough to be a help and comfort to me.
But if I brought him into the picture he would stop me at once. ‘No my
child’, he would say, ‘you will be very happy but I shall not be there.’
He used constantly to talk to me of what I ought to do about different
things in the event of his death. He would allow no shrinking from the
subject but seemed to wish to accustom me to the idea of being happy
without him.
In October 1864, he left home unexpectedly without telling anyone where he
was going. On his return, he told his wife that he had been among the scenes and
companions of his early life and visited some friends whom he had not seen for
many years. On 14 November, he wrote what may have been his last letter to
Robert Harley, telling him about his trip in June and July to London to consult
the great original memoirs of Lagrange, Euler and Laplace which might enable
him to finish the new edition of Differential Equations. Ten days later, on 24
November, he walked from his house in Ballintemple to the Queen’s College (a
distance of about three miles) in the pouring rain in order not to miss a lecture.
He foolishly lectured in wet clothes and the result was a feverish cold which
soon began to affect his lungs. One wonders why he walked the distance in such
conditions when he could possibly have gone by train, but even the distance
from his house to the station, and from the terminus to the College along
unsheltered roads, could have earned him a saturating wetting, if present-day
Cork rainstorms are anything to go by. Mary Boole describes the events leading
up to his death in an almost poetic fashion:
He gave me leave to write to Mr Maurice and ask him to visit us.
When I took him my letter he told me he would enclose it in a note
from himself as soon as we had finished looking over some
examination papers, on which he was engaged. He went to bed very
tired the evening he finished them, and was taken ill in the night. The

doctors told me from the beginning that his brain was in the most
alarming condition. It was literally worn out with all the hard work of
his life. He must have been seriously ill for at least some weeks, they
said, and had within the last few days taken cold, which had brought
on some bronchial affection. He had all the physical symptoms which
are usually accompanied by violent delirium. I was to watch him
incessantly, and keep him quiet if I could. If he once lost control of
himself, or if I lost control of him, the suffering would be very
frightful. I wanted to send for a nurse skilled in such cases. This they
forbade. It was just possible, they said, that I might know enough
about him to keep him from thinking of exciting subjects; no one else
could be of the slightest use …
… I soon noticed that his mind fixed itself in a curious restless way
on questions of time. I had brought him his food or medicine at the
wrong hour; or it was three days, not two, since so and so happened,
etc; the mere mention of the subject always brought on a strange look
of suffering, so I warned him to try to keep his mind off the passing of
time altogether. With his usual docility he asked me what he should
think of instead. I told him to repeat after me, ‘The same yesterday,
today, and for ever’. And whenever the symptoms of restlessness came
on, I used to hear him repeating the words, as if clinging to them for
steadiness. After a time he changed them of his own accord for the
verse, ‘For ever, O Lord, Thy word is settled in Heaven’, which had
always been associated in his mind with his mathematical discoveries.
One day he told me that the whole universe seemed spread before him
like a great black ocean, where there was nothing to see and nothing to
hear, except that at intervals a silver trumpet seemed to sound across
the waters, ‘For ever, O Lord, Thy word is settled in Heaven’. He said
that all the sounds in the house and the movements in the room seemed
to set themselves to a rhythmical chant which was singing the same
words …
… I told him one day, laughing, that I did not believe he was ill at
all; that he was much more like a creature going through a crisis of
development than a sick man; that he had been for many months past
too tired to work properly, and that I expected he would now get a new
lease of his brain. ‘And use it for God’, he said, very solemnly. Our
youngest child had been taken to pay a visit to his room every day. On
the last day of his life he asked me to bring her. ‘Let me see her again’,
he said. Meine Engelchen, sie ist eine Erscheinung (My little angel,

she is a vision).
I think he touched the key-note of his harmonious life just before he
became speechless, when I put some tea to his lips asking if it was
nice, and he smiled and said, ‘It is heavenly’.
He was speechless for some time, but was evidently trying to give
me some instructions about what I was to do. I asked him many
questions, which he answered by signs; but I could make out nothing
more definite than that what he wished to say was somehow connected
with religious instruction for the children … As he was growing
excited I asked him if he could not trust to God to guide me; he
nodded and seemed quite content. Then I remembered how he had
always said he had no positive belief in a future life. I asked him if he
had altered his mind on that point. He shook his head and pushed my
hand away. I said, ‘Are you still willing to leave the future entirely to
God?’ He nodded; and there came over him a smile of such wonderful
peace that I would not speak again; and so he lay quiet until the end.
The reality, however, may have been considerably different from this
sentimental account and Mary Boole herself may have unwittingly hastened his
death because of her unorthodox medical beliefs. She was a believer in
homoeopathy, indeed she had been exposed to its principles and perhaps even
brain-washed into believing their absolute truth ever since childhood when her
eccentric father went to France to become a disciple of Samuel Hahnemann.
Homoeopathy is of course nowadays a respectable branch of medical science,
with many practitioners and even more adherents. But in her book The Message
of Psychic Science, Mary Boole seems to have put it on the same level as mental
hygiene, thought transference, phrenology and mesmerism, and endowed it with
mystical rather than medical qualities. A few quotations from that work may
perhaps give an indication of the dangerous mixture of pseudo-religious and
medical opinions she held. These extracts were written in 1868, shortly after her
husband’s death.
Mothers are often puzzled to account for those mysterious sicknesses
of little children which are called, according to the particular
constitution of the child, either ‘bilious’ or ‘feverish’ attacks. Their
nature being unknown, they often cause a painful degree of
unnecessary fear, and give rise to a mischievous amount of
unnecessary dosing. If I might be allowed to judge from observation of
the source of these attacks, I should be half inclined to say they were

angels’ visits to the house, for the double purpose of getting rid of the
effect of slight imprudences in diet etc. and of loosening the child’s
heart-strings from its stomach, which is in infancy their natural and
proper point of attachment and putting them into its mother’s hands,
before the time arrives when the world, or the flesh, or the devil,
would otherwise get possession of them …
… On strictly Hahnemannian principles, smallpox and scarlatina
should be treated, not as evils, but as heaven-sent opportunities for the
elimination of chronic taints in the blood; and are dangerous chiefly
because not so treated …
… Putting cold limbs near the fire is antipathic; plunging the same
cold limbs in cold water is a homoeopathic remedy. The term
‘hydropathy’ is an absurd compound and has no meaning whatever.
Water, hot or cold air, steam, drugs in any form, may all be
administered either homoeopathically, antipathically, or allopathically.
It ought not to be forgotten that Hahnemann practised successfully for
some years as a true homoeopath before the idea of infinitesimal doses
occurred to him.
In fairness, it must be stated that many other parts of Mary Boole’s books on
medicine display a good deal of down-to-earth common-sense and many of her
attitudes and comments are quite thought-provoking. However, it seems more
than likely that she tried in desperation to cure her husband’s fever by
homoeopathic means, arguing that if the original illness had been caused by a
prolonged exposure to rain, then an ‘infinitesimal’ dose of the same could
restore him to health. The youngest Boole daughter, Ethel Voynich, in
describing the bitter rivalry in later life between Mary Ann Boole, Boole’s only
sister, and the ‘Missus’ – as Mary Boole came to be called – put the rumour to
paper:16
… My sister Mary Hinton, who had a friendship with her, and who
collected from her various anecdotes about the family, told me that, in
Aunt Mary Ann’s view at least, the cause of Father’s early death was
believed to have been the Missus’ belief in a certain crank doctor who
advocated cold water cures for everything. Someone – I can’t
remember who – is reported to have come in and found Father
‘shivering between wet sheets’. Now, for myself I am inclined to
believe that this may have happened. The Everests do seem to have
been a family of cranks and followers of cranks. The Missus’ father

apparently adored Mesmer and Hahnemann and the Missus herself ran
theories to death.
It is interesting to note that Boole himself had a much more balanced and
realistic view of homoeopathy. He certainly believed that it could be useful in
the treatment of illness but, on the other hand, he did not believe that orthodox
medical treatment should be entirely excluded. His point of view is well
expressed in a letter to de Morgan, dated 17 July 1860:
I am sincerely glad that you have so completely and so satisfactorily
(as to the manner) recovered from an illness which if not of a mortal
character is at least of a very dangerous one. I have witnessed pleurisy
and its former mode of treatment more than once in my father. One
would say beforehand that homoeopathy could have no effect on such
a disease. I remember hearing of another form of inflammation some
years ago treated by homoeopathy unsuccessfully, and when the
patient was in extremity by the vigorous measures of ordinary practice.
This was in London – the patient a literary man – my informant a
clergyman in Lincolnshire who went up to see his friend, found him
getting no better but worse and insisted on the lancet. My wife’s father
died of an inflammation of the stomach under homoeopathic treatment.
The moral is – if you are ever attacked with inflammation and
homoeopathy does not produce decided effects soon, do not sacrifice
your life to an opinion, or to the opinion of anyone else, or to a notion
of going through with a thing when you have once begun with it, but
call in some accredited priest of Esculapius with all his weapons of
war and do as your ancestors did – submit to be killed or cured
according to rule …
De Morgan believed that homoeopathy had cured his illness, but Boole’s
comments are ironic and highly prophetic in the light of his subsequent
experiences. Of course, the local doctor was summoned in Boole’s case when it
became obvious that homoeopathy was not improving his condition and when
this became critical, the disgraced Professor Bullen was called in. It is probable,
however, that orthodox medical treatment was not tried until it was much too
late and it is doubtful, given Boole’s state of health, if any nineteenth-century
physician could have saved his life.
George Boole died on the evening of Thursday, 8 December 1864, at his
residence in Ballintemple, and newspaper obituaries gave the cause of death as

either inflammation of the lungs or fever. However, his death certificate gives
the certified cause of death as pleuro-pneumonia and gives the duration of the
illness as from 17 to 19 days.17 The informant was a nurse, Maria Harvey of
Dundanion, who had been in attendance and the Registrar’s signature was that of
Dr William J. Cummins, who had been the previous occupant of Lichfield
Cottage.
Boole’s death came rather suddenly in the end and his brothers, William and
Charles, arrived too late to bid him a final farewell. He was buried in the
churchyard at St Michael’s Church of Ireland, Blackrock, Cork, on the morning
of 12 December 1864. One of his students, Richardson Evans, asked Ryall
whether he wished the students to walk in the funeral procession in their caps
and gowns. Putting his hand on the student’s shoulder, Ryall replied, almost
sobbing, ‘Yes, Evans, I think Boole would have liked it.’18 The next day, the
Cork Examiner printed a letter with a tribute from another former pupil, W.J.
Knight:
Sir, A great man has passed from among us and been carried to his rest
this day – a man great in the noblest and highest acceptation of the
term, for it was not the mere recollection of mental power which drew
that sad and sorrowing multitude to Blackrock Churchyard this
morning, nor did those serried files of students assemble to pay
homage to the colossal intellect of the Professor, as much as to lament
the kind and sympathising and warm-hearted friend – one who would
stoop from the lofty height of his transcendent genius to enter into the
little difficulties of his class and who so identified himself with his
pupils that the Professor seemed at times lost in the fellow labourer.
… Such a man can never die, for so long as one votary of
Mathematical Science exists, or the English language is extant, so long
will the numerous and beautiful methods of Dr Boole render his name
and fame alike imperishable …
In St Michael’s churchyard, an unpretentious gravestone of locally quarried
limestone bears the simple inscription:
GEORGE BOOLE
DIED DECEMBER 8 1864
while within the church, a few yards away, a marble tablet placed there by his
widow pays the following tribute:

To the memory of George Boole, LLD, DCL, FRS, Cork, in whom the
highest order of intellect cultivated by unwearied industry produced
the fruits of deep humility and childlike trust. He was born in Lincoln
on the 2 Nov. 1815 and died at Ballintemple on the 8 Dec. 1864.
For ever O Lord Thy word is settled in Heaven
In Queen’s College, there was consternation mixed with deep regret at the
announcement of Boole’s death. The Council, meeting on 15 December, passed
the following resolution:19
That the Council of the Queen’s College, Cork, take this opportunity
of their first meeting since the lamented death of Doctor Boole, late
Professor of Mathematics, to express their deep sorrow for the event,
and their sense of the irreparable loss sustained by the College, by the
sudden removal from the midst of them, and in the prime of life, of
one who has shed so much lustre on science and endeared himself to
all who knew him, by his high character and noble qualities.
The Council at the same time beg to offer their sincere sympathy to
Mrs Boole in this deep affliction.
On 18 December, the professors of the College met and resolved their
determination to provide an enduring memorial to Boole’s connection with their
institution. They decided to set up a Boole Scholarship for proficiency in the
Mathematical Sciences, but there is no record that this scholarship ever came
into being or was awarded to any student. (However, since the 1960s, the student
Mathematical Society of University College, Cork, annually awards the Boole
Medal for the best undergraduate speaker at its weekly meetings.) The professors
of 1864 also resolved that a further memorial to Boole should be erected within
the college and a committee was set up to appeal to the ‘friends of Education and
the admirers of the late Professor Boole’. Ironically, the committee included
Kane and Kenny, and also Ryall, Blyth, O’Connor, England, Harkness and
Harvey. By 6 February 1865, over £200 – nearly the annual salary of a professor
– had been contributed. Notable names on the subscription list were Fitzgerald,
the Lord Bishop of Killaloe; Sir Robert Kane; Lloyd of Trinity College, Dublin;
J. Pope-Hennessy, MP; Stoney of Queen’s College, Galway, who first named the
electron; Ryall; Cayley; Todhunter; the Reverend E.R. Larken; and W. Brooke
of Lincoln.
However, there was some disagreement in the community as to what form
Boole’s memorial should take. The Dublin correspondent of The Times wrote:

The monument proposed in Cork was a scholarship in honour of his
memory. But I can mention facts on undoubted authority to show you
that it would be absurd, and worse than absurd, to devote contributions
to any such object. Professor Boole was dependent upon his salary,
which was not too large for the support of a family. He has left a very
young widow with three infants, without any provision whatever for
their support, in a state of actual destitution. Mrs Boole is now in a
most precarious state of health – her mind having received such a
shock from the death of her husband that she has not yet been
permitted to see her children or her mother. She could not be in better
hands so far as her health is concerned, but when her mind is restored
how dreadful will be the prospect before her! Here, then, is an object
worthy of the attention of the friends and admirers of the late Professor
Boole. The best monument they can erect to his memory, and the one
which undoubtedly he would prize the most, had he been consulted in
the hour of death, is a suitable provision for his helpless widow and
orphans.
By the end of 1866, sufficient funds had been collected for a beautiful stained
glass window to be erected in the east-facing wall of the Aula Maxima of
Queen’s College. The window consists of ten panels in two tiers surmounted by
an ornate collage, consisting of the Royal Arms flanked by the Cross of St
George on a shield surrounded by a wreath of shamrocks. The themes of the ten
panels and the figures they contain are as follows:20
1. Religion and Music: St Augustine, St Stephen and King David.
2. Navigation: Columbus and Vasco da Gama.
3. Fame: a seated female figure bestowing wreaths of bay leaves.
4. Medicine: Harvey, Hippocrates and Galen.
5. Engineering and Architecture: Archimedes, Phidjas and (perhaps) Leonardo
da Vinci.
6. Astronomy: Copernicus, Hipparchus and Galileo.
7. Mathematics: Bacon, Napier and Newton.
8. The central panel represents Logic: Euclid and Aristotle are shown standing
behind Boole, who is seated at a desk writing.
9. Philosophy: Pascal, Leibniz and Descartes.
10. Geography: Strabo and Ptolemy.
Unfortunately, the names of the designer and artist responsible for this beautiful

window do not seem to have survived.
In November 1982, the Governing Body of University College, Cork, decided
to name the College’s magnificent newly built library complex The Boole
Library, as a fitting tribute to the most eminent man of learning to be associated
with the College. In addition, in 1981, the annual Boole Memorial Lecture was
founded, the first one being given by the present author on ‘The Life and Work
of Boole’, while the second lecture was given in 1982 by Professor Christopher
Zeeman, FRS, on ‘Catastrophe Theory’.
In the President’s annual report issued in April 1865, Sir Robert Kane records
Boole’s death in a rather neutral and formal manner. It is quite possible that he
regretted his passing to some degree, but it is more likely that he regarded it with
relief as the removal of a thorn from his side.
I regret to have to report the decease, on the 8th of December 1864, of
George Boole, LL.D, DCL, FRS, Professor of Mathematics in Queen’s
College, Cork, by whose premature death at a comparatively early age,
the interests of science and of education have sustained a serious loss.
A Resolution of the College Council, expresses as I believe, the
unanimous feeling of his Colleagues, the Professors and Officers of
the College. Similar expressions of sympathy and respect have been
communicated from other Educational Institutions and from many of
the scientific public, who appreciated the services which Dr Boole had
rendered to those branches of knowledge in the cultivation of which he
had been so zealously and so successfully engaged.
Boole was succeeded as professor by Robert Romer, senior wrangler at
Cambridge, who held the position for only two years, when he was replaced by
Charles Niven.
At a meeting of the Cork Cuvierian Society on 5 January 1865, Richard
Caulfield, its President, paid the following eloquent and touching tribute based
on his personal contact with Boole.21
Probably in few individuals could a greater diversity of tastes and
talents be found centered than in him. No subject was ever brought
under our notice that he was not only familiar with, but he illustrated it
with the results of his own great experience or the practical application
of his reasoning mind. Ever ready to do good, he never considered his
exalted intellect humbled by entering even into the very minute details

which must occasionally spring up in man’s converse with man; but
robing even the humblest idea in the majesty of his own thoughts, he
made strong the weakness of others …
… An able writer and expounder of the highest branches of human
learning, with a world-wide reputation, Dr Boole’s unassumed
humility endeared him to all, for he was humble even as a little child.
His gigantic intellect, which could detect the laws that govern thought,
he could bring down to a level with the feeblest capacity and rejoice
when he affected any good. Cut off in the meridian splendour of a life
devoted to a career of usefulness, both in public and private, the
country of his birth mourns for him, the land of his adoption looks
down with sorrow on his tomb. He was thus called away from us
suddenly and unavailing is now our praise. In the silence of the grave
it cannot charm the cold dull ear of death; yet we owe this humble
tribute to the worth of one whose counsel we respected and of whose
presence amongst us we felt ever proud.
Meanwhile, in Lincoln, there was widespread regret at the news of Boole’s death
and his friends there were determined that a memorial should be erected in his
native city equal to, if not better than, that provided in Cork. His friends,
admirers and former pupils held a private meeting at the Guildhall in Lincoln on
11 January 1865. In the chair was Alderman Snow, who had been the doctor
present at Boole’s birth, nearly fifty years previously. In the audience were the
Archdeacon of Lincoln, E.R. Larken, J.B. Porter and, inevitably, the Brooke
brothers William and Benjamin. A committee was formed and a subscription list
opened for the purpose of placing a memorial window in the Cathedral Church
of Lincoln22 and an additional memorial in the City of Lincoln, if funds would
permit. An information leaflet, printed with great care and taste by the Brookes,
accompanied the petition for funds and it included the following words: ‘Those
friends, again, who had the privilege of his more intimate acquaintance, will,
doubtless, rejoice in the opportunity of testifying their sense of innate nobility
and benevolence of his character, and of the many domestic and social virtues by
which he was distinguished.’
A few months later, the committee was able to announce that the sum of £139
17s. had been donated but that up to £50 more would be needed if a window of
the appropriate size and character were to be provided. Finally, in 1869, a fine
stained glass window was inserted in the North Aisle of the Cathedral by the
renowned artists Ward and Hughes, with a Latin inscription on a brass plate
underneath. In translation, it reads:

In memory of George Boole, LL.D, citizen of Lincoln, a man of the
acutest intellect and manifold learning, who being specially exercised
in the severer sciences, diligently explored the hidden recesses of
mathematics and happily illuminated them by his writings. He was
carried off by an untimely death in the year 1864.
Mary Boole suggested to the committee that ‘the calling of Samuel’ would be a
suitable theme for the window as it was one of her husband’s favourite biblical
stories and this suggestion was readily adopted. ‘Christ teaching’ and ‘Christ
among the teachers’ were chosen as the minor themes.
From Lincoln also there were personal tributes. An ‘old friend’ of Boole’s
quoted by Samuel Neil, wrote:
As a man, I have scarcely ever known George Boole’s equal. Looking
back through the forty years – and I am nearly threescore and ten –
that I have known him, I cannot recall an act or word of his which I
could wish to have been otherwise. A perfect and blameless man is, we
know, not to be found on earth; and, doubtless, my friend had his
faults; yet in honestly and searchingly revising the past, I see only a
life of unfailing duty and self-sacrifice, incapable of a mean or low
thought, with not an iota of vanity – even when he had become one of
the landmarks of science and must have known it.
Boole’s death was widely reported in the newspapers and many carried lengthy
obituary notices which were, on the whole, full of praise and frequently
flattering. However, The Athenaeum, a public journal among those professedly
devoted to literature and science, dismissed the event with a few faint and cold
remarks and in the process managed to get the day of his death wrong.
… Science has suffered some loss in the demise of Professor Boole of
Queen’s College, Cork, in which institution he held the mathematical
chair. The Professor’s principal works were An Investigation into the
Laws of Thought and Differential Equations, books which sought a
very limited audience and we believe, found it. He died on Friday last
week.
Other journals were kinder. The Cork Constitution wrote that the College had
sustained a great loss and not only the College, but the country. There was, it
claimed, no profounder mathematician in Europe than Professor Boole. The
London News had an obituary notice written by Ryall, with a flattering portrait

which is now the popular image of what Boole looked like. The London Times
said:


The Boole Memorial Window in University College, Cork (left) and the panel showing Boole at work
(above)                                            (Photograph by R. O’Rahilly, Courtesy Cork University Press)

An untimely death has put a stop to his labours. They were undertaken
in pure love of science and with no thought of winning honour and
renown; but their value was recognised throughout the kingdom and
by the foremost mathematicians on the Continent.
A final tribute was paid by his friend Robert Harley in a biographical account
published in the British Quarterly Review of 1866:
There are some men whose office gives them celebrity; there are other
men who give celebrity to their office. Boole was one of the latter. The
Chair of Mathematics which he filled at Cork would not have made his
name illustrious; but that Chair has, through the genius and labours of
its first occupant, acquired a reputation which only powers of the
highest order in his successors can sustain and perpetuate.
In 1967 one of the craters of the moon was named in honour of Boole, but his
immortality in mathematics had been assured for many years.
His name will live on as long as the computers which depend so vitally on
Boolean algebra continue to operate and as long as students of mathematics
study ring theory, differential equations, probability theory, difference equations,
invariant theory, operator theory, set theory and, of course, mathematical logic.

Electrical engineers are dependent on Boole’s mathematics too and there is one
fact that would surely have drawn a smile from the self-educated cobbler’s son
who became interested in mathematics because of his interest in astronomy – the
modern ‘pictures’ received from space, transmitting information from the
planets, consist of endless combinations of the symbols 1 and 0.

G
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
The Remarkable Boole Family
eorge Mary Boole were remarkable people and there is little doubt that the
five Boole daughters inherited and transmitted to their descendants many
aspects of the genius of their parents. At the time of their father’s death, the
eldest daughter, Mary, was eight years old and the youngest, Ethel Lilian, was
only six months, so it is unlikely that George Boole had much direct influence
on his daughters’ educational and personal development. However, his genetic
influence was a powerful one and it is no exaggeration to say that he and his
wife produced a family of geniuses. Even among the third and fourth generations
of their descendants were to be found an exceptionally large number of men and
women who contributed significantly to twentieth-century science and learning.
When Boole died so unexpectedly, he left his wife and family virtually
destitute.1 As a result of the agitation of some of Boole’s friends, notably de
Morgan, Mary Boole was awarded in the following year a Civil List pension of
£100 per annum, a small amount admittedly but perhaps just enough to tide her
over until she could settle her affairs and find a suitable position. Relatives of
course helped in the rearing of the children – some of the daughters were
brought up by the Ryalls in Cork, while others were looked after by Boole’s
brothers and sister. Mary Boole, however, could see no future for herself and her
family in Ireland and she resolved to return to England as soon as possible. One
of the first people to whom she turned was the Reverend Frederick Denison
Maurice, with whose writings she and her husband had such an affinity. In the
early part of 1865, wishing to take up employment in some educational
institution, she consulted Maurice to learn, as she put it, ‘the position with regard
to the religious world of people of the essentially pantheistic temperament and
those of the essentially scientific turn of mind’. In other words, she wondered if
‘someone of her beliefs and attitudes towards nature and science might be useful
in the service of the English National Church as conceived by Maurice, or if she
would be forced to live in a state of negative antagonism to religion and even
active hostility to religious dogma.’
Maurice, perhaps sensing that she could be very useful in promoting his ideas
on Christian Socialism and the National Church, or simply because he

sympathised with her position and felt sorry for her, immediately offered to find
her work in an institution with which he was connected. The institution was in
fact Queen’s College, London, founded in 1848 as the first college for the higher
education of women in England.2 Maurice had been the driving force behind its
foundation and its continuing inspiration, with the result that the College (still
happily flourishing) has played a very important part in the development of
women’s education. Mary Boole, still only thirty-two years of age, jumped at the
offer and set off for London; she was appointed Librarian at Queen’s College, a
post specially created for her at the suggestion of Maurice. It is also possible that
Francis Newman had a hand in the appointment.
At that time, the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge gave no degrees to
either Jews or women; but the Queen’s College in Harley Street had no degrees
to confer because its sole purpose was educational. The students were all women
though the professors were all men; however, there were some women assistants
on the teaching staff. Mrs Boole was given the tenancy of No. 68 Harley Street,
where she ran a boarding house for students until 1873 during which time two of
her own daughters attended the junior school of the college. She stimulated the
students with her interests which included psychology, psychic science,
mathematics, Judaism, ‘true logic’ and problem encounter groups. However, she
eventually came to be regarded as a somewhat unstable character and the
Committee of Education, worried by what they considered her dangerous ideas,
terminated her lease in 1873.
Shortly after George Boole’s death, his friends and admirers naturally
broached the subject of a full-length biography. Robert Harley wrote a lengthy if
slightly rosy account of Boole’s life, which was published in the British
Quarterly Review in July 1866, and a shorter piece in the Proceedings of the
Royal Society. He remarks:
The foregoing sketch is far from being complete. When the biography
of Boole is written, the materials of which we are glad to learn are
being collected, many illustrations will doubtless be given of the
versatility of his talent, his love of poetry and music, his fine
appreciation of the beauties of external nature, his profound reverence
for truth, especially religious truth, and many other qualities of his
intellect and heart which we have not so much as touched upon.
Mary Boole wrote a piece of some fifty printed pages, entitled Home Side of a
Scientific Mind, and as Maurice was mentioned frequently in her account, she

decided to submit the material to him, with disastrous consequences. Much later
in her life, she related what happened:
Scientific people wished me to edit a biography of my husband. The
materials were collected and submitted to Mr Maurice in order that the
explanation of my husband’s strange reticence and his retirement from
the society most congenial to him might be so stated as to do no
needless injury to the cause of Maurice’s Reform. Mr Maurice
expressed the most intense and inexplicable objection to the
publication of the biography of any psychologist or religious teacher;
at least until the personal interest in the man himself should have had
time to die down. Although I could not at the time understand his
reasons for the objection, he so evidently had reasons that I stopped
the publication. This gave rise to so much misunderstanding and
trouble that the materials collected were dispersed … This might seem
regrettable, but it has never caused me any regret; knowing F.D.
Maurice as I grew to know him, one could not doubt that at certain
moments he was inspired by a consciousness far higher than his own.
Afterwards Alexander Mac Farlane, who wrote a short account of Boole’s life in
Ten British Mathematicians, observed:3‘… of Boole no biography has appeared
… Last summer, when in England, I learned that the reason why no adequate
biography of Boole had appeared was the unfortunate temper and lack of sound
judgement of his widow. Since her husband’s death Mrs Boole has published a
paradoxical book of the false kind worthy of a notice in de Morgan’s Budget.’
Not very many years afterwards, Mary Boole and Maurice parted company
and the reason may have been that he and his friends also opposed publication of
her book The Message of Psychic Science. Significantly, a few years after
Maurice’s death in 1872, she published her biographical account of her
husband’s life written from a domestic point of view.
Mary Boole then became secretary for a number of years to the extraordinary
James Hinton, who had been a friend of her father’s. Hinton was best known as
an ear surgeon, but he was highly eccentric and the author of a number of books
on psychology, philosophy theory and science.4 Like the Booles, he was
interested in the general problem of the reconciliation of science and religion.
Known to his many followers as ‘The Wizard’, he had a peculiar attraction for
women and regarded himself as the ‘Saviour of Women’ in the same way as
Christ was the Saviour of Men. Back in the l850s, Hinton had been induced by

the Reverend T.R. Everest to carry out some experiments suggested by
Hahnemann with a view to testing the truth of the homoeopathic system. Hinton
came to the desired conclusion, namely that the results were due to the
imagination of the patient acted upon by silent suggestion from the doctor. Mary
Boole fell even more under his spell when she began to believe that Hinton’s
confused ideas on the ‘art of thinking’ were in accord with her husband’s laws of
thought which, according to her, were ‘the true key to the physical and moral
regeneration of mankind’.
Hinton died in 1875, but Mary Boole continued to promote his ideas,
supplementing them with ‘a missing element’ from the writings of Thomas
Wedgwood, son of Josiah Wedgwood the famous potter. She became deeply
interested in Judaism under David Marks and wrote for many Jewish newspapers
and magazines. She corresponded with Charles Darwin and her house in
Ladbroke Road became the meeting place for antivivisectionists, vegetarians,
unconventional educational psychologists and fringe religion groups. She was a
friend of H.G. Wells and he wrote a fictional character named Boole into his
book The New Machiavelli.5 She died in 1916 at the age of 84, having spent 52
years as a widow. Perhaps there is one incident which summarises the great
financial strain under which she laboured to bring up her family after her
husband’s death: she is said to have been forced to sell the precious medal of the

Royal Society awarded to George Boole in 1844, though she did hold on to its
replica. However, it is also said that she bought a harmonium with the proceeds!
In her Collected Works, published in four volumes in 1931, Mary Boole left
behind over fifteen hundred pages containing an extraordinary mixture of
insight, common-sense, perception, educational innovation, long-winded
banality, incoherent confusion between philosophy and mathematics and, it must
be stated, what at times appears to be complete nonsense. A few extreme
extracts will perhaps give some of the flavour of her extraordinary ideas – the
reader is invited to decide the category to which each extract belongs.
1. For the last half century, and probably much longer, Ireland has
been appealing to America: for maize-meal; for a home of refuge;
for money; for dynamite; for sympathy; for political leaders; and
for other necessaries of life, real or supposed. The logical
corollary would seem to be that Ireland knows she is in sore need
of something; and has a strong instinct to turn to America for the
supply of her need; but has not as yet discovered exactly what it
is that she wants. May I venture to suggest that the great boon
which America is destined to give Ireland perhaps will consist in
sending to her the initiators of a great religious Reform in the
person of some American Jews.
When a situation has become complicated it needs a wave of
some foreign influence to wash ofF the accumulated cobwebs; a
current of new force to restore the equilibrium. A few clever
American Jews might work wonders in Ireland by attracting the
attention of English and Irish away from each other, and
introducing a new intellectual element. I am not proposing any
special solution to the political problems connected with Ireland;
it seems to me that the political situation can have no sane
solution while the population is virtually crazy with inherited
perplexity, wounded feeling and mutual misunderstanding. In
such a case, it is especially and emphatically true that the
legislator is of less importance than the song-maker; Bret Harte
might do more for Ireland than any statesman could effect. But
more useful still would be the personal touch of a few brilliant
and logical teachers; neither English nor Irish; neither Catholic
nor Protestant, neutral in religion as in nationality, and able to
sympathise in all idealisms without being entangled in any.

2. My Father believed (and so do I) that every woman becomes at
fifty potentially a medium, more or less. The temporary illness
from which so many women suffer at this age is the effort of the
mediumship to assert itself.
3. Now what is a Financier? A man whose work lies among token
values; who does nothing for his living except shuffle token-
values. He is the croupier of a gigantic gambling table.
4. It is demonstrable that the faculties on which depends the
possibility of logic and of algebra must have been evolved in
connection with an intime and private family life; they could have
had no origin anywhere else. They have been used, and therefore
modified for the uses of the individual and his contemporaries;
but their source was – male and female engaged in peopling the
world of the future.
5. Three main symbols of authority have shared between them the
attention of the world: the slave-driver’s whip, the shepherd’s
crook and the conductor’s baton. A reasonable man should make
up his mind which of the three he prefers: which he will submit to
when it is his turn to submit and wield when the time comes for
him to rule.
The 
slave-driver’s 
whip 
has 
various 
modifications,
conventionalised disguises: the sceptre, the mace, the truncheon,
the cane. The appeal of them all alike is to make immediate
impressions on the senses. Their message is brutal but honest: ‘If
you will obey my will, your sensations shall be more agreeable
than they will be if you thwart my will.’
The shepherd’s crook is modified into a bishop’s crozier. The
functions of the two are similar: to keep the sheep from strenuous
exercise in high altitudes, where their limbs grow fleet and their
tissues tough; to keep off wolves who might dispute possession of
any portion of the flock with the man who considers himself its
rightful owner; to lead them into plentiful pasture, so as to make
them fat and their flesh tender, and guide them cunningly at last
into the yard of the slaughter-house. The whole system is simply
one long deception – often of sentimental self-deception.
The conductor’s baton exerts no control except during certain
hours of practice and of performance. Once the appointed time
has expired, every man is free to go where he likes and do as he
chooses. He is freer (because more able) than he would have been

without his occasional episodes of servitude, to play by himself
whatever tune he chooses, or to enter into effective combinations
with musicians not known in that conductor’s orchestra.
Friends, under which symbol will you serve? And by which will
you prefer to rule?
6. All mathematics would be simpler if we used a non-numerical
phraseology, as we surely should do if we were less enslaved than
we are by the convention of asserting that Arithmetic deals only
with questions of number. Much confusion in the teaching of
fractions is caused by popular misuse of the words ‘to multiply’
and ‘multiplication’, which essentially belong to the domain of
number and have no meaning where the symbols involved
represent unity, negation, or fraction. Some word should be
chosen instead of ‘multiply’ which is not associated with the idea
of number or of increase; this word should be defined in the
teacher’s mind as ‘doing to the operand what when done to Unity,
produced the operator’ and should be explained by him to the
children in a sense consonant with this definition.
7. No child should be given a multiplication table until it has first
constructed one.
8. Consistency – A course of thought normal to man and disastrous
to woman.
Lunacy – A course of thought normal to woman and
incomprehensible to man.
Sanity – A condition induced by the steady habit of thinking
according to the laws of one’s own physical thinking machinery.
9. Nearly half a century ago, I woke one night screaming in terror. I
had dreamed of a grey fiend, who had my dear dead father’s
features, but with a horrible expression on his face and horns
above it. His hands, ending in claws, were clutching at my hair;
and he was trying to drag me by it into hell. I saw his face and felt
his clutch after I woke, and was, for some time, powerless to
banish them. At times I see and feel them still. But I could and
did, and do, recognise the origin of the demon, and know him for
what he is: the child of my own folly and cruelty.
Whatever the merits or otherwise of these extracts, one thing is undeniable:
Mary Boole did her husband a considerable disservice when she took it upon
herself to publicise and interpret his work in mathematics and logic in terms of

her own psychology. It is clear that she had very little knowledge of mathematics
and little more than a superficial understanding of her husband’s work on logic
and, as the following extracts from her writings demonstrate, she allowed
religion, mathematics, logic and psychology to become hopelessly intermingled
and confused:
1. The equation 0 = x(1-x), or zero equals anything fused with its polar-
opposite, might be called the equation of Nirvana, as opposed to zero equals
no specialization, no idiosyncrasy, no ‘wrongers’, which is the equation of
death.
2. The first Hebrew algebra is called Mosaism, from the name of Moses the
Liberator, who was its great Incarnation or Singular Solution. It ought
hardly to be called an algebra: it is the master-key of all algebras, the great
central director of all who wish to learn how to get into right relations to the
unknown, so they can make algebras for themselves.
3. The general problem of Logic is: Given that there exist beings whose
consciousness is in n dimensions and other beings whose consciousness is
in n + a dimensions: Find the laws of orderly communication between the
two sets. If we had the answer, we ought, when we make n = 3 and a = 0 to
arrive at the laws of orderly communication between beings whose
consciousness is in three dimensions and other beings whose consciousness
is also in three dimensions. Boole’s books do this, but they do more.
I have been, for half a century, in the habit of conducting intercourse
with some being or beings whose consciousness is in 3 + a
dimensions; on the basis of a method taught me by George Boole. My
various writings are the result of this intercourse.
I believe that the works of N.A. Boulanger, G. Boole, Augustus de
Morgan and the (so-called) Shakespeare plays were written under
similar conditions.
Nevertheless, the writings of Mary Boole on the teaching of mathematics to
young children constitute one of the first attempts towards arriving at abstract
concepts by means of experiencing the real world surrounding the child. From
her own experiences, she had a good grasp of the difficulties young minds
encounter when studying mathematics and she was particularly keen on
understanding geometrical concepts by actually drawing and constructing
curves. She marketed commercially Boole Curve Sewing Cards – simple grids
on which many geometric concepts, such as lines and their envelopes, could be

constructed and illustrated. It is said they were invented by George Boole to
amuse his daughters and of course they form the basis of the present-day art
form of constructing pictures and designs by means of pins and threads or metal
wire, called filography.
In 1906, Mary Boole wrote the preface to Edith Somervell’s beautifully
illustrated book A Rhythmic Approach to Mathematics, in which she explained
how mathematical concepts such as curves of pursuit and envelopes could be
illustrated and used for decorative purposes.6 It is an absolutely superb book on
the occurrence of geometry in the real world and, especially today, it would be
an ideal book to stimulate young peoples’ interest in the beauty of geometry. It
was sold accompanied by Boole Curve Sewing Cards, consisting of seven
packets of designs each containing twelve cards and there were surprisingly
many accessories such as lace threads, rainbow colours, crewel needles,
kindergarten prickers and filoselle silks.
Mary Boole was undoubtedly a crank, an eccentric and the holder of many
unorthodox beliefs and opinions, but she was truly a woman before her time,
whose ideas on educational psychology deserve to be better known. On the other
hand, it is perhaps just as well for her husband’s reputation that her writings
were not widely read.
The Boole’s eldest daughter Mary was rather unremarkable in comparison with
her sisters, but she married Charles Howard Hinton, the remarkable eldest son of
James Hinton.7 While at school in Rugby, C.H. Hinton had become interested in
Boole’s mathematical work. He won a scholarship to Balliol College, Oxford,
where he took the highest honours in mathematics. He studied physics in Oxford
and Berlin and then pursued a teaching career in Japan, eventually becoming a
schoolmaster at Uppingham. However, he was forced to leave England under a
cloud having being tried in 1886 at the Old Bailey for bigamously marrying a
woman named Maud Weldon with whom he had spent a week in a King’s Cross
hotel and by whom it was alleged he was the father of twins. In 1893, he was
offered a post at Princeton where he remained for a number of years as an
instructor in mathematics. In 1897, he made headlines with his invention of an
automatic baseball pitcher which, powered by charges of gunpowder, shot balls
at high velocity and could be adjusted to produce pitches with a great variety of
speeds and curves. It was used by the Princeton team in practice for a time, but
after a few accidents the batters became afraid to face its ferocity.
Hinton however is best remembered for a number of extraordinary books
which include A New Era of Thought, An Episode of Flatland and The Fourth

Dimension8, 9, 10. He was fascinated by the possibility of life in either two or
four dimensions and it is quite probable that his interest in these topics was
stimulated by his mother-in-law Mary Boole and her daughters. In A New Era of
Thought and The Fourth Dimension, Hinton developed a geometrical method of
building models of the three-dimensional cross-sections of four-dimensional
solids. He used hundreds of small cubes, coloured and labelled in a most detailed
and ingenious manner, and by contemplating these cubes for many years he
claimed that he had learned to visualise a fourth dimension in much the same
way as a Flatlander might come to a knowledge of our three-dimensional space
by examining the plane cross-sections of solid objects. His ideas must not be
dismissed as those of a crank because in those pre-Einstein days of 1904 he
showed a good understanding of the non-Euclidean geometry of Lobatchewsky,
Bolyai and Gauss, and of the possibility of considering four-dimensional space
as a genuine mathematical entity worthy of study. He also investigated the
possibility of applying the fourth dimension to analyse logical syllogisms but,
amazingly, he concentrated on Jevons’ approach and did not mention George
Boole at all.

Boole’s third daughter Alicia (Alice) seems to have been the only one of the five
who inherited directly her father’s mathematical talent.11 She was only four
years of age when he died, so her mathematical ability was purely hereditary.
She spent her childhood repressed and unhappy, partly with her maternal
grandmother in England and partly with her great-uncle John Ryall in Cork.
When Alice was about thirteen, she was united with her four sisters and her
mother in London where, according to Ethel, the youngest sister, they lived in a
poor, dark, dirty and uncomfortable house. Her educational opportunities were
even more limited than those of most young women of the day and her
geometric background consisted merely of the first two books of Euclid. But
when her brother-in-law Charles Howard Hinton introduced his little wooden
cubes and set the young Boole girls the task of memorising the arbitrary list of
Latin names he had assigned to them, Alice, who was then about eighteen,
became fascinated and began to experiment by piling them into various shapes.

She had little interest in the mystical aspects of a fourth dimension which so
intrigued Hinton, but she developed instead an amazingly clear grasp of four-
dimensional geometry. She was particularly interested in the convex regular
solids in four dimensions and she introduced into English the term ‘polytope’ to
describe them.

Alice Boole had all the hallmarks of an extremely talented and creative pure
mathematician and it is a tragedy that, due to her circumstances and the attitude
towards the education of women at the time, her gifts were not allowed to
flourish fully. Nevertheless, despite the fact that she was almost entirely self-
educated, she produced work of startling originality for a young girl. She found
that there were exactly six regular polytopes in four dimensions and that they are
bounded by 5, 16 or 600 tetrahedra, 8 cubes, 24 octahedra or 120 dodecaehedra.
She then produced three-dimensional central cross-sections of all the six regular
polytopes by purely Euclidean constructions and synthetic methods for the
simple reason that she had never learned any analytical geometry. She made
beautiful cardboard models of all these sections, but of course it was all done
purely out of interest and she had no notion of publishing her results.
In 1890 she married Walter Stott, an actuary, and put all thoughts of
mathematics aside, devoting herself to her husband and rearing their two
children on a small income. Then, around the turn of the century, her attention
was drawn to a paper by Professor Peiter Schoute of the University of Groningen
in the Proceedings of the Amsterdam Academy. Schoute had solved Alice
Boole’s problem by purely analytical means and his results were identical with
hers. She constructed a complete set of cardboard models, photographed them
and sent prints to him. Totally unaware of her work, he was astonished at what
she had accomplished but was just as incapable of understanding her geometric
methods as she was of understanding his analytical ones. Schoute asked if he
might come to England and collaborate with her. He also insisted that she

publish her work and this was done in two parts in 1900 and 1910 in Holland.12
They worked happily together for a number of years, with her exceptional
powers of geometric visualisation perfectly complementing his analytical
approach. After his death in 1913, she was invited to attend the tercentenary
celebrations of the University of Groningen and on 1 July 1914, she was
conferred with a richly deserved doctorate, honoris causa.
In later life, she resumed her mathematical activities in 1930 when her
nephew G.I. Taylor introduced her to H.S.M. Coxeter, the famous geometer. In
his words, ‘the strength and simplicity of her character combined with the
diversity of her interests to make her an inspiring friend.’ She worked with
Coxeter on an investigation of Gosset’s four-dimensional polytope which he had
rediscovered about that time. Again she made models of its sections and she was
the first to point out that the vertices of the Gosset polytope lie on the edges of
another polytope, dividing them in golden section. She suggested the idea of
partial truncation and invented the processes of expansion and contraction,
which led to her discovering a great variety of uniform polytopes. W.R.R. Ball
in his classic book Mathematical Recreations and Essays13 described the
methods of Alicia Boole Stott as ‘extraordinarily fruitful’ and it is interesting to
speculate what contributions she might have made under her father’s guidance,
had he lived. She herself died in 1940 at the age of eighty. Perhaps, as in her
father’s case, her originality was due to the fact that her mind was untarnished
by a university education.
Alicia Stott’s son, Leonard Boole Stott (1892–1963), became one of the
pioneers in the treatment of tuberculosis.14 After graduating in medicine from
the University of Liverpool in 1914, he served in France during the First World
War and was awarded the Military Cross. In 1921, he became RMO at the
famous Papworth Village Settlement where he remained for 33 years, except for
service in the Second World War. Papworth was based on the-then revolutionary
concept that a village could be set aside for patients with tuberculosis to live
normal lives and bring up their children in healthy conditions while applying the
lessons of sanitorium treatment. The critics, who had foretold the early death of
every child born in the village, were confounded when the incidence of the
disease in such children turned out to be minimal. Stott worked tirelessly on the
Papworth project, visiting every home, impressing on the parents the need for
personal hygiene, the proper disposal of infected sputum, the rigorous
sterilisation of feeding utensils, isolation in every illness and the importance of a
nourishing diet. In later life, he was honoured with an OBE for his work.

However, Leonard Stott’s talents were by no means confined to social
medicine. He had a most original and inventive mind and became widely known
as the inventor of a very successful artificial pneumothorax apparatus and also a
portable X-ray machine. He undoubtedly inherited the mathematical skills of his
mother, his grandfather Boole and perhaps his great-great uncle Sir George
Everest, because he invented a system of navigation based on spherical
trigonometry. This system was inspired by his ardent enthusiasm for sailing and
astronomy, and it saved his life on a number of occasions when he was in danger
at sea.
The Boole’s second daughter Margaret married Edward Ingram Taylor, a well-
known artist who was the son of a foundling. Taylor was a successful landscape
artist and exhibitor at the Royal Academy and he made fine pencil drawings of
English flowers of which there are collections in the British Museum. However,
his main source of income was the design of decoration for the public rooms of
ocean liners. Margaret seems to have passed on the Boole genius because their
son, Geoffrey Ingram Taylor, became one of the most brilliant and influential
mathematical physicists of the twentieth century.15 While he was still a child,
G.I. Taylor was given a small X-ray bulb by his aunt Lucy Boole and he became
fascinated by experiments involving X-rays of low intensity. At the Christmas
lectures for children at the Royal Institution, he was introduced to William
Thomson, Lord Kelvin, as the grandson of George Boole; highly conscious of
his ancestry, which also included Sir George Everest, he decided to devote his
life to science. While at University College School, he came across a copy of
Lamb’s Hydrodynamics in his uncle Walter Stott’s library and it struck him that
this subject would go very well with his interest in sailing and boating.
In 1905, he was awarded a scholarship by Trinity College, Cambridge, and in
that year he proceeded to Cambridge to study mathematics – a privilege denied
to his grandfather. Among his lecturers there were such illustrious names as
Whitehead, Whittaker and Hardy, and later on he studied physics under the
famous J.J. Thomson. He was given a scholarship at Trinity which enabled him
to devote himself full-time to research and he began a lifelong association with
the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge. Taylor published over two hundred
scientific papers of very high quality and value during his lifetime and made
significant contributions to a wide range of topics including shock waves,
dynamical meteorology, turbulent motion, location of icebergs, theoretical
hydrodynamics, supersonic flow, deformation of crystalline materials and
aeronautical dynamics. His interests were strongly influenced by the war effort
and he turned to such subjects as underwater explosions, blast waves and the

detonation of solid explosives. He visited Los Alamos twice during the summers
of 1944 and
1945, and was present at the Trinity explosion of the atomic bomb, then being
tested. He was consulted about the blast wave effects of the bomb and many
other technical aspects of this new form of deadly explosion and was one of the
few men in the world with sufficient expertise and experience in this area.
Taylor also had many other achievements to his credit. He was a keen
yachtsman and invented a new form of anchor, the CQR (‘secure’), together with
its theory and practical demonstration. As an expert on aerodynamics, he was
associated with the first trans Atlantic flight from Newfoundland to Britain and

he was consulted in the design of the airships R100 and R101. He made
contributions to the theory of the weather on the earth and on other planets and it
is now widely believed that the famous red spot on Jupiter is a cosmic example
of the ‘Taylor Column’, a rotating column of fluid that is stable. His work on
turbulence in the atmosphere has been essential in the design of present-day
aircraft and jet engines. Paradoxically, Taylor was a classical mathematical
physicist who flourished in the Cavendish atmosphere of nuclear and quantum
physics.
G.I. Taylor received very many honours during his long life. He was elected
FRS in 1919 and knighted in 1944. He received at least a dozen honorary
doctorates from universities throughout the world, as well as numerous honorary
fellowships, awards and medals. Perhaps his proudest moment was when he was
awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Society in 1933, almost a hundred years
after his grandfather had received the first such medal for mathematics. He was
conferred with the Order of Merit in 1969 and died in 1975 at the age of 89,
sadly leaving no children.
The Boole’s fourth daughter Lucy did not marry and lived with her mother in
London in a semi-detached house at 16 Ladbroke Road, close to Notting Hill.16,
17 She died in 1905, in her early forties, but during her short life she too
exhibited signs of great scientific talent. She studied chemistry and was a
lecturer and demonstrator at the London School of Medicine for Women. She
collaborated and published jointly with Wyndham Dunstan, the chemist; she
became, it is believed, the first woman Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Free
Hospital, London. Her mother summarised her career pithily as follows:
Lucy Everest Boole: Never at any college. Learned chemistry in order
to qualify to act as dispenser or shop assistant in pharmacy. Became
Fellow of the Institute of Chemistry, Lecturer on Chemistry and Head
of Chemical Laboratories at the London School of Medicine for
Women.

The tone of this extract might suggest that there is some truth in the rumour that
Lucy Boole and Mary Boole did not always see eye to eye or even get on well
together.
Charles Howard Hinton and Mary Ellen Boole called their son George Boole
Hinton (1882–1943) and he became a mining engineer, a metallurgist and a very
active botanist. He spent the last seven years of his life in botanical exploration
in the mountains of central Mexico, collecting at least four genera and 350
species of plants new to science. His eldest son, Howard Everest Hinton, FRS
(1912–1977), the entomologist, became one of the outstanding British scientists
of the twentieth century.18 He was born in Mexico and was collecting insects by
the age of nine, whereby he acquired a knowledge of Coleoptera (beetles and
weevils) absolutely astonishing in a schoolboy. He was educated in Mexico City,
Berkeley and Cambridge and by the time he graduated with a BSc degree in
1934, he had already published 17 papers on the collection and identification of
beetles. In the South American expedition of 1937, he collected an unbelievable
8,000 specimens of bird lice in Bolivia and Brazil. During the war, he worked in
the British Museum, ‘camping beside his bench during the blitz’ and afterwards
he was appointed successively Lecturer, Reader and Professor of Entomology at

the University of Bristol. Over a period of nearly 50 years, H.E. Hinton
published over three hundred papers mainly on taxonomy, defining and
describing many new species of insects mostly in the Coleoptera, and he is
recognised as the world’s leading authority on Dryopoidea (a superfamily of
beetles). However, he had a very wide range of interests in biology and
published papers and books on such topics as flour moths, food storage,
mongooses, continental drift and evolution. His magnum opus The Biology of
Insect Eggs, published posthumously in three volumes running to about 1,500
pages, is unlikely to be superseded for many years to come. He was elected FRS
in 1961 and died in 1977, after a long struggle against illness and working to
within a few days of his death.

Howard Everest Hinton seems in many ways to have resembled his great
grandfather George Boole, of whom he was immensely proud. He was
passionately devoted to scientific truth and an absolutely tireless worker. For
example, while Head of the Department of Zoology at Bristol and engaged full-
time in teaching and research, he helped to found the Journal of Insect
Physiology and became its sole Editor; he later founded and edited an offshoot
Insect Biochemistry. He did not suffer fools gladly and was a brilliant
controversialist in the cause of scientific truth, often dismissing his opponents
and those who disagreed with him with a caustic and scathing wit. A short
extract from his reply to Professor Chester R. Longwell’s paper The Psychology
of Continental Drift will perhaps convey some idea of the invective of which he
was capable. Hinton had earlier described some of Longwell’s ideas as
‘absurd’:19
… It is the method of all sophists of all times to cite examples relating
to basically dissimilar cases … Longwell suggests, without actually
saying so, that my analysis of Simpson’s figures for Triassic reptiles is
incorrect. The conclusions I drew from these figures are the exact

opposite of those drawn by Simpson. We cannot both be right. The
reader will doubtless judge for himself which one of us is wrong.
By his choice of the title The Psychology of Continental Drift,
Longwell may mean us to know that his article is not intended to be a
contribution to the theory of continental drift. As an essay in
psychology it adds as little to that field as to the other.
Hinton had very strong and firmly held political views which were rooted in a
revulsion against any kind of oppression or exploitation. His feelings were
strengthened by his own observation of grave social injustices, just as his great
grandfather’s had been, and he became a devout disciple of Karl Marx. He
believed that there are no truths beyond those established by the scientific
method, but that the social and political theories of Marx are scientifically
proven truths. Yet in many ways he was a kindly man, a brilliant
conversationalist, with an absolutely wicked sense of humour, and a welcoming
and generous host as the author discovered when he stayed with him in 1976.
Unlike Boole however, he was not in the least upset by the various controversies
in which he engaged; in fact, he seems to have thrived on controversy which he
regarded as a device for forcing people to think deeply about their subject and
their own ideas.
Another great grandchild of George Boole’s, Joan Hinton (1921–2010), was a
physicist who worked on the development of the first atomic bomb, leading to
the explosion at Los Alamos. In his delightful book, Adventures of a
Mathematician,20 Stanislaw Ulam relates how some of his best students,
including Joan Hinton, suddenly disappeared to an unknown destination and
how he cleverly found out where they had gone by examining the slips of the
library books they had been reading in the previous weeks!
Joan Hinton was educated at Bennington College, the University of
Wisconsin, and gained her doctorate at the University of Chicago, where the
atomic bomb was first conceived. Her PhD work proved her to be a brilliant
nuclear physicist and she went on to become Enrico Fermi’s assistant. From
there, she went to work on the Manhattan Project in the laboratories at Los
Alamos and she was one of the few eye-witnesses of the first atomic explosion
in the New Mexico desert.
Her mother, Carmelita Hinton, was an outstanding American educator who
founded the co-educational Vermont boarding school that became a model for
progressive schools all over the country. It was run on the then revolutionary
principle that physical work was as important as academic classroom work in the

education of adolescent boys and girls. As a young girl at Putney school, Joan
Hinton fed animals, hauled manure and milked cows – actions that were in a
strange way to influence her later career. In 1947, shocked by the destruction to
which she had contributed, she ‘defected’ to Communist China. ‘I wanted to
leave, to leave forever, after the bombing of Hiroshima. I wanted to make up to
the world in some way for the part I had in making those bombs possible.’21 Her
‘defection’ made newspaper headlines of super atomic secrets being given to the
enemy, but in reality she arrived in a very primitive society where nails and
cooking pots were the equivalent of advanced technology. In her own words, the
whole point of leaving the United States was to leave the science of destruction
behind and to try and help people make life better. She was a superb athlete who
very nearly made the first woman’s American Olympic ski team; but she knew
that if she stayed in the United States she would become further involved in
refining the elements of destruction, so it was a matter of ‘selling her soul or
quitting’. In China, she and her husband and family worked on a state farm and
still live in a commune near Peking. She inherited her great grandfather’s tireless
desire for work, research and innovation, and displayed them in her efforts to
build a sensible technological future for China, without pollution and without
unemployment. She was appalled at the waste, the pollution and the lack of
recycling paper, glass and human waste when she revisited the Western world.
She missed physics and the excitement of research, but she felt that she had
chosen the better part in attempting to help lay the foundations of a new world in
China.
We come finally to the fifth and undoubtedly the most remarkable daughter of
the Boole family – Ethel Lilian (1864–1960), who was to become Ethel Lilian
Voynich or simply E.L.V.22 She was but six months old when her father died
and all she could remember of her childhood was that they were so terribly poor.
She grew up in London but had frequent holidays in Ireland and Cornwall. She
saw very little of her mother in early childhood but recalls that the house was
always full of eccentrics and intellectuals, talking and preaching. The influence
of James Hinton and his adoring female followers surrounded her childhood and
she was wise beyond her years. At the age of eight, she contracted erysipelas,
probably as a result of poor living conditions, and her mother shipped her off to
Lancashire to live for a while with her uncle Charles Boole who was manager of
a coal mine, hoping that the change of air and company would do her good. In
later life, Ethel claimed that Charles Boole was little less than a sadist who
although he never laid a finger on her personally, flogged his own children
continually. Though he claimed to be a music-lover, he forced her to play the

piano for hours on end, reducing her to tears of frustration while he pounded the
piano and made horrible faces. In later years, she magnanimously forgave him,
realising that he was a frustrated musician who could not express himself.
Ethel was a spirited youngster and when her uncle falsely accused her of
stealing a lump of sugar, she refused to confess and take the easy way out. He
locked her in a room all alone for days on end, threatening to put a chemical in
her mouth to test her truthfulness. She called his bluff by telling him that she
would drown herself in the horsepond and he backed down. He wrote to her
mother saying that she was having a bad effect on his own children and Ethel
was allowed to return home to London after two years. In later life, she wrote

her second novel Jack Raymond about an ill-treated boy, a social outcast whose
generous instincts had been perverted by the ill-treatment of a sadistic uncle, and
one does not have to look very far to find the inspiration for this book.23 Perhaps
she never really recovered from this childhood trauma. Arnold Kettle wrote:24
Mrs Voynich evidently had something of an obsession with physical
pain. Disease, torture and mutilation occur in her books with a
frequence for which there is not always artistic justification and there
is a rather ghoulish tendency to hover over descriptions of the
extremities of physical agony.
On the other hand, her tough childhood may have prepared her for the incredible
adventures that were in store for her and her father would doubtless have
approved of her spirit. She became a hyper-sensitive young girl and around the
age of ten, soon after returning from her uncle’s, suffered something akin to a
nervous breakdown. Though she was actually born in Ireland, she always
referred to herself as English and, surprisingly, she never espoused any of the
Irish revolutionary movements or any of the many attempts at land reform by the
Irish peasant farmers, reserving her attention instead for those in a similar plight
in Eastern Europe. She spent several holidays in Cornwall with her mother’s
relatives and set her last book Put off thy Shoes (1946) there, recalling some of
the happier memories of her childhood.25
When she was fifteen she spent a summer holiday in Ireland with her great
uncle John Ryall and his wife, and came across a book about Mazzini. She fell in
love with the image of the man with dark hair curling down to his shoulders and
his melancholy beauty haunted her. She copied the clothes he wore and dressed
in black until her marriage, in mourning for the state of the world. However, not
all was gloom, because she was passionately fond of music and only lack of
money prevented her from studying it. When she was eighteen, a small legacy
enabled her to study for three years in Germany at the Berlin Hochschule der
Musik and a curious incident there was to affect her future beliefs and attitudes
towards God and religion. When Professor Spitta, the great expert on Bach,
explained to her that in tuning, the third and fourth notes of the octave had to be
just a little off or otherwise the octave would not fit, she suddenly ‘began to hate
God and to despise the Almighty Creator of all things visible and invisible who
couldn’t make even eight notes fit’, and she remained devoutly atheistic for the
rest of her days. When Anne Fremantle told her many years later that Einstein
had shown that it was only in our space-time continuum that the octave does not
fit, the ninety-six year old Voynich replied reflectively, ‘Yes, perhaps I was a bit

hasty.’
Lily Boole, as she was known in her younger days, became attracted to the
revolutionary causes of Russia and Central Europe when she met two liberal
exiles, Prince Petr Kropotkin, who had been imprisoned in Russia and had
escaped to England, and Sergei Kravchinski (pseudonym Stepniak), who had
fled from Russia after assassinating Mezentzer, the brutal chief of the secret
Tzarist police. Stepniak taught her Russian and he was to play an important part
in her subsequent literary career. During Easter week 1887, she set ofF for
Russia to see for herself if conditions were as bad as the refugees claimed. She
arrived in Warsaw, where she stood in the great square, staring in horror at the
Warsaw Citadel, a hideous prison, while some of the prisoners looked out on her
slim blonde figure, bareheaded and dressed entirely in black. She sought out
Karaulova, a doctor, who was a sister of Stepniak’s wife, and together they
roamed the countryside rendering medical aid and other comforts to starving
peasants living in appalling conditions. She spent two full years in Russia,
deeply moved by what she had seen, and returned to London in 1889, smuggling
out of Russia a manuscript for Stepniak.
Back in London, she set to work with Stepniak organising the Society of
Friends of Russian Freedom and publishing a monthly magazine called Free
Russia. In the course of her work she met such celebrities as Eleanor, the
daughter of Karl Marx, Engels, George Bernard Shaw and Oscar Wilde. One
night late in 1890, there arrived at Stepniak’s house a man named Wilfred
Michail Voynich, who had been born in Lithuania in 1865 of Polish parents. He
had escaped from Siberia and, after incredible adventures, arrived penniless in
London with a piece of paper bearing the name Lily Boole and Stepniak’s
address. After he had washed and changed into some ill-fitting clothes, he turned
to Lily and said, ‘Haven’t I seen you before? Weren’t you standing in the square
near the prison fortress on Easter Sunday 1887?’ When she admitted she was, he
replied, ‘I was inside, and I looked out and saw you.’ After such a romantic
introduction, their friendship blossomed and they were married in 1891. They
collaborated with Stepniak in printing and sending books to Russia, such as
Russian translations of the works of Marx and Engels which were forbidden
there. In 1894 Ethel Lilian Voynich – now known as E.L.V. – made a dangerous
trip to Russia to organise the smuggling of illegal publications into the country
and she met many dissident Ukranian writers.
In the meantime, with Stepniak’s encouragement and under his guidance, she
turned to writing, initially concentrating mostly on translations of Russian

literature into English. She translated both classical and modern authors and also
Russian and Ukranian folk songs, having learned Ukranian in order to read in the
original the poetry of Sherchenko. Her first book was published in 1893 and was
entitled Stories from Garshin, a translation with an introduction by Stepniak.26
In 1894, she published a translation of a volume of pamphlets by Stepniak
entitled Nihilism as it is,27 and in 1895, a curious book The Humour of Russia,28
with an introduction by Stepniak and including a translation of one of his
humorous pieces. Russian humour of the Victorian era is unlikely to provoke
much laughter nowadays but, significantly, E.L.V. pointed out that ‘the richest
pearls of humour are gathered at the bottom of the sea of sadness.’ The book was
her contribution to a series covering the humour of over a dozen nations
throughout the world and remains today a curiosity and a collector’s item.
In 1895, Stepniak was killed by a train and with his death, E.L.V. and her
husband ended their involvement with the Russian revolutionary movement. It is
unlikely that the Voynich marriage was a close or happy one in the early days
and perhaps their friendship with Stepniak and his causes was all they really had
in common; after his death, a rift appeared and they drifted apart. In 1895,
E.L.V. threw herself into a brief but passionate love affair with the master spy
Sydney Reilly, one of the most incredible men of his or any other generation.
Reilly, whose real name was Sigmund Rosenblum, was nicknamed ‘the bastard
of Odessa’ and was said to possess eleven passports and a different wife to go
with each. Many believe that he was the original inspiration for James Bond
because Ian Fleming had indirect contact with him in his official work.
Reilly was born in Odessa in 1874, his mother a Russian of Polish descent and
his father, apparently, a colonel in the Russian army with connections at the
court of the Tsar. His family were Catholic landowners and mildly aristocratic,
but even in later life he never divulged their name. He was christened Georgi
and was well educated, showing an enormous aptitude for languages. He became
involved in student politics and was lucky to escape deportation to Siberia for
his Marxist activities, but otherwise, his early life was relatively uneventful.
Then, at the age of nineteen, just after his mother’s death, he received a
shattering psychological blow. Before the assembled family, a vindictive uncle
bluntly informed him that he was not his supposed father’s son but the result of
an adulterous relationship between his beloved mother and Dr Rosenblum, the
Jewish doctor who had attended her and whom Georgi had so much cared for
and admired hitherto. His name was not even Georgi, but Sigmund. Utterly
shattered by the knowledge that he was Jewish and illegitimate, he swore
undying hatred against his family, his country and the world, faked suicide and

stowed away on a British ship bound for Brazil. After many adventures, he
found himself in London in 1895 with a large amount of money which he began
to fritter away on gambling and high-living.
There he met Ethel Lilian Voynich who seemed to be daily drifting apart from
her husband and she quickly became his principal mistress of the moment. Using
his last few hundred pounds, the couple eloped to Italy. Here under the hot
Mediterranean sun and surrounded by the ever-present influence of the Catholic
Church which reawoke the suppressed memories of his upbringing, for the only
time in his life he bared his soul to a fellow human being and told every detail of
his dramatic background and adventures to E.L.V. To escape the burden of the
knowledge of his true father, he had worked in South America as a docker, a
roadworker, on a plantation, a cook and even a doorman at a brothel in Rio de
Janeiro. He had rescued three British intelligence officers from the swamps of
the Amazon jungles and led them to safety. He also told her of the torments of
his experiences while in jail.
Of course his clandestine relationship with E.L.V. did not last very long and
he soon deserted her, but not before they had visited Elba to worship at the
shrine of Napoleon, his lifelong hero. Reilly then worked for the British Secret
Service in Russia and it was at this time he finally decided on the name by which
he now seems to be remembered. The full story of his rather incredible life
afterwards as a master-spy is well told in Robin Bruce Lockhart’s book Ace of
Spies, published in 1967.29 In Lockhart’s words, Reilly was ‘the most amazing
secret agent in the history of espionage’. His life has been the subject of a major
television series made by Independent Television.
The heartbroken E.L.V. now returned to London from Florence where her
lover had finally abandoned her. She decided to continue her literary career by
writing a fictional novel. She called it The Gadfly, after the stinging insect that
drives animals crazy with its small and persistent bite, and though she never
actually admitted the fact, it is obvious that she based the novel on the early
adventures of Sydney Reilly. The Gadfly is set in Italy in the first half of the
nineteenth century and tells the story of Arthur Burton who, unknown to himself,
is the illegitimate son of Montanelli, an Italian priest, and Mrs Burton, an
Englishwoman. Before the death of his mother, Arthur is for many years under
the spiritual care of his real father, who is in charge of a seminary at Pisa. The
young man is gentle and devout and even has thoughts of entering the priesthood
until he meets again a childhood companion, Gemma, daughter of the English Dr
Warren. Now grown into a beautiful young woman, dressed all in black, she is

one of a group of conspirators, members of the Young Italy Society. He falls
madly in love with her and The Gadfly becomes a three-pronged story,
embracing all the passions in Arthur’s life – his love-hate relationship with his
natural father, the priest Montanelli; his fight with Church and State; and his
love for Gemma. There are many obvious similarities between Gemma and
E.L.V. herself, but even here E.L.V. insisted that the character was drawn from
Charlotte Wilson, mistress of Prince Petr Kropotkin.
After Montanelli is elevated to a bishopric, Arthur confesses his association
with the Young Italy Society to his successor Father Cardi, who immediately
betrays him to the authorities. He is imprisoned and, when released, accused by
Gemma of being a traitor. He is also shattered to learn for the first time that
Montanelli is his real father. Reeling from the shock, he fakes suicide and heads
for South America, where he wanders about aimlessly, his heart filled with
hatred for everything and everybody. He allows himself to be maimed and
mutilated and to suffer all kinds of indignity; stuttering horribly, he ends up as a
hunchback in a travelling circus, a pathetic figure of tortured ridicule. Yet
something deep in his heart can never forget his youthful vow to devote his life
to the freeing of Italy and somehow he returns there, his physical appearance
now totally unrecognisable. He meets up with Gemma again and the climax of
the novel is his confrontation with Montanelli, now a Cardinal. The gadfly
insists that he must choose between his earthly love for his child and his duty to
his spiritual children. Montanelli chooses the latter, as he must, and Arthur is
condemned to be shot after being slowly tortured. The whole affair, however,
unhinges the Cardinal’s mind and while carrying the host in solemn procession,
he raises it and then smashes it to the ground in a manic identification of himself
with God the Father, sacrificing his only begotten son for the salvation of
mankind. The plot of the book may sound a little melodramatic to modern ears
but it is still a very good read. Bertrand Russell, who did so much to establish
Boole’s reputation, described it as ‘one of the most exciting novels I have read in
the English language’.
The Gadfly was published in 1897 in New York rather than London because
the publishers, Heinemann, feared adverse public reaction to the inflammatory
emotions raised in the book.30 Criticism in the United States was at times intense
– one critic decried its ‘outrageous and horrible character’ – but it became a
great success and ran into many editions in both America and Britain. It is also
currently in print as a very popular paperback. Sydney Reilly was by no means
displeased by the book and probably a little flattered to have made such an
impression on the author; one can only speculate how Wilfred Voynich felt since

his own adventures must have inspired at least part of the plot.
Literary critics were divided on the book’s merits. Conrad disliked it
intensely, saying ‘I don’t ever remember reading a book I disliked so much’, but
Rolfe paid it the ultimate compliment:31 ‘It is doubtful whether Man ever
mentally knew Woman. It is certain that Woman never knew Man -except in the
case of the author of The Gadfly for example.’
The book was widely read by socialists in the Western world, but it was in
Russia that The Gadfly had an astonishing success. Its anti-clerical and
revolutionary theme, which was in fact merely the fabric of the story, appealed
enormously to those who supported the Bolshevik Revolution and the Tzarist
rulers’ condemnation only enhanced its popularity. After it was translated into
Russian in 1898, it virtually became the bible of the Revolution and it has sold
over five million copies in over a hundred editions in twenty-two of the
languages spoken in the USSR. It has also sold over a million copies in China
and Eastern Europe. It is estimated that 250 million Russian teenagers have read
The Gadfly in translation and many polls have shown that Arthur Burton is the
favourite hero of every right-minded, or perhaps one should say left-minded,
Soviet youth.
The book has since been translated into over thirty languages worldwide. A
dramatic version has never been off the boards in Moscow since 1920 and
Broadway did it the honour of putting on a pirated version. The Russians
produced two full-length film versions: the first, a silent one in 1928; the second
in colour with music by Shostakovich in 1955 won an award at the Cannes Film
Festival. There have been at least three operatic versions, the most recent in
1957 to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the Russian Revolution.
There have been many attempts to explain the extraordinary appeal of The
Gadfly to the Russians. Perhaps the most likely explanation is the fact that
Arthur Burton was eventually betrayed by the Church, his natural father, his
family and even the woman he loved, but yet he held firm to his revolutionary
ideals which in a way never betrayed him. Amazingly, it was only in 1967, with
the publication of Lockhart’s book Ace of Spies, that the true identity of the
inspiration for The Gadfly became known and, though the facts of the matter
were not widely publicised, many Russians must have been secretly horrified.32
Sydney Reilly was a passionate anticommunist who devoted much of his life to
the overthrow of the Bolshevik Revolution; yet, in the guise of Arthur Burton, he
has successfully insinuated himself deeply into the heart and mind of almost
every citizen of the Soviet Union! Perhaps that is the ultimate ironic

achievement of the world’s greatest master-spy.
E.L.V. published a number of other novels – Jack Raymond (1901), Olive
Latham (1904),33 An Interrupted Friendship (1910) and Put Off Thy Shoes
(1946) – some of which attempted to fill in gaps in her original story of The
Gadfly, but she never again scaled the heights of her first novel.34 In 1931, she
published a translation into English of Chopin’s letters;35 in later life, she turned
her attention from literature to music and published a number of cantatas. She
worked as a social worker for the Quakers during the First World War and
developed an intense and abiding hatred of violence and war.
Wilfred Voynich moved from London to New York in 1914 and his wife
followed him there in 1920.36 He is remembered as one of the world’s greatest
experts and dealers in rare books, both in England and the United States. In
1912, he purchased for an unknown sum in Italy a mysterious manuscript written
in code which has come to be known as the ‘Voynich Manuscript’.37 It has been
described as ‘the longest, the best known, the most tantalising, the most heavily
attacked, the most resistant and the most expensive of all historical cryptograms’
and it remains to this day unsolved, despite the efforts of all the world’s greatest
experts in the field of code-breaking. It has been ascribed to various people
including Roger Bacon (c. 1220–1292) and, while it undoubtedly has many
scientific references, no scientist has been able to decipher even part of it.
Voynich died in 1930 and E.L.V. kept the manuscript in a safe-deposit box for
thirty years. In 1960, it was sold for $160,000, and in the words of one of the
world’s greatest experts on cryptography, David Kahn: ‘… the book lies quietly
inside its slipcase in the blackness of Yale’s vaults, possibly a time bomb in the
history of science, awaiting the man who can interpret what is still the most
mysterious manuscript in the world.’
As for E.L.V., she lived quietly in New York after her husband’s death,
devoting her time mostly to her first love – music. She shared her life with her
devoted companion Anne Nill and her adopted daughter Winifred. She knew
nothing of her popularity in Russia and had received not a kopek in royalties for
her books sold there until, in 1955, a Soviet delegation in New York
rediscovered her. Pravda ran a three-column story under the headline ‘Voynich
is Alive in New York!’ and she began to receive sacks of fan mail. The Russians
took the unprecedented step of giving her a token $15,000 royalties. She died in
1960 at the age of 96, active and alert almost to the very end.
The Boole family was indeed a remarkable one and it is fortunate that George

Boole and Mary Everest transmitted to future generations some of their
exceptional talents and genius.

A
Bibliography of Boole’s Published
Works
t least three bibliographies of George Boole’s published works have
already appeared: the first by Todhunter in his edition of Boole’s
Differential Equations, published in 1865; the second in a catalogue of science
papers in the Library of the Royal Society; and the third by G.C. Smith in his
book The Boole – De Morgan Correspondence (1842–1864), published in 1982.
All of these lists are somewhat incomplete and contain a number of minor errors,
which the present author has attempted to correct in the following bibliography.
Ode to the Spring (1830) The Lincoln Herald, dated 28 May.
Letter to the Editor (1830) The Lincoln Herald, dated 12 June.
Letter to the Editor (1830) The Lincoln Herald, dated 26 June.
Lines to a Departed Friend, From the Greek (1830) The Lincoln Herald, dated
15 July.
To the Evening Star, From the Greek of Bion (1830) The Lincoln Herald, dated
25 August.
An Address on the Genius and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton (1835) Gazette
Office, Lincoln.
Researches on the Theory of Analytical Transformations, with a special
application to the Reduction of the General Equation of the Second Order
(1841) Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 64–73.
On Certain Theorems in the Calculus of Variations (1841) Cambridge
Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 97–102.
On the Integration of Linear Differential Equations with Constant Coefficients
(1841) Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 114–119.
Analytical Geometry (1841) Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 179–
188.
Exposition of a General Theory of Linear Transformations. Part I (1842)
Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 3, pp. 1–20.
Exposition of a General Theory of Linear Transformations. Part II (1842)
Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 3, pp. 106–119.
On the Transformation of Definite Integrals (1843) Cambridge Mathematical
Journal, vol. 3, pp. 216–224.

Remarks on a Theorem of M. Catalan (1843) Cambridge Mathematical Journal,
vol. 3, pp. 277–283.
On a General Method in Analysis (1844) Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society, vol. 134, pp. 225–282.
On the Transformation of Multiple Integrals (1845) Cambridge Mathematical
Journal, vol. 4, pp. 20–28.
On the Inverse Calculus of Definite Integrals (1845) Cambridge Mathematical
Journal, vol. 4, pp. 82–87.
Notes on Linear Transformations (1845) Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol.
4, pp. 167–171.
On the Theory of Developments. Part I (1845) Cambridge Mathematical
Journal, vol. 4, pp. 214–223.
On the Equation of Laplace’s Functions (1845) Report of the British Association
for the Advancement of Science, Cambridge, Part 2, p. 2.
On the Equation of Laplace’s Functions (1846) Cambridge and Dublin
Mathematical Journal, vol. 1, pp. 10–22.
The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, being an Essay towards a Calculus of
Deductive Reasoning (1847) Macmillan, Barclay and Macmillan,
Cambridge.
The Right Use of Leisure (1847) London.
On a Method of Definite Integration (1847) Report of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, Oxford, Part 2, p. 2.
On the Attraction of a Solid of Revolution on an External Point (1847)
Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 1–7.
On a certain Symbolical Equation (1847) Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical
Journal, vol. 2, pp. 7–12.
Remarks on the Rev. B. Bronwin’s Method for Differential Equations (1847)
Philosophical Magazine, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 6–8.
Note on a Class of Differential Equations (1847) Philosophical Magazine, vol.
30, no. 3, pp. 96–97.
A Memoir on Discontinuous Functions (1848) Proceedings of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. 3, pp. 182–184.
On a certain Definite Multiple Integral (1848) Proceedings of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. 3, pp. 217–218.
Remarks on a Paper by the Rev. Brice Bronwin, On the Solution of a particular
Differential Equation (1848) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
413–418.
Letter to the Editor concerning Remarks on a Paper by the Rev. Brice Bronwin,
on the Solution of a particular Differential Equation (1848) Philosophical

Magazine, vol. 33, no. 3, p. 211.
Notes on Quaternions (1848) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 278–
280.
Theoreme general concernant l’integration definie (1848) Liouville’s Journal de
Mathématique, vol. 13, pp. 111–112.
On the Analysis of Discontinuous Functions (1848) Transactions of the Royal
Irish Academy, vol. 21, pp. 124–139.
On a certain Multiple Definite Integral (1848) Transactions of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. 21, pp. 140–149.
On a General Transformation of any Quantitative Function (1848) Cambridge
and Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 3, pp. 112–116.
The Calculus of Logic (1848) Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal,
vol. 3, pp. 183–198.
Mr. Boole’s Theory of the Mathematical Basis of Logic (1848) Mechanics’
Magazine, vol. 49, pp. 254–255.
Supplementary Investigations on Discontinuous Functions and Definite Multiple
Integrals (1848) Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 3, pp. 292–
294.
On a General Theorem of Definite Integration (1849) Cambridge and Dublin
Mathematical Journal, vol. 4, pp. 14–20.
The Claims of Science, especially as founded in its Relations to Human Nature
(1851) London.
On the Theory of Linear Transformations (1851) Cambridge and Dublin
Mathematical Journal, vol. 6, pp. 87–106.
On the Reduction of the General Equation of the nth Degree. (Sequel to a
Memoir on the Theory of Linear Transformations) (1851) Cambridge and
Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 6, pp. 106–113.
Letter to the Editor (1851) Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 6,
pp. 284–285.
Proposed Question in the Theory of Probabilities (1851) Cambridge and Dublin
Mathematical Journal, vol. 6, p. 286.
On the Theory of Probabilities and in particular on Mitchell’s Problem of the
Distribution of the Fixed Stars (1851) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 1, no.
4, pp. 521–530.
Further Observations on the Theory of Probabilities (1851) Philosophical
Magazine, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 96–101.
An Account of the late John Walsh of Cork (1851) In a letter from Professor
Boole to Professor de Morgan. Philosophical Magazine, vol. 2, no. 4, pp.
348–358.

On Reciprocal Methods in the Differential Calculus (1852) Cambridge and
Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 7, pp. 156–166.
On Reciprocal Methods in the Differential Calculus, continued (1853)
Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal, vol. 8, pp. 1–24.
An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, on which are founded the
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities (1854) Walton and
Maberley, London.
Solution of a Question in the Theory of Probabilities (1854) Philosophical
Magazine, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 29–32.
Reply to some Observations published by Mr. Wilbraham in the Philosophical
Magazine, vol. vii, p. 465, on the Theory of Chances developed in
Professor Boole’s Laws of Thought (1854) Philosophical Magazine, vol.
8, no. 4, pp. 87–91.
On the Conditions by which the Solutions of Questions in the Theory of
Probabilities are limited (1854) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
91–98.
Further Observations relating to the Theory of Probabilities in reply to Mr.
Wilbraham (1854) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 175–176.
On a General Method in the Theory of Probabilities (1854) Philosophicai
Magazine, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 431–444.
The Social Aspects of Intellectual Culture (1855) An Address to the Cuvierian
Society. Cuvierian Society, Cork.
On certain Propositions in Algebra connected with the Theory of Probabilities
(1855) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 165–179.
On the Solution of the Equation of Continuity of an Incompressible Fluid (1856)
Letter to Rev. Charles Graves, 5 May 1856. Proceedings of the Royal Irish
Academy, vol. 6, pp. 375–386.
Letter to the Editor (1856) Cork Daily Reporter, 13 November.
Letter to the Editor (1856) Cork Daily Reporter, 27 November.
On the Comparison of Transcendents, with certain applications to the Theory of
Definite Integrals (1857) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
vol. 147, pp. 745–804.
On the Theory of Astronomical Observations, and on some Related Questions
(1857) Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
Dublin, Part 2, p. 2.
On certain Additions to the Integral Calculus (1857) Report of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, Dublin, Part 2, p. 2.
On the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to the Question of the
Combination of Testimonies or Judgements (1857) Transactions of the

Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 21, pp. 597–653.
Evidence to the Queen’s Colleges Commission (1858) Report of Her Majesty’s
Commissioners appointed to inquire into the Progress and Condition of
the Queen’s Colleges, H.M. Government, Dublin, pp. 171–174, 201–203.
Curriculum for the Degree of BA and MA in the Queen’s University (1858)
Report of Her Majesty’s Commissioners, HM Government, Dublin, pp.
327–328.
Letter to Dr Ryall (1859) An Investigation into the condition of the children in
the Cork Workhouse, by John Arnott, MP (privately published pamphlet).
Cork.
A Treatise on Differential Equations (1859) Macmillan, Cambridge.
A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences (1860) Macmillan, Cambridge.
On the Theory of Probabilities (1862) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, vol. 152, pp. 225–252.
On Simultaneous Differential Equations of the first order in which the number of
variables exceeds by more than one the number of the equations (1862)
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, vol. 152, pp. 437–454.
On Simultaneous Differential Equations in which the Number of Variables
exceeds by more than unity the Number of Equations (1862) Proceedings
of the Royal Society, vol. 12, p. 184.
On the Differential Equations of Dynamics (1862) Report of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, Cambridge, Part 2, p. 3.
Some Observations by Professor Boole (contained in On a Question in the
Theory of Probabilities, by A. Cayley) (1862) Philosophical Magazine,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 361–365.
Supplement to a paper On the Differential Equations of Dynamics (1862)
Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol. 12, p. 481.
Considerations sur la recherche des integraies premières des equations
differentielles partielles du second ordre (1862) Bulletin de l’Academie
Imperiale des Sciences de St Petersbourg, vol. 4, pp. 198–215.
On the Differential Equations of Dynamics. A Sequel to a paper On
Simultaneous Differential Equations (1863) Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society, vol. 153, pp. 485–501.
Ueber die partielle Differentialgleichung zweiter Ornung Rr+Ss+Tt+U (s2–rt) =
V (1863) Crelle’s Journal der Mathematik, vol. 61, pp. 309–333.
(Translated into English, with additional remarks, as Chapter XXIX in A
Treatise on Differential Equations: Supplementary Volume (1865) Edited
by Isaac Todhunter. Macmillan, Cambridge.) On the Theory of
Probabilities (1863) Philosophical Magazine, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 313–317.

On the Differential Equations which determine the form of the Roots of
Algebraic Equations (1864) Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol. 13, pp.
245–246.
On the Differential Equations which determine the form of the Roots of an
Algebraic Equation (1864) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, vol. 154, pp. 733–755.
A Treatise on Differential Equations: Supplementary Volume (1865) Edited by
Isaac Todhunter. Macmillan, Cambridge.
Of Propositions numerically Definite (1871) Published posthumously, written
about 1850. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 11,
pp. 396–411.
Boole’s Collected Logical Works, Volume II (1916) Edited by P.E.B. Jourdain.
Open Court, Chicago and London. (Volume I, which was meant to contain
a full-length biography of Boole, never appeared.) Mary Everest Boole:
Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel,
Essex. These volumes contain poems by George Boole: The Fellowship of
the Dead; Three Aspects of Nature; Ten Years Later; To the Number
Three; The Lord sitteth above the Water-Flood and the Lord remaineth a
King forever; The Communion of Saints; Ode to Truth; The Council of
Constance.
Studies in Logic and Probability by George Boole (1952) Edited by Rush Rhees.
Watts and Co., London. This contains: Sketch of a Theory and Method of
Probabilities founded upon the Calculus of Logic. Written between 1848
and 1854. pp.141–166; Logic and Reasoning. Title postulated by Rush
Rhees (Editor). pp. 211–229; On the Mathematical Theory of Logic and
on the Philosophical Interpretation of its Methods and Processes
(extracts). Written in 1855 or 1856. pp. 230–246. These three papers are
based on previously unpublished manuscripts by Boole, held in the
Library of the Royal Society, London.
The Boole – De Morgan Correspondence, 1842–1864 (1982) Edited by G.C.
Smith. Clarendon Press, Oxford.

Sources and References
CHAPTER 1: EARLY LIFE
1. Poetical Works of P.B. Shelley (1890) Frederick Warne and Co., London.
2. The King’s England – Lincolnshire (1949) A. Mee (Editor), Hodder and
Stoughton, London.
3. Details of the Boole family history are taken from a Boole family bible, in
the possession of the Reverend R.H.P. Boole.
4. Information on John Boole’s career is based on Mary Everest Boole’s
account in Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M.
Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex.
5. This quotation is from George Boole’s essay on The Right Use of Leisure
(1847) London.
6. Details of George Boole’s early life are based on material in the Local
History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library, especially the
following: The Life of George Boole by L. Elvin (unpublished); Some Notes
on the Boole Family by G. Layton (unpublished); and the Boole Archive,
University College, Cork.
7. Harley, R. (1866) George Boole, FRS. British Quarterly Review, vol. 44,
pp. 141–181. This article is the only substantial biographical paper on
Boole written in the nineteenth century and has been used freely throughout
the present book. It was reprinted in Studies in Logic and Probability by
George Boole (1952) Edited by Rush Rhees, Watts and Co., London.
8. Neil, S. (1865) Modern Logicians. The British Controversialist, pp. 81–
94,161–173.
9. Taylor, G.I. (1955) George Boole, 1815–1864. Proceedings of the Royal
Irish Academy, vol. 57, Series B, pp. 66–73.
10. Taylor, G.I. (1956) George Boole, FRS. Notes and Records of the Royal
Society of London, vol. 12, pp. 44–52.
11. George Boole’s poems translated from the Greek, and subsequent
correspondence, are from the Newspaper Archives of the British Museum.
Ode to the Spring appeared in The Lincoln Herald on 28 May 1830; two
letters from George Boole to the Editor were dated 12 June and 26 June
respectively; Lines to a Departed Friend (from the Greek) appeared on 15

July; To the Evening Star (from the Greek of Bion) was published in the
edition of 25 August.
12. Robertson’s comments are taken from G.I. Taylor (1955) George Boole,
1815–1864. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 57, Series B, pp.
66–73.
13. Huxley’s comments are from a personal communication to the author.
14. Bell, E.T. (1953) Men of Mathematics. 2 volumes, Penguin Books, London.
15. Information on Boole’s early teaching career is based on the following
sources: (1) Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M.
Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex; (2) The Life of George Boole by
L. Elvin (unpublished); (3) Some Notes on the Boole Family by G. Layton
(unpublished); (4) R. Harley (1866) George Boole, FRS. British Quarterly
Review, vol. 44, pp. 141–181; (5) S. Neil (1865) Modern Logicians. The
British Controversialist, pp. 81–94, 161–173; (6) R. Rhees (1955) Boole as
Student and Teacher. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 57,
Series B. pp. 74–79; (7) The Boole Archive, University College, Cork.
16. The prospectus of William Boole’s school is from the Local History
Collection of the Lincolnshire Central Library.
CHAPTER 2: HIS OWN MASTER
A general reference for this chapter is R. Harley (1866) George Boole, FRS.
British Quarterly Review, vol. 4, pp. 141–181.
1. The account of Boole’s views on Education is based on (1) R. Rhees (1955)
Boole as Student and Teacher. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy,
vol. 57, Series B, pp. 74–79; (2) Boole’s Essay on Education, the
manuscript of which is in the Library of the Royal Society, London.
2. The prospectus for Boole’s school in Waddington is from the Local History
Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
3. The prospectus for Boole’s school in Lincoln is from newspaper clippings
in the Local History collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
4. Extracts from letters to William Thomson and the Boole–Thomson
correspondence are from Professor P.D. Barry, University College, Cork.
5. The advertisement for Boole’s school in 1849 is from newspaper clippings
in the Local History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
CHAPTER 3: SOCIAL INVOLVEMENT

1. The quotation is from Samuel Neil (1865) Modern Logicians. The British
Controversialist, pp. 81–94, 161–173.
2. Hill, F. (1974) Victorian Lincoln. Cambridge University Press.
3. Second Annual Report of the Lincoln and Lincolnshire Female Penitents’
Home, Lincoln 1849, from the Local History Collection of Lincolnshire
Central Library.
4. The account of the Mechanics’ Institute is based on: (1) The Minute Book of
the Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute; (2) The Annual Reports of the Lincoln
Mechanics’ Institute; (3) A Catalogue of Books in Lincoln Mechanics’
Institute; (4) A Report on the Library of the Mechanics’ Institute. All are
from the Local History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
5. Boole’s A Plea for Freedom is in the Boole Mss., held in the Library of the
Royal Society, London.
6. Details of the Early Closing Association are from R. Harley (1866) George
Boole, FRS. British Quarterly Review, vol. 44, pp. 141–181.
7. Extracts from Boole’s address are from The Right Use of Leisure (1847)
London.
CHAPTER 4: EARLY MATHEMATICAL WORK
1. Details of Boole’s early mathematical reading are based on R. Harley
(1866) George Boole, FRS. British Quarterly Review, vol. 44, pp. 141–181.
2. The Boole–Bromhead correspondence is from the private collection of Lt.
Col. Sir Benjamin Bromhead, Thurlby Hall, Lincoln.
3. The papers are Boole’s (1) Researches on the Theory of Analytical
Transformations, with a special application to the Reduction of the General
Equation of the Second Order (1841) Cambridge Mathematical Journal,
vol. 2, pp. 64–73; (2) On Certain Theorems in the Calculus of Variations
(1841) Cambridge Mathematical Journal, vol. 2, pp. 97–102.
4. Details of Gregory’s life and the Boole–Gregory correspondence are based
on R. Harley (1866) George Boole, FRS. British Quarterly Review, vol. 44,
pp. 141–181.
5. The Cayley–Boole correspondence is in the Library of the University of
Cambridge.
6. Details of de Morgan’s life are based on the entry in The Dictionary of
National Biography.
7. The Boole–De Morgan correspondence is now happily collected in The
Boole–De Morgan Correspondence, 1842–1864 (1982) Edited by G.C.

Smith, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
8. The paper under discussion is Boole’s On a General Method in Analysis
(1844) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, vol. 134, pp. 225–
282.
9. Kelland, P. (1858) Address on the Award of the Keith Medal. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, pp. 84–87.
10. Details of Murphy’s life are based on (1) the entry in The Dictionary of
National Biography; (2) S. MacCnáimhín (1966) Éireannaigh San
Eolaíocht. Dublin.
11. Report of the British Association Meeting: Cambridge 1845 (1846) British
Association for the Advancement of Science, London.
12. Thompson, S.P. (1910) Life of Lord Kelvin. Macmillan, London.
13. The book under discussion is Boole’s The Mathematical Analysis of Logic,
being an Essay Towards a Calculus of Deductive Reasoning (1847)
Macmillan, Barclay and Macmillan, Cambridge.
14. De Morgan, A. (1847) Formal Logic. Taylor and Walton, London. This
book contains a detailed discussion of the De Morgan-Hamilton
controversy from de Morgan’s point of view.
CHAPTER 5: THE CORK PROFESSORSHIP
1. Boole’s letters of application, testimonials and related correspondence are
to be found in the State Papers Office, Dublin Castle.
2. There is comment on Boole’s application in S.F. Pettit (1973) The Queen’s
University, Cork: Its Origins and Early History. Ph.D. Thesis, University
College, Cork.
3. De Morgan, S. (1882) Memoir of Augustus de Morgan. Longman, Essex.
4. The account of Boole’s testimonial dinner in Lincoln is based on newspaper
accounts in the Local History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
CHAPTER 6: QUEEN’S COLLEGE CORK
1. There is much useful information on the history of higher education in
Munster and the background to the Queen’s Colleges in S.F. Pettit (1973)
The Queen’s College, Cork: Its Origins and Early History. Ph.D. Thesis,
University College, Cork. This work also serves as a general reference for
the chapter.
2. Reports of the opening of Queen’s College, Cork, are taken from The Cork

Examiner of 8 November 1849.
3. The statutory declaration signed by Boole and information concerning
salaries, courses and curricula are taken from the archives of University
College, Cork.
4. Cody, RA. (1859) The River Lee, Cork, and the Corkonians. Tower
(Reprint), Cork.
5. De Vericour, R. (1851) An Historical Analysis of Christian Civilisation.
London.
6. Details of the de Vericour affair are taken from the archives of University
College, Cork, based on clippings from Cork newspapers of the day: The
Cork Examiner, The Cork Reporter and The Cork Constitution.
7. Boole’s correspondence with Albani, the Deans and the Council is from the
archives of University College, Cork.
8. Details of Boole’s involvement in College affairs are taken from the Minute
Books of the Library Committee, the Faculties and the Council, in the
Archives of University College, Cork.
9. The paper under discussion in Boole’s The Claims of Science, especially as
founded in its Relation to Human Nature (1851) Taylor and Walton,
London.
CHAPTER 7: LOVE AND MARRIAGE
1. Details of Mary Everest Boole and her family are from (1) Mary Everest
Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W.
Daniel, Essex; (2) E.M. Cobham (1951) Mary Everest Boole: A Memoir
with some letters. C.W. Daniel, Essex.
2. Boole, M.E. (1878) Home Side of a Scientific Mind. University Magazine,
vol. 1 (in four parts). This article is reprinted in full in Mary Everest Boole:
Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel,
Essex.
3. Tahta, D.G., Editor (1972) A Boolean Anthology. Association of Teachers
of Mathematics, London.
4. Kneale, W. (1948) Boole and the Revival of Logic. Mind, vol. 57, pp. 149–
175.
5. Kneale, M. and Kneale, W. (1962) The Development of Logic. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
6. MacFarlane, A. (1916) Ten British Mathematicians. John Wiley, New
York.

7. Information on the marriage of George Boole and Mary Everest is taken
from the records of Wickwar Parish Church, Gloucestershire.
8. The letter to William Brooke is from the papers of Sir G.I. Taylor.
9. Boole’s will is from the Office of Registration of Wills, Four Courts,
Dublin.
CHAPTER 8: THE CUVIERIAN SOCIETY
1. For information on scientific education in Cork in the nineteenth century
and on the Cuvierian Society, see (1) S.F. Pettit (1973) The Queen’s
College, Cork: Its Origins and Early History. Ph.D. Thesis, University
College, Cork; (2) MacSweeney, M. and Reilly, J. (1958) The Cork
Cuvierian Society. Journal of the Cork Historical and Archaeological
Society, vol. 63, pp. 9–14.
2. Gwynn, D. (1951) Cork Cuvierian Society. Cork University Record, vol.
23, pp. 27–34.
3. Details of the affairs of the Cuvierian Society and on Boole’s papers
delivered to the Society are taken from The Minute Book of the Cuvierian
Society, Archives of the Cork County Library.
4. The rules and regulations of the Society are to be found in Reports of the
Cuvierian Society (1851) Cork.
5. The article on John Walsh is from Boole’s An Account of the late John
Walsh of Cork (1851) In a letter from Professor Boole to Professor de
Morgan. Philosophical Magazine, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 348–358.
6. The extracts quoted from Boole’s address are taken from The Social
Aspects of Intellectual Culture (1855) An Address to the Cuvierian Society,
Cork.
CHAPTER 9: THE LAWS OF THOUGHT
1. The De Morgan-Hamilton correspondence is taken from R.P. Graves
(1882) Life of Sir William Rowan Hamilton. 3 volumes, Hodges Figgis,
Dublin.
2. Details on Ryall are from the records of Trinity College, Dublin.
3. Russell, B. (1955) Letter. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 57,
Series B, p. 64.
4. Birkhoff, G. (1955) Letter. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol.
57, Series B, p. 64.

5. Letter from Boole to Sir William Hamilton is taken from J. Veitch (1882)
Hamilton. London.
6. Hesse, M.B. (1952) Boole’s Philosophy of Logic. Annals of Science, vol. 8,
pp. 61–81.
CHAPTER 10: CONTROVERSY
1. A general reference for this chapter is Evidence to the Queen’s Colleges
Commission (1858) Report of Her Majesty’s Commissioners appointed to
inquire into the Progress and Condition of the Queen’s Colleges, Dublin,
pp. 171–174, 201–203.
2. Quotes from Mary Boole are taken from her article entitled ‘Home Side of
a Scientific Mind’ (1878) University Magazine, vol. 1 (in four parts), which
is reprinted in full in Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited
by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex.
3. Details of Kane’s life are from (1) the entry in The Dictionary of National
Biography; (2) D. O Raghallaigh (1942) Sir Robert Kane. Cork University
Press, Cork; (3) T.S. Wheeler (1944) Sir Robert Kane: Life and Work.
Studies, pp. 158–168, 316–330.
4. Kane, R. (1844) The Industrial Resources of Ireland. Hodges and Smith,
Dublin.
5. Lane’s Memorial and details of the Alcock controversy are from (1) the
archives of University College, Cork; (2) R. O’Rahilly (1948) Benjamin
Alcock. Cork University Press, Cork.
6. Details of the Triennial Visitation are from (1) The Minute Book of the
Council of Queen’s College; (2) newspaper clippings in the archives of
University College, Cork.
7. Questions from Boole’s examination papers are taken from (1) The Annual
Reports of the President of Queen’s College, Cork for the years 1849—
1856; (2) P.D. Barry, Editor (1969) George Boole: A Miscellany. Cork
University Press, Cork.
8. Boole’s letters to Jack and Kane are from the archives of University
College, Cork.
9. The evidence and the letters of Boole and Kane are reproduced in full in the
general reference for this chapter: Evidence to the Queen’s Colleges
Commission (1858) Report of Her Majesty’s Commissioners, Dublin, pp.
171–174, 201–203.

CHAPTER 11: FAMILY LIFE AND SOCIAL ATTITUDES
1. General references for this chapter are (1) R. Harley (1866) George Boole,
FRS. British Quarterly Review, vol. 44, pp. 141–181. This article is
reprinted in full in Studies in Logic and Probability by George Boole (1952)
Edited by Rush Rhees. Watts and Co., London; (2) M.E. Boole (1878)
Home Side of a Scientific Mind. University Magazine, vol. 1 (in four parts).
This article is reprinted in full in Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works
(1931) Edited by K.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex.
2. Information on Boole’s residences in Cork was obtained from Mrs Sheila
O’Riordan, Mr C.J.F. McCarthy, Mr and Mrs S.T.S. Harman, and Mr and
Mrs D. Terry.
3. Letters to the President and the Council are from the archives of University
College, Cork.
4. The slum alley incident is recounted in G.I. Taylor (1955) George Boole,
1815–1864. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol. 57, Series B, pp.
66–73.
5. Newham, A.T. (1970) The Cork, Blackrock and Passage Railway.
Oakwood Press, Surrey.
6. Information on the births and christenings of the Boole children is from the
records of St Mary’s Church of Ireland, Shandon, Cork and St Michael’s
Church of Ireland, Blackrock, Cork.
7. Details of Boole’s income and expenses are based on entries in the
notebooks in the Boole Mss., held in the Library of the Royal Society,
London.
8. Letter on cruelty to animals was found among the papers of Sir G.I. Taylor.
9. Extracts from Boole’s lecture to the Mechanics’ Institute are from the Local
History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library.
10. Memoirs of Richardson Evans (manuscript notebooks) are from Joy
Robinson and Walter McGrath.
11. The pamphlet by John Arnott, M.P., on An Investigation into the Condition
of the Children in the Cork Workhouse is from the archives of University
College, Cork.
12. An account of the sailor incident is to be found in A. Fremantle (1975) The
Russian Best Seller. History Today, September, pp. 629–637.
13. Details on H.J.S. Smith are taken from A. MacFarlane (1916) Ten British
Mathematicians. John Wiley, New York.

CHAPTER 12: POETRY
General references for this chapter are: (1) Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works
(1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex; (2) G.I. Taylor
(1955) George Boole, 1815–1864. Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy, vol.
57, Series B, pp. 66–73.
1. The text and titles of Boole’s poems come from (1) Mary Everest Boole:
Collected Works (quoted above); (2) the papers of the Royal Irish
Academy; (3) the Boole Archive in University College, Cork.
CHAPTER 13: BOOLE AND HAMILTON: SOME
UNANSWERED QUESTIONS
1. Details of the life of Sir William Rowan Hamilton are from (1) R.P. Graves
(1882) Life of Sir William Rowan Hamilton. 3 volumes, Hodges Figgis,
Dublin; (2) T.L. Hankins (1980) Sir William Rowan Hamilton. Johns
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore; (3) Sean O’Donnell (1983) William
Rowan Hamilton: Portrait of a Prodigy. Boole Press Limited,
Dublin.
2. The Boole–Hamilton correspondence is from: (1) R.P. Graves (1882) Life
of Sir William Rowan Hamilton. 3 volumes, Hodges Figgis, Dublin; (2) the
archives of Trinity College,
Dublin.
3. The Everest-Hamilton correspondence and the De Morgan-Hamilton
correspondence are also to be found in R.P. Graves’ biography of Hamilton
(quoted above).
CHAPTER 14: RELIGION
The contents of this chapter are based largely on M.E. Boole (1878) Home Side
of a Scientific Mind. University Magazine, vol. 1 (in four parts), which article is
reprinted in full in Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M.
Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex.
1. These extracts are taken from Boole’s notebooks in the Library of the Royal
Society, London.
2. Carroll, L. (1896) Symbolic Logic. 2nd Edition, Harvester Press, New York.
3. Details on Renan, Colenso, Newman, Maurice and Gratry are based mostly

on entries in The Dictionary of National Biography.
4. Renan, E. (1927) The Life of Jesus. The Modern Library, New York.
5. Details on Renan, Colenso, Newman, Maurice and Gratry are based mostly
on entries in The Dictionary of National Biography.
6. Ibid.
7. Details on Renan, Colenso, Newman, Maurice and Gratry are based mostly
on entries in The Dictionary of National Biography.
8. Ibid.
9. Jenkins, C. (1938) Frederick Denison Maurice and the New Reformation.
SPCK, London.
CHAPTER 15: LATER MATHEMATICAL WORK
1. Broad, C.D. (1917) Review of Boole’s Collected Logical Works, vol. Mind,
New Series, vol. 26, pp. 81–99.
2. Hailperin, T. (1976) Boole’s Logic and Probability. North Holland
Publishing Company, Amsterdam. This excellent book is a critical
exposition of Boole’s logic and probability from the standpoint of
contemporary algebra, logic and probability theory.
3. The paper referred to is Boole’s Of Propositions Numerically Definite
(1871) Published posthumously, written about 1850. Transactions of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 11, pp. 396–411.
4. The paper referred to is Boole’s On the Application of the Theory of
Probabilities to the Question of the Combination of Testimonies or
Judgements (1857) Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. 21,
pp. 597–653.
5. The reference to Kelland’s account is from P. Kelland (1858) Address on
the Award of the Keith Medal. Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh, pp. 84–87.
6. The paper referred to is Boole’s On the Theory of Probabilities (1862)
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, vol. 152, pp. 225–252.
7. Details on the award of Boole’s FRS are from the Library of the Royal
Society, London.
8. Details on membership of the Cambridge Philosophical Society and the
degree of LL.D. are from the archives of the Universities of Cambridge and
Oxford.
9. The book referred to is Boole’s A Treatise on Differential Equations (1859)
Macmillan, Cambridge.

10. The quote from Mary Boole is taken from M.E. Boole (1878) Home Side of
a Scientific Mind. University Magazine, vol. 1 (in four parts).
11. The book referred to is Boole’s A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite
Differences (1860) Macmillan, Cambridge.
12. The quotation from Carver is taken from P.D. Barry (1969) George Boole:
A Miscellany. Cork University Press, Cork.
13. The papers referred to are Boole’s (1) On the Theory of Astronomical
Observations and on some Related Questions (1857) Report of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science, Dublin, Part 2, p. 2; (2) On the
Theory of Probabilities (1862) Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society, vol. 152, pp. 225–252.
14. Fearnley-Sander, D. (1982) Herman Grassmann and the Prehistory of
Universal Algebra. American Mathematical Monthly, vol. 89, March.
15. Grassmann, H. (1844) Die Ausdehnungslehre. Leipzig.
CHAPTER 16: THE FINAL YEARS
The general reference for this chapter is Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works
(1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex. The majority of
quotations cited have been taken from this work.
1. Details of the College fire are based on R. O’Rahilly (1949) A History of
Cork Medical School. Cork University Press, Cork.
2. Details of the Triennial Visitation of 1864 are from the archives of
University College, Cork.
3. Boole’s letter concerning the fire is taken from The Minute Book of
Council, Queen’s College, Cork.
4. Details of Boole’s proposals are to be found in his Curriculum for the
Degree of BA and MA in the Queen’s University (1858) Report of Her
Majesty’s Commissioners, Dublin, pp. 327–328.
5. The Boole–Todhunter correspondence is from the papers of Sir G.I. Taylor.
6. The Boole–Babbage letter is in the Library of the British Museum.
7. The Message of Psychic Science is included in Mary Everest Boole:
Collected Works (1931). Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel,
Essex.
8. Hyman, A. (1982) Charles Babbage. Oxford University Press. In this book,
it is related that Babbage wrote in the margin of his copy of Boole’s The
Laws of Thought, ‘Now this is the work of a real thinker.’
9. Symbolical Methods of Study is included in Mary Everest Boole: Collected

Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex.
10. Jevons, W.S. (1890) Pure Logic and Other Minor Works. Macmillan, New
York.
11. Passmore, J. (1967) A Hundred Years of Philosophy. Pelican Books,
London.
12. Discussion on the Boole–Jevons controversy is based on T. Hailperin
(1976) Boole’s Logic and Probability. North Holland Publishing Company,
Amsterdam.
13. The Boole–Jevons correspondence is to be found in the Boole Mss. in the
Library of the Royal Society, London.
14. Jevons, W.S. (1913) The Principles of Science. Macmillan, London.
15. Details on Boole’s final illness are based on accounts in (1) Mary Everest
Boole: Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W.
Daniel, Essex; (2) R. Harley (1866) George Boole, FRS. British Quarterly
Review, vol. 44, pp. 141–181.
16. The Ethel Voynich letter is from the papers of Sir G.I. Taylor.
17. Boole’s death certificate is from the Office for the Registration of Births,
Marriages and Deaths, Liberty Street, Cork.
18. The Evans-Ryall incident is from the memoirs of Richardson Evans
(manuscript notebooks), supplied by Joy Robinson.
19. The Resolution of Council is from The Minute Book of Council of Queen’s
College, Cork.
20. Information on the Boole Window in the Aula Maxima is based on P.D.
Barry, Editor (1969) George Boole: A Miscellany. Cork University Press,
Cork.
21. Caulfield’s tribute to Boole is from the Minute Book of the Cuvierian
Society, held in the Archives of the Cork County Library.
22. Information on the Boole Memorial Window in Lincoln Cathedral is from
the Local History Collection of Lincolnshire Central Library; and P.B.G.
Binnall (1966) The Nineteenth Century stained glass in Lincoln Minster.
Lincoln Minster Pamphlets (2), no. 3, Lincoln.
CHAPTER 17: THE REMARKABLE BOOLE FAMILY
General references for this chapter are (1) Mary Everest Boole: Collected Works
(1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel, Essex; (2) E.M.
Cobham (1951) Mary Everest Boole: A Memoir. C.W. Daniel, Essex.
1. Harley, R. (1866–1867) Obituary Notice of George Boole, FRS.

Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol. 15, pp. vi-xi.
2. Kaye, E. (1972) A History of Queen’s College, London, 1848–1972. Chatto
and Windus, London.
3. The reference is A. MacFarlane (1916) Ten British Mathematicians. John
Wiley, New York.
4. Information on James Hinton from the papers of H.E. Hinton is based on
(1) A. Calder-Marshall. Havelock Ellis; (2) E. Hopkins, Editor (1885) Life
and Letters of James Hinton. London.
5. Wells, H.G. (1913) The New Machiavelli. Bodley Head, London.
6. Somervell, E.L. (1906) A Rhythmic Approach to Mathematics. George
Philip and Son, London.
7. Information on C.H. Hinton is from (1) A. Calder-Marshall. Havelock Ellis;
(2) E.B. Johnson (1908) Dictionary of the University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis; (3) M. Gardner (1977) Further Mathematical Diversions.
Pelican Books, London.
8. Hinton, C.H. (1888) A New Era of Thought. Swan Sonnenschein, London.
9. Hinton, C.H. (1884) An Episode of Flatland. Allen and Unwin, London.
10. Hinton, C.H. (1904) The Fourth Dimension. Allen and Unwin, London.
11. Information on Alicia Boole Stott is from (1) H.S.M. Coxeter (1948)
Regular Polytopes. Methuen and Co., London; (2) a personal
communication to the author from Professor Coxeter.
12. Boole Stott, A. (1910) Geometrical Deduction of Semi-regular from
Regular Polytopes and Space Fillings.
13. Ball, W.R.R. (1947) Mathematical Recreations and Essays. 11th Edition,
Macmillan, London.
14. Information on Leonard Boole Stott is from the papers of H.E. Hinton and
the Obituary Notice for L.B. Stott, OBE, British Medical Journal, 23
February 1963.
15. Information on Sir G.I. Taylor is based on G.K. Batchelor (1976) Goeffrey
Ingram Taylor, 1886–1975. Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal
Society, vol. 22, November.
16. Gridgeman, N.T. (1964) In Praise of Boole. New Scientist, no. 420,
December, pp. 655–657.
17. Information on Lucy Boole is to found in (1) Mary Everest Boole:
Collected Works (1931) Edited by E.M. Cobham, 4 volumes, C.W. Daniel,
Essex; (2) N.T. Gridgeman (1964) In Praise of Boole. New Scientist, no.
420, December, pp. 655–657.
18. Information on H.E. Hinton and the Hinton family is based on G. Salt
(1978) Howard Everest Hinton, 1912–1977. Biographical Memoirs of

Fellows of the Royal Society, vol. 24, November.
19. Hinton, H.E. (1951) On Longwell’s ‘The Psychology of Continental Drift’.
Advancement of Science, June.
20. Ulam, S. (1976) Adventures of a Mathematician. C. Scribner, New York.
21. Ridder, M. (1978) Leaving the Science of Destruction Behind. Washington
Post, 12 March 1978.
22. Information on Ethel Lilian Voynich is based on information supplied by
the Embassy of the USSR, Dublin, and the following publications: (1) A.
Fremantle (1975) The Russian Best Seller. History Today, September, pp.
629–637; (2) L. Bergqvist (1958) A Best Seller in Russia. Look Magazine,
8 July 1958, (3) E. Taratata (1964) Ethel Lilian Voynich: A Biography.
Moscow (In Russian). Parts of the latter were translated for the author by
Professor H. Goheen.
23. Voynich, E.L. (1901) Jack Raymond. Heinemann, London.
24. Kettle, A. (1957) E.L. Voynich: A Forgotten English Novelist. Essays in
Criticism, vol. 7.
25. Voynich, E.L. (1946) Put off thy shoes. Heinemann, London.
26. Voynich, E.L. (1893) Stories from Garshin. London.
27. Stepniak, S. (1894) Nihilism as it is. Translated by E.L. Voynich, London.
28. Voynich, E.L. (1895) The Humour of Russia. Walter Scott Ltd., London.
29. Lockhart, R.B. (1967) The Ace of Spies. Hodder and Stoughton, London.
30. Voynich, E.L. (1897) The Gadfly. Heinemann, New York.
31. Rolfe, Fr. (1904) Hadrian the Seventh.
32. Azamuely, T. (1968) The Gadfly and the Spy. The Spectator, 17 May 1968,
p. 665.
33. Voynich, E.L. (1904) Olive Latham. Heinemann, London.
34. Courtney, W.L. (1904) The Feminine Note in Fiction: Mrs Voynich.
Chapman and Hall, London.
35. Voynich, E.L. (1931) Chopin’s Letters. New York.
36. Information on Wilfred Voynich is based on M. Sowerby (1967) Rare
People and Rare Books. Constable, London.
37. Information on the Voynich Manuscript is based on D. Kahn (1973) The
Codebreakers. Sphere Books, London.

Index
Illustrations are indicated by page numbers n bold.
abstract group theory 63, 65, 226, 255, 256, 265, 270
Ace of Spies (Lockhart) 311, 313 Adventures of a Mathematician (Ulam) 305
Airy, George Biddell 67, 68, 71, 138, 207 Albani, Francis 107, 117
Alcock, Benjamin 160–62
algebra 18, 21–2, 37, 52, 62–6, 72–3, 120–21, 175–6, 208, 229, 253, 255–6,
268–70, 293
algebra of classes 66, 149–51, 155, 208, 255, 256, 266
alternative medicine 119, 235, 274–6, 288–90
Amsterdam Academy: Proceedings 298
Andrew, Richard 7
Analytical Society 51–2, 54, 57, 192
Angeli, Basilio 101
animal welfare 183–4, 238
Apothecaries’ Hall 157
Archaeological Institute, Lincoln 137
Aristotle 69, 78, 137, 145, 151, 208
Arithmetica Universalis (Newton) 207
Arnold, Matthew 199
Arnott, John 186
art 139, 140, 142, 299
associative law 270
astronomy 6, 20, 41–3, 53, 68, 118, 128, 137, 176, 206, 207, 240, 254
Athenaeum, Cork 139
Athenaeum, The 281
atomic bomb 301, 305, 306
Ausdehnungslehre, Die (Grassman) 255–6
Babbage, Charles 51–2, 54, 65, 120, 138, 145, 251, 266–7
Bacon, Roger 137, 222, 314
Baily, Francis 68, 92
Bainbridge, Thomas 17–18
Ball, W.R.R. 298
Ballintemple, Cork 180, 272, 276

Balliol College, Oxford 192, 229, 294
baseball pitcher, automatic 294
Bayly, Helen 210
Bell, E.T. 18–19, 125
Berlin Hochschüle der Musik 308
Bible 220, 223, 226, 236
Biology of Insect Eggs, The (Hinton) 303
Birkhoff, Garrett 149
Blackrock, Cork 179–80, 188, 189
Blackrock Temperance Band 182–3
Blyth, John 110, 259, 278
Bolshevik Revolution 313
Bolyai, János 295
Boole, Alicia (daughter) see Stott, Alicia (née Boole)
Boole, Charles (brother) 3, 25, 276, 306
Boole, Ethel Lilian (daughter) see Voynich, Ethel Lilian (née Boole)
Boole, George
addresses: to the British Association 76, 254; to the Cuvierian Society 131–6,
137, 138; at the Cuvierian Society conversazione 139–43; as Dean of
Faculty, Queen’s College 111–14; to the Lincoln Early Closing
Association 46–9; to the Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute 38–45, 227
and animal welfare 183–4, 238
art, views on 140, 142
biographies of 287–8
biography of John Walsh 107, 130–36
birth 3
Calculus of Logic 83, 241
childhood 3–18
children 127, 179–82, 188–9, 190, 221–2, 227, 273, 286, 289, 294–302,
306–14
The Claims of Science 111–14
Communion of Saints 203–4
Considérations sur la recherche des intégrales premières 253
and the Cuvierian Society 130–44, 238
death 218, 235, 257, 276
education, views on 25–8, 262–3
Essay on Education 26–8
Exposition of a General Theory of Linear
Transformations 62–3, 246

eyesight 7, 189, 258, 272
family life 178–83, 188–9
family tree 4
farewell dinner, Lincoln 97–9
The Fellowship of the Dead 198
Genius and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton 38–43
grandchildren and great-grandchildren 289, 296, 297–301, 302–6
and Hamilton 206–19
handwriting 27, 193
health 32–3, 178–9, 180, 194, 235, 257, 270–76
honorary degrees 212, 215, 247
income 102, 103, 109, 124, 182, 190
Keith Medal awarded to 71, 212, 243–4
languages 18, 52, 79, 253
The Laws of Thought 83, 107, 111, 118, 123, 138, 145–55, 188, 216–17,
222–3, 225, 231, 239, 240, 247, 268
logic, work on 21–2, 69, 78–83, 113, 145–55, 222–6, 231, 246, 254–5,
267–70
Love 204
love affairs 124–5, 210
marriage 124–7, 178–82, 191, 210
The Mathematical Analysis of Logic 80–83, 145, 155, 212, 231, 239, 240
mathematics: published papers 56–60, 62–3, 67–76, 77–8, 213, 239–54;
research on 32, 54–78, 107, 239–56, 257–8; study of 6–7, 18, 20–21,
32, 52–4; teaching of (Queen’s College) 97, 100–118, 160–77, 185–6,
258–64; teaching of (schools) 20, 25–6, 86, 87
meeting and friendship with Mary Everest 121–4, 148
A Memoir of Robert Grosseteste 137
memorials to 277–85, 282–3, 284, 285
memory 7
Notes on Linear Transformations 63
Notes on Quaternions 213
obituaries 281–4
On a General Method in Analysis 67–76, 88, 149, 208, 246, 254
On Certain Theorems in the Calculus of Variations 56–7, 59
On Propositions Numerically Definite 243
On Some Astronomical Figures 137
On the Application of the Theory of Probabilities 243–4
On the Equation of Laplace’s Functions 76

On the Integration of Linear Differential Equations 59
On the Theory of Probabilities 239–41, 266
philosophy, work on 148, 153–5, 222
photography 138, 139
pictured 40, 226, 245
plagiarism allegations 10–15
Plea for Freedom 44–6, 227
poetry: reading 195–6; translations 8–17, 196; writing 7, 106, 196–205, 272
political views 188, 211
probability, work on 82, 107, 145–9, 151, 239–46, 254
professorship applications: Melbourne 190–91; Oxford 192–4; Queen’s
Colleges 84–97
at Queen’s College Cork: administrative involvement 108–18, 160–77,
258–63; and controversies 156, 159, 160–77, 189–90, 259–61;
Deanship of Faculty 110–15, 160–62, 258; fire at 259–62; on Library
Committee 115–17, 258; on Museum Committee 117; professorship of
mathematics 97, 100–118, 160–77, 185–6, 258–64; restructuring of
degrees 262–3
reading 7, 18, 195–6, 236
religion 18–20, 39, 45, 79, 124–5, 210, 220–38
A Remarkable Echo 138
Researches in the Integral Calculus 246
Researches on the Theory of Analytical Transformations 57, 59
The Right Use of Leisure 46–9
Royal Medal awarded to 70–71, 76, 212
Royal Society fellowship 211, 246–7
schooling 5–18
schools: Free School Lane school 23–4, 25–8; Potter Gate school 30, 30–33,
300; Waddington Academy 28–30
science: study of 6–7, 53; teaching of 20, 87; views on 48, 111–14, 142–3
social involvement 34–49, 182–8, 238
teaching (schools) 19–24, 25–33, 78, 79, 86, 87
Ten Years Later 204–5
testimonials 85–93, 191, 216
To the Number Three 199, 221
translations 8–17, 196
A Treatise on Differential Equations 24–79, 252–3, 264, 272
A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences 249–52
Über die partielle Differentialgeichungen zweiter ordnung 253

will 127
working methods 257–8
Boole, John (father) 2–8, 17–18, 20, 25, 36–7, 96
Boole, Lucy (daughter) 180, 289, 299, 301–2, 302
Boole, Margaret (daughter) see Taylor, Margaret (née Boole)
Boole, Mary Ann (née Joyce) (mother) 3–5, 7, 25, 243
Boole, Mary Ann (sister) 3, 5, 7, 22, 25, 31, 237, 275
Boole, Mary Ellen (daughter) see Hinton, Mary (née Boole)
Boole, Mary Everest (wife)
on Babbage 267
on Boole’s dislike of controversy 156, 261
on Boole’s mathematical works 248–9
on Boole’s poetry 196
on Boole’s religious beliefs 220, 221–2, 227–8, 229–30, 231, 234
on Boole’s unfinished manuscripts 153
on Boole’s working methods 257–8
childhood 119–21
children 127, 179–82, 189, 190, 221–2, 227, 286, 289, 294–302, 306–14
Collected Works 211, 290–93
on events leading up to Boole’s death 272, 273–4
family life 178–82, 189
grandchildren and great-grandchildren 289, 296, 297–301, 302–6
health 123–4, 278
higher education 180–81
Home Side of a Scientific Mind 121–2, 178, 220–22, 227–31, 234, 261, 287–8
librarian at Queen’s College, London 287
on logic 293
and mathematics 120–21, 122–3, 292, 293–4
marriage 124–7, 178–82, 191, 210
medical beliefs 274–5
meeting and friendship with Boole 121–4, 148
on memorials for Boole 281
The Message of Psychic Science 267, 274–5, 288
pension 218–19, 286
pictured 120, 271, 289
quotes Thomas Davis 211
returns to England 286–7
schooling 120–21
secretary to James Hinton 288–90

Symbolical Methods of Study 267
Boole, William (brother) 3, 20, 25, 31, 276
Boole, William (uncle) 23–4
Boole Curve Sewing Cards 293, 294
Boole Library 279, 284 Boole Medal 278
Boole Memorial Lecture 279
Boole Scholarship 277
Boolean algebra 149–51, 155, 225, 238, 239, 268–9
Boole’s Inequality 241
botany 302
Brewster, Sir David 38
Bristol University 303, 304
British Association for the Advancement of Science 76–7, 130, 192, 199, 214,
217, 254
British Museum 137, 252, 299, 303
British Quarterly Review 284, 287
Broad, C.D. 239
Bromhead, Sir Edward ffrench 36, 54–6
Brooke, William 8, 12, 14, 21, 46, 126, 180, 199, 237, 264, 278, 280
Broxholme, Lincolnshire 2
Budget of Paradoxes (de Morgan) 130–31, 288
Bullen, Denis B. 102, 104, 118, 128, 189, 259–61, 276
Bullen, Richard 102, 116, 261
Bulletin de l’Academie Imperiale des Sciences de St Petersbourg 253
Burke, Richard 259
Byron, Lord 198
Calcul des Fonctions (Lagrange) 52–3
calculating machines 6, 65, 250, 267
calculus 1, 21, 39, 50–52, 54–9, 69, 73–6, 77, 122–3, 131, 132, 207, 208, 217,
246–55
Calculus of Logic (Boole) 83, 241
Calvinism 45, 227
Cambridge 76–7, 189, 199, 214
Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal 83, 92
Cambridge Mathematical Journal 57–9, 62–3, 67, 241
Cambridge Philosophical Society 52, 212, 247
Cambridge University 8, 51–2, 58–62, 66–7, 68, 72, 77, 192, 229, 232, 248,
264–5, 299–300, 302
cameras 6, 20; see also photography Carroll, Lewis 224–5

Carver, Harry C. 251–2
Castle Dykings, Lincoln 34
catastrophe theory 258, 279
Catholic University of Ireland 229
Catholicism 93, 100, 103–5, 210, 228, 230, 237, 259–60, 311
Cauchy, Augustin-Louis 62, 74, 133, 248, 249, 251, 252
Caulfield, Richard 279–80
Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge 300–301
Cayley, Arthur 57, 63–7, 77–8, 84–5, 89, 216, 238, 241–2, 255–6, 265–6, 270,
278
Chalmers, Thomas 38, 44, 47, 49
chemistry 143, 156–7, 158, 301
Chicago University 305
China 306, 313
Christ Church College, Oxford 215
Christian Socialism 232, 287
Christie, S. Hunter 69
Church of England 19, 125, 220, 227, 229–30, 232, 234
Church of Ireland 210, 227, 235, 237
Claims of Science, The (Boole) 111–14
Clairaut, Alexis 207, 249, 252
Clare College, Cambridge 265
Clarke, Samuel 225
classics 8–17, 18, 26, 28, 86, 87, 196, 206, 262, 263; see also Greek; Latin
Colburn, Zerah 206–7
Colenso, John William 228, 229–30, 232, 236
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 207, 210–11
Collected Works (Mary Boole) 211, 290–93
Collins, Mathew 177
Communion of Saints (Boole) 203–4
commutative law 65, 73, 149
complex numbers 65, 208, 214
computer science 82, 155, 208, 238, 250
Conrad, Joseph 313
Considérations sur la recherches des intégrales premières (Boole) 253
continental drift 303, 304–5
contradiction, principle of 151
Cooke, Henry 262

Cork
antipathy to Dublin 211
Boole’s residences in 72, 103, 147, 178–80
British Association meets in 76, 130
Cuvierian Society 129–44, 238, 279–80
John Walsh in 131–5
observatory 128
scientific knowledge 128–44
weather 191–2, 194, 272–3
workhouse 133, 135, 186–8
see also Queen’s College Cork
Cork Constitution 281
Cork Daily Reporter 165–6, 170–73
Cork Examiner 100–101, 164–5, 167–70, 177, 276–7
Cork Literary and Scientific Society 144
Cork Mechanics’ Institute 128, 144
Cork Union Workhouse 133, 135, 186–8
Cornwall 306, 308
Cowper, William 13, 198
Coxeter, H.S.M. 298
Crelle’s Journal 253
Cronin, Patrick 16–17
Cummins, Nicholas 184
Cummins, William J. 276
Cunningham Gold Medal 158
Cuvier, Baron 129
Cuvierian Society 129–44, 238, 279–80
daguerreotypes 139
Dante 185, 195, 205
Darley, Charles 116, 118
Darwin, Charles 290
Davies, Thomas 70
Davis, Thomas 211
Davy, Edmund 128
de Morgan, Augustus advocates decimal currency 138
background 68–9
and Boole’s unpublished papers 153–4, 223, 243
A Budget of Paradoxes 130–31, 288
contributes to Cambridge Mathematical Journal 57

controversy with Hamilton 22, 79–81
correspondence with Boole 68–9, 81–2, 95, 99, 103–4, 106–7, 111, 126, 145–7,
151, 190–92, 194, 236, 254–5, 266, 272, 275–6
correspondence with Rowan Hamilton 147, 207–8, 211, 215, 218–19
Differential and Integral Calculus 68
Essay on Probabilities 146
Formal Logic 69, 81, 146, 151, 208
influence on Boole 62, 72, 80–81, 145–6, 148, 248, 249, 252
obituary of Murphy 72
and pension for Mary Boole 218–19, 286
testimonials for Boole 85, 88, 92, 93, 99, 216
de Morgan, Sophia 92, 238
de Vere, Aubrey 210
de Vericour, Raymond 102, 103, 105, 107, 116, 122, 144, 158–9, 237
decimal currency 68, 138, 144
determinants 244, 255, 256
Dickson, George Stephens 21, 52, 53, 81, 90–91, 148
difference equations 74, 249–52, 256
Differential and Integral Calculus (de Morgan) 68
Differential and Integral Calculus (Lacroix) 21, 52, 53
differential calculus 1, 21, 39, 50–52, 54–9, 69, 73–7, 122–3, 131–2, 207, 208,
217, 246–55
differential equations 55, 59, 67, 69, 72–6, 206, 208, 213, 218, 247–9, 251,
252–5, 256
differential operator 51, 52, 73
discontinuous functions 213
Disney, Catherine 210
distributive law 73, 150
Dodgson, Charles L. see Carroll, Lewis Doncaster 19–22
Donkin, W.F. 241, 249
Dublin 76, 156, 164–5, 170, 173, 211, 215, 217, 254
Dublin Journal of Medical and Chemical
Science 157
Dublin Statistical Society 136–7
Dunstan, Wyndham 301
dynamics 54, 176, 206, 208, 248, 253
education Boole’s views on 25–8, 262–3
Carmelita Hinton’s views on 305–6
Mary Everest’s views on 121, 292, 293–4

effective computability 64–5
Einstein, Albert 64, 238, 308
Eisenstein, Gotthold 63
Elba 311
electricity 72, 77, 139, 143
Elements of Chemistry (Kane) 158
Elements of Geometry (Walsh) 132
Elements of Logic (Whately) 148
Elements of Practical Pharmacy (Kane) 157
elliptic functions 84, 265
Ellis, Robert Leslie 57, 71, 77, 85, 89–90, 216, 266, 269
Engels, Friedrich 309
England, John 175, 176, 278
entomology 302–4
Episode of Flatland, An (Hinton) 294
Essay on Education (Boole) 26–8
Essay on Probabilities (de Morgan) 146
Euclid 72, 132, 163, 207, 296
Euler, Leonhard 73, 249, 252, 272
Evans, Richardson 185–6, 276
Everest, Sir George 76, 119, 121, 125, 214, 230, 299
Everest, Mary see Boole, Mary Everest Everest, Mount 76, 119
Everest, Thomas 119–21, 124, 267, 288
evolution 129, 303
Exposition of a General Theory of Linear
Transformations (Boole) 62–3, 246
exterior algebra 256
Famine 93–4, 135, 183, 184–5, 237
Faraday, Michael 77, 158
Fellowship of the Dead (Boole) 198
Female Penitents’ Home, Lincoln 34–5, 238
Fermi, Enrico 305
Fields Medal 71
finite differences 72, 249–52
First Memoir on the Theory of Analytical operations (Murphy) 73
First World War 298, 314
Fitzgerald, George Francis 237–8, 278
Fitzgerald, William 237
Forbes, James 239–40

Formal Logic (de Morgan) 69, 81, 146, 208
Fourier, Joseph 54, 56, 74, 213
fourth dimension 294–5, 297–8
Fourth Dimension, The (Hinton) 294–5
Fowler, Lydia 235
Free Russia 309
Free School Lane school 23–4, 25–8
Freemantle, Anne 308
French Academy of Sciences 132, 133, 247
Gadfly, The (Voynich) 188, 311–14
Gauss, Carl Friedrich 62, 295
General Principles of the Theory of Sound (Walsh) 131
Genius and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton (Boole) 38–43
geography 48, 97, 263
geometry 6, 20, 37, 58, 64, 132, 162–3, 167, 175, 192, 248, 251, 255–6, 293–5,
296–8
Germany 308
Glasgow University 77, 93, 95–6
Gosset, Thorold 298
Grassman, Hermann 255–6
Gratry, August 228, 230–31, 237
Graves, Charles 76, 77–8, 81, 85, 88, 93, 94–5, 212, 213, 214, 216, 266, 270
Graves, John 270
Graves, Robert 212
gravitation 41, 77, 134
Great Famine 93–4, 135, 183, 184–5, 237
Greek 8–17, 18, 79, 196, 262; see also classics
Green, George 54, 77
Gregory, Duncan F. 58–61, 67–8, 71, 249, 266, 270
Groningen University 298
Grosseteste, Robert 137
group theory 63, 65, 226, 255, 256, 265, 270
Hahnemann, Samuel 119–20, 274, 275, 288
Hailperin, Theodore 239, 268, 269, 270
Hall, Robert 22–3, 25, 28
Hamilton, James 206
Hamilton, Sir William 22, 69, 79–80, 151–3, 231
Hamilton, Sir William Rowan 65–6, 76–8, 127, 138, 147, 157–8, 206–19, 209,
238, 248, 256, 266, 270

handwriting 21, 26–7, 131, 193
Harding, John 131
Hardy, G.H. 61–2, 195
Harley, Robert 46, 246, 253–4, 256, 269, 272, 284, 287
Harvey, Maria 276
Heaviside, Oliver 74
Hebrew 19, 220
herbalism 235
Herschel, John 51–2, 54, 68, 120, 138, 266
Hinton, Carmelita 305
Hinton, Charles Howard 294–5, 296–7, 302
Hinton, George Boole 302
Hinton, Howard Everest 302–5, 304
Hinton, James 288–90, 306
Hinton, Joan 305–6
Hinton, Mary (née Boole) 179, 180, 188, 190, 275, 286, 289, 294–5, 302, 303
Historical Analysis of Christian Civilisation (de Vericour) 105
Home Side of a Scientific Mind (Mary Boole) 121–2, 178, 220–22, 227–31, 234,
261, 287–8
homoeopathy 119, 235, 274–6, 288–90
homogeneous functions 57, 62–3
Hornsea, Yorkshire 32–3, 106, 196, 202
Humour of Russia, The (Voynich) 310
Huxley, George 16
hydrostatics 139
hypnosis 235
index law 73
India 76, 119, 121, 214, 216
induction 48, 134, 137, 176, 231
Industrial Resources of Ireland (Kane) 158
infant mortality 186–8
information processing 82
information storage and retrieval 82, 155
Inquiry into the Probable Magnitude and Parallax of the Fixed Stars (Mitchell)
239–40
Insect Biochemistry 304
Interrupted Friendship, An (Voynich) 313
invariant theory 62–6, 208, 246, 255, 256, 265
Irish Geological Survey 157

Irish University Bill 100
Isle of Wight 106, 199
Italy 188, 311
Jack Raymond (Voynich) 308, 313
Jacobi, Carl Gustav Jacob 53, 62, 248, 249, 253
Jennings, F.M. 138
Jevons, William Stanley 267–70, 295
Journal of Insect Physiology 304
Joyce, Mary Ann see Boole, Mary Ann (née Joyce)
Judaism 19, 221, 227, 228, 236, 290–91, 310
Kahn, David 314
Kane, Sir Robert 92, 100–102, 104–5, 109, 138, 148, 156–67, 157, 186, 211,
259–62, 278–9
Kant, Immanuel 207
Keats, John 198, 205
Keith Medal 71, 212, 243–4
Kelland, Phillip 70, 71, 74, 85, 88, 216, 244, 266
Kelvin, Lord see Thomson, William Kettle, Arnold 308
King and Queen’s College of Physicians 157
Kingdom of Christ, The (Maurice) 232
King’s College, London 232
Kingsley, Charles 232–3
Kirk, Charles 87, 92
Kneale, William 125
Knight, W.J. 276–7
Kolmogorov, Andrey 240
Kravchinski, Sergei see Stepniak, Sergei Kropotkin, Prince Petr 309, 312
Lacroix, Silvestre François 21, 52, 53, 251
Lagrange, Joseph-Louis 37, 52–3, 54–7, 62, 248, 249, 250, 252, 255, 272
Lane, Christopher 109–10, 116, 159–60
Lane, Denny 130
languages Boole’s study of 18, 52, 79, 253
Boole’s teaching of 26
Hamilton’s study of 206
as part of degree course 262, 263
Laplace, Pierre-Simon 37, 51, 52, 55, 62, 76–8, 207, 231, 239, 242, 252, 255,
272
Larken, E.R. 35, 46, 53, 81, 91, 99, 124, 278, 280
Latin 8, 18, 20, 26, 229, 262; see also classics Laws of Thought, The (Boole) 83,

107, 111, 118, 123, 138, 145–55, 188, 216–17, 222–3, 225, 231, 239, 240,
247, 268
least action, principle of 55, 56, 137
Lebesgue, Henri 53, 54, 55, 62
Lectures on Quaternions (Hamilton) 215–16
Legendre, Adrien-Marie 72, 73, 249, 252
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 1, 50–51, 58, 69, 78, 79, 82, 145, 231, 249, 252
Lichfield Cottage, Ballintemple 180, 181, 272, 276, 285
Life of Job (Renan) 228
Lincoln 3–18, 23–8, 30–32, 34–49, 54, 66, 92, 93, 97–9, 105–6, 137, 138, 189,
241, 280
Lincoln Cathedral 280–81
Lincoln Early Closing Association 46, 238
Lincoln Herald 8–16
Lincoln Mechanics’ Institute 5, 32, 35–45, 97, 110, 116, 130, 185, 227, 238
Lincoln Savings Bank 5
Lincolnshire Advertiser 137
Lincolnshire Chronicle 36
linear algebra 255–6
linear transformations 59, 62–5
Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester: Proceedings 253
literature 6, 18, 26, 262; see also poetry Liverpool 22
Lobatchewsky, Nikolai 295
Lockhart, Robin Bruce 311, 313

logic
Boole’s work on 21–2, 69, 78–83, 113, 145–55, 222–6, 231, 246, 254–5, 267–70
controversy between Hamilton and de Morgan 22, 79–81
as part of degree course 262
Mary Everest on 293
and notation 21–2, 69, 78–83, 145, 149–51, 268
and probability 145–9, 151, 240–46
and religion 222–6, 230–31
logical machines 270
Logique (Gratry) 230–31
London 3, 72, 189, 235, 252, 272, 287, 296, 306, 309, 311
London, University of 68, 232
London News 281
London School of Medicine for Women 301
Longwell, Chester R. 304–5
Lorentz, Hendrik 237
Los Alamos 300–301, 305
Love (Boole) 204
Lovelace, Ada 267
Lubbock, Sir John 148, 191
Lucy, Seán 196–9
MacFarlane, Alexander 125, 288
MacHale, Desmond 279, 285
MacHale, John 103, 104
Manhattan Project 305
Marks, David 236, 290
Marx, Eleanor 309
Marx, Karl 305, 309
Mathematical Analysis of Logic, The (Boole) 80–83, 145, 155, 212, 231, 239,
240
Mathematical Journal 77
Mathematical Recreations and Essays (Ball) 298
mathematics advances in 50–52, 57–9, 62–6, 73–5, 208
Alicia Boole’s work on 296–8
Boole’s published papers 56–60, 62–3, 67–76, 77–8, 213, 239–54
Boole’s research on 32, 54–78, 107, 239–56, 257–8
Boole’s study of 6–7, 18, 20–21, 32, 52–4
Boole’s teaching of (Queen’s College) 97, 100–118, 160–77, 185–6, 258–64
Boole’s teaching of (schools) 20, 25–6, 86, 87

degree courses 262, 263
and elegance 195
G.I. Taylor’s work on 299–300
Hamilton’s study of 206–7
Hinton’s work on 294–5
and language 150
and Mary Everest 120–21, 122–3, 292, 293–4
and notation 50–52, 56–7, 69, 74, 76
matrix theory 63, 65, 255, 256, 265
Maurice, Frederick 228, 232–5, 236, 273, 286–8
Mazzini, Giuseppe 308
Mécanique Analytique (Lagrange) 52, 56, 57, 62
Mécanique Céleste (Laplace) 51, 52, 207
mechanics 22, 53
Melbourne 190–91
Meleager 8–17
Memoir of Augustus de Morgan (de Morgan) 92, 238
Memoir of Robert Grosseteste (Boole) 137
Memoir on the Calculus of Variations (Walsh) 132–3
memory 7, 133
Men of Mathematics (Bell) 18–19, 125
mesmerism 235, 274
Message of Psychic Science (Mary Boole) 267, 274–5, 288
metallurgy 143, 302
Metalogia (Walsh) 134
Methodism 20
metrication 138, 144
Mexico 302
Michelson–Morley experiment 237–8
microscopes 5, 6, 143, 183
Milne-Thompson, Louis M. 252
Milton, John 196, 198
Mitchell, John 239–40
Monge, Gaspard 54, 56, 249
Moore, Thomas 198
moral education 28, 29
moral philosophy 38, 48–9, 112–14
Mulcahy, John 117
Munster Farmer’s Magazine 128

Murphy, Edmund 107–8, 109–10
Murphy, Robert 72–3, 77
Museum of Economic Geology 157
music 7, 182–3, 306–7, 308, 314
mysticism 121, 225, 230, 233, 237
National Church 230, 232, 234, 286–7
natural history 128, 139, 263
natural philosophy 20, 86, 87, 93, 157, 191, 262, 263
navigation 37, 299
Neil, Samuel 34, 281
New Era of Thought (Hinton) 294–5
New York 312, 314
Newman, Francis 228, 229, 236, 287
Newman, John Henry 210, 229, 232
Newton, Isaac 1, 38–43, 50–51, 53, 79, 98, 131, 134, 205, 222, 231
Arithmetica Universalis 207
Principia 41–2, 53, 175, 176, 207
Theory of Universal Gravitation 41
A Treatise on Optics 39–41
Nihilism as it is (Voynich) 310
Nill, Anne 314
Ninth Bridgewater Treatise (Babbage) 267
Niven, Charles 279
North Infirmary, Cork 133–4
notation and logic 21–2, 69, 78–83, 145, 149–51, 268
and mathematics 50–52, 56–7, 69, 74, 76
Notes on Linear Transformations (Boole) 63
Notes on Quaternions (Boole) 213
nuclear physics 305, 306
O’Callaghan, Ann 285 O’Ciarda, Tadhg 285 Ode to the Spring (Meleager) 8–17
Olive Latham (Voynich) 313
On a General Method in Analysis (Boole) 67–76, 88, 149, 208, 246, 254
On a General Method in Dynamics (Hamilton) 208
On Certain Theorems in the Calculus of
Variations (Boole) 56–7, 59
On Some Astronomical Figures (Boole) 137
On Propositions Numerically Definite (Boole) 243
On the Alleged Evidence for a Physical Connexion between Stars (Forbes)
239–40

On the Application of the Theory of Probabilities (Boole) 243–4
On the Equation of Laplace’s Functions (Boole) 76
On the Integration of Linear Differential Equations (Boole) 59
On the Measurement of the Great Meridional Arc of India (Everest) 214
On the Possibility of Combining two or more Probabilities (Terrot) 243
On the Theory of Linear Transformations (Cayley) 63
On the Theory of Probabilities (Boole) 239–41, 266
Open University 252
operational calculus 71, 74, 149, 216, 218
operator theory 59, 79, 208, 246, 247, 256
optics 6, 20, 39–41, 53, 139, 207, 208, 248, 251
Outlines of the Laws of Thought (Thomson) 148
Oxford movement 192, 210, 232
Oxford University 189, 192–4, 212, 215, 229, 232, 247, 294
Paley, William 38, 49
Papworth Village Settlement 298–9
Paradiso (Dante) 195
Paris 119–21
Pascal, Blaise 145, 228
Passmore, John 268
Peacock, George 51–2, 54, 138
Peano, Giuseppe 225
Peel, Sir Robert 100, 157, 259, 261
Philosophical Magazine 37, 55, 60, 65, 130, 158, 213, 23940, 242–3
Philosophical Transactions see Royal Society:
Philosophical Transactions philosophy 38, 48–9, 148, 153–5, 207–8, 222, 288
photography 138, 139, 143; see also cameras phrenology 235, 275
physics 20, 137, 191, 237–8, 299–301, 305
Plato 207–8
Plea for Freedom (Boole) 44–6, 227
pneumothorax apparatus 299
Poerio, Carlo 188
poetry Boole’s reading of 195–6
Boole’s translations of 8–17, 196
Boole’s writing of 7, 106, 196–205, 272
Hamilton’s writing of 207
Poisson, Siméon Denis 37, 53, 133, 249, 252
political philosophy 38
Polya, George 195

polytopes 297, 297–8
Poor Law Commissioners 187
Pope-Hennessy, J. 259–60, 278
Porter, J.B. 280
Portlock, Colonel 162, 171
potential theory 77
Potter Gate school 30, 30–33, 300
Price, Bartholomew 247
Princeton University 294
Principia (Newton) 41–2, 53, 175, 176
principle of contradiction 151
principle of least action 55, 56, 137
Principles of Analytical Calculation (Woodhouse) 51
Principles of Science (Jevons) 269
probability 82, 107, 145–9, 151, 239–46, 254
Proceedings see Amsterdam Academy: Proceedings; Literary and Philosophical
Society of Manchester: Proceedings; Royal Irish Academy: Proceedings;
Royal Society: Proceedings
Protestantism 100, 210
psychology 112–13, 154, 155, 246, 288
Psychology of Continental Drift, The (Longwell) 304–5
Pure Logic (Jevons) 268
Pusey, Edward 45, 227, 229, 232
Put off thy Shoes (Voynich) 308, 313–14
Pythagoras 222, 225
Quakers 314
quaternions 65, 76, 208, 213–14, 255, 256, 270
Queen’s College Belfast 100, 247, 262
Queen’s College Cork academic staff 101–2, 104–5, 148, 156–77
administration 108–18, 156, 158–77, 258–63
Boole’s professorship 97, 100–118, 160–77, 185–6, 258–64
buildings 100
class fees 102, 103, 109
controversies 105, 107, 109–10, 158–77, 189–90, 259–61
Council 105, 108, 109–11, 117–18, 159, 161, 168–9, 258
examinations 104, 106, 107, 108, 163, 171–2, 186, 262–3
fire at 259–262, 260
library 102, 115–17, 279
Library Committee 115–17, 258

mechanical workshop 110
memorial window 278–9, 282–3
memorials to Boole 277–9
museum 110, 117
Museum Committee 117
official inquiry into conditions 173–7
opening of 100–101, 106
pictured 101, 106, 260
restructuring of degrees 262–3
salaries 102, 103, 109, 190
statutes 153, 158, 160, 161, 162
Triennial Visitations 160, 260
Queen’s College Galway 100, 247
Queen’s College, London 232, 287
Queen’s Colleges 84–97, 100, 104–5, 211
Queen’s University of Ireland 247
Quetelet, Adolphe 148
Ramanujan, Srinivasa 61–2
Reeves, John Walter 6
Reilly, Sydney 310–12, 313
relativity, theory of 64, 238
religion 18–20, 39, 45, 68, 100, 102, 103–5, 124–5, 134, 192, 210–11, 220–38
Remarkable Echo, A (Boole) 138
Renan, Ernest 228, 235, 236, 237
Researches in the Integral Calculus (Boole) 246
Researches on the Theory of Analytical Transformations (Boole) 57, 59
Rhythmic Approach to Mathematics (Somer vell) 293–4
Riccati’s Equation 248
Right Use of Leisure, The (Boole) 46–9
Robertson, Donald 16
Rolfe, Frederick 313
Romer, Robert 279
Rosenblum, Sigmund see Reilly, Sydney Royal Academy 299
Royal Astronomical Society 92
Royal College of Preceptors 32
Royal Commission on the Queen’s Colleges 173–7, 262
Royal Cork Institution 128–9
Royal Dublin Society 157
Royal Free Hospital, London 301

Royal Institution of London 128, 299
Royal Irish Academy 39, 132, 158, 211–12, 213
Proceedings 212, 213
Transactions 212
Royal Medal 70–71, 76, 158, 208, 212, 290, 301
Royal Society 39, 52, 67, 69–71, 74–5, 132, 158, 211–12, 246–7, 252, 301, 303
Philosophical Transactions 67, 69–70, 73, 244–5, 253, 254
Proceedings 287
Royal Society of Edinburgh 71, 132, 212, 243–4
Transactions 243
Russell, Bertrand 149, 246, 254, 312
Russia 309–10, 311, 313, 314
Russian Revolution 313
Ryall, John 100–102, 121, 125, 147–8, 160, 165–6, 168–9, 173, 186, 218, 262,
264, 276, 278, 286, 296, 308
sailing 299, 301
St John’s College, Cambridge 66, 264–5
St Michael’s Church, Blackrock 180, 276–7
Salmon, George 63–4, 117
Saxilby, Lincolnshire 2
Schoute, Peiter 298
science, Boole’s views on 48, 111–14, 142–3
Scott, Sir Walter 7, 198
Second World War 298, 300–301, 303
set theory 245
Shaw, George Bernard 309
Shelley, Percy Bysshe 2, 198, 205
singular solutions 248, 249, 252, 256
Skibbereen 184
Smith, Henry John Stephen 192
Sneem, Co Kerry 135
Snow, James 7, 97, 98, 280
social class 18, 61, 139, 144, 183, 209
Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge 38
Society of Friends of Russian Freedom 309
Somervell, Edith 293–4
spherical trigonometry 103, 106, 176, 299
Spinoza, Benedict de 225
Spitta, Philipp 308

sport 31, 47, 299, 301, 306
statistics 136–7, 143–4, 186–8
Stepniak, Sergei 309–10
Stokes, Sir George 57, 93, 249, 254, 266, 272
Stoney, George Johnstone 278
Stories from Garshin (Voynich) 310
Stott, Alicia (née Boole) 180, 190, 289, 295, 295–9, 296 Stott, Leonard 298–9
Stott, Walter 297–8, 299
Sylvester, James Joseph 57, 63–4
symbolic logic 21–2, 69, 78–83, 113, 145–55, 246, 253, 254–5, 267–70
Symbolical Methods of Study (Mary Boole) 267
Synod of Thurles 104–5
Taylor, Brook 249, 252
Taylor, Edward Ingram 299
Taylor, G.I. 298, 299–301, 300
Taylor, Margaret (née Boole) 180, 190, 289, 299–301
Taylor Columns 301
Taylor’s Theorem 73, 151, 250
telescopes 5, 6, 97, 182, 207
Ten British Mathematicians (MacFarlane)
125, 288
Ten Years Later (Boole) 204–5
Tennyson, Alfred, Lord 196, 205
Terrot, Charles 243–4
Thomson, J.J. 299
Thomson, William 57, 76–8, 84–6, 90, 92–3, 95–6, 104, 145–6, 148, 191,
215–16, 238, 266, 299
Times, The 184, 218, 264, 278, 281–4
To the Number Three (Boole) 199, 221
Todhunter, Isaac 53, 252–3, 264–6, 278
Tractarian movement 192, 210, 232
Transactions see Royal Irish Academy: Transactions; Royal Society:
Philosophical Transactions; Royal Society of Edinburgh: Transactions
translations Boole’s 8–17, 196
Ethel Lilian Voynich’s 309–10, 314
Treatise on Algebra (Peacock) 52
Treatise on Differential Equations (Boole) 247–9, 252–3, 264, 272
Treatise on Optics (Newton) 39–41
Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences (Boole) 249–52

Triennial Visitations 160, 260
trigonometry 20, 37, 176, 299
Trinity, doctrine of 19, 221
Trinity College, Cambridge 51, 60–61, 66–7, 68, 299–300
Trinity College, Dublin 72, 100, 148, 156, 206, 207, 211, 212, 215, 247
truth tables 155, 270
tuberculosis 298–9
–ber die partielle Differentialgeichungen zweiter Ordnung (Boole) 253
Ulam, Stanislaw 305
United States 301, 305–6, 312, 314
Unitarianism 19, 20, 39, 45, 68, 210–11, 221, 227, 229, 232
universal algebra 256
University Magazine 178, 220
Venn, John 269
Vie de Jésus (Renan) 228, 235
Voynich, Ethel Lilian (née Boole) 180, 188, 286, 289, 296, 306–14, 307
Voynich, Wilfred Michail 309, 312, 314
Voynich Manuscript 314
Waddington, Lincolnshire 22–3, 25, 28–9
Waddington Academy 22–3, 25, 28–30
Walsh, John 107, 130–36
Warsaw 309
weather 191–2, 194, 272–3
Wedgwood, Thomas 290
Weierstrass, Karl 195, 251
Weldon, Maud 294
Wells, H.G. 290
Whately, Richard 148, 160, 161
Whiddy Island 185
Wickwar, Gloucestershire 119, 121, 122–3, 125–6
Wilbraham, Henry 242–3
Wilde, Oscar 309
Wilson, Charlotte 312
Wisconsin University 305
Woodhouse, Robert 51
Woolwich Academy 158, 162, 164, 167, 171
Wordsworth, William 196, 198, 205, 207
Wycherley, William 133
Wye Valley 126

X-rays 299
Xenophanes 222
Yarborough, Earl of 35, 36, 38–9
York 76, 214
Young Ireland movement 130, 211
Zeeman, Christopher 279


