

IF YOU CHASE TWO RABBITS...

... YOU WILL NOT CATCH EITHER ONE.
RUSSIAN PROVERB

CONTENTS
1. The ONE Thing
2. The Domino Effect
3. Success Leaves Clues
PART 1
THE LIES
THEY MISLEAD AND DERAIL US
4. Everything Matters Equally
5. Multitasking
6. A Disciplined Life
7. Willpower Is Always on Will-Call
8. A Balanced Life
9. Big Is Bad
PART 2
THE TRUTH
THE SIMPLE PATH TO PRODUCTIVITY
10. The Focusing Question
11. The Success Habit
12. The Path to Great Answers
PART 3
EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS
UNLOCKING THE POSSIBILITIES WITHIN YOU
13. Live with Purpose
14. Live by Priority
15. Live for Productivity
16. The Three Commitments

17. The Four Thieves
18. The Journey
Putting The ONE Thing to Work
On the Research
Index
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Resources
Copyright

1  THE ONE THING
“Be like a postage stamp— stick to one thing until you get
there.”
   —Josh Billings
On June 7, 1991, the earth moved for 112 minutes. Not really, but it
felt that way.
I was watching the hit comedy City Slickers, and the audience’s
laughter rattled and rocked the theater. Considered one of the funniest
movies of all time, it also sprinkled in unexpected doses of wisdom
and insight. In one memorable scene, Curly, the gritty cowboy played
by the late Jack Palance, and city slicker Mitch, played by Billy
Crystal, leave the group to search for stray cattle. Although they had
clashed for most of the movie, riding along together they finally
connect over a conversation about life. Suddenly Curly reins his horse
to a stop and turns in the saddle to face Mitch.
Curly: Do you know what the secret of life is?
Mitch: No. What?
Curly: This. [He holds up one finger.]
Mitch: Your finger?
Curly: One thing. Just one thing. You stick to that and everything
else don’t mean sh*t.
Mitch: That’s great, but what’s the “one thing”?
Curly: That’s what you’ve got to figure out.
Out of the mouth of a fictional character to our ears comes the
secret of success. Whether the writers knew it or unwittingly
stumbled on it, what they wrote was the absolute truth. The ONE
Thing is the best approach to getting what you want.
I didn’t really get this until much later. I’d experienced success
in the past, but it wasn’t until I hit a wall that I began to connect my

results with my approach. In less than a decade we’d built a
successful company with national and international ambitions, but all
of a sudden things weren’t working out. For all the dedication and
hard work, my life was in turmoil and it felt as if everything was
crumbling around me.
I was failing.
SOMETHING HAD TO GIVE
At the end of a short rope that looked eerily like a noose, I sought
help and found it in the form of a coach. I walked him through my
situation and talked through the challenges I faced, both personal and
professional. We revisited my goals and the trajectory I wanted for
my life, and with a full grasp of the issues, he set out in search of
answers. His research was thorough. When we got back together, he
had my organizational chart—essentially a bird’s-eye view of the
entire company—up on the wall.
Our discussion started with a simple question: “Do you know
what you need to do to turn things around?” I hadn’t a clue.
He said there was only one thing I needed to do. He had
identified 14 positions that needed new faces, and he believed that
with the right individuals in those key spots, the company, my job,
and my life would see a radical change for the better. I was shocked
and let him know I thought it would take a lot more than that.
He said, “No. Jesus needed 12, but you’ll need 14.”
It was a transformational moment. I had never considered how so
few could change so much. What became obvious is that, as focused
as I thought I was, I wasn’t focused enough. Finding 14 people was
clearly the most important thing I could do. So, based on this
meeting, I made a huge decision. I fired myself.
I stepped down as CEO and made finding those 14 people my
singular focus.
This time the earth really did move. Within three years, we

began a period of sustained growth that averaged 40 percent year-
over-year for almost a decade. We grew from a regional player to an
international contender. Extraordinary success showed up, and we
never looked back.
As success begat success, something else happened along the
way. The language of the ONE Thing emerged.
Having found the 14, I began working with our top people
individually to build their careers and businesses. Out of habit, I
would end our coaching calls with a recap of the handful of things
they were agreeing to accomplish before our next session.
Unfortunately, many would get most of them done, but not
necessarily what mattered most. Results suffered. Frustration
followed. So, in an effort to help them succeed, I started shortening
my list: If you can do just three things this week. ... If you can do just
two things this week. ... Finally, out of desperation, I went as small as
I could possibly go and asked: “What’s the ONE Thing you can do this
week such that by doing it everything else would be easier or
unnecessary?” And the most awesome thing happened.
Results went through the roof.
After these experiences, I looked back at my successes and
failures and discovered an interesting pattern. Where I’d had huge
success, I had narrowed my concentration to one thing, and where my
success varied, my focus had too.
And the light came on.
GOING SMALL
If everyone has the same number of hours in a day, why do some
people seem to get so much more done than others? How do they do
more, achieve more, earn more, have more? If time is the currency of
achievement, then why are some able to cash in their allotment for
more chips than others? The answer is they make getting to the heart
of things the heart of their approach. They go small.

When you want the absolute best chance to succeed at anything
you want, your approach should always be the same. Go small.
“Going small” is ignoring all the things you could do and doing
what you should do. It’s recognizing that not all things matter equally
and finding the things that matter most. It’s a tighter way to connect
what you do with what you want. It’s realizing that extraordinary
results are directly determined by how narrow you can make your
focus.
The way to get the most out of your work and your life is to go as
small as possible. Most people think just the opposite. They think big
success is time consuming and complicated. As a result, their
calendars and to-do lists become overloaded and overwhelming.
Success starts to feel out of reach, so they settle for less. Unaware that
big success comes when we do a few things well, they get lost trying
to do too much and in the end accomplish too little. Over time they
lower their expectations, abandon their dreams, and allow their life to
get small. This is the wrong thing to make small.
You have only so much time and energy, so when you spread
yourself out, you end up spread thin. You want your achievements to
add up, but that actually takes subtraction, not addition. You need to
be doing fewer things for more effect instead of doing more things
with side effects. The problem with trying to do too much is that even
if it works, adding more to your work and your life without cutting
anything brings a lot of bad with it: missed deadlines, disappointing
results, high stress, long hours, lost sleep, poor diet, no exercise, and
missed moments with family and friends— all in the name of going
after something that is easier to get than you might imagine.
Going small is a simple approach to extraordinary results, and it
works. It works all the time, anywhere and on anything. Why?
Because it has only one purpose—to ultimately get you to the point.
When you go as small as possible, you’ll be staring at one thing.
And that’s the point.

2  THE DOMINO EFFECT
“Every great change starts like falling dominoes.”
   — BJ Thornton
In Leeuwarden, The Netherlands, on Domino Day, November 13,
2009, Weijers Domino Productions coordinated the world record
domino fall by lining up more than 4,491,863 dominoes in a dazzling
display In this instance, a single domino set in motion a domino fall
that cumulatively unleashed more than 94,000 joules of energy, which
is as much energy as it takes for an average-sized male to do 545
pushups.
Each standing domino represents a small amount of potential
energy; the more you line up, the more potential energy you’ve
accumulated. Line up enough and, with a simple flick, you can start a
chain reaction of surprising power. And Weijers Domino Productions
proved it. When one thing, the right thing, is set in motion, it can
topple many things. And that’s not all.
In 1983, Lorne Whitehead wrote in the American Journal of
Physics that he’d discovered that domino falls could not only topple
many things, they could also topple bigger things. He described how a
single domino is capable of bringing down another domino that is
actually 50 percent larger.


FIG. 1  A geometric domino progression.
FIG. 2  A geometric progression is like a long, long train — it starts out too slow to
notice until it’s moving too fast to stop.
Do you see the implication? Not only can one knock over others
but also others that are successively larger. In 2001 a physicist from
San Francisco’s Exploratorium reproduced Whitehead’s experiment
by creating eight dominoes out of plywood, each of which was 50
percent larger than the one before. The first was a mere two inches,
the last almost three feet tall. The resulting domino fall began with a

gentle tick and quickly ended “with a loud SLAM.”
Imagine what would happen if this kept going. If a regular
domino fall is a linear progression, Whitehead’s would be described
as a geometric progression. The result could defy the imagination.
The 10th domino would be almost as tall as NFL quarterback Peyton
Manning. By the 18th, you’re looking at a domino that would rival the
Leaning Tower of Pisa. The 23rd domino would tower over the Eiffel
Tower and the 31st domino would loom over Mount Everest by
almost 3,000 feet. Number 57 would practically bridge the distance
between the earth and the moon!
GETTING EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS
So when you think about success, shoot for the moon. The moon is
reachable if you prioritize everything and put all of your energy into
accomplishing the most important thing. Getting extraordinary results
is all about creating a domino effect in your life.
Toppling dominoes is pretty straightforward. You line them up
and tip over the first one. In the real world, though, it’s a bit more
complicated. The challenge is that life doesn’t line everything up for
us and say, “Here’s where you should start.” Highly successful people
know this. So every day they line up their priorities anew, find the
lead domino, and whack away at it until it falls.
Why does this approach work? Because extraordinary success is
sequential, not simultaneous. What starts out linear becomes
geometric. You do the right thing and then you do the next right thing.
Over time it adds up, and the geometric potential of success is
unleashed. The domino effect applies to the big picture, like your
work or your business, and it applies to the smallest moment in each
day when you’re trying to decide what to do next. Success builds on
success, and as this happens, over and over, you move toward the
highest success possible.
When you see someone who has a lot of knowledge, they learned

it over time. When you see someone who has a lot of skills, they
developed them over time. When you see someone who has done a
lot, they accomplished it over time. When you see someone who has a
lot of money, they earned it over time.
The key is over time. Success is built sequentially. It’s one thing
at a time.

3  SUCCESS LEAVES CLUES
“It is those who concentrate on but one thing at a time who
advance in this world.”
   — Og Mandino
Proof of the ONE Thing is everywhere. Look closely and you’ll
always find it.
ONE PRODUCT, ONE SERVICE
Extraordinarily successful companies always have one product or
service they’re most known for or that makes them the most money.
Colonel Sanders started KFC with a single secret chicken recipe. The
Adolph Coors Company grew 1,500 percent from 1947 to 1967 with
only one product, made in a single brewery. Microprocessors generate
the vast majority of Intel’s net revenue. And Starbucks? I think you
know.
The list of businesses that have achieved extraordinary results
through the power of the ONE Thing is endless. Sometimes what is
made or delivered is also what is sold, sometimes not. Take Google.
Their ONE Thing is search, which makes selling advertising, its key
source of revenue, possible.
And what about Star Wars? Is the ONE Thing movies or
merchandise? If you guessed merchandise, you’d be right— and
you’d be wrong. Revenue from toys recently totaled over $10 billion,
while combined worldwide box office revenue for the six main films
totaled less than half that, $4.3 billion. From where I sit, movies are
the ONE Thing because they make the toys and products possible.
The answer isn’t always clear, but that doesn’t make finding it
any less important. Technological innovations, cultural shifts, and
competitive forces will often dictate that a business’s ONE Thing
evolve or transform. The most successful companies know this and

are always asking: “What’s our ONE Thing?”
Apple is a study in creating an environment where an
extraordinary ONE Thing can exist while transitioning to another
extraordinary ONE Thing. From 1998 to 2012, Apple’s ONE Thing
moved from Macs to iMacs to iTunes to iPods to iPhones, with the
iPad already jockeying for the pole position at the head of the product
line. As each new “golden gadget” entered the limelight, the other
products weren’t discontinued or relegated to the discount tables.
Those lines, plus others, continued to be refined while the current
ONE Thing created a well-documented halo effect, making the user
more likely to adopt the whole Apple product family
“There can only be one most important thing. Many things
may be important, but only one can be the most important.”
   —Ross Garber
When you get the ONE Thing, you begin to see the business
world differently If today your company doesn’t know what its ONE
Thing is, then the company’s ONE Thing is to find out.
ONE PERSON
The ONE Thing is a dominant theme that shows up in different ways.
Take the concept and apply it to people, and you’ll see where one
person makes all the difference. As a freshman in high school, Walt
Disney took night courses at the Chicago Art Institute and became the
cartoonist for his school newspaper. After graduation, he wanted to be
a newspaper cartoonist but couldn’t get a job, so his brother Roy, a
businessman and banker, got him work at an art studio. It was there he
learned animation and began creating animated cartoons. When Walt
was young, his one person was Roy.
For Sam Walton, early on it was L. S. Robson, his father-in-law,
who loaned him the $20,000 he needed to start his first retail
business, a Ben Franklin franchise store. Then, when Sam was
opening his first Wal-Mart, Robson secretly paid a landlord $20,000

to provide a pivotal expansion lease.
Albert Einstein had Max Talmud, his first mentor. It was Max
who introduced a ten-year-old Einstein to key texts in math, science,
and philosophy. Max took one meal a week with the Einstein family
for six years while guiding young Albert.
No one is self-made.
Oprah Winfrey credits her father, and the time she spent with
him and his wife, for “saving” her. She told Jill Nelson of The
Washington Post Magazine, “If I hadn’t been sent to my father, I
would have gone in another direction.” Professionally, it started with
Jeffrey D. Jacobs, the “lawyer, agent, manager and financial adviser”
who, when Oprah was looking for employment contract advice,
persuaded her to establish her own company rather than simply be a
talent for hire. Harpo Productions, Inc., was born.
The world is familiar with the influence that John Lennon and
Paul McCartney had on each other’s songwriting success, but in the
recording studio there was George Martin. Considered one of the
greatest record producers of all time, George has often been referred
to as the “Fifth Beatle” for his extensive involvement on the Beatles’
original albums. Martin’s musical expertise helped fill the gaps
between the Beatles’ raw talent and the sound they wanted to achieve.
Most of the Beatles’ orchestral arrangements and instrumentation, as
well as numerous keyboard parts on the early records, were written or
performed by Martin in collaboration with the band.
Everyone has one person who either means the most to them or
was the first to influence, train, or manage them.
No one succeeds alone. No one.
ONE PASSION, ONE SKILL
Look behind any story of extraordinary success and the ONE Thing is
always there. It shows up in the life of any successful business and in
the professional life of anyone successful. It also shows up around

personal passions and skills. We each have passions and skills, but
you’ll see extraordinarily successful people with one intense emotion
or one learned ability that shines through, defining them or driving
them more than anything else.
“You must be single-minded. Drive for the one thing on
which you have decided.”
   —General George S. Patton
Often, the line between passion and skill can be blurry. That’s
because they’re almost always connected. Pat Matthews, one of
America’s great impressionist painters, says he turned his passion for
painting into a skill, and ultimately a profession, by simply painting
one painting a day. Angelo Amorico, Italy’s most successful tour
guide, says he developed his skills and ultimately his business from
his singular passion for his country and the deep desire to share it
with others. This is the story line for extraordinary success stories.
Passion for something leads to disproportionate time practicing or
working at it. That time spent eventually translates to skill, and when
skill improves, results improve. Better results generally lead to more
enjoyment, and more passion and more time is invested. It can be a
virtuous cycle all the way to extraordinary results.
Gilbert Tuhabonye’s one passion is running. Gilbert is an
American long-distance runner born in Songa, Burundi, whose early
love of track and field helped him win the Burundi National
Championship in the men’s 400 and 800 meters while only a junior in
high school. This passion helped save his life.
On October 21, 1993, members of the Hutu tribe invaded
Gilbert’s high school and captured the students of the Tutsi tribe.
Those not immediately killed were beaten and burned alive in a
nearby building. After nine hours buried beneath burning bodies,
Gilbert managed to escape and outrun his captors to the safety of a
nearby hospital. He was the lone survivor.
“Success demands singleness of purpose.”

   — Vince Lombardi
He came to Texas and kept competing, honing his skills.
Recruited by Abilene Christian University, Gilbert earned All-
America honors six times. After graduation he moved to Austin,
where by all accounts he is the most popular running coach in the
city. To drill for water in Burundi, he cofounded the Gazelle
Foundation, whose main fundraiser is—wait for it—“Run for the
Water,” a sponsored run through the streets of Austin. Do you see the
theme running through his life?
From competitor to survivor, from college to career to charity,
Gilbert Tuhabonye’s passion for running became a skill that led to a
profession that opened up an opportunity to give back. The smile he
greets fellow runners with on the trails around Austin’s Lady Bird
Lake symbolizes how one passion can become one skill, and together
ignite and define an extraordinary life.
The ONE Thing shows up time and again in the lives of the
successful because it’s a fundamental truth. It showed up for me, and
if you let it, it will show up for you. Applying the ONE Thing to your
work—and in your life—is the simplest and smartest thing you can do
to propel yourself toward the success you want.
ONE LIFE
If I had to choose only one example of someone who has harnessed
the ONE Thing to build an extraordinary life, it would be American
businessman Bill Gates. Bill’s one passion in high school was
computers, which led him to develop one skill, computer
programming. While in high school he met one person, Paul Allen,
who gave him his first job and became his partner in forming
Microsoft. This happened as the result of one letter they sent to one
person, Ed Roberts, who changed their lives forever by giving them a
shot at writing the code for one computer, the Altair 8800—and they
needed only one shot. Microsoft began its life to do one thing,

develop and sell BASIC interpreters for the Altair 8800, which
eventually made Bill Gates the richest man in the world for 15
straight years. When he retired from Microsoft, Bill chose one person
to replace him as CEO— Steve Ballmer, whom he met in college. By
the way, Steve was Microsoft’s 30th employee but the first business
manager hired by Bill. And the story doesn’t end there.
Bill and Melinda Gates decided to put their wealth to work
making a difference in the world. Guided by the belief that every life
has equal value, they formed one foundation to do ONE Thing: to
tackle “really tough problems” like health and education. Since its
inception, the majority of the foundation’s grants have gone to one
area, Bill and Melinda’s Global Health Program. This ambitious
program’s one goal is to harness advances in science and technology
to save lives in poor countries. To do this they eventually settled on
one thing— stamp out infectious disease as a major cause of death in
their lifetime. At some point in their journey, they made a decision to
focus on one thing that would do this—vaccines. Bill explained the
decision by saying, “We had to choose what the most impactful thing
to give would be... . The magic tool of health intervention is vaccines,
because they can be made inexpensively.” A singular line of
questioning led them down this one path when Melinda asked,
“Where’s the place you can have the biggest impact with the money?”
Bill and Melinda Gates are living proof of the power of the ONE
Thing.
ONE THING
The doors to the world have been flung wide open, and the view that’s
available is staggering. Through technology and innovation,
opportunities abound and possibilities seem endless. As inspiring as
this can be, it can be equally overwhelming. The unintended
consequence of abundance is that we are bombarded with more
information and choices in a day than our ancestors received in a

lifetime. Harried and hurried, a nagging sense that we attempt too
much and accomplish too little haunts our days.
We sense intuitively that the path to more is through less, but the
question is, Where to begin? From all that life has to offer, how do
you choose? How do you make the best decisions possible, experience
life at an extraordinary level, and never look back?
Live the ONE Thing.
What Curly knew, all successful people know. The ONE Thing
sits at the heart of success and is the starting point for achieving
extraordinary results. Based on research and real-life experience, it’s
a big idea about success wrapped in a disarmingly simple package.
Explaining it is easy; buying into it can be tough.
So, before we can have a frank, heart-to-heart discussion about
how the ONE Thing actually works, I want to openly discuss the
myths and misinformation that keep us from accepting it. They are
the lies of success.
Once we banish these from our minds, we can take up the ONE
Thing with an open mind and a clear path.

1
THE LIES
THEY MISLEAD AND DERAIL US

“It ain’t what you don’t know that gets you into trouble. It’s
what you know for sure that just ain’t so.”
—Mark Twain
THE TROUBLE WITH “TRUTHINESS”
In 2003, Merriam-Webster began analyzing searches on their online
dictionary to determine the “Word of the Year.” The idea was that
since online searches for words reveal whatever is on our collective
minds, then the most searched-for word should capture the spirit of
the times. The debut winner delivered. On the heels of the invasion of
Iraq, it seems everyone wanted to know what “democracy” really
meant. The next year, “blog,” a little made-up word that described a
new way to communicate, topped the list. After all the political
scandals of 2005, “integrity” earned top honors.
Then, in 2006, Merriam-Webster added a twist. Site visitors
could nominate candidates and subsequently vote on the “Word of the
Year.” You could say it was an effort to instill a quantitative exercise
with qualitative feedback, or you could just call it good marketing.
The winner, by a five-to-one landslide, was “truthiness,” a word
comedian Stephen Colbert coined as “truth that comes from the gut,
not books” on the debut episode of his Comedy Central show, The
Colbert Report. In an Information Age driven by round-the-clock
news, ranting talk radio, and editorless blogging, truthiness captures
all the incidental, accidental, and even intentional falsehoods that
sound just “truthy” enough for us to accept as true.
The problem is we tend to act on what we believe even when
what we believe isn’t anything we should. As a result, buying into The
ONE Thing becomes difficult because we’ve unfortunately bought
into too many others—and more often than not those “other things”
muddle our thinking, misguide our actions, and sidetrack our success.
Life is too short to chase unicorns. It’s too precious to rely on a
rabbit’s foot. The real solutions we seek are almost always hiding in

plain sight; unfortunately, they’ve usually been obscured by an
unbelievable amount of bunk, an astounding flood of “common
sense” that turns out to be nonsense. Ever hear your boss evoke the
frog-in-boiling-water metaphor? (“Toss a frog into a pot of hot water
and it will jump right back out. But if you place a frog in lukewarm
water and slowly raise the temperature, it will boil to death.”) It’s a
lie—a very truthy lie, but a lie nonetheless. Anyone ever tell you “fish
stink from the head down”? Not true. Just a fish tale that actually
turns out to be fishy. Ever hear about how the explorer Cortez burned
his ships on arriving at the Americas to motivate his men? Not true.
Another lie. “Bet on the jockey, not the horse!” has long been a
rallying cry for placing your faith in a company’s leadership.
However, as a betting strategy, this maxim will put you on the fast
track to the pauper’s house, which makes you wonder how it ever
became a maxim at all. Over time, myths and mistruths get thrown
around so often they eventually feel familiar and start to sound like
the truth.
Then we start basing important decisions on them.
The challenge we all face when forming our success strategies is
that, just like tales of frogs, fish, explorers, and jockeys, success has
its own lies too. “I just have too much that has to be done.” “I’ll get
more done by doing things at the same time.” “I need to be a more
disciplined person.” “I should be able to do what I want whenever I
want.” “I need more balance in my life.” “Maybe I shouldn’t dream
so big.” Repeat these thoughts often enough and they become the six
lies about success that keep us from living The ONE Thing.
THE SIX LIES BETWEEN YOU AND SUCCESS
1. Everything Matters Equally
2. Multitasking
3. A Disciplined Life

4. Willpower Is Always on Will-Call
5. A Balanced Life
6. Big Is Bad
The six lies are beliefs that get into our heads and become
operational principles driving us the wrong way. Highways that end as
bunny trails. Fool’s gold that diverts us from the mother lode. If
we’re going to maximize our potential, we’re going to have to make
sure we put these lies to bed.

4  EVERYTHING MATTERS
EQUALLY
“Things which matter most must never be at the mercy of
things which matter least.”
   —Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
Equality is a worthy ideal pursued in the name of justice and human
rights. In the real world of results, however, things are never equal.
No matter how teachers grade—two students are not equal. No matter
how fair officials try to be—contests are not equal. No matter how
talented people are—no two are ever equal. A dime equals ten cents
and people must absolutely be treated fairly, but in the world of
achievement everything doesn’t matter equally.
Equality is a lie.
Understanding this is the basis of all great decisions.
So, how do you decide? When you have a lot to get done in the
day, how do you decide what to do first? As kids, we mostly did
things we needed to do when it was time to do them. It’s breakfast
time. It’s time to go to school, time to do homework, time to do chores,
bath time, bedtime. Then, as we got older, we were given a measure of
discretion. You can go out and play as long as you get your homework
done before dinner.  Later, as we became adults, everything became
discretionary. It all became our choice. And when our lives are
defined by our choices, the all-important question becomes, How do
we make good ones?
Complicating matters, the older we get, it seems there is more
and more piled on that we believe “simply must get done.”
Overbooked, overextended, and overcommitted. “In the weeds”
overwhelmingly becomes our collective condition.
That’s when the battle for the right of way gets fierce and frantic.

Lacking a clear formula for making decisions, we get reactive and fall
back on familiar, comfortable ways to decide what to do. As a result,
we haphazardly select approaches that undermine our success.
Pinballing through our day like a confused character in a B-horror
movie, we end up running up the stairs instead of out the front door.
The best decision gets traded for any decision, and what should be
progress simply becomes a trap.
When everything feels urgent and important, everything seems
equal. We become active and busy, but this doesn’t actually move us
any closer to success. Activity is often unrelated to productivity, and
busyness rarely takes care of business.
“The things which are most important don’t always scream
the loudest.”
   —Bob Hawke
As Henry David Thoreau said, “It’s not enough to be busy, so are
the ants. The question is, what are we busy about?” Knocking out a
hundred tasks for whatever the reason is a poor substitute for doing
even one task that’s meaningful. Not everything matters equally, and
success isn’t a game won by whoever does the most. Yet that is
exactly how most play it on a daily basis.
MUCH TO-DO ABOUT NOTHING
To-do lists are a staple of the time-management-and-success industry.
With our wants and others’ wishes flying at us right and left, we
impulsively jot them down on scraps of paper in moments of clarity
or build them methodically on printed notepads. Time planners
reserve valuable space for daily, weekly, and monthly task lists. Apps
abound for taking to-dos mobile, and software programs code them
right into their menus. It seems that everywhere we turn we’re
encouraged to make lists—and though lists are invaluable, they have
a dark side.
While to-dos serve as a useful collection of our best intentions,

they also tyrannize us with trivial, unimportant stuff that we feel
obligated to get done—because it’s on our list. Which is why most of
us have a love-hate relationship with our to-dos. If allowed, they set
our priorities the same way an inbox can dictate our day. Most
inboxes overflow with unimportant e-mails masquerading as
priorities. Tackling these tasks in the order we receive them is
behaving as if the squeaky wheel immediately deserves the grease.
But, as Australian prime minister Bob Hawke duly noted, “The things
which are most important don’t always scream the loudest.”
Achievers operate differently. They have an eye for the essential.
They pause just long enough to decide what matters and then allow
what matters to drive their day. Achievers do sooner what others plan
to do later and defer, perhaps indefinitely, what others do sooner. The
difference isn’t in intent, but in right of way. Achievers always work
from a clear sense of priority.
Left in its raw state, as a simple inventory, a to-do list can easily
lead you astray. A to-do list is simply the things you think you need to
do; the first thing on your list is just the first thing you thought of.
To-do lists inherently lack the intent of success. In fact, most to-do
lists are actually just survival lists—getting you through your day and
your life, but not making each day a stepping-stone for the next so
that you sequentially build a successful life. Long hours spent
checking off a to-do list and ending the day with a full trash can and a
clean desk are not virtuous and have nothing to do with success.
Instead of a to-do list, you need a success list—a list that is
purposefully created around extraordinary results.
To-do lists tend to be long; success lists are short. One pulls you
in all directions; the other aims you in a specific direction. One is a
disorganized directory and the other is an organized directive. If a list
isn’t built around success, then that’s not where it takes you. If your
to-do list contains everything, then it’s probably taking you
everywhere but where you really want to go.

So how does a successful person turn a to-do list into a success
list? With so many things you could do, how do you decide what
matters most at any given moment on any given day?
Just follow Juran’s lead.
JURAN CRACKS THE CODE
In the late ’30s a group of managers at General Motors made an
intriguing discovery that opened the door for an amazing
breakthrough. One of their card readers (input devices for early
computers) started producing gibberish. While investigating the
faulty machine, they stumbled on a way to encode secret messages.
This was a big deal at the time. Since Germany’s infamous Enigma
coding machines first appeared in World War I, both code making
and code breaking were the stuff of high national security and even
higher public curiosity. The GM managers quickly became convinced
that their accidental cipher was unbreakable. One man, a visiting
Western Electric consultant, disagreed. He took up the code-breaking
challenge, worked into the night, and cracked the code by three
o’clock the following morning. His name was Joseph M. Juran.
Juran later cited this incident as the starting point for cracking an
even bigger code and making one of his greatest contributions to
science and business. As a result of his deciphering success, a GM
executive invited him to review research on management
compensation that followed a formula described by a little-known
Italian economist, Vilfredo Pareto. In the 19th century, Pareto had
written a mathematical model for income distribution in Italy that
stated that 80 percent of the land was owned by 20 percent of the
people. Wealth was not evenly distributed. In fact, according to
Pareto, it was actually concentrated in a highly predictable way. A
pioneer of quality-control management, Juran had noticed that a
handful of flaws would usually produce a majority of the defects. This
imbalance not only rang true to his experience, but he suspected it

might even be a universal law—and that what Pareto had observed
might be bigger than even Pareto had imagined.
While writing his seminal book Quality Control Handbook,
Juran wanted to give a short name to the concept of the “vital few and
trivial many.” One of the many illustrations in his manuscript was
labeled “Pareto’s principle of unequal distribution... .” Where another
might have called it Juran’s Rule, he called it Pareto’s Principle.
Pareto’s Principle, it turns out, is as real as the law of gravity,
and yet most people fail to see the gravity of it. It’s not just a theory
—it is a provable, predictable certainty of nature and one of the
greatest productivity truths ever discovered. Richard Koch, in his
book The 80/20 Principle, defined it about as well as anyone: “The
80/20 Principle asserts that a minority of causes, inputs, or effort
usually lead to a majority of the results, outputs, or rewards.” In other
words, in the world of success, things aren’t equal. A small amount of
causes creates most of the results. Just the right input creates most of
the output. Selected effort creates almost all of the rewards.

FIG. 3  The 80/20 Principle says the minority of your effort leads to the majority of
your results.
Pareto points us in a very clear direction: the majority of what
you want will come from the minority of what you do. Extraordinary
results are disproportionately created by fewer actions than most
realize.
Don’t get hung up on the numbers. Pareto’s truth is about
inequality, and though often stated as an 80/20 ratio, it can actually
take a variety of proportions. Depending on the circumstances, it can
easily play out as, say, 90/20, where 90 percent of your success comes
from 20 percent of your effort. Or 70/10 or 65/5. But understand that
these are all fundamentally working off the same principle. Juran’s

great insight was that not everything matters equally; some things
matter more than others—a lot more. A to-do list becomes a success
list when you apply Pareto’s Principle to it.


FIG. 4  A to-do list becomes a success list when you prioritize it.
The 80/20 Principle has been one of the most important guiding
success rules in my career. It describes the phenomenon which, like
Juran, I’ve observed in my own life over and over again. A few ideas
gave me most of my results. Some clients were far more valuable
than others; a small number of people created most of my business
success; and a handful of investments put the most money in my
pocket. Everywhere I turned, the concept of unequal distribution
popped up. The more it showed up, the more I paid attention—and the
more I paid attention, the more it showed up. Finally I quit thinking it
was a coincidence and began to apply it as the absolute principle of
success that it is—not only to my life, but also in working with
everyone else, as well. And the results were extraordinary.
EXTREME PARETO
Pareto proves everything I’m telling you—but there’s a catch. He
doesn’t go far enough. I want you to go further. I want you to take
Pareto’s Principle to an extreme. I want you to go small by
identifying the 20 percent, and then I want you to go even smaller by
finding the vital few of the vital few. The 80/20 rule is the first word,
but not the last, about success. What Pareto started, you’ve got to
finish. Success requires that you follow the 80/20 Principle, but you
don’t have to stop there.

FIG. 5  No matter how many to-dos you start with, you can always narrow it to one.
Keep going. You can actually take 20 percent of the 20 percent
of the 20 percent and continue until you get to the single most
important thing! (See figure 5.) No matter the task, mission, or goal.
Big or small. Start with as large a list as you want, but develop the
mindset that you will whittle your way from there to the critical few
and not stop until you end with the essential ONE. The imperative
ONE. The ONE Thing.
In 2001, I called a meeting of our key executive team. As fast as
we were growing, we were still not acknowledged by the very top
people in our industry. I challenged our group to brainstorm 100 ways
to turn this situation around. It took us all day to come up with the
list. The next morning, we narrowed the list down to ten ideas, and
from there we chose just one big idea. The one that we decided on was
that I would write a book on how to become an elite performer in our
industry. It worked. Eight years later that one book had not only
become a national bestseller, but also had morphed into a series of
books with total sales of over a million copies. In an industry of about
a million people, one thing changed our image forever.
Now, again, stop and do the math. One idea out of 100. That is
Pareto to the extreme. That’s thinking big, but going very small.

That’s applying the ONE Thing to a business challenge in a truly
powerful way.
But this doesn’t just apply to business. On my 40th birthday, I
started taking guitar lessons and quickly discovered I could give only
20 minutes a day to practice. This wasn’t much, so I knew I had to
narrow down what I learned. I asked my friend Eric Johnson (one of
the greatest guitarists ever) for advice. Eric said that if I could do
only one thing, then I should practice my scales. So, I took his advice
and chose the minor blues scale. What I discovered was that if I
learned that scale, then I could play many of the solos of great classic
rock guitarists from Eric Clapton to Billy Gibbons and, maybe
someday, even Eric Johnson. That scale became my ONE Thing for
the guitar, and it unlocked the world of rock ’n’ roll for me.
The inequality of effort for results is everywhere in your life if
you will simply look for it. And if you apply this principle, it will
unlock the success you seek in anything that matters to you. There
will always be just a few things that matter more than the rest, and out
of those, one will matter most. Internalizing this concept is like being
handed a magic compass. Whenever you feel lost or lacking direction,
you can pull it out to remind yourself to discover what matters most.
   

BIG IDEAS
1. Go small. Don’t focus on being busy; focus on being productive.
Allow what matters most to drive your day.
2. Go extreme. Once you’ve figured out what actually matters,
keep asking what matters most until there is only one thing left.
That core activity goes at the top of your success list.
3. Say no. Whether you say “later” or “never,” the point is to say
“not now” to anything else you could do until your most
important work is done.
4. Don’t get trapped in the “check off” game. If we believe things
don’t matter equally, we must act accordingly. We can’t fall prey
to the notion that everything has to be done, that checking things
off our list is what success is all about. We can’t be trapped in a
game of “check off” that never produces a winner. The truth is
that things don’t matter equally and success is found in doing
what matters most.
Sometimes it’s the first thing you do. Sometimes it’s the only
thing you do. Regardless, doing the most important thing is always
the most important thing.

5  MULTITASKING
“To do two things at once is to do neither.”
   —Publilius Syrus
So, if doing the most important thing is the most important thing, why
would you try to do anything else at the same time? It’s a great
question.
In the summer of 2009, Clifford Nass set out to answer just that.
His mission? To find out how well so-called multitaskers multitasked.
Nass, a professor at Stanford University, told the New York Times that
he had been “in awe” of multitaskers and deemed himself to be a poor
one. So he and his team of researchers gave 262 students
questionnaires to determine how often they multitasked. They divided
their test subjects into two groups of high and low multitaskers and
began with the presumption that the frequent multitaskers would
perform better. They were wrong.
“I was sure they had some secret ability” said Nass. “But it turns
out that high multitaskers are suckers for irrelevancy.” They were
outperformed on every measure. Although they’d convinced
themselves and the world that they were great at it, there was just one
problem. To quote Nass, “Multitaskers were just lousy at everything.”
Multitasking is a lie.
It’s a lie because nearly everyone accepts it as an effective thing
to do. It’s become so mainstream that people actually think it’s
something they should do, and do as often as possible. We not only
hear talk about doing it, we even hear talk about getting better at it.
More than six million webpages offer answers on how to do it, and
career websites list “multitasking” as a skill for employers to target
and for prospective hires to list as a strength. Some have gone so far
as to be proud of their supposed skill and have adopted it as a way of
life. But it’s actually a “way of lie,” for the truth is multitasking is

neither efficient nor effective. In the world of results, it will fail you
every time.
“Multitasking is merely the opportunity to screw up more
than one thing at a time.”
   —Steve Uzzell
When you try to do two things at once, you either can’t or won’t
do either well. If you think multitasking is an effective way to get
more done, you’ve got it backward. It’s an effective way to get less
done. As Steve Uzzell said, “Multitasking is merely the opportunity
to screw up more than one thing at a time.”
MONKEY MIND
The concept of humans doing more than one thing at a time has been
studied by psychologists since the 1920s, but the term “multitasking”
didn’t arrive on the scene until the 1960s. It was used to describe
computers, not people. Back then, ten megahertz was apparently so
mind-bogglingly fast that a whole new word was needed to describe a
computer’s ability to quickly perform many tasks. In retrospect, they
probably made a poor choice, for the expression “multitasking” is
inherently deceptive. Multitasking is about multiple tasks alternately
sharing one resource (the CPU), but in time the context was flipped
and it became interpreted to mean multiple tasks being done
simultaneously by one resource (a person). It was a clever turn of
phrase that’s misleading, for even computers can process only one
piece of code at a time. When they “multitask,” they switch back and
forth, alternating their attention until both tasks are done. The speed
with which computers tackle multiple tasks feeds the illusion that
everything happens at the same time, so comparing computers to
humans can be confusing.
People can actually do two or more things at once, such as walk
and talk, or chew gum and read a map; but, like computers, what we
can’t do is focus on two things at once. Our attention bounces back

and forth. This is fine for computers, but it has serious repercussions
in humans. Two airliners are cleared to land on the same runway. A
patient is given the wrong medicine. A toddler is left unattended in
the bathtub. What all these potential tragedies share is that people are
trying to do too many things at once and forget to do something they
should do.
It’s strange, but somehow over time the image of the modern
human has become one of a multitasker. We think we can, so we think
we should. Kids studying while texting, listening to music, or
watching television. Adults driving while talking on the phone,
eating, applying makeup, or even shaving. Doing something in one
room while talking to someone in the next. Smartphones in hands
before napkins hit laps. It’s not that we have too little time to do all
the things we need to do, it’s that we feel the need to do too many
things in the time we have. So we double and triple up in the hope of
getting everything done.
And then there’s work.
The modern office is a carnival of distracting multitasking
demands. While you diligently try to complete a project, someone has
a coughing fit in a nearby cubicle and asks if you have a lozenge. The
office paging system continually calls out messages that anyone
within earshot of an intercom hears. You’re alerted around the clock
to new e-mails arriving in your inbox while your social media
newsfeed keeps trying to catch your eye and your cell phone
intermittently vibrates on the desk to the tune of a new text. A stack
of unopened mail and piles of unfinished work sit within sight as
people keep swinging by your desk all day to ask you questions.
Distraction, disturbance, disruption. Staying on task is exhausting.
Researchers estimate that workers are interrupted every 11 minutes
and then spend almost a third of their day recovering from these
distractions. And yet amid all of this we still assume we can rise
above it and do what has to be done within our deadlines.

But we’re fooling ourselves. Multitasking is a scam. Poet
laureate Billy Collins summed it up well: “We call it multitasking,
which makes it sound like an ability to do lots of things at the same
time. ... A Buddhist would call this monkey mind.” We think we’re
mastering multitasking, but we’re just driving ourselves bananas.
JUGGLING IS AN ILLUSION
We come by it naturally. With an average of 4,000 thoughts a day
flying in and out of our heads, it’s easy to see why we try to
multitask. If a change in thought every 14 seconds is an invitation to
change direction, then it’s rather obvious we’re continually tempted
to try to do too much at once. While doing one thing we’re only
seconds away from thinking of something else we could do.
Moreover, history suggests that our continued existence may have
required that human beings evolve to be able to oversee multiple
tasks at the same time. Our ancestors wouldn’t have lasted long if
they couldn’t scan for predators while gathering berries, tanning
hides, or just idling by the fire after a hard day hunting. The pull to
juggle more than one task at a time is not only at the core of how
we’re wired, but was most likely a necessity for survival.
But juggling isn’t multitasking.
Juggling is an illusion. To the casual observer, a juggler is
juggling three balls at once. In reality, the balls are being
independently caught and thrown in rapid succession. Catch, toss,
catch, toss, catch, toss. One ball at a time. It’s what researchers refer
to as “task switching.”
When you switch from one task to another, voluntarily or not,
two things happen. The first is nearly instantaneous: you decide to
switch. The second is less predictable: you have to activate the
“rules” for whatever you’re about to do (see figure 6). Switching
between two simple tasks—like watching television and folding
clothes—is quick and relatively painless. However, if you’re working

on a spreadsheet and a co-worker pops into your office to discuss a
business problem, the relative complexity of those tasks makes it
impossible to easily jump back and forth. It always takes some time
to start a new task and restart the one you quit, and there’s no
guarantee that you’ll ever pick up exactly where you left off. There is
a price for this. “The cost in terms of extra time from having to task
switch depends on how complex or simple the tasks are,” reports
researcher Dr. David Meyer. “It can range from time increases of 25
percent or less for simple tasks to well over 100 percent or more for
very complicated tasks.” Task switching exacts a cost few realize
they’re even paying.


FIG. 6  Multitasking doesn’t save time —it wastes time.
BRAIN CHANNELS
So, what’s happening when we’re actually doing two things at once?
It’s simple. We’ve separated them. Our brain has  channels, and as a
result we’re able to process different kinds of data in different parts
of our brain. This is why you can talk and walk at the same time.
There is no channel interference. But here’s the catch: you’re not
really focused on both activities. One is happening in the foreground
and the other in the background. If you were trying to talk a passenger
through landing a DC-10, you’d stop walking. Likewise, if you were
walking across a gorge on a rope bridge, you’d likely stop talking.
You can do two things at once, but you can’t focus effectively on two
things at once. Even my dog Max knows this. When I get caught up
with a basketball game on TV, he gives me a good nudge. Apparently,
background scratches can be pretty unsatisfying.
Many think that because their body is functioning without their
conscious direction, they’re multitasking. This is true, but not the way
they mean it. A lot of our physical actions, like breathing, are being
directed from a different part of our brain than where focus comes
from. As a result, there’s no channel conflict. We’re right when we
say something is “front and center” or “top of mind,” because that’s
where focus occurs—in the prefrontal cortex. When you focus, it’s
like shining a spotlight on what matters. You can actually give
attention to two things, but that is what’s called “divided attention.”
And make no mistake. Take on two things and your attention gets
divided. Take on a third and something gets dropped.
The problem of trying to focus on two things at once shows up
when one task demands more attention or if it crosses into a channel
already in use. When your spouse is describing the way the living
room furniture has been rearranged, you engage your visual cortex to
see it in your mind’s eye. If you happen to be driving at that moment,

this channel interference means you are now seeing the new sofa and
love seat combination and are effectively blind to the car braking in
front of you. You simply can’t effectively focus on two important
things at the same time.
Every time we try to do two or more things at once, we’re simply
dividing up our focus and dumbing down all of the outcomes in the
process. Here’s the short list of how multitasking short-circuits us:
1. There is just so much brain capability at any one time. Divide it
up as much as you want, but you’ll pay a price in time and
effectiveness.
2. The more time you spend switched to another task, the less likely
you are to get back to your original task. This is how loose ends
pile up.
3. Bounce between one activity and another and you lose time as
your brain reorients to the new task. Those milliseconds add up.
Researchers estimate we lose 28 percent of an average workday
to multitasking ineffectiveness.
4. Chronic multitaskers develop a distorted sense of how long it
takes to do things. They almost always believe tasks take longer
to complete than is actually required.
5. Multitaskers make more mistakes than non-multitaskers. They
often make poorer decisions because they favor new information
over old, even if the older information is more valuable.
6. Multitaskers 
experience 
more 
life-reducing, 
happiness-
squelching stress.
With research overwhelmingly clear, it seems insane that—
knowing how multitasking leads to mistakes, poor choices, and stress
—we attempt it anyway Maybe it’s just too tempting. Workers who
use computers during the day change windows or check e-mail or
other programs nearly 37 times an hour. Being in a distractible setting

sets us up to be more distractible. Or maybe it’s the high. Media
multitaskers actually experience a thrill with switching—a burst of
dopamine—that can be addictive. Without it, they can feel bored. For
whatever the reason, the results are unambiguous: multitasking slows
us down and makes us slower witted.
DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION
In 2009, New York Times reporter Matt Richtel earned a Pulitzer Prize
for National Reporting with a series of articles (“Driven to
Distraction”) on the dangers of driving while texting or using cell
phones. He found that distracted driving is responsible for 16 percent
of all traffic fatalities and nearly half a million injuries annually.
Even an idle phone conversation when driving takes a 40 percent bite
out of your focus and, surprisingly, can have the same effect as being
drunk. The evidence is so compelling that many states and
municipalities have outlawed cell phone use while driving. This
makes sense. Though some of us at times have been guilty, we’d
never condone it for our teenage kids. All it takes is a text message to
turn the family SUV into a deadly, two-ton battering ram.
Multitasking can cause more than one type of wreck.
We know that multitasking can even be fatal when lives are at
stake. In fact, we fully expect pilots and surgeons to focus on their
jobs to the exclusion of everything else. And we expect that anyone in
their position who gets caught doing otherwise will always be taken
severely to task. We accept no arguments and have no tolerance for
anything but total concentration from these professionals. And yet,
here the rest of us are—living another standard. Do we not value our
own job or take it as seriously? Why would we ever tolerate
multitasking when we’re doing our most important work? Just
because our day job doesn’t involve bypass surgery shouldn’t make
focus any less critical to our success or the success of others. Your
work deserves no less respect. It may not seem so in the moment, but

the connectivity of everything we do ultimately means that we each
not only have a job to do, but a job that deserves to be done well.
Think of it this way. If we really lose almost a third of our workday to
distractions, what is the cumulative loss over a career? What is the
loss to other careers? To businesses? When you think about it, you
might just discover that if you don’t figure out a way to resolve this,
you could in fact lose your career or your business. Or worse, cause
others to lose theirs.
On top of work, what sort of toll do our distractions take on our
personal lives? Author Dave Crenshaw put it just right when he wrote,
“The people we live with and work with on a daily basis deserve our
full attention. When we give people segmented attention, piecemeal
time, switching back and forth, the switching cost is higher than just
the time involved. We end up damaging relationships.” Every time I
see a couple dining with one partner trying earnestly to communicate
while the other is texting under the table, I’m reminded of the simple
truth of that statement.
   
BIG IDEAS
1. Distraction is natural. Don’t feel bad when you get distracted.

Everyone gets distracted.
2. Multitasking takes a toll. At home or at work, distractions lead
to poor choices, painful mistakes, and unnecessary stress.
3. Distraction undermines results. When you try to do too much
at once, you can end up doing nothing well. Figure out what
matters most in the moment and give it your undivided attention.
In order to be able to put the principle of The ONE Thing to
work, you can’t buy into the lie that trying to do two things at once is
a good idea. Though multitasking is sometimes possible, it’s never
possible to do it effectively.

6  A DISCIPLINED LIFE
“It’s one of the most prevalent myths of our culture: self-
discipline.”
   —Leo Babauta
There is this pervasive idea that the successful person is the
“disciplined person” who leads a “disciplined life.”
It’s a lie.
The truth is we don’t need any more discipline than we already
have. We just need to direct and manage it a little better.
Contrary to what most people believe, success is not a marathon
of disciplined action. Achievement doesn’t require you to be a full-
time disciplined person where your every action is trained and where
control is the solution to every situation. Success is actually a short
race—a sprint fueled by discipline just long enough for habit to kick
in and take over.
When we know something that needs to be done but isn’t
currently getting done, we often say, “I just need more discipline.”
Actually, we need the habit of doing it. And we need just enough
discipline to build the habit.
In any discussion about success, the words “discipline” and
“habit” ultimately intersect. Though separate in meaning, they
powerfully connect to form the foundation for achievement—
regularly working at something until it regularly works for you. When
you discipline yourself, you’re essentially training yourself to act in a
specific way. Stay with this long enough and it becomes routine—in
other words, a habit. So when you see people who look like
“disciplined” people, what you’re really seeing is people who’ve
trained a handful of habits into their lives. This makes them seem
“disciplined” when actually they’re not. No one is.
And who would want to be, anyway? The very thought of having

your every behavior molded and maintained by training seems
frighteningly impossible on one hand and utterly boring on the other.
Most people ultimately reach this conclusion but, seeing no
alternative, redouble their efforts at the impossible or quietly quit.
Frustration shows up and resignation eventually sets in.
You don’t need to be a disciplined person to be successful. In
fact, you can become successful with less discipline than you think,
for one simple reason: success is about doing the right thing, not
about doing everything right.
The trick to success is to choose the right habit and bring just
enough discipline to establish it. That’s it. That’s all the discipline
you need. As this habit becomes part of your life, you’ll start looking
like a disciplined person, but you won’t be one. What you will be is
someone who has something regularly working for you because you
regularly worked on it. You’ll be a person who used selected
discipline to build a powerful habit.
SELECTED DISCIPLINE WORKS SWIMMINGLY
Olympic swimmer Michael Phelps is a case study of selected
discipline. When he was diagnosed with ADHD as a child, his
kindergarten teacher told his mother, “Michael can’t sit still. Michael
can’t be quiet... . He’s not gifted. Your son will never be able to focus
on anything.” Bob Bowman, his coach since age 11, reports that
Michael spent a lot of time on the side of the pool by the lifeguard
stand for disruptive behavior. That same misbehavior has cropped up
from time to time in his adult life as well.
Yet, he’s set dozens of world records. In 2004 he won six gold
and two bronze medals in Athens and then, in 2008, a record eight in
Beijing, surpassing the legendary Mark Spitz. His 18 gold medals set
a record for Olympians in any sport. Before he hung up his goggles in
retirement, his wins at the 2012 London Olympic Games brought his
total medal count to 22 and earned him the status of most-decorated

Olympian in any sport in history. Talking about Phelps, one reporter
said, “If he were a country he’d be ranked 12th over the last three
Olympics.” Today, his mom reports, “Michael’s ability to focus
amazes me.” Bowman calls it “his strongest attribute.” How did this
happen? How did the boy who would “never be able to focus on
anything” achieve so much?
Phelps became a person of selected discipline.
From age 14 through the Beijing Olympics, Phelps trained seven
days a week, 365 days a year. He figured that by training on Sundays
he got a 52-training-day advantage on the competition. He spent up to
six hours in the water each day. “Channeling his energy is one of his
great strengths,” said Bowman. Not to oversimplify, but it’s not a
stretch to say that Phelps channeled all of his energy into one
discipline that developed into one habit—swimming daily.
The payoff from developing the right habit is pretty obvious. It
gets you the success you’re searching for. What sometimes gets
overlooked, however, is an amazing windfall: it also simplifies your
life. Your life gets clearer and less complicated because you know
what you have to do well and you know what you don’t. The fact of
the matter is that aiming discipline at the right habit gives you license
to be less disciplined in other areas. When you do the right thing, it
can liberate you from having to monitor everything.
Michael Phelps found his sweet spot in the swimming pool. Over
time, finding the discipline to do this formed the habit that changed
his life.
SIXTY-SIX DAYS TO THE SWEET SPOT
Discipline and habit. Honestly, most people never really want to talk
about these. And who can blame them? I don’t either. The images
these words conjure in our heads are of something hard and
unpleasant. Just reading the words is exhausting. But there’s good
news. The right discipline goes a long way, and habits are hard only in

the beginning. Over time, the habit you’re after becomes easier and
easier to sustain. It’s true. Habits require much less energy and effort
to maintain than to begin (see figure 7). Put up with the discipline
long enough to turn it into a habit, and the journey feels different.
Lock in one habit so it becomes part of your life, and you can
effectively ride the routine with less wear and tear on yourself. The
hard stuff becomes habit, and habit makes the hard stuff easy.


FIG. 7  Once a new behavior becomes a habit, it takes less discipline to maintain.
So, how long do you have to maintain discipline? Researchers at
the University College of London have the answer. In 2009, they
asked the question: How long does it take to establish a new habit?
They were looking for the moment when a new behavior becomes
automatic or ingrained. The point of “automaticity” came when
participants were 95 percent through the power curve and the effort
needed to sustain it was about as low as it would get. They asked
students to take on exercise and diet goals for a period of time and
monitor their progress. The results suggest that it takes an average of
66 days to acquire a new habit. The full range was 18 to 254 days, but
the 66 days represented a sweet spot—with easier behaviors taking
fewer days on average and tough ones taking longer. Self-help circles
tend to preach that it takes 21 days to make a change, but modem
science doesn’t back that up. It takes time to develop the right habit,
so don’t give up too soon. Decide what the right one is, then give
yourself all the time you need and apply all the discipline you can
summon to develop it.
Australian researchers Megan Oaten and Ken Cheng have even
found some evidence of a halo effect around habit creation. In their
studies, students who successfully acquired one positive habit
reported less stress; less impulsive spending; better dietary habits;
decreased alcohol, tobacco, and caffeine consumption; fewer hours
watching TV; and even fewer dirty dishes. Sustain the discipline long
enough on one habit, and not only does it become easier, but so do
other things as well. It’s why those with the right habits seem to do
better than others. They’re doing the most important thing regularly
and, as a result, everything else is easier.

   
BIG IDEAS
1. Don’t be a disciplined person. Be a person of powerful habits
and use selected discipline to develop them.
2. Build one habit at a time. Success is sequential, not
simultaneous. No one actually has the discipline to acquire more
than one powerful new habit at a time. Super-successful people
aren’t superhuman at all; they’ve just used selected discipline to
develop a few significant habits. One at a time. Over time.
3. Give each habit enough time. Stick with the discipline long
enough for it to become routine. Habits, on average, take 66 days
to form. Once a habit is solidly established, you can either build
on that habit or, if appropriate, build another one.
If you are what you repeatedly do, then achievement isn’t an
action you take but a habit you forge into your life. You don’t have to
seek out success. Harness the power of selected discipline to build the
right habit, and extraordinary results will find you.

7  WILLPOWER IS ALWAYS ON
WILL-CALL
“Odysseus understood how weak willpower actually is when
he asked his crew to bind him to the mast while sailing by
the seductive Sirens.”
   —Patricia Cohen
Why would you ever do something the hard way? Why would you
ever knowingly get behind the eight ball, deliberately crawl between a
rock and a hard place, or intentionally work with one hand tied behind
your back? You wouldn’t. But most people unwittingly do every day.
When we tie our success to our willpower without understanding what
that really means, we set ourselves up for failure. And we don’t have
to.
Often quoted as a statement about sheer determination, the old
English proverb “Where there’s a will, there’s a way” has probably
misled as many as it’s helped. It just rolls off the tongue and passes
so quickly through our head that few stop to hear its full meaning.
Widely regarded as the singular source of personal strength, it gets
misinterpreted as a cleverly phrased, one-dimensional prescription for
success. But for will to have its most powerful way, there’s more to it
than that. Construe willpower as just a call for character and you miss
its other equally essential element: timing. It’s a critical piece.
For most of my life I never gave willpower much thought. Once I
did, it captivated me. The ability to control oneself to determine one’s
actions is a pretty powerful idea. Base it on training and it’s called
discipline. But do it because you simply can, that’s raw power. The
power of will.
It seemed so straightforward: invoke my will and success was
mine. I was on my way. Sadly, I didn’t need to pack much, for it was

a short trip. As I set out to impose my will against defenseless goals, I
quickly discovered something discouraging: I didn’t always have
willpower. One moment I had it, the next—poof! I didn’t. One day it
was AWOL, the next— bang! It was at my beck and call. My
willpower seemed to come and go as if it had a life of its own.
Building success around full strength, on-demand willpower proved
unsuccessful. My initial thought was, What’s wrong with me? Was I a
loser? Apparently so. It seemed I had no grit. No strength of
character. No inner fortitude. Consequently, I gutted it up, bore down
with determination, doubled my effort, and reached a humbling
conclusion: willpower isn’t on will-call. As powerful as my
motivation was, my willpower wasn’t just sitting around waiting for
my call, ready at any moment to enforce my will on anything I
wanted. I was taken aback. I had always assumed that it would always
be there. That I could simply access it whenever I wanted, to get
whatever I wanted. I was wrong.
Willpower is always on will-call is a lie.
Most people assume willpower matters, but many might not
fully appreciate how critical it is to our success. One highly unusual
research project revealed just how important it really is.
TODDLER TORTURE
In the late ’60s and early ’70s, researcher Walter Mischel began
methodically tormenting four-year-olds at Stanford University’s Bing
Nursery School. More than 500 children were volunteered for the
diabolical program by their own parents, many of whom would later,
like millions of others, laugh mercilessly at videos of the squirming,
miserable kids. The devilish experiment was called “The
Marshmallow Test.” It was an interesting way to look at willpower.
Kids were offered one of three treats—a pretzel, a cookie, or the
now infamous marshmallow. The child was told that the researcher
had to step away, and if he could wait 15 minutes until the researcher

returned, he’d be awarded a second treat. One treat now or two later.
(Mischel knew they’d designed the test well when a few of the kids
wanted to quit as soon as they explained the ground rules.)
Left alone with a marshmallow they couldn’t eat, kids engaged
in all kinds of delay strategies, from closing their eyes, pulling their
own hair, and turning away, to hovering over, smelling, and even
caressing their treats. On average, kids held out less than three
minutes. And only three out of ten managed to delay their
gratification until the researcher returned. It was pretty apparent most
kids struggled with delayed gratification. Willpower was in short
supply.
Initially no one assumed anything about what success or failure
in the marshmallow test might say about a child’s future. That insight
came about organically. Mischel’s three daughters attended Bing
Nursery School, and over the next few years, he slowly began to see a
pattern when he’d ask them about classmates who had participated in
the experiment. Children who had successfully waited for the second
treat seemed to be doing better. A lot better.
Starting in 1981, Mischel began systematically tracking down
the original subjects. He requested transcripts, compiled records, and
mailed questionnaires in an attempt to measure their relative
academic and social progress. His hunch was correct—willpower or
the ability to delay gratification was a huge indicator of future
success. Over the next 30-plus years, Mischel and his colleagues
published numerous papers on how “high delayers” fared better.
Success in the experiment predicted higher general academic
achievement, SAT test scores that were on average 210 points higher,
higher feelings of self-worth, and better stress management. On the
other hand, “low delayers” were 30 percent more likely to be
overweight and later suffered higher rates of drug addiction. When
your mother told you “all good things come to those who wait,” she
wasn’t kidding.

Willpower is so important that using it effectively should be a
high priority. Unfortunately, since it’s not on will-call, putting it to its
best use requires you to manage it. Just as with “the early bird gets
the worm” and “make hay while the sun shines,” willpower is a
timing issue. When you have your will, you get your way. Although
character is an essential element of willpower, the key to harnessing it
is when you use it.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
Think of willpower like the power bar on your cell phone. Every
morning you start out with a full charge. As the day goes on, every
time you draw on it you’re using it up. So as your green bar shrinks,
so does your resolve, and when it eventually goes red, you’re done.
Willpower has a limited battery life but can be recharged with some
downtime. It’s a limited but renewable resource. Because you have a
limited supply, each act of will creates a win-lose scenario where
winning in an immediate situation through willpower makes you
more likely to lose later because you have less of it. Make it through a
tough day in the trenches, and the lure of late-night snacking can
become your diet’s downfall.
Everyone accepts that limited resources must be managed, yet
we fail to recognize that willpower is one of them. We act as though
our supply of willpower were endless. As a result, we don’t consider
it a personal resource to be managed, like food or sleep. This
repeatedly puts us in a tight spot, for when we need our willpower the
most, it may not be there.
Stanford University professor Baba Shiv’s research shows just
how fleeting our willpower can be. He divided 165 undergraduate
students into two groups and asked them to memorize either a two-
digit or a seven-digit number. Both tasks were well within the average
person’s cognitive abilities, and they could take as much time as they
needed. When they were ready, students would then go to another

room where they would recall the number. Along the way, they  were
offered a snack for participating in the study. The two choices were
chocolate cake or a bowl of fruit salad—guilty pleasure or healthy
treat. Here’s the kicker: students asked to memorize the seven-digit
number were nearly twice as likely to choose cake. This tiny extra
cognitive load was just enough to prevent a prudent choice.
The implications are staggering. The more we use our mind, the
less minding power we have. Willpower is like a fast-twitch muscle
that gets tired and needs rest. It’s incredibly powerful, but it has no
endurance. As Kathleen Vohs put it in Prevention magazine in 2009,
“Willpower is like gas in your car... . When you resist something
tempting, you use some up. The more you resist, the emptier your
tank gets, until you run out of gas.” In fact, a measly five extra digits
is all it takes to drain our willpower dry.
While decisions tap our willpower, the food we eat is also a key
player in our level of willpower.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT
The brain makes up l/50th of our body mass but consumes a
staggering 1/5th of the calories we bum for energy. If your brain were
a car, in terms of gas mileage, it’d be a Hummer. Most of our
conscious activity is happening in our prefrontal cortex, the part of
our brain responsible for focus, handling short-term memory, solving
problems, and moderating impulse control. It’s at the heart of what
makes us human and the center for our executive control and
willpower.
Here’s an interesting fact. The “last in, first out” theory is very
much at work inside our head. The most recent parts of our brain to
develop are the first to suffer if there is a shortage of resources.
Older, more developed areas of the brain, such as those that regulate
breathing and our nervous responses, get first helpings from our blood
stream and are virtually unaffected if we decide to skip a meal. The

prefrontal cortex, on the other hand, feels the impact. Unfortunately,
being relatively young in terms of human development, it’s the runt
of the litter come feeding time.
Advanced research shows us why this matters. A 2007 article in
t h e Journal of Personality and Social Psychology detailed nine
separate studies on the impact of nutrition and willpower. In one set,
researchers assigned tasks that did or did not involve willpower and
measured blood-sugar levels before and after each task. Participants
who exercised willpower showed a marked drop in the levels of
glucose in the bloodstream. Subsequent studies showed the impact on
performance when two groups completed one willpower-related task
and then did another. Between tasks, one group was given a glass of
Kool-Aid lemonade sweetened with real sugar (buzz) and the other
was given a placebo, lemonade with Splenda (buzzkill). The placebo
group had roughly twice as many errors on the subsequent test as the
sugar group.
The studies concluded that willpower is a mental muscle that
doesn’t bounce back quickly. If you employ it for one task, there will
be less power available for the next unless you refuel. To do our best,
we literally have to feed our minds, which gives new credence to the
old saw, “food for thought.” Foods that elevate blood sugar evenly
over long periods, like complex carbohydrates and proteins, become
the fuel of choice for high-achievers—literal proof that “you are what
you eat.”
DEFAULT JUDGMENT
One of the real challenges we have is that when our willpower is low
we tend to fall back on our default settings. Researchers Jonathan
Levav of the Stanford School of Business in California, along with
Liora Avnaim-Pesso and Shai Danziger of Ben Gurion University of
the Negev, found a creative way to investigate this. They took a hard
look at the impact of willpower on the Israeli parole system.

The researchers analyzed 1,112 parole board hearings assigned to
eight judges over a ten-month period (which incidentally amounted to
40 percent of Israel’s total parole requests over that period). The pace
is grueling. The judges hear arguments and take about six minutes to
render a decision on 14 to 35 parole requests a day, and they get only
two breaks—a morning snack and late lunch—to rest and refuel. The
impact of their schedule is as spectacular as it is surprising: In the
mornings and after each break, parolees’ chances for being released
peak at 65 percent, and then plunge to near zero by the end of each
period (see figure 8).
The results are most likely tied to the mental toll of repetitive
decision making. These are big decisions for the parolees and the
public at large. High stakes and the assembly-line rhythm demand
intense focus throughout the day As their energy is spent, judges
mentally collapse into their “default choice,” which doesn’t turn out
so well for hopeful prisoners. The default decision for a parole judge
is no. When in doubt and willpower is low, the prisoner stays behind
bars.
And if you’re not careful, your default settings may convict you
too.
When our willpower runs out, we all revert to our default
settings. This begs the question: What are your default settings? If
your willpower is dragging, will you grab the bag of carrots or the bag
of chips? Will you be up for focusing on the work at hand or down for
any distraction that drops in? When your most important work is done
while your willpower wanes, default will define your level of
achievement. Average is often the result.


FIG. 8  Good decisions depend on more than just wisdom and common sense.
GIVE WILLPOWER THE TIME OF DAY
We lose our willpower not because we think about it but because we
don’t. Without appreciating that it can come and go, we let it do
exactly that. Without intentionally protecting it every day, we allow
ourselves to go from a will and a way to no will and no way. If
success is what were after, this won’t work.
Think about it. There are degrees of willpower strength. Like the
battery indicator going from green to red, there is willpower and there
is “won’t” power. Most people bring won’t power to their most
important challenges without ever realizing that’s what makes them
so hard. When we don’t think of resolve as a resource that gets used
up, when we fail to reserve it for the things that matter most, when we
don’t replenish it when it’s low, we are probably setting ourselves up
for the toughest possible path to success.
So how do you put your willpower to work? You think about it.
Pay attention to it. Respect it. You make doing what matters most a
priority when your willpower is its highest. In other words, you give it
the time of day it deserves.
WHAT TAXES YOUR WILLPOWER
Implementing new behaviors
Filtering distractions
Resisting temptation
Suppressing emotion
Restraining aggression
Suppressing impulses
Taking tests
Trying to impress others
Coping with fear

Doing something you don’t enjoy
Selecting long-term over short-term rewards
Every day, without realizing it, we engage in all manner of
activities that diminish our willpower. Willpower is depleted when
we make decisions to focus our attention, suppress our feelings and
impulses, or modify our behavior in pursuit of goals. It’s like taking
an ice pick and gouging a hole in our gas line. Before long we have
willpower leaking everywhere and none left to do our most important
work. So like any other limited but vital resource, willpower must be
managed.
When it comes to willpower, timing is everything. You will need
your willpower at full strength to ensure that when you’re doing the
right thing, you don’t let anything distract you or steer you away from
it. Then you need enough willpower the rest of the day to either
support or avoid sabotaging what you’ve done. That’s all the
willpower you need to be successful. So, if you want to get the most
out of your day, do your most important work—your ONE Thing—
early, before your willpower is drawn down. Since your self-control
will be sapped throughout the day, use it when it’s at full strength on
what matters most.
   

BIG IDEAS
1. Don’t spread your willpower too thin. On any given day, you
have a limited supply of willpower, so decide what matters and
reserve your willpower for it.
2. Monitor your fuel gauge. Full-strength willpower requires a full
tank. Never let what matters most be compromised simply
because your brain was under-fueled. Eat right and regularly.
3. Time your task. Do what matters most first each day when your
willpower is strongest. Maximum strength willpower means
maximum success.
Don’t fight your willpower. Build your days around how it works
and let it do its part to build your life. Willpower may not be on
willcall, but when you use it first on what matters most, you can
always count on it.

8  A BALANCED LIFE
“The truth is, balance is bunk. It is an unattainable pipe
dream... . The quest for balance between work and life, as
we’ve come to think of it, isn’t just a losing proposition; it’s
a hurtful, destructive one.”
   —Keith H. Hammonds
Nothing ever achieves absolute balance. Nothing. No matter how
imperceptible it might be, what appears to be a state of balance is
something entirely different— an act of balancing. Viewed wistfully
as a noun, balance is lived practically as a verb. Seen as something we
ultimately attain, balance is actually something we constantly do. A
“balanced life” is a myth—a misleading concept most accept as a
worthy and attainable goal without ever stopping to truly consider it. I
want you to consider it. I want you to challenge it. I want you to reject
it.
A balanced life is a lie.
The idea of balance is exactly that—an idea. In philosophy “the
golden mean” is the moderate middle between polar extremes, a
concept used to describe a place between two positions that is more
desirable than one state or the other. This is a grand idea, but not a
very practical one. Idealistic, but not realistic. Balance doesn’t exist.
This is tough to conceive, much less believe, mainly because one
of the most frequent laments is “I need more balance,” a common
mantra for what’s missing in most lives. We hear about balance so
much we automatically assume it’s exactly what we should be
seeking. It’s not. Purpose, meaning, significance—these are what
make a successful life. Seek them and you will most certainly live
your life out of balance, criss-crossing an invisible middle line as you
pursue your priorities. The act of living a full life by giving time to

what matters is a balancing act. Extraordinary results require focused
attention and time. Time on one thing means time away from another.
This makes balance impossible.
THE GENESIS OF A MYTH
Historically, balancing our lives is a novel privilege to even consider.
For thousands of years, work was life. If you didn’t work—hunt
game, harvest crops, or raise livestock—you didn’t live long. But
things changed. Jared Diamond’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Guns,
Germs, and Steel: The Pates of Human Societies illustrates how farm-
based societies that generated a surplus of food ultimately gave rise to
professional specialization. “Twelve thousand years ago, everybody
on earth was a hunter-gatherer; now almost all of us are farmers or
else are fed by farmers.” This freedom from having to forage or farm
allowed people to become scholars and craftsmen. Some worked to
put food on our tables while others built the tables.
At first, most people worked according to their needs and
ambitions. The blacksmith didn’t have to stay at the forge until 5
p.m.; he could go home when the horse’s feet were shod. Then 19th-
century industrialization saw for the first time large numbers working
for someone else. The story became one of hard-driving bosses, year-
round work schedules, and lighted factories that ignored dawn and
dusk. Consequently, the 20th century witnessed the start of significant
grassroots movements to protect workers and limit work hours.
Still, the term “work-life balance” wasn’t coined until the mid-
1980s when more than half of all married women joined the
workforce. To paraphrase Ralph E. Gomory’s preface in the 2005
book Being Together, Working Apart: Dual-Career Families and the
Work-Life Balance, we went from a family unit with a breadwinner
and a homemaker to one with two breadwinners and no homemaker.
Anyone with a pulse knows who got stuck with the extra work in the
beginning. However, by the ’90s “work-life balance” had quickly

become a common watchword for men too. A LexisNexis survey of
the top 100 newspapers and magazines around the world shows a
dramatic rise in the number of articles on the topic, from 32 in the
decade from 1986 to 1996 to a high of 1,674 articles in 2007 alone
(see figure 9).
It’s probably not a coincidence that the ramp-up of technology
parallels the rise in the belief that something is missing in our lives.
Infiltrated space and fewer boundaries will do that. Rooted in real-life
challenges, the idea of “work-life balance” has clearly captured our
minds and imagination.

FIG. 9  The number of times “work-life balance” is mentioned in newspaper and
magazine articles has exploded in recent years.

MIDDLE MISMANAGEMENT
The desire for balance makes sense. Enough time for everything and
everything done in time. It sounds so appealing that just thinking
about it makes us feel serene and peaceful. This calm is so real that
we just know it’s the way life was meant to be. But it’s not.
If you think of balance as the middle, then out of balance is when
you’re away from it. Get too far away from the middle and you’re
living at the extremes. The problem with living in the middle is that it
prevents you from making extraordinary time commitments to
anything. In your effort to attend to all things, everything gets
shortchanged and nothing gets its due. Sometimes this can be okay
and sometimes not. Knowing when to pursue the middle and when to
pursue the extremes is in essence the true beginning of wisdom.
Extraordinary results are achieved by this negotiation with your time.


FIG. 10  Pursuing a balanced life means never pursuing anything at the extremes.
The reason we shouldn’t pursue balance is that the magic never
happens in the middle; magic happens at the extremes. The dilemma
is that chasing the extremes presents real challenges. We naturally
understand that success lies at the outer edges, but we don’t know
how to manage our lives while we’re out there.
When we work too long, eventually our personal life suffers.
Falling prey to the belief that long hours are virtuous, we unfairly
blame work when we say, “I have no life.” Often, it’s just the
opposite. Even if our work life doesn’t interfere, our personal life
itself can be so full of “have-tos” that we again reach the same
defeated conclusion: “I have no life.” And sometimes we get hit from
both sides. Some of us face so many personal and professional
demands that everything suffers. Breakdown imminent, we once again
declare, “I have no life!”


FIG. 11  Pursuing the extremes presents its own set of problems.
Just like playing to the middle, playing to the extremes is the
kind of middle mismanagement that plays out all the time.
TIME WAITS FOR NO ONE
My wife once told me the story of a friend of hers. The friend’s
mother was a schoolteacher and her father was a farmer. They had
scrimped, saved, and done with less their entire lives in anticipation
of retirement and travel. The woman fondly remembered the regular
shopping trips she and her mother would take to the local fabric store
where they would pick out some fabric and patterns. The mother
explained that when she retired these would be her travel clothes.
She never got to her retirement years. In her final year of
teaching, she developed cancer and later died. The father never felt
good about spending the money they’d saved, believing that it was
“their” money and now she wasn’t there to share it with him. When he
passed away and my wife’s friend went to clean out her parents’
home, she discovered a closet full of fabric and dress patterns. The
father had never cleaned it out. He couldn’t. It represented too much.
It was as if its contents were so full of unfulfilled promises that they
were too heavy to lift.
Time waits for no one. Push something to an extreme and
postponement can become permanent.
I once knew a highly successful businessman who had worked
long days and weekends for most of his life, sincere in his belief that
he was doing it all for his family. Someday when he was done, they
would all enjoy the fruits of his labor, spend time together, travel, and
do all the things they’d never done. After giving many years to
building his company he had recently sold it and was open to
discussing what he might do next. I asked him how he was doing and
he proudly proclaimed that he was fine. “When I was building the
business, I was never home and rarely saw my family. So now I’m

with them on vacation making up for lost time. You know how it is,
right? Now that I have the money and the time, I’m getting those
years back.”
Do you really think you can ever get back a child’s bedtime story
or birthday? Is a party for a five-year-old with imaginary pals the
same as dinner with a teenager with high-school friends? Is an adult
attending a young child’s soccer game on par with attending a soccer
game with an adult child? Do you think you can cut a deal with God
that time stands still for you, holding off on anything important until
you’re ready to participate again?
When you gamble with your time, you may be placing a bet you
can’t cover. Even if you’re sure you can win, be careful that you can
live with what you lose.
Toying with time will lead you down a rabbit hole with no way
out. Believing this lie does its harm by convincing you to do things
you shouldn’t and stop doing things you should. Middle
mismanagement can be one of the most destructive things you ever
do. You can’t ignore the inevitability of time.
So if achieving balance is a lie, then what do you do?
Counterbalance.
Replace the word “balance” with “counterbalance” and what you
experience makes sense. The things we presume to have balance are
really just counterbalancing. The ballerina is a classic example. When
the ballerina poses en pointe, she can appear weightless, floating on
air, the very idea of balance and grace. A closer look would reveal her
toe shoes vibrating rapidly, making minute adjustments for balance.
Counterbalancing done well gives the illusion of balance.
COUNTERBALANCING—THE LONG AND SHORT
OF IT
When we say we’re out of balance, we’re usually referring to a sense
that some priorities—things that matter to us—are being underserved

or unmet. The problem is that when you focus on what is truly
important, something will always be underserved. No matter how
hard you try, there will always be things left undone at the end of your
day, week, month, year, and life. Trying to get them all done is folly.
When the things that matter most get done, you’ll still be left with a
sense of things being undone—a sense of imbalance. Leaving some
things undone is a necessary tradeoff for extraordinary results. But
you can’t leave everything undone, and that’s where counterbalancing
comes in. The idea of counterbalancing is that you never go so far that
you can’t find your way back or stay so long that there is nothing
waiting for you when you return.
This is so important that your very life may hang in the balance.
An 11-year study of nearly 7,100 British civil servants concluded that
habitual long hours can be deadly. Researchers showed that
individuals who worked more than 11 hours a day (a 55-plus hour
workweek) were 67 percent more likely to suffer from heart disease.
Counterbalancing is not only about your sense of well-being, it’s
essential to your being well.


FIG. 12  Extraordinary results at work require longer periods between
counterbalancing.
There are two types of counterbalancing: the balancing between
work and personal life and the balancing within each. In the world of
professional success, it’s not about how much overtime you put in;
the key ingredient is focused time over time. To achieve an
extraordinary result you must choose what matters most and give it
all the time it demands. This requires getting extremely out of
balance in relation to all other work issues, with only infrequent
counterbalancing to address them. In your personal world, awareness
is the essential ingredient. Awareness of your spirit and body,
awareness of your family and friends, awareness of your personal
needs—none of these can be sacrificed if you intend to “have a life,”
so you can never forsake them for work or one for the other. You can
move back and forth quickly between these and often even combine
the activities around them, but you can’t neglect any of them for long.
Your personal life requires tight counterbalancing.
Whether or not to go out of balance isn’t really the question. The
question is: “Do you go short or long?” In your personal life, go short
and avoid long periods where you’re out of balance. Going short lets
you stay connected to all the things that matter most and move them
along together. In your professional life, go long and make peace with
the idea that the pursuit of extraordinary results may require you to be
out of balance for long periods. Going long allows you to focus on
what matters most, even at the expense of other, lesser priorities. In
your personal life, nothing gets left behind. At work it’s required.
In his novel Suzanne’s Diary for Nicholas,  James Patterson
artfully highlights where our priorities lie in our personal and
professional balancing act: “Imagine life is a game in which you are
juggling five balls. The balls are called work, family, health, friends,
and integrity. And you’re keeping all of them in the air. But one day
you finally come to understand that work is a rubber ball. If you drop

it, it will bounce back. The other four balls—family, health, friends,
integrity—are made of glass. If you drop one of these, it will be
irrevocably scuffed, nicked, perhaps even shattered.”
LIFE IS A BALANCING ACT
The question of balance is really a question of priority. When you
change your language from balancing to prioritizing, you see your
choices more clearly and open the door to changing your destiny.
Extraordinary results demand that you set a priority and act on it.
When you act on your priority, you’ll automatically go out of balance,
giving more time to one thing over another. The challenge then
doesn’t become one of not going out of balance, for in fact you must.
The challenge becomes how long you stay on your priority. To be able
to address your priorities outside of work, be clear about your most
important work priority so you can get it done. Then go home and be
clear about your priorities there so you can get back to work.
When you’re supposed to be working, work, and when you’re
supposed to be playing, play. It’s a weird tightrope you’re walking,
but it’s only when you get your priorities mixed up that things fall
apart.
   

BIG IDEAS
1. Think about two balancing buckets. Separate your work life
and 
personal 
life 
into 
two 
distinct 
buckets—not 
to
compartmentalize them, just for counterbalancing. Each has its
own counterbalancing goals and approaches.
2. Counterbalance your work bucket. View work as involving a
skill or knowledge that must be mastered. This will cause you to
give disproportionate time to your ONE Thing and will throw the
rest of your work day, week, month, and year continually out of
balance. Your work life is divided into two distinct areas—what
matters most and everything else. You will have to take what
matters to the extremes and be okay with what happens to the
rest. Professional success requires it.
3. Counterbalance your personal life bucket. Acknowledge that
your life actually has multiple areas and that each requires a
minimum of attention for you to feel that you “have a life.” Drop
any one and you will feel the effects. This requires constant
awareness. You must never go too long or too far without
counterbalancing them so that they are all active areas of your
life. Your personal life requires it.
Start leading a counterbalanced life. Let the right things take
precedence when they should and get to the rest when you can.
An extraordinary life is a counterbalancing act.

9  BIG IS BAD
“We are kept from our goal, not by obstacles but by a clear
path to a lesser goal.”
   —Robert Brault
The Big Bad Wolf. Big Bad John. From folktales to folk songs, the
suggestion that big and bad go together has been a common theme
across history—so much so that many think they’re synonymous.
They’re not. Big can be bad and bad can be big, but they’re not one
and the same. They aren’t inherently related.
A big opportunity is better than a small one, but a small problem
is better than a big one. Sometimes you want the biggest present
under the tree and sometimes you want the smallest. Often a big laugh
or a big cry is just what you need, and every so often a small chuckle
and a few tears will do the trick. Big and bad are no more tied
together than small and good.
Big is bad is a lie.
It’s quite possibly the worst lie of all, for if you fear big success,
you’ll either avoid it or sabotage your efforts to achieve it.
WHO’S AFRAID OF THE BIG BAD BIG?
Place big and results in the same room and a lot of people balk or
walk. Mention big with achievement and their first thoughts are hard,
complicated, and time-consuming. Difficult to get there and complex
once you do pretty much sums up their views. Overwhelming and
intimidating is what they feel. For some reason there is the fear that
big success brings crushing pressure and stress, that the pursuit of it
robs them of not only time with family and friends but eventually
their health. Uncertain of the right to achieve big, or fearful of what
might happen if they try and fall short, their head spins just thinking
about it and they immediately doubt they have a head for heights.

All of this reinforces a “dis-ease” with the very idea of big. To
invent a word, call it megaphobia—the irrational fear of big.
When we connect big with bad, we trigger shrinking thinking.
Lowering our trajectory feels safe. Staying where we are feels
prudent. But the opposite is true: When big is believed to be bad,
small thinking rules the day and big never sees the light of it.
FLAT WRONG
How many ships didn’t sail because of the belief that the earth was
flat? How much progress was impeded because man wasn’t supposed
to breathe underwater, fly through the air, or venture into outer space?
Historically, we’ve done a remarkably poor job of estimating our
limits. The good news is that science isn’t about guessing, but rather
the art of progressing.
And so is your life.
None of us knows our limits. Borders and boundaries may be
clear on a map, but when we apply them to our lives, the lines aren’t
so apparent. I was once asked if I thought thinking big was realistic. I
paused to reflect on this and then said, “Let me ask you a question
first: Do you know what your limits are?” “No,” was the reply. So I
said that it seemed the question was irrelevant. No one knows their
ultimate ceiling for achievement, so worrying about it is a waste of
time. What if someone told you that you could never achieve above a
certain level? That you were required to pick an upper limit which
you could never exceed? What would you pick? A low one or a high
one? I think we know the answer. Put in this situation, we would all
do the same thing—go big. Why? Because you wouldn’t want to limit
yourself.
When you allow yourself to accept that big is about who you can
become, you look at it differently.
In this context, big is a placeholder for what you might call a
leap of possibility. It’s the office intern visualizing the boardroom or

a penniless immigrant imagining a business revolution. It’s about
bold ideas that might threaten your comfort zones but simultaneously
reflect your greatest opportunities. Believing in big frees you to ask
different questions, follow different paths, and try new things. This
opens the doors to possibilities that until now only lived inside you.
Sabeer Bhatia arrived in America with only $250 in his pocket,
but he wasn’t alone. Sabeer came with big plans and the belief that he
could grow a business faster than any business in history. And he did.
He created Hotmail. Microsoft, a witness to Hotmail’s meteoric rise,
eventually bought it for $400 million.
According to his mentor, Farouk Arjani, Sabeer’s success was
directly related to his ability to think big. “What set Sabeer apart
from the hundreds of entrepreneurs I’ve met is the gargantuan size of
his dream. Even before he had a product, before he had any money
behind him, he was completely convinced that he was going to build a
major company that would be worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
He had an unrelenting conviction that he was not just going to build a
run-of-the-mill Silicon Valley company. But over time I realized, by
golly, he was probably going to pull it off.”
As of 2011, Hotmail ranked as one of the most successful
webmail service providers in the world, with more than 360 million
active users.
GOING BIG
Thinking big is essential to extraordinary results. Success requires
action, and action requires thought. But here’s the catch—the only
actions that become springboards to succeeding big are those
informed by big thinking to begin with. Make this connection, and the
importance of how big you think begins to sink in.


FIG. 13  Thinking informs actions and actions determine outcomes.
Everyone has the same amount of time, and hard work is simply
hard work. As a result, what you do in the time you work determines
what you achieve. And since what you do is determined by what you
think, how big you think becomes the launching pad for how high you
achieve.
Think of it this way. Every level of achievement requires its own
combination of what you do, how you do it, and who you do it with.
The trouble is that the combination of what, how, and who that gets
you to one level of success won’t naturally evolve to a better
combination that leads to the next level of success. Doing something
one way doesn’t always lay the foundation for doing something
better, nor does a relationship with one person automatically set the
stage for a more successful relationship with another. It’s unfortunate,
but these things don’t build on each other. If you learn to do
something one way, and with one set of relationships, that may work
fine until you want to achieve more. It’s then that you’ll discover
you’ve created an artificial ceiling of achievement for yourself that
may be too hard to break through. In effect, you’ve boxed yourself in
when there is a simple way to avoid it. Think as big as you possibly
can and base what you do, how you do it, and who you do it with on
succeeding at that level. It just might take you more than your
lifetime to run into the walls of a box this big.
When people talk about “reinventing” their career or their
business, small boxes are often the root cause. What you build today
will either empower or restrict you tomorrow. It will either serve as a
platform for the next level of your success or as a box, trapping you
where you are.


FIG. 14  Choose your box—choose your outcome.
“The rung of a ladder was never meant to rest upon, but only
to hold a man’s foot long enough to enable him to put the
other somewhat higher.”
   — Thomas Henry Huxley
Big gives you the best chance for extraordinary results today and
tomorrow. When Arthur Guinness set up his first brewery, he signed a
9,000-year lease. When J. K. Rowling conceived Harry Potter, she
thought big and envisioned seven years at Hogwarts before she
penned the first chapter of the first of seven books. Before Sam
Walton opened the first Wal-Mart, he envisioned a business so big
that he felt he needed to go ahead and set up his future estate plan to
minimize inheritance taxes. By thinking big, long before he made it
big, he was able to save his family an estimated $11 to $13 billion in
estate taxes. Transferring the wealth of one of the greatest companies
ever built as tax-free as possible requires thinking big from the
beginning.
Thinking big isn’t just about business. Candace Lightner started
Mothers Against Drunk Driving in 1980 after her daughter was killed
in a hit-and-run accident by a drunk driver. Today, MADD has saved
more than 300,000 lives. As a six-year-old in 1998, Ryan Hreljac was
inspired by stories told by his teacher to help bring clean water to
Africa. Today his foundation, Ryan’s Well, has improved conditions
and helped bring safe water to over 750,000 people in 16 countries.
Derreck Kayongo recognized both the waste and hidden value in
getting new soap into hotels every day. So in 2009 he created the
Global Soap Project, which has provided more than 250,000 bars of
soap in 21 countries, helping combat child mortality by simply giving
impoverished people the chance to wash their hands.
Asking big questions can be daunting. Big goals can seem
unattainable at first. Yet how many times have you set out to do

something that seemed like a real stretch at the time, only to discover
it was much easier than you thought? Sometimes things are easier
than we imagine, and truthfully sometimes they’re a lot harder. That’s
when it’s important to realize that on the journey to achieving big,
you get bigger. Big requires growth, and by the time you arrive,
you’re big too! What seemed an insurmountable mountain from a
distance is just a small hill when you arrive—at least in proportion to
the person you’ve become. Your thinking, your skills, your
relationships, your sense of what is possible and what it takes all grow
on the journey to big.
As you experience big, you become big.
THE BIG DEAL
For more than four decades, Stanford psychologist Carol S. Dweck
has studied the science of how our self-conceptions influence our
actions. Her work offers great insight into why thinking big is such a
big deal.
Dweck’s work with children revealed two mindsets in action—a
“growth” mindset that generally thinks big and seeks growth and a
“fixed” mindset that places artificial limits and avoids failure.
Growth-minded students, as she calls them, employ better learning
strategies, experience less helplessness, exhibit more positive effort,
and achieve more in the classroom than their fixed-minded peers.
They are less likely to place limits on their lives and more likely to
reach for their potential. Dweck points out that mindsets can and do
change. Like any other habit, you set your mind to it until the right
mindset becomes routine.
When Scott Forstall started recruiting talent to his newly formed
team, he warned that the top-secret project would provide ample
opportunities to “make mistakes and struggle, but eventually we may
do something that we’ll remember the rest of our lives.” He gave this
curious pitch to superstars across the company, but only took those

w h o immediately jumped at the challenge. He was looking for
“growth-minded” people, as he later shared with Dweck after reading
her book. Why is this significant? While you’ve probably never even
heard of Forstall, you’ve certainly heard of what his team created.
Forstall was a senior vice president at Apple, and the team he formed
created the iPhone.
BLOWING UP YOUR LIFE
Big stands for greatness—extraordinary results. Pursue a big life and
you’re pursuing the greatest life you can possibly live. To live great,
you have to think big. You must be open to the possibility that your
life and what you accomplish can become great. Achievement and
abundance show up because they’re the natural outcomes of doing the
right things with no limits attached.
Don’t fear big. Fear mediocrity. Fear waste. Fear the lack of
living to your fullest. When we fear big, we either consciously or
subconsciously work against it. We either run toward lesser outcomes
and opportunities or we simply run away from the big ones. If
courage isn’t the absence of fear, but moving past it, then thinking big
isn’t the absence of doubts, but moving past them. Only living big
will let you experience your true life and work potential.
   

BIG IDEAS
1. Think big. Avoid incremental thinking that simply asks, “What
do I do next?” This is at best the slow lane to success and, at
worst, the off ramp. Ask bigger questions. A good rule of thumb
is to double down everywhere in your life. If your goal is ten, ask
the question: “How can I reach 20?” Set a goal so far above what
you want that you’ll be building a plan that practically
guarantees your original goal.
2. Don’t order from the menu. Apple’s celebrated 1997 “Think
Different” ad campaign featured icons like Ali, Dylan, Einstein,
Hitchcock, Picasso, Gandhi, and others who “saw things
differently” and who went on to transform the world we know.
The point was that they didn’t choose from the available options;
they imagined outcomes that no one else had. They ignored the
menu and ordered their own creations. As the ad reminds us,
“People who are crazy enough to think they can change the
world are the only ones who do.”
3. Act bold. Big thoughts go nowhere without bold action. Once
you’ve asked a big question, pause to imagine what life looks
like with the answer. If you still can’t imagine it, go study people
who have already achieved it. What are the models, systems,
habits, and relationships of other people who have found the
answer? As much as we’d like to believe we’re all different,
what consistently works for others will almost always work for
us.
4. Don’t fear failure. It’s as much a part of your journey to
extraordinary results as success. Adopt a growth mindset, and
don’t be afraid of where it can take you. Extraordinary results
aren’t built solely on extraordinary results. They’re built on
failure too. In fact, it would be accurate to say that we fail our
way to success. When we fail, we stop, ask what we need to do to

succeed, learn from our mistakes, and grow. Don’t be afraid to
fail. See it as part of your learning process and keep striving for
your true potential.
Don’t let small thinking cut your life down to size. Think big,
aim high, act bold. And see just how big you can blow up your life.

2
THE TRUTH
THE SIMPLE PATH TO PRODUCTIVITY

“Be careful how you interpret the world; it is like that.”
—Erich Heller
UNCLENCHED
For many years, I suffered from trying to live the lies of success.
I began my career assuming everything mattered equally, so in
an effort to cram it all in, I attempted too much at once. Frustrated, I
eventually began to doubt I had the discipline or will to achieve
success at all. As my life continually fell out of balance, I started to
consider that trying to live a big life might be a bad thing. When you
try to live up to something that isn’t possible, you can get pretty
down.
I was pretty down.
In an attempt to make it all work, I began to bear down even
harder. You might say that I started to clench my way to success. I
really did. I thought that this might be the way you went through life
—with your jaw clenched, your fist clenched, your stomach clenched,
and your butt clenched. Leaning forward, breath held and body taut,
tight and totally tense. I just assumed that was the feeling of focus
and intensity as I struggled to live with the lies. That approach
actually worked, but it also put me in the hospital.
I also began to think you had to talk like a success, walk like a
success, and even dress for success. It wasn’t me, but I was open to
any way to make things work, so I took seriously the suggestion that
you are supposed to project the way you want to be. That approach
worked as well, but after a while, I simply got tired of “playing”
success.
I bought into getting up before the crack of dawn, getting revved
up playing inspirational theme songs, and getting going before anyone
else. In fact, I became so full of this thinking that I would drive to the
office while the rest of the city slept and then crash at my desk just to
make sure that I beat everyone else to work. I started to accept the

notion that maybe this is what ambition and achievement looked like
as I fought the good fight. I would hold staff meetings at 7:30 in the
morning and, at 7:31, would actually shut the door and lock out
anyone who showed up late. I was going overboard, but I was
beginning to believe this was the only way you could succeed, and the
way you pushed others to succeed as well. This approach also worked,
but in the end it also pushed me too hard, others too far, and my world
over the edge.
I was truly beginning to think that the secret to success was to
get as tightly wound up as possible each morning, set myself on fire,
and then open the door and fly through the day, unwinding on the
world, until I literally burnt out.
And what did all of this get me? It got me success, and it got me
sick. Eventually, it got me sick of success.
So what did I do? I ditched the lies and went in the opposite
direction. 
I 
joined 
overachievers 
anonymous 
and 
went
antiestablishment on all the success “tactics” that supposedly build
success.
First off, I got unclenched. I actually started listening to my
body, slowed down, and chilled out. Next, I started wearing T-shirts
and jeans to work and defied anyone to make a comment. I dropped
the language and the attitude and went back to just being me. I had
breakfast with my family. I got in shape physically and spiritually and
stayed there. And last, I started doing less. Yes, less. Intentionally,
purposefully less. I was looser than ever, way laid back for me, and
breathing. I challenged the axioms of success, and guess what? I
became more successful than I ever dreamed possible and felt better
than I’d ever felt in my life.
Here’s what I found out: We overthink, overplan, and
overanalyze our careers, our businesses, and our lives; that long hours
are neither virtuous nor healthy; and that we usually succeed in spite
of most of what we do, not because of it. I discovered that we can’t

manage time, and that the key to success isn’t in all the things we do
but in the handful of things we do well.
I learned that success comes down to this: being appropriate in
the moments of your life. If you can honestly say, “This is where I’m
meant to be right now, doing exactly what I’m doing,” then all the
amazing possibilities for your life become possible.
Most of all, I learned that the ONE Thing is the surprisingly
simple truth behind extraordinary results.

10  THE FOCUSING QUESTION
“There is an art to clearing away the clutter and focusing on
what matters most. It is simple and it is transferable. It just
requires the courage to take a different approach.”
   —George Anders
On June 23, 1885, in the town of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Andrew
Carnegie addressed the students of the Curry Commercial College. At
the height of his business success, the Carnegie Steel Company was
the largest and most profitable industrial enterprise in the world.
Carnegie would later become the second-richest man in history, after
John D. Rockefeller. In Carnegie’s talk, entitled “The Road to
Business Success,” he discussed his life as a successful
businessperson and gave this advice:
And here is the prime condition of success, the great secret—
concentrate your energy, thought and capital exclusively upon
the business in which you are engaged. Having begun on one
line, resolve to fight it out on that line, to lead in it, adopt every
improvement, have the best machinery, and know the most about
it. The concerns which fail are those which have scattered their
capital, which means that they have scattered their brains also.
They have investments in this, or that, or the other, here, there
and everywhere. “Don’t put all your eggs in one basket” is all
wrong. I tell you “put all your eggs in one basket, and then watch
that basket.” Look round you and take notice; men who do that
do not often fail. It is easy to watch and carry the one basket. It is
trying to carry too many baskets that breaks most eggs in this
country.
So, how do you know which basket to pick? The Focusing

Question.
Mark Twain agreed with Carnegie and described it this way:
The secret of getting ahead is getting started. The secret to
getting started is breaking your complex overwhelming tasks
into small manageable tasks and then starting on the first one.
So, how do you know what the first one should be? The Focusing
Question.
Did you notice that both of these great men considered their
advice a “secret”? I don’t think it’s so much a secret as something
people know but don’t give proper weight or importance. Most people
are familiar with the Chinese proverb “A journey of a thousand miles
must begin with a single step.” They just never stop to fully
appreciate that if this is true, then the wrong first step begins a
journey that could end as far as two thousand miles from where they
want to be. The Focusing Question helps keep your first step from
being a misstep.
LIFE IS A QUESTION
You may be asking, “Why focus on a question when what we really
crave is an answer?” It’s simple. Answers come from questions, and
the quality of any answer is directly determined by the quality of the
question. Ask the wrong question, get the wrong answer. Ask the right
question, get the right answer. Ask the most powerful question
possible, and the answer can be life altering.
Voltaire once wrote, “Judge a man by his questions rather than
his answers.” Sir Francis Bacon added, “A prudent question is one-
half of wisdom.” Indira Gandhi concluded that “the power to question
is the basis of all human progress.” Great questions are clearly the
quickest path to great answers. Every discoverer and inventor begins
his quest with a transformative question. The scientific method asks
questions of the universe in hypothesis form. The more than 2,000-

year-old Socratic Method, teaching through questions, is still
embraced by educators from the heights of Harvard Law School to the
local kindergarten class. Questions engage our critical thinking.
Research shows that asking questions improves learning and
performance by as much as 150 percent. In the end, it’s hard to argue
with author Nancy Willard, who wrote, “Sometimes questions are
more important than answers.”
I first became aware of the power of questions as a young man. I
read a poem that affected me profoundly and I’ve carried it with me
ever since.
MY WAGE
By J. B. Rittenhouse
I bargained with Life for a penny,
And Life would pay no more,
However I begged at evening
When I counted my scanty store.
For Life is a just employer,
He gives you what you ask,
But once you have set the wages,
Why, you must bear the task.
I worked for a menials hire,
Only to learn, dismayed,
That any wage I had asked of Life,
Life would have willingly paid.
The last two lines deserve repeating: “... any wage I had asked of
Life, Life would have willingly paid.” One of the most empowering
moments of my life came when I realized that life is a question and

how we live it is our answer. How we phrase the questions we ask
ourselves determines the answers that eventually become our life.
The challenge is that the right question isn’t always so obvious.
Most things we want don’t come with a road map or a set of
instructions, so it can be difficult to frame the right question. Clarity
must come from us. It seems we must envision our own journeys,
make our own maps, and create our own compasses. To get the
answers we seek, we have to invent the right questions—and we’re
left to devise our own. So how do you do this? How do you come up
with uncommon questions that take you to uncommon answers?
You ask one question: the Focusing Question.
Anyone who dreams of an uncommon life eventually discovers
there is no choice but to seek an uncommon approach to living it. The
Focusing Question is that uncommon approach. In a world of no
instructions, it becomes the simple formula for finding exceptional
answers that lead to extraordinary results.
The Focusing Question is so deceptively simple that its power is
easily dismissed by anyone who doesn’t closely examine it. But that
would be a mistake. The Focusing Question can lead you to answer
not only “big picture” questions (Where am I going? What target

should I aim for?) but also “small focus” ones as well (What must I
do right now to be on the path to getting the big picture? Where’s the
bull’s-eye?). It tells you not only what your basket should be, but also
the first step toward getting it. It shows you how big your life can be
and just how small you must go to get there. It’s both a map for the
big picture and a compass for your smallest next move.


FIG. 15  The Focusing Question is a big-picture map and small-focus compass.
Extraordinary results are rarely happenstance. They come from
the choices we make and the actions we take. The Focusing Question
always aims you at the absolute best of both by forcing you to do
what is essential to success—make a decision. But not just any
decision—it drives you to make the best decision. It ignores what is
doable and drills down to what is necessary, to what matters.
It leads you to the first domino.
To stay on track for the best possible day month, year, or career,
you must keep asking the Focusing Question. Ask it again and again,
and it forces you to line up tasks in their levered order of importance.
Then, each time you ask it, you see your next priority. The power of
this approach is that you’re setting yourself up to accomplish one task
on top of another. When you do the right task first, you also build the
right mindset first, the right skill first, and the right relationship first.
Powered by the Focusing Question, your actions become a natural
progression of building one right thing on top of the previous right
thing. When this happens, you’re in position to experience the power
of the domino effect.
ANATOMY OF THE QUESTION
The Focusing Question collapses all possible questions into one:
“What’s the ONE Thing I can do / such that by doing it / everything
else will be easier or unnecessary?”
PART ONE: “WHAT’S THE ONE THING I CAN DO...
This sparks focused action. “What’s the ONE Thing” tells you the
answer will be one thing versus many. It forces you toward something
specific. It tells you right up front that, although you may consider
many options, you need to take this seriously because you don’t get
two, three, four, or more. You can’t hedge your bet. You’re allowed to
pick one thing and one thing only.

The last phrase, “can do,” is an embedded command directing
you to take action that is possible. People often want to change this to
“should do,” “could do,” or “would do,” but those choices all miss the
point. There are many things we should, could, or would do but never
do. Action you “can do” beats intention every time.
PART TWO: “...SUCH THAT BY DOING IT...
“But those Woulda-Coulda-Shouldas all ran away and hid
from one little Did.”
   —Shel Silverstein
This tells you there’s a criterion your answer must meet. It’s the
bridge between just doing something and doing something for a
specific purpose. “Such that by doing it” lets you know you’re going
to have to dig deep, because when you do this ONE Thing, something
else is going to happen.
PART THREE: “... EVERYTHING ELSE WILL BE
EASIER OR UNNECESSARY?”
Archimedes said, “Give me a lever long enough and I could move the
world,” and that’s exactly what this last part tells you to find.
“Everything else will be easier or unnecessary” is the ultimate
leverage test. It tells you when you’ve found the first domino. It says
that when you do this ONE Thing, everything else you could do to
accomplish your goal will now be either doable with less effort or no
longer even necessary. Most people struggle to comprehend how
many things don’t need to be done, if they would just start by doing
the right thing. In effect, this qualifier seeks to declutter your life by
asking you to put on blinders. This elevates the answer’s potential to
change your life by doing the leveraged thing and avoiding
distractions.
The Focusing Question asks you to find the first domino and

focus on it exclusively until you knock it over. Once you’ve done that,
you’ll discover a line of dominoes behind it either ready to fall or
already down.
   
BIG IDEAS
1. Great questions are the path to great answers. The Focusing
Question is a great question designed to find a great answer. It
will help you find the first domino for your job, your business, or
any other area in which you want to achieve extraordinary
results.
2. The Focusing Question is a double-duty question. It comes in
two forms: big picture and small focus. One is about finding the
right direction in life and the other is about finding the right
action.
3. The Big-Picture Question: “What’s my ONE Thing?” Use it
to develop a vision for your life and the direction for your career
or company; it is your strategic compass. It also works when
considering what you want to master, what you want to give to
others and your community, and how you want to be
remembered. It keeps your relationships with friends, family,

and colleagues in perspective and your daily actions on track.
4. The Small-Focus Question: “What’s my ONE Thing right
now?” Use this when you first wake up and throughout the day.
It keeps you focused on your most important work and, whenever
you need it, helps you find the “levered action” or first domino
in any activity. The small-focus question prepares you for the
most productive workweek possible. It’s effective in your
personal life too, keeping you attentive to your most important
immediate needs, as well as those of the most important people
in your life.
Extraordinary results come from asking the Focusing Question.
It’s how you’ll plot your course through life and business, and how
you’ll make the best progress on your most important work.
Whether you seek answers big or small, asking the Focusing
Question is the ultimate success habit for your life.

11  THE SUCCESS HABIT
“Success is simple. Do what’s right, the right way, at the
right time.”
   —Arnold H. Glasow
You know about habits. They can be hard to break—and hard to
create. But we are unknowingly acquiring new ones all the time.
When we start and continue a way of thinking or a way of acting over
a long enough period, we’ve created a new habit. The choice we face
is whether or not we want to form habits that get us what we want
from life. If we do, then the Focusing Question is the most powerful
success habit we can have.
For me, the Focusing Question is a way of life. I use it to find my
most leveraged priority, make the most out of my time, and get the
biggest bang for my buck. Whenever the outcome absolutely matters,
I ask it. I ask it when I wake up and start my day. I ask it when I get to
work, and again when I get home. What’s the ONE Thing I can do
such that by doing it everything else will be easier or unnecessary?
And when I know the answer, I continue to ask it until I can see the
connections and all my dominoes are lined up.
Obviously, you can drive yourself nuts analyzing every little
aspect of everything you might do. I don’t do that, and you shouldn’t
either. Start with the big stuff and see where it takes you. Over time,
you’ll develop your own sense of when to use the big-picture question
and when to use the small-focus question.
The Focusing Question is the foundational habit I use to achieve
extraordinary results and lead a big life. I use it for some things and
not at all for others. I apply it to the important areas of my life: my
spiritual life, physical health, personal life, key relationships, job,
business, and financial life. And I address them in that order—each
one is a foundation for the next.

Because I want my life to matter, I approach each area by doing
what matters most in it. I view these as the cornerstones of my life
and have found that when I’m doing what’s most important in each
area, my life feels like it’s running on all cylinders.
The Focusing Question can direct you to your ONE Thing in the
different areas of your life. Simply reframe the Focusing Question by
inserting your area of focus. You can also include  a time frame—such
as “right now” or “this year”—to give your answer the appropriate
level of immediacy, or “in five years” or “someday” to find a big-
picture answer that points you at outcomes to aim for.


FIG. 16  My life and the areas that matter most in it.
Here are some Focusing Questions to ask yourself. Say the
category first, then state the question, add a time frame, and end by
adding “such that by doing it everything else will be easier or
unnecessary?” For example: “For my job, what’s the ONE Thing I can
do to ensure I hit my goals this week such that by doing it everything
else will be easier or unnecessary?”
FOR MY SPIRITUAL LIFE...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to help others... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my relationship with
God... ?
FOR MY PHYSICAL HEALTH...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to achieve my diet goals... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to ensure that I exercise... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to relieve my stress... ?
FOR MY PERSONAL LIFE...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my skill at
________... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to find time for myself... ?
FOR MY KEY RELATIONSHIPS...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my relationship with
my spouse/partner... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my children’s school
performance... ?

What’s the ONE Thing I can do to show my appreciation to my
parents... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to make my family stronger... ?
FOR MY JOB...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to ensure that I hit my goals... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my skills... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to help my team succeed... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to further my career... ?
FOR MY BUSINESS...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to make us more competitive... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to make our product the best... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to make us more profitable... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve our customer
experience... ?
FOR MY FINANCES...
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to increase my net worth... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to improve my investment cash
flow... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to eliminate my credit card
debt... ?

   
BIG IDEAS
So how do you make The ONE Thing part of your daily routine? How
do you make it strong enough to get extraordinary results at work and
in the other areas of your life? Here’s a starter list drawn from our
experience and our work with others.
1. Understand and believe it. The first step is to understand the
concept of the ONE Thing, then to believe that it can make a
difference in your life. If you don’t understand and believe, you
won’t take action.
2. Use it. Ask yourself the Focusing Question. Start each day by
asking, “What’s the ONE Thing I can do today for [whatever you
want] such that by doing it everything else will be easier or even
unnecessary?” When you do this, your direction will become
clear. Your work will be more productive and your personal life
more rewarding.
3. Make it a habit. When you make asking the Focusing Question
a habit, you fully engage its power to get the extraordinary
results you want. It’s a difference maker. Research says this will
take about 66 days. Whether it takes you a few weeks or a few

months, stick with it until it becomes your routine. If you’re not
serious about learning the Success Habit, you’re not serious
about getting extraordinary results.
4. Leverage reminders. Set up ways to remind yourself to use the
Focusing Question. One of the best ways to do this is to put up a
sign at work that says, “Until my ONE Thing is done—
everything else is a distraction.” We designed the back cover of
this book to be a trigger —set it on the corner of your desk so
that it’s the first thing you see when you get to work. Use notes,
screen savers, and calendar cues to keep making the connection
between the Success Habit and the results you seek. Put up
reminders like, “The ONE Thing = Extraordinary Results” or
“The Success Habit Will Get Me to My Goal.”
5. Recruit support. Research shows that those around you can
influence you tremendously. Starting a success support group
with some of your work colleagues can help inspire all of you to
practice the Success Habit every day. Get your family involved.
Share your ONE Thing. Get them on board. Use the Focusing
Question around them to show them how the Success Habit can
make a difference in their school work, their personal
achievements, or any other part of their lives.
This one habit can become the foundation for many more, so
keep your Success Habit working as powerfully as possible. Use the
strategies outlined in Part 3: Extraordinary Results, for goal setting
and time blocking to experience extraordinary results every day of
your life.

12  THE PATH TO GREAT
ANSWERS
“People do not decide their futures, they decide their habits
and their habits decide their futures.”
   —F. M. Alexander
The Focusing Question helps you identify your ONE Thing in any
situation. It will clarify what you want in the big areas of your life
and then drill down to what you must do to get them. It’s really a
simple process: You ask a great question, then you seek out a great
answer. As simple as two steps, it’s the ultimate Success Habit.
FIG. 17  Your one-two punch for extraordinary results.
1. ASK A GREAT QUESTION

The Focusing Question helps you ask a great question. Great
questions, like great goals, are big and specific. They push you,
stretch you, and aim you at big, specific answers. And because they’re
framed to be measurable, there’s no wiggle room about what the
results will look like.


FIG. 18  Four options for framing a Great Question.
Look at the “Great Question” matrix (figure 18) to see the power
of the Focusing Question.
Let’s take increasing sales as a way to break down each of the
quadrants, using “What can I do to double sales in six months?” as a
placeholder for Big & Specific (figure 19).
Now, let’s examine the pros and cons of each question quadrant,
ending with where you want to be—Big & Specific.


FIG. 19  Four options for framing a Great Question illustrated.
Quadrant 4. Small & Specific: “What can I do to increase sales
by 5 percent this year?” This aims you in a specific direction, but
there’s nothing truly challenging about this question. For most
salespeople, a 5 percent bump in sales could just as easily happen
because the market shifted in your favor rather than anything you
might have done. At best it’s an incremental gain, not a life-changing
leap forward. Low goals don’t require extraordinary actions so they
rarely lead to extraordinary results.
Quadrant 3. Small & Broad: “What can I do to increase sales?”
This is not really an achievement question at all. It’s more of a
brainstorming question. It’s great for listing your options but requires
more to narrow your options and go small. How much will sales
increase? By what date? Unfortunately, this is the kind of average
question most people ask and then wonder why their answers don’t
deliver extraordinary results.
Quadrant 2. Big & Broad: “What can I do to double sales?”
Here you have a big question, but nothing specific. It’s a good start,
but the lack of specifics leaves more questions than answers.
Doubling sales in the next 20 years is very different from attempting
the same goal in a year or less. There are still too many options and
without specifics you won’t know where to start.
Quadrant 1. Big & Specific: “What can I do to double sales in
six months?” Now you have all the elements of a Great Question. It’s
a big goal and it’s specific. You’re doubling sales, and that’s not easy.
You also have a time frame of six months, which will be a challenge.
You’ll need a big answer. You’ll have to stretch what you believe is
possible and look outside the standard toolbox of solutions.
See the difference? When you ask a Great Question, you’re in
essence pursuing a great goal. And whenever you do this, you’ll see
the same pattern—Big & Specific. A big, specific question leads to a
big, specific answer, which is absolutely necessary for achieving a big

goal.
So if “What can I do to double sales in six months?” is a Great
Question, how do you make it more powerful? Convert it to the
Focusing Question: “What’s the ONE Thing I can do to double sales
in six months such that by doing it everything else will be easier or
unnecessary?” Turning it into the Focusing Question goes to the heart
of success by forcing you to identify what absolutely matters most
and start there. Why?
Because that’s where big success starts too.
2. FIND A GREAT ANSWER
The challenge of asking a Great Question is that, once you’ve asked
it, you’re now faced with finding a Great Answer.
Answers come in three categories: doable, stretch, and
possibility. The easiest answer you can seek is the one that’s already
within reach of your knowledge, skills, and experience. With this type
of solution you probably already know how to do it and won’t have to
change much to get it. Think of this as “doable” and the most likely to
be achieved.
The next level up is a “stretch” answer. While this is still within
your reach, it can be at the farthest end of your range. You’ll most
likely have to do some research and study what others have done to
come up with this answer. Doing it can be iffy since you might have
to extend yourself to the very limits of your current abilities. Think of
this as potentially achievable and probable, depending on your effort.
High achievers understand these first two routes but reject them.
Unwilling to settle for ordinary when extraordinary is possible,
they’ve asked a Great Question and want the very best answer.


FIG. 20  The Success Habit unlocks possibilities.
Extraordinary results require a Great Answer.
Highly successful people choose to live at the outer limits of
achievement. They not only dream of but deeply crave what is beyond
their natural grasp. They know this type of answer is the hardest to
come by but also know that just by extending themselves to find it,
they expand and enrich their life for the better.
If you want the most from your answer, you must realize that it
lives outside your comfort zone. This is rare air. A big answer is
never in plain view, nor is the path to finding one laid out for you. A
possibility answer exists beyond what is already known and being
done. As with a stretch goal, you can start out by doing research and
studying the lives of other high achievers. But you can’t stop there. In
fact, your search has just begun. Whatever you learn, you’ll use it to
do what only the greatest achievers do: benchmark and trend.
A Great Answer is essentially a new answer. It is a leap across
all current answers in search of the next one and is found in two steps.
The first is the same as when you stretch. You uncover the best
research and study the highest achievers. Anytime you don’t know the
answer, your answer is to go find your answer. In other words, by
default, your first ONE Thing is to search for clues and role models to
point you in the right direction. The first thing to do is ask, “Has
anyone else studied or accomplished this or something like it?” The
answer is almost always yes, so your investigation begins by finding
out what others have learned.
One of the reasons I’ve amassed a large library of books over the
years is because books are a great go-to resource. Short of having a
conversation with someone who has accomplished what you hope to
achieve, in my experience books and published works offer the most
in terms of documented research and role models for success. The
Internet has quickly become an invaluable tool as well. Whether
offline or online, you’re trying to find people who have already gone

down the road you’re traveling, so you can research, model,
benchmark, and trend their experience. A college professor once told
me, “Gary, you’re smart, but people have lived before you. You’re not
the first person to dream big, so you’d be wise to study what others
have learned first, and then build your actions on the back of their
lessons.” He was so right. And he was talking to you too.
The research and experience of others is the best place to start
when looking for your answer. Armed with this knowledge, you can
establish a benchmark, the current high-water mark for all that is
known and being done. With a stretch approach this was your
maximum, but now it is your minimum. It’s not all you’ll do, but it
becomes the hilltop where you’ll stand to see if you can spot what
might come next. This is called trending, and it’s the second step.
You’re looking for the next thing you can do in the same direction
that the best performers are heading or, if necessary, in an entirely
new direction.

FIG. 21  The benchmark is today’s success—the trend is tomorrow’s.
This is how big problems are solved and big challenges are
overcome, for the best answers rarely come from an ordinary process.
Whether it’s figuring out how to leapfrog the competition, finding a
cure for a disease, or coming up with an action step for a personal
goal, benchmarking and trending is your best option. Because your
answer will be original, you’ll probably have to reinvent yourself in
some way to implement it. A new answer usually requires new
behavior, so don’t be surprised if along the way to sizable success you
change in the process. But don’t let that stop you.
This is where the magic happens and possibilities are unlimited.
As challenging as it can be, trailblazing up the path of possibilities is
always worth it—for when we maximize our reach, we maximize our
life.
   
BIG IDEAS
1. Think big and specific. Setting a goal you intend to achieve is
like asking a question. It’s a simple step from “I’d like to do
that” to “How do I achieve that?” The best question—and by

default, the best goal—is big and specific: big, because you’re
after extraordinary results; specific, to give you something to
aim at and to leave no wiggle room about whether you hit the
mark. A big and specific question, especially in the form of the
Focusing Question, helps you zero in on the best possible
answer.
2. Think possibilities. Setting a doable goal is almost like creating
a task to check off your list. A stretch goal is more challenging.
It aims you at the edge of your current abilities; you have to
stretch to reach it. The best goal explores what’s possible. When
you 
see 
people 
and 
businesses 
that 
have 
undergone
transformations, this is where they live.
3. Benchmark and trend for the best answer. No one has a crystal
ball, but with practice you can become surprisingly good at
anticipating where things are heading. The people and businesses
who get there first often enjoy the lion’s share of the rewards
with few, if any, competitors. Benchmark and trend to find the
extraordinary answer you need for extraordinary results.

3
EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS
UNLOCKING THE POSSIBILITIES
WITHIN YOU

“Even if you’re on the right track, you’ll get run over if you
just sit there.”
— Will Rogers
EXTRAORDINARY RESULTS
There is a natural rhythm to our lives that becomes a simple formula
for implementing the ONE Thing and achieving extraordinary results:
purpose, priority, and productivity. Bound together, these three are
forever connected and continually confirming each other’s existence
in our lives. Their link leads to the two areas where you’ll apply the
ONE Thing—one big and one small.
Your big ONE Thing is your purpose and your small ONE Thing
is the priority you take action on to achieve it. The most productive
people start with purpose and use it like a compass. They allow
purpose to be the guiding force in determining the priority that drives
their actions. This is the straightest path to extraordinary results.
Think of purpose, priority, and productivity as three parts of an
iceberg.
With typically only 1/9 of an iceberg above water, whatever you
see is just the tip of everything that is there. This is exactly how
productivity, priority, and purpose are related. What you see is
determined by what you don’t.


FIG. 22  Productivity is driven by purpose and priority.
The more productive people are, the more purpose and priority
are pushing and driving them. With the additional outcome of profit,
it’s the same for business. What’s visible to the public—productivity
and profit—is always buoyed by the substance that serves as the
company’s foundation— purpose and priority. All businesspeople
want productivity and profit, but too many fail to realize that the best
path to attaining them is through purpose-driven priority.


FIG. 23  In business, profit and productivity are also driven by priority and purpose.
Personal productivity is the building block of all business profit.
The two are inseparable. A business can’t have unproductive people
yet magically still have an immensely profitable business. Great
businesses are built one productive person at a time. And not
surprisingly, the most productive people receive the greatest rewards
from their businesses.
Connecting purpose, priority, and productivity determines how
high above the rest successful individuals and profitable businesses
rise. Understanding this is at the core of producing extraordinary
results.

13  LIVE WITH PURPOSE
“Life isn’t about finding yourself. Life is about creating
yourself.”
   —George Bernard Shaw
So, how do you use purpose to create an extraordinary life? Ebenezer
Scrooge shows us how.
Cold-hearted, penny-pinching, and greedy, a man who despised
Christmas and all things that give people happiness, his last name a
byword for miserliness and meanness—Ebenezer Scrooge might have
been the least likely candidate to teach us anything about how to live.
Yet, in Charles Dickens’s 1843 classic A Christmas Carol, he does.
The redemptive tale of Scrooge’s transformation from stingy,
callous, and unloved to considerate, caring, and beloved is one of the
best examples of how our destinies are determined by our decisions,
our lives shaped by our choices. Once again, fiction provides us a
formula we can all follow to build an extraordinary life with
extraordinary results. I’d like to beg your forgiveness, take a little
literary license, and quickly retell this timeless tale to show you.
One Christmas Eve, Ebenezer Scrooge is visited by the deceased
spirit of Jacob Marley, his former business partner. We do not know
if this is a dream or if it’s real. Marley wails, “I am here tonight to
warn you, that you have yet a chance and a hope of escaping my fate.
You will be haunted by three spirits”—from the past, present, and
future, as it turns out. “Remember what has passed between us!”
Now, let’s stop for a second and bear in mind who Scrooge is.
Dickens describes him as a man whose old features are frozen by the
cold within him. Tight-fisted, with head down and hand to the
grindstone, Scrooge pays as little as possible and keeps as much as he
can. He is secretive and solitary. No one ever stops him in the streets
to say hello. No one cares, for he cares for no one. He is a bitter,

mean, covetous old sinner—cold to the sight, cold to the touch, and
cold of heart, with no thaw in sight. His life is a lonely existence, and
the world is worse off for it.
Over the course of the evening, the three spirits visit Scrooge to
show him his past, present, and future. Through these visits he sees
how he became the man he is, how his life is currently going, and
what will ultimately happen to him and those around him. It’s a
terrifying experience that leaves him visibly shaken when he wakes
the next morning. Not knowing whether it was real or a dream, but
giddy upon discovering no time has passed, Scrooge realizes there is
still time to alter his fate. In a joyous blur, he rushes into the street
and instructs the first boy he sees to go buy the biggest turkey at the
market and send it anonymously to the home of his sole employee,
Bob Cratchit. Upon seeing a gentleman he’d once rebuffed for
pleading charity for the needy, he prays for forgiveness and promises
to donate huge sums of money to the poor.
Ebenezer eventually ends up at the home of his nephew, where
he begs forgiveness for being such a fool for far too long and accepts
an invitation to stay for holiday dinner. His nephew’s wife and guests,
shocked at his heartfelt bliss, can barely believe this is Scrooge.
The next morning, Bob Cratchit, upon arriving noticeably late to
work, is confronted by Scrooge: “What do you mean coming here at
this time of day? I am not going to stand for this sort of thing any
longer!” Before this wretched news can sink in, the incredulous
Cratchit hears him say, “And therefore I am about to raise your
salary!”
Scrooge goes on to become the Cratchit family’s benefactor. He
finds a doctor for Tiny Tim, Cratchit’s invalid son, and becomes like
a second father to him. Scrooge lives out the rest of his days spending
his time and money doing everything he can for others.
Through this simple story, Charles Dickens shows us a simple
formula for creating an extraordinary life: Live with purpose. Live by

priority. Live for productivity.
As I reflect on this story, I believe Dickens reveals purpose as a
combination of where we’re going and what’s important to us. He
implies that our priority is what we place the greatest importance on
and our productivity comes from the actions we take. He lays out life
as a series of connected choices, where our purpose sets our priority
and our priority determines the productivity our actions produce.
To Dickens, our purpose determines who we are.
Scrooge is transparent and easy to understand, so let’s revisit A
Christmas Carol through the lens of Dickens’s formula. At the place
we enter his life, Scrooge’s purpose is clearly about money. He
pursues a life either working for it or being alone with it. He cares for
money more than for people and believes that money is the end by
which any means are justified. Based on his purpose, his priority is
straightforward: making as much money for himself as he can.
Collecting coin is what matters to Scrooge. As a result, his
productivity is always aimed at making money. When he takes a
break from making it, for fun, he counts it. Earning, netting, lending,
receiving, tallying—these are the actions that fill his days, for he is
greedy, selfish, and unmoved by the human condition of those around
him.
By Scrooge’s own standards, he’s highly productive in
accomplishing his purpose. By anyone else’s, it’s simply a miserable
life.
This would be the end of the story, were it not for the perspective
provided to Ebenezer by his former partner. Jacob Marley didn’t want
Scrooge to reach the same dead end he had. So, after the haunting,
what happened to Scrooge? By Dickens’s account, his purpose
changed, which changed his most important priority, which changed
where he focused his productivity. After Marley’s intervention,
Scrooge experienced the transformative power of a new purpose.
So, who did he become? Well, let’s look.

As the narrative ends, Scrooge’s purpose is no longer money, but
people. He now cares about people. He cares about their financial
circumstances and their physical condition. He sees himself happily
in relationships with others, lending a hand any way he can. He values
helping people more than hoarding money and believes money is
good for the good it can do.
What is his priority? Where he once saved money and used
people, he now uses money to save people. His overriding priority is
to make as much money as he can so he can help as many as he can.
His actions? He is productive throughout his days putting every penny
he can toward others.
The transformation is remarkable, the message unmistakable.
Who we are and where we want to go determine what we do and what
we accomplish.
A life lived on purpose is the most powerful of all—and the
happiest.
HAPPINESS ON PURPOSE
Ask enough people what they want in life and you’ll hear happiness as
the overwhelming response. Although we all have a wide variety of
specific answers, happiness is what we most want—yet, it’s what
most of us understand the least. No matter our motivations, most of
what we do in life is ultimately meant to make us happy. And yet we
get it wrong. Happiness doesn’t happen the way we think.
To explain, I want to share an ancient tale with you.
THE BEGGING BOWL
Upon coming out of his palace one morning and encountering a
beggar, a king asks, “What do you want?” The beggar laughingly
says, “You ask as though you can fulfill my desire!” Offended, the
king replies, “Of course I can. What is it?” The beggar warns, “Think
twice before you promise anything.”

Now, the beggar was no ordinary beggar but the king’s past-life
master, who had promised in their former life, “I will come to try and
wake you in our next life. This life you have missed, but I will come
again to help you.”
The king, not recognizing his old friend, insisted, “I will fulfill
anything you ask, for I am a very powerful king who can fulfill any
desire.” The beggar said, “It is a very simple desire. Can you fill this
begging bowl?” “Of course!” said the king, and he instructed his
vizier to “fill the man’s begging bowl with money.” The vizier did,
but when the money was poured into the bowl, it disappeared. So he
poured more and more, but the moment he did, it would disappear.
The begging bowl remained empty.
Word spread throughout the kingdom, and a huge crowd gathered.
The prestige and power of the king were at stake, so he told his vizier,
“If my kingdom is to be lost, I am ready to lose it, but I cannot be
defeated by this beggar.” He continued to empty his wealth into the
bowl. Diamonds, pearls, emeralds. His treasury was becoming empty.
And yet the begging bowl seemed bottomless. Everything put into it
immediately disappeared!
Finally, as the crowd stood in utter silence, the king dropped at the
beggars feet and admitted defeat. “You are victorious, but before you
go, fulfill my curiosity. What is the secret of this begging bowl?”
The beggar humbly replied, “There is no secret. It is simply made up
of human desire.”
One of our biggest challenges is making sure our life’s purpose
doesn’t become a beggar’s bowl, a bottomless pit of desire
continually searching for the next thing that will make us happy.
That’s a losing proposition.
Acquiring money and obtaining things are pretty much all done
for the pleasure we expect them to bring. On one hand, this actually

works. Securing money or something we want can spike our
happiness meter—for a moment. Then it goes back down. Over the
ages, our greatest minds have pondered happiness, and their
conclusions are much the same: having money and things won’t
automatically lead to lasting happiness.
How circumstances affect us depends on how we interpret them
as they relate to our life. If we lack a “big picture” view, we can
easily fall into serial success seeking. Why? Once we get what we
want, our happiness sooner or later wanes because we quickly become
accustomed to what we acquire. This happens to everyone and
eventually leaves us bored, seeking something new to get or do.
Worse, we may not even stop or slow down to enjoy what we’ve got
because we automatically get up and go for something else. If we’re
not careful, we wind up ricocheting from achieving and acquiring to
acquiring and achieving without ever taking time to fully enjoy any of
it. This is a good way to remain a beggar, and the day we realize this
is the day our life changes forever. So how do we find enduring
happiness?
Happiness happens on the way to fulfillment.
Dr. Martin Seligman, past president of the American
Psychological Association, believes there are five factors that
contribute to our happiness: positive emotion and pleasure,
achievement, relationships, engagement, and meaning. Of these, he
believes engagement and meaning are the most important. Becoming
more engaged in what we do by finding ways to make our life more
meaningful is the surest way to finding lasting happiness. When our
daily actions fulfill a bigger purpose, the most powerful and enduring
happiness can happen.
Take money, for instance. Since money represents both getting
something and the potential to get more, it makes for a great example.
Many people not only misunderstand how to make money but also
how it makes us happy. I’ve taught wealth building to everyone from

seasoned entrepreneurs to high school students, and whenever I ask,
“How much money do you want to earn?” I get all kinds of answers,
but usually the number is quite high. When I ask, “How did you pick
this number?” I frequently get the familiar answer: “Don’t know.” I
then ask, “Can you tell me your definition of a financially wealthy
person?” Invariably, I get numbers that start at a million dollars and
go up from there. When I ask how they arrived at this, they often say,
“It sounds like a lot.” My response is, “It is, and it isn’t. It all depends
on what you’d do with it.”
I believe that financially wealthy people are those who have
enough money coming in without having to work to finance their
purpose in life. Now, please realize that this definition presents a
challenge to anyone who accepts it. To be financially wealthy you
must have a purpose for your life. In other words, without purpose,
you’ll never know when you have enough money, and you can never
be financially wealthy.
It isn’t that having more money won’t make you happy. To a
point, it certainly can. But then it stops. For more money to continue
to motivate you will depend on why you want more. It’s been said
that the end shouldn’t justify the means, but be careful—when
achieving happiness, any end you seek will only create happiness for
you through the means it takes to achieve it. Wanting more money
just for the sake of getting it won’t bring the happiness you seek from
it. Happiness happens when you have a bigger purpose than having
more fulfills, which is why we say happiness happens on the way to
fulfillment.
THE POWER OF PURPOSE
Purpose is the straightest path to power and the ultimate source of
personal strength—strength of conviction and strength to persevere.
The prescription for extraordinary results is knowing what matters to
you and taking daily doses of actions in alignment with it. When you

have a definite purpose for your life, clarity comes faster, which leads
to more conviction in your direction, which usually leads to faster
decisions. When you make faster decisions, you’ll often be the one
who makes the first decisions and winds up with the best choices. And
when you have the best choices, you have the opportunity for the best
experiences. This is how knowing where you’re going helps lead you
to the best possible outcomes and experiences life has to offer.
Purpose also helps you when things don’t go your way. Life gets
tough at times and there’s no way around that. Aim high enough, live
long enough, and you’ll encounter your share of tough times. That’s
okay. We all experience this. Knowing why you’re doing something
provides the inspiration and motivation to give the extra perspiration
needed to persevere when things go south. Sticking with something
long enough for success to show up is a fundamental requirement for
achieving extra-ordinary results.
Purpose provides the ultimate glue that can help you stick to the
path you’ve set. When what you do matches your purpose, your life
just feels in rhythm, and the path you beat with your feet seems to
match the sound in your head and heart. Live with purpose and don’t
be surprised if you actually hum more and even whistle while you
work.
When you ask yourself, “What’s the ONE Thing I can do in my
life that would mean the most to me and the world, such that by doing
it everything else would be easier or unnecessary?” you’re using the
power of The ONE Thing to bring purpose to your life.

   
BIG IDEAS
1. Happiness happens on the way to fulfillment. We all want to
be happy, but seeking it isn’t the best way to find it. The surest
path to achieving lasting happiness happens when you make your
life about something bigger, when you bring meaning and
purpose to your everyday actions.
2. Discover your Big Why. Discover your purpose by asking
yourself what drives you. What’s the thing that gets you up in the
morning and keeps you going when you’re tired and worn down?
I sometimes refer to this as your “Big Why.” It’s why you’re
excited with your life. It’s why you’re doing what you’re doing.
3. Absent an answer, pick a direction. “Purpose” may sound
heavy but it doesn’t have to be. Think of it as simply the ONE
Thing you want your life to be about more than any other. Try
writing down something you’d like to accomplish and then
describe how you’d do it.
For me, it looks like this: “My purpose is to help people live
their greatest life possible through my teaching, coaching, and
writing.” So, then what does my life look like?

Teaching is my ONE Thing and has been for almost 30
years. At first it was teaching clients about the market and how
to make great decisions. Next, it was teaching salespeople in the
classroom, during sales meetings, and one-on-one. Later it was
teaching business classes. Then it became teaching high
performers models and strategies for high achievement, and the
last ten years it has been teaching seminars on specific life-
building principles. What I teach is what I then coach and is
supported by what I write.
Pick a direction, start marching down that path, and see how
you like it. Time brings clarity and if you find you don’t like it,
you can always change your mind. It’s your life.

14  LIVE BY PRIORITY
“Planning is bringing the future into the present so that you
can do something about it now.”
   —Alan Lakein
“Would you tell me, please, which way I ought to go from here?”
“That depends a good deal on where you want to get to,” said the
Cat.
“I don’t much care where—” said Alice.
“Then it doesn’t matter which way you go,” said the Cat.
Alice’s classic encounter with the Cheshire Cat in Lewis
Carroll’s Alices Adventures in Wonderland  reveals the close
connection between purpose and priority. Live with purpose and you
know where you want to go. Live by priority and you’ll know what to
do to get there.
When each day begins, we each have a choice. We can ask,
“What shall I do?” or “What should I do?” Without direction, without
purpose, whatever you “shall do” will always get you somewhere. But
when you’re going somewhere on purpose, there will always be
something you “should do” that will get you where you must go.
When your life is on purpose, living by priority takes precedence.
GOAL SETTING TO THE NOW
As Ebenezer Scrooge profoundly discovered, our life is driven by the
purpose we give it. But there’s a catch even he had to confront.
Purpose has the power to shape our lives only in direct proportion to
the power of the priority we connect it to. Purpose without priority is
powerless.
To be precise, the word is priority—not priorities—and it
originated in the 14th century from the Latin prior, meaning “first.” If
something mattered the most it was a “priority.” Curiously, priority

remained unpluralized until around the 20th century, when the world
apparently demoted it to mean generally “something that matters”
and the plural “priorities” appeared. With the loss of its initial intent,
a wide variety of sayings like “most pressing matter,” “prime
concern,” and “on the front burner” pitched in to recapture the
essence of the original. Today, we elevate priority to its former
meaning by adding “highest,” “top,” “first,” “main,” and “most
important” in front of it. It would seem priority has traveled an
interesting road.
So, watch your language. You may have many ways to talk about
priority, but no matter the words you choose, to achieve extraordinary
results your meaning must be the same—ONE Thing.
Whenever I teach goal setting I make it my top priority to show
how a goal and a priority work together. I do this by asking, “Why do
we set goals and create plans?” In spite of all the good answers I get,
the truth is we have goals and plans for only one reason—to be
appropriate in the moments of our lives that matter. While we may
pull from the past and forecast the future, our only reality is the
present moment. Right NOW is all we have to work with. Our past is
but a former now, our future a potential one. To drive this point home,
I started referring to the way to create a powerful priority as “Goal
Setting to the Now” to emphasize why we were creating a priority in
the first place.
The truth about success is that our ability to achieve
extraordinary results in the future lies in stringing together powerful
moments, one after the other. What you do in any given moment
determines what you experience in the next. Your “present now” and
all “future nows” are undeniably determined by the priority you live
in the moment. The deciding factor in determining how you set that
priority is who wins the battle between your present and future selves.
If you’re offered a choice of $100 today or $200 next year, which
would you choose? The $200, right? You would if your goal were to

make the most money from the opportunity. Strangely, most people
don’t make that choice.
Economists have long known that even though people prefer big
rewards over small ones, they have an even stronger preference for
present rewards over future ones—even when the future rewards are
MUCH BIGGER. It’s an ordinary occurrence, oddly named
hyperbolic discounting—the further away a reward is in the future,
the smaller the immediate motivation to achieve it. Maybe it’s
because objects that are farther away appear smaller, so people
mistakenly assume they really are and discount their value. That
might explain why so many people would actually choose the $100
today over twice the amount in the future. Their “present bias”
overrides logic, and they allow a big future with potentially
extraordinary results to get away Now imagine the devastating impact
living this way every day could have on your future self. Remember
our conversation on delayed gratification? Turns out that what starts
out as marshmallows can later cost you much more.
We need a simple way of thinking to save us from ourselves, set
the right priority, and move closer toward accomplishing our purpose.
Goal Setting to the Now will get you there.
By thinking through the filter of Goal Setting to the Now, you set
a future goal and then methodically drill down to what you should be
doing right now. It can be a little like a Russian matryoshka doll in
that your ONE Thing “right now” is nested inside your ONE Thing
today which is nested inside your ONE Thing this week, which is
nested inside your ONE Thing this month... . It’s how a small thing
can actually build up to a big one.
You’re lining up your dominoes.

FIG. 24  Future purpose connects to present priority.

To understand how Goal Setting to the Now will guide your
thinking and determine your most important priority, read this out
loud to yourself:
Based on my someday goal, what’s the ONE Thing I can do in
the next five years to be on track to achieve it? Now, based on
my five-year goal, what’s the ONE Thing I can do this year to be
on track to achieve my five-year goal, so that I’m on track to
achieve my someday goal? Now, based on my goal this year,
what’s the ONE Thing I can do this month so I’m on track to
achieve my goal this year, so I’m on track to achieve my five-
year goal, so I’m on track to achieve my someday goal? Now,
based on my goal this month, what’s the ONE Thing I can do this
week so I’m on track to achieve my goal this month, so I’m on
track to achieve my goal this year, so I’m on track to achieve my
five-year goal, so I’m on track to achieve my someday goal?
Now, based on my goal this week, what’s the ONE Thing I can
do today so I’m on track to achieve my goal this week, so I’m on
track to achieve my goal this month, so I’m on track to achieve
my goal this year, so I’m on track to achieve my five-year goal,
so I’m on track to achieve my someday goal? So, based on my
goal today, what’s the ONE Thing I can do right NOW so I’m on
track to achieve my goal today, so I’m on track to achieve my
goal this week, so I’m on track to achieve my goal this month, so
I’m on track to achieve my goal this year, so I’m on track to
achieve my five-year goal, so I’m on track to achieve my
someday goal?
I hope you hung in there and read the entire thing. Why? Because
you’re training your mind how to think, how to connect one goal with
the next over time until you know the most important thing you must
do right NOW. You’re learning how to think big—but go small.
To prove its value, just skip the steps by asking yourself,

“What’s the ONE Thing I can do right now so I’m on track to achieve
my someday goal?” Doesn’t work. The moment is too far from the
future for you to clearly see your key priority In fact, you can keep
adding back in today, this week, and so on, but you won’t see the
powerful priority you seek until you’ve added back in all the steps.
It’s why most people never get close to their goals. They haven’t
connected today to all the tomorrows it will take to get there.
Connect today to all your tomorrows. It matters.
Research backs this up. In three separate studies, psychologists
observed 262 students to see the impact of visualization on outcomes.
The students were asked to visualize in one of two ways: Those in one
group were told to visualize the outcome (like getting an “A” on an
exam) and the others were asked to visualize the process needed to
achieve a desired outcome (like all of the study sessions needed to
earn that “A” on the exam). In the end, students who visualized the
process performed better across the board—they studied earlier and
more frequently and earned higher grades than those who simply
visualized the outcome.
People tend to be overly optimistic about what they can
accomplish, and therefore most don’t think things all the way
through. Researchers call this the “planning fallacy” Visualizing the
process—breaking a big goal down into the steps needed to achieve it
—helps engage the strategic thinking you need to plan for and achieve
extraordinary results. This is why Goal Setting to the Now really
works.


FIG. 25  Living a domino run.
I have this dialogue with people every day. It’s particularly
effective when they ask me what they should do. I turn it around and
say, “Before I answer your question, let me ask you something:
Where are you going, and where do you want to be someday?”
Without fail, as I walk them through Goal Setting to the Now, they
catch on quickly and come up with their own answers, and by the time
they tell me the ONE Thing they should be doing right now, I
laughingly ask, “So why are you still talking to me?”
Your last step is to write down your answers. Much has been
written about writing down goals and for a very good reason—it
works.
In 2008, Dr. Gail Matthews of the Dominican University of
California, recruited 267 participants from a wide range of
professions (lawyers, accountants, nonprofit employees, marketers,
etc.) and a variety of countries. Those who wrote down their goals
were 39.5 percent more likely to accomplish them. Writing down
your goals and your most important priority is your final step to
living by priority.
   

BIG IDEAS
1. There can only be ONE. Your most important priority is the
ONE Thing you can do right now that will help you achieve what
matters most to you. You may have many “priorities,” but dig
deep and you’ll discover there is always one that matters most,
your top priority—your ONE Thing.
2. Goal Set to the Now. Knowing your future goal is how you
begin. Identifying the steps you need to accomplish along the
way keeps your thinking clear while you uncover the right
priority you need to accomplish right now
3. Put pen to paper. Write your goals down and keep them close.
Pull your purpose through to a single priority built by Goal
Setting to the Now, and that priority—that ONE Thing you can do
such that by doing it everything else will be easier or unnecessary—
will show you the way to extraordinary results.
And once you know what to do, the only thing left is to go from
knowing to doing.

15  LIVE FOR PRODUCTIVITY
“Productivity isn’t about being a workhorse, keeping busy
or burning the midnight oil... . It’s more about priorities,
planning, and fiercely protecting your time.”
   —Margarita Tartakovsky
Ebenezer Scrooge’s story might have been a footnote in literary
history except for this—he acted. Passionate about his new purpose
and empowered by a priority that fulfilled it, he got up and got going.
Productive action transforms lives.
“Let’s go be productive!” will never be heard in the movies as
the cavalry takes the hill. It’s not the first choice a coach, manager, or
general uses as a rallying cry to arouse deep emotion and inspire the
troops. It’s not what you say to yourself as you take a deep breath and
dive into a challenge or face competition. And Dickens never had
Scrooge utter these words as he took command of his transformed
life. Yet productive is exactly what Scrooge was, and there’s no better
word than productivity to describe what you want from what you do
when the outcome matters.
We are always doing something—working, playing, eating,
sleeping, standing, sitting, breathing. If we’re alive, we’re doing
something. Even if we’re doing nothing, that’s something. Every
minute of every day, the question is never will we be doing
something, but rather what that something is we’ll be doing.
Sometimes what we do doesn’t matter, but sometimes it does. And
when it does, what we do defines our life more than anything else. In
the end, putting together a life of extraordinary results simply comes
down to getting the most out of what you do, when what you do
matters.
Living for productivity produces extraordinary results.

Whenever I teach productivity I always start by asking, “What
type of time-managing system do you use?” The answers are as varied
as the number of people in the room: paper calendar, electronic
calendar, Day-Timer, At-A-Glance weekly planner... you name it and
I hear it. I then ask, “So how did you choose yours?” The reasons
cited come in every shape, size, color, price, and criteria imaginable.
But the students invariably describe the format, not the function—
what they are, not how they work. So when I say, “That’s great, but
what kind of system do you use?” the answer is always the same:
“What do you mean?”
“Well, if everyone has the same amount of time and yet some
earn more than others,” I ask, “can we then say that it’s how we use
our time that determines the money we make?” Everyone always
agrees, so I continue: “If this is true, that time is money, then the best
way to describe a time-managing system might just be by the money
it makes. So, do you think you’re using the $10,000-a-year system?
The $20,000-a-year system? The $50,000-, $100,000-, or $500,000-a-
year system? Are you using the $1,000,000-plus system?”
Silence.
Until inevitably someone asks, “How do we know?”
To which I reply, “How much do you make?”
If money is a metaphor for producing results, then it’s clear—a
time-managing system’s success can be judged by the productivity it
produces.
The strange thing about my life is that I’ve never worked for
anyone who wasn’t a millionaire or didn’t become one. I didn’t set
out for this to happen. It just did. And the most important thing I
learned from these experiences is that the most successful people are
the most productive people.
“My goal is no longer to get more done, but rather to have
less to do.”
   —Francine Jay

Productive people get more done, achieve better results, and earn
far more in their hours than the rest. They do so because they devote
maximum time to being productive on their top priority, their ONE
Thing. They time block their ONE Thing and then protect their time
blocks with a vengeance. They’ve connected the dots between
working their time blocks consistently and the extra-ordinary results
they seek.
FIG. 26  Make an appointment with yourself and keep it!
TIME BLOCKING
I often say that I come from a “long line of lethargic people.” This is
usually good for a laugh, but it’s also true. It seems at times that my
genes just might have more in common with the tortoise than the
hare. On the other hand, some of the people I work with are so blessed
with energy they actually vibrate. Amazingly, they’re able to work
long hours over extended periods and never wear down. When I try to
follow suit, in less than a week my body simply falls apart. I’ve
discovered that, no matter how hard I try, I can’t use more time as my
main means of doing more. It’s just not physically possible for me.
So, given my constraints, I’ve had to find a way to be highly
productive in the hours I can put in.
The solution? Time blocking.

Most people think there’s never enough time to be successful,
but there is when you block it. Time blocking is a very results-
oriented way of viewing and using time. It’s a way of making sure
that what has to be done gets done. Alexander Graham Bell said,
“Concentrate all your thoughts upon the work at hand. The sun’s rays
do not burn until brought to a focus.” Time blocking harnesses your
energy and centers it on your most important work. It’s productivity’s
greatest power tool.
So, go to your calendar and block off all the time you need to
accomplish your ONE Thing. If it’s a onetime ONE Thing, block off
the appropriate hours and days. If it’s a regular thing, block off the
appropriate time every day so it becomes a habit. Everything else—
other projects, paperwork, e-mail, calls, correspondence, meetings,
and all the other stuff— must wait. When you time block like this,
you’re creating the most productive day possible in a way that’s
repeatable every day for the rest of your life.
Unfortunately, if you’re like most individuals, your typical day
might look something like figure 27, when you find yourself with less
and less time to focus on what matters most.
The most productive people’s day is dramatically different
(figure 28).


FIG. 27  Everything Else dominates your day!
If disproportionate results come from one activity, then you must
give that one activity disproportionate time. Each and every day, ask
this Focusing Question for your blocked time: “Today, what’s the
ONE Thing I can do for my ONE Thing such that by doing it
everything else will be easier or unnecessary?” When you find the
answer, you’ll be doing the most leveraged activity for your most
leveraged work.
This is how results become extraordinary.


FIG. 28  Your ONE Thing gets the time of day it deserves!
Those who do this, in my experience, are the ones who not only
become the most accomplished, but who also have the most career
opportunities. Slowly but surely they become known in their
organization for their ONE Thing and become “irreplaceable.”
Ultimately, no one can imagine or tolerate the cost of losing them.
(The opposite is equally true, by the way, for those lost in the land of
“Everything Else.”)
Once you’ve done your ONE Thing for the day, you can devote
the rest of it to everything else. Just use the Focusing Question to
identify your next priority and give that task the time it deserves.
Repeat this approach until your workday is done. Getting “everything
else” done may help you sleep better at night, but it’s unlikely to earn
you a promotion.

FIG. 29  Your time-blocking calendar.
Time blocking works on the premise that a calendar records
appointments but doesn’t care who those appointments are with. So,
when you know your ONE Thing, make an appointment with yourself
to tackle it. Every day great salespeople generate leads, great
programmers program, and great artists paint. Take any profession or

any position and fill in the blank. Great success shows up when time
is devoted every day to becoming great.
To achieve extraordinary results and experience greatness, time
block these three things in the following order:
1. Time block your time off.
2. Time block your ONE Thing.
3. Time block your planning time.
1. TIME BLOCK YOUR TIME OFF
Extraordinarily successful people launch their year by taking time out
to plan their time off. Why? They know they’ll need it and they know
they’ll be able to afford it. In truth, the most successful simply see
themselves as working between vacations. On the other hand, the least
successful don’t reserve time off, because they don’t think they’ll
deserve it or be able to afford it. By planning your time off in
advance, you are, in effect, managing your work time around your
downtime instead of the other way around. You’re also letting
everyone else know well in advance when you’ll be out so they can
plan accordingly. When you intend to be successful, you start by
protecting time to recharge and reward yourself.
Take time off. Block out long weekends and long vacations, then
take them. You’ll be more rested, more relaxed, and more productive
afterward. Everything needs rest to function better, and you’re no
different.
Resting is as important as working. There are a few examples of
successful people who violate this, but they are not our role models.
They succeed in spite of how they rest and renew—not because of it.
2. TIME BLOCK YOUR ONE THING
After you’ve time blocked your time off, time block your ONE Thing.
Yes, you read that right. Your most important work comes second.

Why? Because you can’t happily sustain success in your professional
life if you neglect your personal “re-creation” time. Time block your
time off, and then make time for your ONE Thing.
The most productive people, the ones who experience
extraordinary results, design their days around doing their ONE
Thing. Their most important appointment each day is with
themselves, and they never miss it. If they complete their ONE Thing
before their time block is done, they don’t necessarily call it a day.
They use the Focusing Question to tell them how they can use the
time they have left.
Similarly, if they have a specific goal for their ONE Thing, they
finish it, regardless of the time. In A Geography of Time, Robert
Levine points out that most people work on “clock” time—“It’s five
o’clock, I’ll see you tomorrow”— while others work on “event” time
— “My work is done when it’s done.” Think about it. The dairy
farmer doesn’t get to knock off at any certain time; he goes home
when the cows have been milked. It’s the same for any position in any
profession where results matter. The most productive people work on
event time. They don’t quit until their ONE Thing is done.
“Day, n. A period of twenty-four hours, mostly misspent.”
   —Ambrose Bierce
The key to making this work is to block time as early in your day
as you possibly can. Give yourself 30 minutes to an hour to take care
of morning priorities, then move to your ONE Thing.
My recommendation is to block four hours a day. This isn’t a
typo. I repeat: four hours a day. Honestly, that’s the minimum. If you
can do more, then do it.
In On Writing, Stephen King describes his work flow: “My own
schedule is pretty clear-cut. Mornings belong to whatever is new—the
current composition. Afternoons are for naps and letters. Evenings are
for reading, family, Red Sox games on TV, and any revisions that just
cannot wait. Basically, mornings are my prime writing time.” Four

hours a day may scare you more than King’s novels, but you can’t
argue with his results. Stephen King is one of the most successful and
prolific writers of our time.
Whenever I tell this story, there is always one person who says to
me, “Well, sure, it’s easy for Stephen King—he’s Stephen King!” To
that I simply say, “I think the question you must ask yourself is this:
Does he get to do this because he is Stephen King, or is he Stephen
King because he does this?” That invariably stops that discussion
cold.
Like so many other successful writers, early in his career King
had to find his time blocks where he could—mornings, evenings, even
lunch breaks—because his day job didn’t accommodate his ambition
for his life. Once extraordinary results started showing up and he
could earn a living from his ONE Thing, he was able to move his time
blocks to a more sustainable time.
“Efficiency is doing the thing right. Effectiveness is doing
the right thing.”
   —Peter Drucker
An executive assistant on our team recently transitioned to
blocking large chunks of time for a project. It was stressful at first.
She was continually interrupted. E-mail alerts pinged, colleagues
dropped by, team members provided a steady stream of requests for
her time. These weren’t even distractions—they were her job. In the
end, she had to borrow a laptop and book a conference room to escape
“drive-bys” and random, nonurgent requests. But within just a week,
everyone became accustomed to the fact that for regular periods of
time she would not be accessible. They adjusted. It took a week. Not a
month or a year. A week. Meetings got rescheduled and life went on.
And she experienced a huge leap in productivity.
No matter who you are, large time blocks work.
Paul Graham’s 2009 essay “Maker’s Schedule, Manager’s
Schedule” underscores the need for large time blocks. Graham, one of

the founders of the innovative venture capital firm Y Combinator,
argues that normal business culture gets in the way of the very
productivity it seeks because of the way people traditionally schedule
their time (or are allowed to).
Graham divides all work into two buckets: maker (do or create)
and manager (oversee or direct). “Maker” time requires large blocks
of the clock to write code, develop ideas, generate leads, recruit
people, produce products, or execute on projects and plans. This time
tends to be viewed in half-day increments. “Manager time,” on the
other hand, gets divided into hours. This time typically has one
moving from meeting to meeting, and because those who oversee or
direct tend to have power and authority, “they are in a position to
make everyone resonate at their frequency.” This can create a huge
conflict if those needing maker time are pulled into meetings at odd
hours, destroying the very time blocks they need to move themselves
and the company forward. Graham embraced this insight and created
a company culture at Y Combinator that now runs completely on a
maker’s schedule. All meetings get clustered at the end of the day.
To experience extraordinary results, be a maker in the morning
and a manager in the afternoon. Your goal is “ONE and done.” But if
you don’t time block each day to do your ONE Thing, your ONE
Thing won’t become a done thing.
3. TIME BLOCK YOUR PLANNING TIME
The last priority you time block is planning time. This is when you
reflect on where you are and where you want to go. For annual
planning, schedule this time late enough in the year that you have a
sense of your trajectory, but not so late that you lose your running
start for the next. Take a look at your someday and five-year goals
and assess the progress you must make in the next year to be on track.
You may even add new goals, re-envision old ones, or eliminate any
that no longer reflect your purpose or priorities.

Block an hour each week to review your annual and monthly
goals. First, ask what needs to happen that month for you to be on
target for your annual goals. Then ask what must happen that week to
be on course for your monthly goals. You’re essentially asking,
“Based on where I am right now, what’s the ONE Thing I need to do
this week to stay on track for my monthly goal and for my monthly
goal to be on track for my annual goal?” You’re lining up the
dominoes. Decide how much time you’ll need to achieve this, and
reserve that amount of time on your calendar. In effect, you could say
that when you time block your planning time, you’re really time
blocking your time to time block. Think about it.


FIG. 30  X’s add up to extraordinary results!
In July 2007, software developer Brad Isaac shared a
productivity secret he reportedly got from comedian Jerry Seinfeld.
Before Seinfeld was a household name and still regularly toured,
Isaac ran into him at an open-mic comedy club and asked him for
advice on how to be a better comedian. Seinfeld told him the key was
to write jokes (hint: his ONE Thing!) every day. And the way he’d
figured out how to make that happen was to hang a huge annual
calendar on the wall and then put a big red X across every day he
worked on his craft. “After a few days, you’ll have a chain,” Seinfeld
said. “Just keep at it and the chain will grow longer every day. You’ll
like seeing the chain, especially when you get a few weeks under your
belt. Your only job is to not break the chain. Don’t break the chain.”
What I love about Seinfeld’s method is that it resonates with
everything I know to be true. It’s simple. It’s based on doing ONE
Thing, and it creates its own momentum. You could look at the
calendar and be overwhelmed: “How can I commit to this for an
entire year?” But the system is designed to bring your biggest goal to
the now and simply focus on making the next X. As Walter Elliot
said, “Perseverance is not a long race; it is many short races one after
another.” As you complete these short races and get a chain going, it
gets easier and easier. Momentum and motivation start to take over.
There is magic in knocking down your most important domino
day after day. All you have to do is avoid breaking the chain, one day
at a time, until you generate a powerful new habit in your life—the
time-blocking habit.
Sound simple? Time blocking is—if you protect it.
PROTECT YOUR TIME BLOCK
For time blocks to actually block time, they must be protected.
Although time blocking isn’t hard, protecting the time you’ve blocked

is. The world doesn’t know your purpose or priorities and isn’t
responsible for them—you are. So it’s your job to protect your time
blocks from all those who don’t know what matters most to you, and
from yourself when you forget.
The best way to protect your time blocks is to adopt the mindset
that they can’t be moved. So, when someone tries to double-book you,
just say, “I’m sorry, I already have an appointment at that time,” and
offer other options. If the other person is disappointed, you’re
sympathetic but ultimately unmoved. Extraordinarily results-oriented
people—the very people who have the most demands on their time—
do this every day. They keep their most important appointment.
The toughest part is navigating a high-level request. How do you
say no to anyone important—your boss, a key client, your mom—who
asks you to do something with a high sense of urgency? One way is to
say yes and then ask, “If I have that done by [a specific time in the
future], would that work?” Most often, these requests are more about
an immediate need to hand a task off than about a need for it to be
done immediately, so the requester usually just wants to know it will
get done. Sometimes the request is real, needs to be done now, and
you must drop what you’re doing and do it. In this situation, follow
the rule “If you erase, you must replace” and immediately reschedule
your time block.
Then there’s you. If you’re already feeling overbooked and
overworked, it can seem incredibly challenging to hold to a time
block. It can be hard to imagine how everything else will get done
when so much time is given to ONE Thing. The key is to fully
internalize the domino fall that will happen when your ONE Thing
gets done, and remember that everything else you might do or have to
do will be easier or unnecessary. When I first began to time block, the
most effective thing I did was to put up a sheet of paper that said,
“Until My ONE Thing Is Done—Everything Else Is A Distraction!”
Try it. Put it where you can see it and others can see it as well. Then

make this the mantra you say to yourself and everyone else. In time,
others will begin to understand how you work and support it. Just
watch.
The last thing that can knock you off your time block is when
you can’t free your mind. Day in and day out, your own need to do
other things instead of your ONE Thing may be your biggest
challenge to overcome. Life doesn’t simplify itself the moment you
simplify your focus; there’s always other stuff screaming to be done.
Always. So when stuff pops into your head, just write it down on a
task list and get back to what you’re supposed to be doing. In other
words, do a brain dump. Then put it out of sight and out of mind until
its time comes.
In the end, there are plenty of ways your time block can get
sabotaged. Here are four proven ways to battle distractions and keep
your eye on your ONE Thing.
1. Build a bunker. Find somewhere to work that takes you out of
the path of disruption and interruption. If you have an office, get
a “Do Not Disturb” sign. If it has glass walls, install shades. If
you work in a cubicle, get permission to put up a folding screen.
If necessary, go elsewhere. The immortal Ernest Hemingway
kept a strict writing schedule starting at seven every morning in
his bedroom. The mortal but still immensely talented business
author Dan Heath “bought an old laptop, deleted all its browsers,
and, for good measure, deleted its wireless network drivers” and
would take his “way-back machine” to a coffee shop to avoid
distractions. Between the two extremes, you could just find a
vacant room and simply close the door.
2. Store provisions. Have any supplies, materials, snacks, or
beverages you need on hand and, other than for a bathroom
break, avoid leaving your bunker. A simple trip to the coffee
machine can derail your day should you encounter someone

seeking to make you a part of theirs.
3. Sweep for mines. Turn off your phone, shut down your e-mail,
and exit your Internet browser. Your most important work
deserves 100 percent of your attention.
4. Enlist support. Tell those most likely to seek you out what
you’re doing and when you’ll be available. It’s amazing how
accommodating others are when they see the big picture and
know when they can access you.
If, ultimately, you continue a tug-of-war to make time blocking
take place, then use the Focusing Question to ask: What’s the ONE
Thing I can do to protect my time block every day such by doing it
everything else I might do will be easier or unnecessary?
   
BIG IDEAS
1. Connect the dots. Extraordinary results become possible when
where you want to go is completely aligned with what you do
today. Tap into your purpose and allow that clarity to dictate
your priorities. With your priorities clear, the only logical course
is to go to work.

2. Time block your ONE Thing. The best way to make your ONE
Thing happen is to make regular appointments with yourself.
Block time early in the day, and block big chunks of it—no less
than four hours! Think of it this way: If your time blocking were
on trial, would your calendar contain enough evidence to convict
you?
3. Protect your time block at all costs. Time blocking works only
when your mantra is “Nothing and no one has permission to
distract me from my ONE Thing.” Unfortunately, your resolve
won’t keep the world from trying, so be creative when you can
be and firm when you must. Your time block is the most
important meeting of your day, so whatever it takes to protect it
is what you have to do.
The people who achieve extraordinary results don’t achieve them
by working more hours. They achieve them by getting more done in
the hours they work.
Time blocking is one thing; productive time blocking is another.

16  THE THREE
COMMITMENTS
“Nobody who ever gave his best regretted it.”
   —George Halas
Achieving extraordinary results through time blocking requires three
commitments. First, you must adopt the mindset of someone seeking
mastery. Mastery is a commitment to becoming your best, so to
achieve extraordinary results you must embrace the extraordinary
effort it represents. Second, you must continually seek the very best
ways of doing things. Nothing is more futile than doing your best
using an approach that can’t deliver results equal to your effort. And
last, you must be willing to be held accountable to doing everything
you can to achieve your ONE Thing. Live these commitments and you
give yourself a fighting chance to experience extraordinary
THE THREE COMMITMENTS TO YOUR ONE
THING
1. Follow the Path of Mastery
2. Move from “E” to “P”
3. Live the Accountability Cycle
1. FOLLOW THE PATH OF MASTERY
Mastery isn’t a word we often hear anymore, but it’s as critical as
ever to achieving extraordinary results. As intimidating as it might
initially seem, when you can see mastery as a path you go down
instead of a destination you arrive at, it starts to feel accessible and
attainable. Most assume mastery is an end result, but at its core,

mastery is a way of thinking, a way of acting, and a journey you
experience. When what you’ve chosen to master is the right thing,
then pursuing mastery of it will make everything else you do either
easier or no longer necessary. That’s why what you choose to master
matters.
Mastery plays a key role in your domino run.
I believe the healthy view of mastery means giving the best you
have to become the best you can be at your most important work. The
path is one of an apprentice learning and relearning the basics on a
never-ending journey of greater experience and expertise. Think of it
this way: At some point white belts training to advance know the
same basic karate moves black belts know—they simply haven’t
practiced enough to be able to do them as well. The creativity you see
at a black- belt level comes from mastery of the white-belt
fundamentals. Since there is always another level to learn, mastery
actually means you’re a master of what you know and an apprentice
of what you don’t. In other words, we become masters of what is
behind us and apprentices for what is ahead. This is why mastery is a
journey. Alex Van Halen has said that when he would go out at night
his brother Eddie would be sitting on his bed practicing the guitar,
and when he came home many hours later Eddie would be in the same
place, still practicing. That’s the journey of mastery—it never ends.
In 1993, psychologist K. Anders Ericsson published “The Role of
Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance” in the
journal Psychological Review. As the benchmark for understanding
mastery, this article debunked the idea that an expert performer was
gifted, a natural, or even a prodigy. Ericsson essentially gave us our
first real insights into mastery and birthed the idea of the “10,000-
hour rule.” His research identified a common pattern of regular and
deliberate practice over the course of years in elite performers that
made them what they were—elite. In one study, elite violinists had
separated themselves from all others by each accumulating more than

10,000 hours of practice by age 20. Thus the rule. Many elite
performers complete their journey in about ten years, which, if you do
the math, is an average of about three hours of deliberate practice a
day, every day, 365 days a year. Now, if your ONE Thing relates to
work and you put in 250 workdays a year (five days a week for 50
weeks), to keep pace on your mastery journey you’ll need to average
four hours a day. Sound familiar? It’s not a random number. That’s
the amount of time you need to time block every day for your ONE
Thing.
More than anything else, expertise tracks with hours invested.
Michelangelo once said, “If the people knew how hard I had to work
to gain my mastery, it wouldn’t seem wonderful at all.” His point is
obvious. Time on a task, over time, eventually beats talent every time.
I’d say you can “book that,” but actually you should “block it.”
When you commit to time block your ONE Thing, make sure you
approach it with a mastery mentality. This will give you the best
opportunity to be the most productive you can be, and ultimately the
best you can become. And here’s what’s interesting: the more
productive you are, the more likely you are to receive several
additional payoffs you would otherwise have missed. The pursuit of
mastery bears gifts.
As you progress along the path of mastery, both your self-
confidence and your success competence will grow. You’ll make a
discovery: the path of mastery is not so different from one pursuit to
the next. What might pleasantly surprise you is how giving yourself
over to mastering ONE Thing serves as a platform for, and speeds up
the process of, doing other things. Knowledge begets knowledge and
skills build on skills. It’s what makes future dominoes fall more
easily.
Mastery is a pursuit that keeps giving, because it’s a path that
never ends. In his landmark book Mastery, George Leonard tells the
story of Jigoro Kano, the founder of judo. According to legend, as

Kano approached death, he called his students around him and asked
to be buried in his white belt. The symbolism wasn’t lost. The
highest-ranking martial artist of his discipline embraced the emblem
of the beginner for his life and beyond, because to him the journey of
the successful lifelong learner was never over. Time blocking is
essential to mastery, and mastery is essential to time blocking. They
go hand in hand—when you do one, you do the other.
2. MOVE FROM “E” TO “P”
When coaching top performers, I often ask, “Are you doing this to
simply do the best you can do, or are you doing this to do it the best it
can be done?” Although it’s not meant to be a trick question, it trips
people up anyway. Many realize that although they are giving their
best effort, they aren’t doing the best that could be done, because they
aren’t willing to change what they are doing. The path of mastering
something is the combination of not only doing the best you can do at
it, but also doing it the best it can be done. Continually improving
how you do something is critical to getting the most from time
blocking.
It’s called moving from “E” to “P.”
When we roll out of bed in the morning and start tackling the
day, we do so in one of two ways: Entrepreneurial (“E”) or Purposeful
(“P”). Entrepreneurial is our natural approach. It’s seeing something
we want to do or that needs to be done and racing off to do it with
enthusiasm, energy, and our natural abilities. No matter the task, all
natural ability has a ceiling of achievement, a level of productivity
and success that eventually tops out. Although this varies from person
to person and task to task, everybody in life has a natural ceiling for
everything. Give some people a hammer and they’re an instant
carpenter. Give one to me and I’m all thumbs. In other words, some
people can naturally use a hammer extremely well with minimal
instruction or practice, but there are others, like me, who hit their

ceiling of achievement the moment they’re holding one. If the
outcome of your efforts is acceptable at whatever level of
achievement you reach, then you high-five and move on. But when
you’re going about your ONE Thing, any ceiling of achievement must
be challenged, and this requires a different approach— a Purposeful
approach.
Highly productive people don’t accept the limitations of their
natural approach as the final word on their success. When they hit a
ceiling of achievement, they look for new models and systems, better
ways to do things to push them through. They pause just long enough
to examine their options, they pick the best one, and then they’re right
back at it. Ask an “E” to cut some firewood and the Entrepreneurial
person would likely shoulder an axe and head straight for the woods.
On the other hand, the Purposeful person might ask, “Where can I get
a chainsaw?” With a “P” mindset, you can achieve breakthroughs and
accomplish things far beyond your natural abilities. You must simply
be willing to do whatever it takes.

FIG. 31  In the long run, “P” beats “E” every time.
You can’t put limits on what you’ll do. You have to be open to
new ideas and new ways of doing things if you want breakthroughs in
your life. As you travel the path of mastery you’ll find yourself
continually challenged to do new things. The Purposeful person
follows the simple rule that “a different result requires doing
something different.” Make this your mantra and breakthroughs
become possible.
Too many people reach a level where their performance is “good
enough” and then stop working on getting better. People on the path
to mastery avoid this by continually upping their goal, challenging
themselves to break through their current ceiling, and staying the

forever apprentice. It’s what writer and memory champion Joshua
Foer dubbed the “OK Plateau.” He illustrated it with typing. If
practice time were all that mattered, over the course of our
professional careers, with the millions of memos and e-mails we type,
we’d all progress from the lowly chicken peck to 100 words a minute.
But that doesn’t happen. We reach a level of skill we deem to be
acceptable and then simply switch off the learning. We go on
automatic pilot and hit one of the most common ceilings of
achievement: we hit the OK Plateau.
When you’re in search of extraordinary results, accepting an OK
Plateau or any other ceiling of achievement isn’t okay when it applies
to your ONE Thing. When you want to break through plateaus and
ceilings, there is only one approach—“P.”
In business and in life, we all start off entrepreneurially. We go
after something with our current level of abilities, energy, knowledge,
and effort—in short, everything that comes easily. Approaching
things with “E” is comfortable because it feels natural. It’s who we
currently are and how we currently like to do things.
It’s also limiting.
When “E” is our only approach, we create artificial limits to
what we can achieve and who we can become. If we tackle something
with all “E” and then hit a ceiling of achievement, we simply bounce
up against it, over and over and over. This continues until we just
can’t take the disappointment anymore, become resigned to this being
the only outcome we can ever have, and eventually seek out greener
pastures elsewhere. When we think we’ve maxed out our potential in
a situation, starting over is how we think we’ll get ahead. The
problem is this becomes a vicious cycle of taking on the next new
thing with renewed enthusiasm, energy, natural ability, and effort,
until another ceiling is hit and disappointment and resignation set in
once again. And then it’s on to—you guessed it—the next greener
pasture.

Bring “P” to the same ceiling and things look different. The
Purposeful approach says, “I’m still committed to growing, so what
are my options?” You then use the Focusing Question to narrow those
choices down to the next thing you should do. It could be to follow a
new model, get a new system, or both. But be prepared. Implementing
these may require new thinking, new skills, and even new
relationships. Probably none of this will feel natural at first. That’s
okay. Being Purposeful is often about doing what comes
“unnaturally,” but when you’re committed to achieving extraordinary
results, you simply do whatever it takes anyway.
When you’ve done the best you can do but are certain the results
aren’t the best they can be, get out of “E” and into “P.” Look for the
better models and systems, the ways that can take you farther. Then
adopt new thinking, new skills, and new relationships to help you put
them into action. Become Purposeful during your time block, and
unlock your potential.
3. LIVE THE ACCOUNTABILITY CYCLE
There is an undeniable connection between what you do and what you
get. Actions determine outcomes, and outcomes inform actions. Be
accountable and this feedback loop is how you discover the things you
must do to achieve extraordinary results. That’s why your final
commitment is to live the accountability cycle of results.
Taking complete ownership of your outcomes by holding no one
but yourself responsible for them is the most powerful thing you can
do to drive your success. As such, accountability is most likely the
most important of the three commitments. Without it, your journey
down the path of mastery will be cut short the moment you encounter
a challenge. Without it, you won’t figure out how to break through the
ceilings of achievement you’ll hit along the way. Accountable people
absorb setbacks and keep going. Accountable people persevere
through problems and keep pushing forward. Accountable people are

results oriented and never defend actions, skill levels, models,
systems, or relationships that just aren’t getting the job done. They
bring their best to whatever it takes, without reservation.
Accountable people achieve results others only dream of.
When life happens, you can be either the author of your life or
the victim of it. Those are your only two choices— accountable or
unaccountable. This may sound harsh, but it’s true. Every day we
choose one approach or the other, and the consequences follow us
forever.
To illustrate the difference, consider the tale of two managers of
two competing businesses who both experience a sudden shift in the
market. One month, there is a continuous line of customers stretching
out the door. The next, no one shows up. How each manager responds
makes all the difference.


FIG. 32  Don’t be a victim —live the cycle of accountability!
The accountable manager immediately tunes in: What’s
happening here? She investigates exactly what she’s up against. The
other manager refuses to acknowledge what’s happening. It’s a blip, a
glitch, an anomaly. He shrugs it off as simply a “bad month.”
Meanwhile, the accountable manager, having discovered how a
competitor is grabbing market share, bites the bullet and says, So, this
is the way it is, and takes ownership of the problem. If it’s to be, it’s
up to me, she thinks. Being willing to address reality head-on gives
her a huge edge. It puts her in a position to start thinking about what
she can do differently.
The other manager keeps fighting reality. He comes up with an
alternative view, placing responsibility elsewhere. That’s not how I
see it, he counters. If people in the company would just do their jobs,
we wouldn’t have problems like this!
The accountable manager looks for solutions. More important,
she assumes she’s a part of the solution: What can I do? The moment
she finds the right tactic, she acts. Circumstances won’t change by
themselves, she thinks, so let’s get on with it!  The other manager,
having blamed everyone else, now excuses himself altogether. It’s not
my job, he declares, and settles in to hoping things change for the
better.
Told in this way, the difference is pretty stark, isn’t it? One is
actively trying to author her destiny. The other is simply along for the
ride. One is acting accountable; the other is being a victim. One will
change the outcome. One won’t.
Granted, “victim” is a tough word. Please know that I’m
describing the attitude, not the person, though if kept up long enough
these could become one and the same. No one is a born victim; it’s
simply an attitude or an approach. But if allowed to persist, the cycle
becomes a habit. The opposite is also true. Anyone can be accountable
at any time—and the more you choose the cycle of accountability, the

more likely it is to become your automatic answer to any adversity.
Highly successful people are clear about their role in the events
of their life. They don’t fear reality. They seek it, acknowledge it, and
own it. They know this is the only way to uncover new solutions,
apply them, and experience a different reality, so they take
responsibility and run with it. They see outcomes as information they
can use to frame better actions to get better outcomes. It’s a cycle
they understand and use to achieve extraordinary results.
One of the fastest ways to bring accountability to your life is to
find an accountability partner. Accountability can come from a
mentor, a peer or, in its highest form, a coach. Whatever the case, it’s
critical that you acquire an accountability relationship and give your
partner license to lay out the honest truth. An accountability partner
isn’t a cheerleader, although he can lift you up. An accountability
partner provides frank, objective feedback on your performance,
creates an ongoing expectation for productive progress, and can
provide critical brainstorming or even expertise when needed. As for
me, a coach or a mentor is the best choice for an accountability
partner. Although a peer or a friend can absolutely help you see things
you may not see, ongoing accountability is best provided by someone
to whom you agree to be truly accountable. When that’s the nature of
the relationship, the best results occur.
Earlier, I discussed Dr. Gail Matthews’s research that individuals
with written goals were 39.5 percent more likely to succeed. But
there’s more to the story. Individuals who wrote their goals and sent
progress reports to friends were 76.7 percent more likely to achieve
them. As effective as writing down your goals can be, simply sharing
your progress toward your goals with someone regularly even just a
friend, makes you almost twice as effective.
Accountability works.
Ericsson’s research on expert performance confirms the same
relationship between elite performance and coaching. He observed

that “the single most important difference between these amateurs
and the three groups of elite performers is that the future elite
performers seek out teachers and coaches and engage in supervised
training, whereas the amateurs rarely engage in similar types of
practice.”
An 
accountability 
partner 
will 
positively 
impact 
your
productivity. They’ll keep you honest and on track. Just knowing they
are waiting for your next progress report can spur you to better
results. Ideally, a coach can “coach” you on how to maximize your
performance over time. This is how the very best become the very
best.
Coaching will help you with all three commitments to your ONE
Thing. On the path to mastery, on the journey from “E” to “P,” and in
living the accountability cycle, a coach is invaluable. In fact, you’d be
hard-pressed to find elite achievers who don’t have coaches helping
them in key areas of their life.
It’s never too soon or too late to get a coach. Commit to
achieving extraordinary results and you’ll find a coach gives you the
best chance possible.
   
BIG IDEAS

1. Commit to be your best. Extraordinary results happen only
when you give the best you have to become the best you can be
at your most important work. This is, in essence, the path to
mastery—and because mastery takes time, it takes a
commitment to achieve it.
2. Be purposeful about your ONE Thing. Move from “E” to “P.”
Go on a quest for the models and systems that can take you the
farthest. Don’t just settle for what comes naturally—be open to
new thinking, new skills, and new relationships. If the path of
mastery is a commitment to be your best, being purposeful is a
commitment to adopt the best possible approach.
3. Take ownership of your outcomes. If extraordinary results are
what you want, being a victim won’t work. Change occurs only
when you’re accountable. So stay out of the passenger seat and
always choose the driver’s side.
4. Find a coach. You’ll be hard-pressed to find anyone who
achieves extraordinary results without one.
Remember, we’re not talking about ordinary results—
extraordinary is what we’re after. That kind of productivity eludes
most, but it doesn’t have to. When you time block your most
important priority, protect your time block, and then work your time
block as effectively as possible, you’ll be as productive as you can be.
You’ll be living the power of The ONE Thing.
Now you just have to avoid getting hijacked.

17  THE FOUR THIEVES
“Focus is a matter of deciding what things you’re not going
to do.”
   —John Carmack
In 1973, a group of seminary students unknowingly participated in a
grand study known as “The Good Samaritan Experiment.” These
students were recruited and divided into two groups to see what
factors influenced whether or not they would help a stranger in
distress. Some were told they were going to prepare a talk about
seminary jobs; the others, that they were going to give a talk about the
Parable of the Good Samaritan, a Biblical story about helping people
in need. Within each group, some were told they were late and had to
hurry to their destination, while others were told they could take their
time. What the students didn’t know was that researchers had planted
a man along the way—slumped on the ground, coughing, apparently
in distress.
In the end, fewer than half the students stopped to help. But the
deciding factor wasn’t the task—it was time. Ninety percent of the
students who were rushed failed to stop and render aid to the stranger.
Some actually stepped over him in their hurry to get where they were
supposed to go. It didn’t seem to matter that half of them were on
their way to deliver a talk on helping others!
Now, if seminary students can so easily lose focus on their real
priority, do the rest of us even have a prayer?
Clearly, our best intentions can easily be undone. Just as there
are the Six Lies that will deceive and mislead you, there are Four
Thieves that can hold you up and rob you of your productivity. And
since there’s no one standing by to protect you, it’s up to you to stop
these thieves in their tracks.

THE FOUR THIEVES OF PRODUCTIVITY
1. Inability to Say “No”
2. Fear of Chaos
3. Poor Health Habits
4. Environment Doesn’t Support Your Goals
1. INABILITY TO SAY “NO”
Someone once told me that one “yes” must be defended over time by
1,000 “nos.” Early in my career I didn’t understand this at all. Today,
I think it’s an understatement.
It’s one thing to be distracted when you’re trying to focus, it’s
another entirely to be hijacked before you even get to. The way to
protect what you’ve said yes to and stay productive is to say no to
anyone or anything that could derail you.
Peers will ask for your advice and help. Co-workers will want
you on their team. Friends will request your assistance. Strangers will
seek you out. Invitations and interruptions will come at you from
everywhere imaginable. How you handle all of this determines the
time you’re able to devote to your ONE Thing and the results you’re
ultimately able to produce.
Here’s the thing. When you say yes to something, it’s imperative
that you understand what you’re saying no to. Screenwriter Sidney
Howard, of Gone with the Wind fame, advised, “One-half of knowing
what you want is knowing what you must give up before you get it.”
In the end, the best way to succeed big is to go small. And when you
go small, you say no—a lot. A lot more than you might have ever
considered before.
No one knew how to go small better than Steve Jobs. He was
famously as proud of the products he didn’t pursue as he was of the
transformative products Apple created. In the two years after his
return in 1997, he took the company from 350 products to ten. That’s

340 nos, not counting anything else proposed during that period. At
the 1997 MacWorld Developers Conference, he explained, “When
you think about focusing, you think, ‘Well, focusing is saying yes.’
No! Focusing is about saying no.” Jobs was after extraordinary results
and he knew there was only one way to get there. Jobs was a “no”
man.
The art of saying yes is, by default, the art of saying no. Saying
yes to everyone is the same as saying yes to nothing. Each additional
obligation chips away at your effectiveness at everything you try. So
the more things you do, the less successful you are at any one of
them. You can’t please everyone, so don’t try. In fact, when you try,
the one person you absolutely won’t please is yourself.
Remember, saying yes to your ONE Thing is your top priority.
As long as you can keep this in perspective, saying no to anything that
keeps you from keeping your time block should become something
you can accept.
Then it’s just a matter of how.
All of us struggle to some degree with saying no. There are many
reasons. We want to be helpful. We don’t want to be hurtful. We want
to be caring and considerate. We don’t want to seem callous and cold.
All of this is totally understandable. Being needed is incredibly
satisfying, and helping others can be deeply fulfilling. Focusing on
our own goals to the exclusion of others, especially the causes and the
people we value the most, can feel downright selfish and self-
centered. But it doesn’t have to.
Master marketer Seth Godin says, “You can say no with respect,
you can say no promptly, and you can say no with a lead to someone
who might say yes. But just saying yes because you can’t bear the
short-term pain of saying no is not going to help you do the work.”
Godin gets it. You can keep your yes and say no in a way that works
for you and for others.
Of course, whenever you need to say no, you can just say it and

be done with it. There is nothing wrong with this at all. In fact, this
should be your first choice every time. But if you feel there are times
you need to say no in a helpful way, there are many ways to say it that
can still lead people forward toward their goals.
You can ask them a question that leads them to find the help they
need elsewhere. You might suggest another approach that doesn’t
require any help at all. You might not know what else they could do,
so you could help them by gently prompting them to get creative. You
can politely redirect their request to others who might be better able
to assist them.
Now, if you do end up saying yes, there are a variety of creative
ways you can deliver it. In other words, you can leverage your yeses.
Help desks, support centers, and information resources couldn’t exist
without this kind of strategic thinking. Preprinted scripts, frequently
asked question pages or files, written explanations, recorded
instructions, posted information, checklists, catalogs, directories, and
prescheduled training classes can all be used to effectively say yes
while still preserving your time block. I started doing this in my first
job as sales manager. I leveraged training sessions to cut frequently
asked questions off at the pass, and then by either printing or
recording them, created a library of answers my team could access
whenever I wasn’t personally available.
The biggest lesson I’ve learned is that it helps to have a
philosophy and an approach to managing my space. Over time I
developed what I refer to as the “Three-Foot Rule.” When I hold one
of my arms out as widely as possible, from my neck to my fingertips
is three feet. I’ve made it my time-managing mission to limit who
and what can get within three feet of me. The rule is simple: A
request must be connected to my ONE Thing for me to consider it. If
it’s not, then I either say no to it or use any one of the approaches I
shared above to deflect it elsewhere.
Learning to say no isn’t a recipe for being a recluse. Just the

opposite. It’s a way to gain the greatest freedom and flexibility
possible. Your talent and abilities are limited resources. Your time is
finite. If you don’t make your life about what you say yes to, then it
will almost certainly become what you intended to say no to.
In a 1977 article in Ebony magazine, the incredibly successful
comedian Bill Cosby summed up this productivity thief perfectly. As
he was building his career, Cosby read some advice that he took to
heart: “I don’t know the key to success, but the key to failure is trying
to please everybody.” This is advice worth living by. If you can’t say
no a lot, you’ll never truly be able to say yes to achieving your ONE
Thing. Literally, it’s one or the other—and you get to decide.
When you give your ONE Thing your most emphatic “Yes!” and
vigorously say “No!” to the rest, extraordinary results become
possible.
2. FEAR OF CHAOS
A not-so-funny thing happens along the way to extraordinary results.
Untidiness. Unrest. Disarray. Disorder. When we tirelessly work our
time block, clutter automatically takes up residence around us.
Messes are inevitable when you focus on just one thing. While
you whittle away on your most important work, the world doesn’t sit
and wait. It stays on fast forward and things just rack up and stack up
while you bear down on a singular priority. Unfortunately, there’s no
pause or stop button. You  can’t run life in slow motion. Wishing you
could will just make you miserable and disappointed.
One of the greatest thieves of productivity is the unwillingness to
allow for chaos or the lack of creativity in dealing with it.
Focusing on ONE Thing has a guaranteed consequence: other
things don’t get done. Although that’s exactly the point, it doesn’t
automatically make us feel any better about it. There will always be
people and projects that simply aren’t a part of your biggest single
priority but still matter. You will feel them pressing for your

attention. There will always be unfinished work and loose ends lying
around to snare your focus. Your time block can feel like a
submersible, where the deeper you commit to your ONE Thing, the
more the pressure mounts for you to come up for air and address
everything you’ve put on hold. Eventually it can feel like even the
tiniest leak might trigger an all-out implosion.
When this happens, when you give in to the pressure of any
chaos being left unattended, it can be a total relief. But not when it
comes to productivity.
It’s a thief!
The truth is, it’s a package deal. When you strive for greatness,
chaos is guaranteed to show up. In fact, other areas of your life may
experience chaos in direct proportion to the time you put in on your
ONE Thing. It’s important for you to accept this instead of fighting it.
Oscar-winning filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola warns us that
“anything you build on a large scale or with intense passion invites
chaos.” In other words, get used to it and get over it.
Now, in anybody’s life or work there are some things that just
can’t be ignored: family, friends, pets, personal commitments, or
critical job projects. At any given time, you may have some or all of
these tugging at your time block. You can’t forgo your power hours,
that’s a given. So, what do you do?
“If a cluttered desk is a sign of a cluttered mind, of what,
then, is an empty desk a sign?”
   —Albert Einstein
I get asked this a lot. I’ll be teaching and know that, as soon as I
finish, hands are going to shoot up. “What do I do if I’m a single
parent with kids?” “What if I have elderly parents who constantly
depend on me?” “I have absolute obligations I must take care of, so
what do I do?” These are obviously fair questions. Here’s what I tell
them.
Depending on your situation, your time block might initially

look different from others’. Each of our situations is unique.
Depending on where you are in your life, you may not be able to
immediately block off every morning to be by yourself. You may
have a kid or a parent in tow. You may be doing your time block at a
day care, nursing home, or some other place you have to be. Your
alone time may have to be at a different time of day for a while. You
may have to trade off time with others so they protect your time block
and you in turn protect theirs. You may even have your kids or
parents help you during your time block because they simply must be
with you or you actually need the support.
If you have to beg, then beg. If you have to barter, then barter. If
you have to be creative, then be creative. Just don’t be a victim of
your circumstances. Don’t sacrifice your time block on the altar of “I
just can’t make it work.” My mom used to say, “When you argue for
your limitations, you get to keep them,” but this is one you can’t
afford. Figure it out. Find a way. Make it happen.
“The art of being wise is the art of knowing what to
overlook.”
   — William James
When you commit to your ONE Thing each day, extraordinary
results ultimately occur. In time, this creates the income or
opportunity to manage the chaos. So, don’t let this thief pickpocket
your productivity. Move past your fear of chaos, learn to deal with it,
and trust that your work on your ONE Thing will come through for
you.
3. POOR HEALTH HABITS
I was once asked, “If you don’t take care of your body, where will you
live?” It was a real question. I had been fighting the painful side
effects of interstitial cystitis (you don’t want to know) and was
dealing with continually shaking legs, a debilitating side effect of
cholesterol-fighting statins. My ability to function, much less focus,

was extremely compromised, and the challenge to overcome this was
daunting. My doctor gave me some options and asked me what I
wanted to do. The answer was to change my health habits. It was then
that I discovered one of the greatest lessons of extraordinary results:
Personal energy mismanagement is a silent thief of productivity.
When we keep borrowing against our future by poorly protecting
our energy, there is a predictable outcome of either slowly running
out of gas or prematurely crashing and burning. You see it all the
time. When people don’t understand the power of the ONE Thing,
they try to do too much—and because this never works over time,
they end up making a horrific deal with themselves. They go for
success by sacrificing their health. They stay up late, miss meals or
eat poorly, and completely ignore exercise. Personal energy becomes
an afterthought; allowing health and home life to suffer becomes
acceptable by default. Driven to hit goals, they think of cheating
themselves as a good bet, but this gamble can’t pay off. Not only does
this approach consistently short-circuit your best work, it’s dangerous
to assume that health and hearth will be just waiting for you to come
back and enjoy anytime in the future.
High achievement and extraordinary results require big energy.
The trick is learning how to get it and keep it.
So, what can you do? Think of yourself as the amazing biological
machine you are and consider this daily energy plan for high
productivity. Begin early with meditation and prayer for spiritual
energy; starting the day by connecting with your higher purpose
aligns your thoughts and actions with a larger story. Then move
straight to the kitchen for your most important meal of the day and
the cornerstone of physical energy: a nutritious breakfast designed to
fuel your day’s work. You can’t run long on empty calories, and you
can’t run at all on an empty tank. Figure out easy ways to eat right
and then plan all your daily meals a week at a time.
Fueled up, head to your exercise spot to relieve stress and

strengthen your body. Conditioning gives you maximum capacity,
which is critical for maximum productivity. If you have limited time
to exercise, the simple thing to do is to wear a pedometer. Toward the
end of the day, if you haven’t walked at least 10,000 steps, make it
your ONE “exercise” Thing to reach your 10,000-step goal before you
go to bed. This one habit will change your life.
Now, if you haven’t spent time with your loved ones at breakfast
or during your workout, go find them. Hug, talk, and laugh. You’ll be
reminded why you’re working in the first place, and motivated to be
as productive as possible so you can get home earlier. Productive
people thrive on emotional energy; it fills their heart with joy and
makes them light on their feet.
Next, grab your calendar and plan your day. Make sure you know
what matters most, and make sure those things are going to get done.
Look at what you have to do, estimate the time it will take to do them,
and plan your time accordingly. Knowing what you must do and
making the time to do it is how you bring the most amazing mental
energy to your life. Calendaring your day this way frees your mind
from worrying about what might not get done while inspiring you
with what will. It’s only when you make time for extraordinary
results that they get a chance to show up.
When you get to work, go to work on your ONE Thing. If you’re
like me and have some morning priorities you must get done first,
then give yourself an hour at most to do them. Don’t loiter and don’t
slow down. Clear the decks and then get down to the business of
doing what matters most. Around noon, take a break, have lunch, and
turn your attention to everything else you can do before you head out
for the day.
Last, in the evening when it’s time for bed, get eight hours of
sleep. Powerful engines need cooling down and resting before taking
off again, and you’re no different. You need your sleep so your mind
and body can rest and recharge for tomorrow’s extraordinary

productivity. Anyone you know who gets little sleep and appears to be
doing great is either a freak of nature or hiding its effects from you.
Either way, they aren’t your role model. Protect your sleep by
determining when you must go to bed each night and don’t allow
yourself to be lured away from it. If you’re committed to your wake-
up time, you can stay up late only so many nights before you’re
forced to hit the hay at a decent hour. If your response is that you
have too much to do, stop right now, go back to the beginning of this
book, and start over. You apparently missed something. When you’ve
connected proper sleep with success, you’ll have a good enough
reason to get up and you’ll go to sleep at the right time.
THE HIGHLY PRODUCTIVE PERSON’S DAILY
ENERGY PLAN
1. Meditate and pray for spiritual energy.
2. Eat right, exercise, and sleep sufficiently for physical energy.
3. Hug, kiss, and laugh with loved ones for emotional energy.
4. Set goals, plan, and calendar for mental energy.
5. Time block your ONE Thing for business energy.
Here’s the productivity secret of this plan: when you spend the
early hours energizing yourself, you get pulled through the rest of the
day with little additional effort. You’re not focused on having a
perfect day all day, but on having an energized start to each day. If
you can have a highly productive day until noon, the rest of the day
falls easily into place. That’s positive energy creating positive
momentum. Structuring the early hours of each day is the simplest
way to extraordinary results.
4. ENVIRONMENT DOESN’T SUPPORT YOUR
GOALS

Early in my career, a married mom of two teenagers sat in front of me
and cried. Her family had told her they would support her new career
as long as nothing at home changed. Meals, carpooling, anything that
touched their world couldn’t be disrupted. She had agreed, only to
discover later how bad a deal she’d cut. As I listened, I suddenly
realized I was hearing about a productivity thief almost everyone
overlooks.
Your environment must support your goals.
Your environment is simply who you see and what you
experience every day. The people are familiar, the places
comfortable. You trust these elements of your environment and quite
possibly even take them for granted. But be aware. Anyone and
anything at any time can become a thief, diverting your attention
away from your most important work and stealing your productivity
right from under your nose. For you to achieve extraordinary results,
the people surrounding you and your physical surroundings must
support your goals.
No one lives or works in isolation. Every day, throughout your
day, you come in contact with others and are influenced by them.
Unquestionably, these individuals impact your attitude, your health—
and ultimately, your performance.
The people around you may be more important than you think.
It’s a fact that you’re likely to pick up some of the attitudes of others
by working with them, socializing with them, or simply being around
them. From co-workers to friends to family, if they’re generally not
positive or fulfilled on the job or away from it, they’ll probably pass
on some of their negativity. Attitude is contagious; it spreads easily.
As strong as you think you are, no one is strong enough to avoid the
influence of negativity forever. So, surrounding yourself with the
right people is the right thing to do. While attitude thieves will rob
you of energy, effort, and resolve, supportive people will do what they
can to encourage or assist you. Ultimately, being with success-minded

people creates what researchers call a “positive spiral of success”
where they lift you up and send you on your way.


FIG. 33  Create a productivity-specific environment to support your ONE Thing.
Who you hang out with also has serious implications for your
health habits. Harvard professor Dr. Nicholas A. Christakis and
University of California, San Diego associate professor James H.
Fowler wrote the book on how our social networks unmistakably
impact our well-being. Their book, Connected: The Surprising Power
of Our Social Networks and How They Shape Our Lives, connects the
dots between our relationships and drug use, sleeplessness, smoking,
drinking, eating, and even happiness. For instance, their 2007 study
on obesity revealed that if one of your close friends becomes obese,
you’re 57 percent more likely to do the same. Why? The people we
see tend to set our standard for what’s appropriate.
In time, you begin to think, act, and even look a little like those
you hang out with. But not only do their attitudes and health habits
influence you, their relative success does too. If the people you spend
your time with are high achievers, their achievements can influence
your own. A study featured in the psychology journal Social
Development shows that out of nearly 500 school-age participants
with reciprocal “best friend” relationships, “children who establish
and maintain relationships with high-achieving students experience
gains in their report card grades.” Further, those who have high-
achieving friends appear “to benefit with regard to their motivational
beliefs and academic performance.” Hanging out with people who
seek success will strengthen your motivation and positively push your
performance.
Your mother was right when she cautioned you to be careful of
the company you keep. The wrong people in your environment can
most certainly dissuade, deter, and distract you from the productivity
course you’ve set out on. But the opposite is also true. No one
succeeds alone and no one fails alone. Pay attention to the people
around you. Seek out those who will support your goals, and show the
door to anyone who won’t. The individuals in your life will influence

you and impact you—probably more than you give them credit for.
Give them their due and make sure that the sway they have on you
sends you in the direction you want to go.
If people are the first priority in creating a supportive
environment, place isn’t far behind. When your physical environment
isn’t in step with your goals, it can also keep you from ever getting
started on them in the first place.
“Surround yourself only with people who are going to lift
you higher.”
   —Oprah Winfrey
I know this sounds oversimplified, but to succeed at doing your
ONE Thing you have to be able to get to it, and your physical
environment plays a vital role in whether you do or not. The wrong
surroundings may never let you get there. If your environment is so
full of distractions and diversions that before you can help yourself
you’ve gotten caught doing something you shouldn’t, you won’t get
where you need to go. Think of it as having to walk down an aisle of
candy every day when you’re trying to lose weight. Some may be able
to handle this easily, but most of us are going to sample some sweets
along the way.
What is around you will either aim you toward your time block
or pull you away. This starts from the time you wake up and continues
until you get to your time-block bunker. What you see and hear from
the time your alarm rings to when your time block begins ultimately
determines if you get there, when you get there, and whether you’re
ready to be productive when you do. So, do a trial run. Walk through
the path you’ll take each day, and eradicate all the sight and sound
thieves that you find. For me, at home it’s simple things like e-mail,
the morning paper, the morning TV news shows, the neighbors out
walking their dogs. All wonderful things, but not wonderful when I
have an appointment with myself to accomplish my ONE Thing. So, I
check off e-mail quickly, I never see the paper, I keep  the TV cabinet

closed, and I choose my driving route carefully At work, I avoid the
community coffee pot and the information boards. They can come
later in the day. What I’ve learned is that when you clear the path to
success— that’s when you consistently get there.
Don’t let your environment lead you astray. Your physical
surroundings matter and the people around you matter. Having an
environment that doesn’t support your goals is all too common, and
unfortunately an all-too-common thief of productivity. As actor and
comedian Lily Tomlin once said, “The road to success is always
under construction.” So don’t allow yourself to be detoured from
getting to your ONE Thing. Pave your way with the right people and
place.
   
BIG IDEAS
1. Start saying “no.” Always remember that when you say yes to
something, you’re saying no to everything else. It’s the essence
of keeping a commitment. Start turning down other requests
outright or saying, “No, for now” to distractions so that nothing
detracts you from getting to your top priority. Learning to say no
can and will liberate you. It’s how you’ll find the time for your

ONE Thing.
2. Accept chaos. Recognize that pursuing your ONE Thing moves
other things to the back burner. Loose ends can feel like snares,
creating tangles in your path. This kind of chaos is unavoidable.
Make peace with it. Learn to deal with it. The success you have
accomplishing your ONE Thing will continually prove you made
the right decision.
3. Manage your energy. Don’t sacrifice your health by trying to
take on too much. Your body is an amazing machine, but it
doesn’t come with a warranty, you can’t trade it in, and repairs
can be costly. It’s important to manage your energy so you can
do what you must do, achieve what you want to achieve, and live
the life you want to live.
4. Take ownership of your environment. Make sure that the
people around you and your physical surroundings support your
goals. The right people in your life and the right physical
environment on your daily path will support your efforts to get to
your ONE Thing. When both are in alignment with your ONE
Thing, they will supply the optimism and physical lift you need
to make your ONE Thing happen.
Screenwriter Leo Rosten pulled everything together for us when
he said, “I cannot believe that the purpose of life is to be happy. I
think the purpose of life is to be useful, to be responsible, to be
compassionate. It is, above all, to matter, to count, to stand for
something, to have made some difference that you lived at all.” Live
with Purpose, Live by Priority, and Live for Productivity. Follow
these three for the same reason you make the three commitments and
avoid the four thieves—because you want to leave your mark. You
want your life to matter.

18  THE JOURNEY
“To get through the hardest journey we need take only one
step at a time, but we must keep on stepping.”
   —Chinese Proverb
“One step at a time” may be trite, but it’s still true. No matter the
objective, no matter the destination, the journey to anything you want
always starts with a single step.
That step is called the ONE Thing.
I want you to do something. I want you to close your eyes and
imagine your life as big as it can possibly be. As big as you have ever
dared to dream, and then some. Can you see it?
Now, open your eyes and listen to me. Whatever you can see,
you have the capacity to move toward. And when what you go for is
as vast as you can possibly envision, you’ll be living the biggest life
you can possibly live.
Living large is that simple.
Let me share a way you can do this. Write down your current
income. Then multiply it by a number: 2, 4, 10, 20—it doesn’t matter.
Just pick one, multiply your income by it, and write down the new
number. Looking at it and ignoring whether you’re frightened or
excited, ask yourself, “Will my current actions get me to this number
in the next five years?” If they will, then keep doubling the number
until they won’t. If you then make your actions match your answer,
you’ll be living large.
Now, I use personal earnings only as an example. This thinking
can apply to your spiritual life, your physical conditioning, your
personal relationships, your career achievement, your business
success, or anything else that matters to you. When you lift the limits
of your thinking, you expand the limits of your life. It’s only when
you can imagine a bigger life that you can ever hope to have one.

The challenge is that living the largest life possible requires you
not only to think big, but also to take the necessary actions to get
there.
Extraordinary results require you to go small.
Getting your focus as small as possible simplifies your thinking
and crystallizes what you must do. No matter how big you can think,
when you know where you’re going and work backwards to what you
need to do to get there, you’ll always discover it begins with going
small. Years ago, I wanted  an apple tree on our property. Turns out
you can’t buy a fully mature one. The only option I had was to buy a
small one and grow it. I could think big, but I had no choice but to
start small. So I did, and five years later we had apples. But because I
thought as big as I could, guess what? You got it. I didn’t just plant
one. Today—we have an orchard.
Your life is like this. You don’t get a fully mature one. You get a
small one and the opportunity to grow it—if you want to. Think small
and your life’s likely to stay small. Think big and your life has a
chance to grow big. The choice is yours. When you choose a big life,
by default, you’ll have to go small to get there. You must survey your
choices, narrow your options, line up your priorities, and do what
matters most. You must go small. You must find your ONE Thing.
There is no surefire thing, but there’s always something, ONE
Thing, that out of everything matters more than anything. I’m not
saying there will only be one thing, or even the same thing, forever.
I’m saying that at any moment in time there can be only ONE Thing,
and when that ONE Thing is in line with your purpose and sits atop
your priorities, it will be the most productive thing you can do to
launch you toward the best you can be.
Actions build on action. Habits build on habit. Success builds on
success. The right domino knocks down another and another and
another. So whenever you want extraordinary results, look for the
levered action that will start a domino run for you. Big lives ride the

powerful wave of chain reactions and are built sequentially, which
means when you’re aiming for success you can’t just skip to the end.
Extraordinary doesn’t work like that. The knowledge and momentum
that build as you live the ONE Thing each day, each week, each
month, and each year are what give you the ability to build an
extraordinary life.
“Only those who will risk going too far can possibly find out
how far one can go.”
   — T. S. Eliot
But this doesn’t just happen. You have to make it happen.
One evening an elder Cherokee told his grandson about a battle
that goes on inside all people. He said, “My son, the battle is between
two wolves inside us. One is Fear. It carries anxiety, concern,
uncertainty, hesitancy, indecision and inaction. The other is Faith. It
brings calm, conviction, confidence, enthusiasm, decisiveness,
excitement and action.” The grandson thought about it for a moment
and then meekly asked his grandfather: “Which wolf wins?” The old
Cherokee replied, “The one you feed.”
Your journey toward extraordinary results will be built above all
else on faith. It’s only when you have faith in your purpose and
priorities that you’ll seek out your ONE Thing. And once certain you
know it, you’ll have the personal power necessary to push you
through any hesitancy to do it. Faith ultimately leads to action, and
when we take action we avoid the very thing that could undermine or
undo everything we’ve worked for—regret.
ADVICE FROM A FRIEND
As satisfying as succeeding is, as fulfilling as journeying feels, there
is actually an even better reason to get up every day and take action
on your ONE Thing. On your way to living a life worth living, doing
your best to succeed at what matters most to you not only rewards you
with success and happiness but with something even more precious.

No regrets.
“Twenty years from now you will be more disappointed by
the things that you didn’t do than by the ones you did do. So
throw off the bowlines. Sail away from the safe harbor.
Catch the trade winds in your sails. Explore. Dream.
Discover.”
   —Mark Twain
If you could go back in time and talk to the 18-year-young you or
leap forward and visit with the 80-year-old you, who would you want
to take advice from? It’s an interesting proposition. For me, it would
be my older self. The view from the stern comes with the wisdom
gathered from a longer and wider lens.
So what would an older, wiser you say? “Go live your life. Live
it fully, without fear. Live with purpose, give it your all, and never
give up.” Effort is important, for without it you will never succeed at
your highest level. Achievement is important, for without it you will
never experience your true potential. Pursuing purpose is important,
for unless you do, you may never find lasting happiness. Step out on
faith that these things are true. Go live a life worth living where, in
the end, you’ll be able to say, “I’m glad I did,” not “I wish I had.”
Why do I think this? Because many years ago I began trying to
understand what a life worth living would look like. I decided to go
out and discover what this might be. It was a trip worth taking. I
visited with people older than me, wiser than me, more successful
than me. I researched, I read, I sought advice. From every credible
source imaginable, I looked for clues and signs. Ultimately I
stumbled on a simple point of view: A life worth living might be
measured in many ways, but the one way that stands above all others
is living a life of no regrets.
Life is too short to pile up woulda, coulda, shouldas.
What clinched this for me was when I asked myself who might

be the people with the greatest clarity about life. I decided it was
those who were nearing the end of theirs. If starting with the end in
mind is a good idea, then there’s no end further than the very end of
life to look for clues about how to live. I wondered what people with
nothing left to do but look back might tell me about how to move
forward. Their collective voice was overwhelming, the answer clear:
live your life to minimize the regrets you might have at the end.
What kind of regrets? For me, very few books cause tears, much
less require a handkerchief, but Bronnie Ware’s 2012 book The Top
Five Regrets of the Dying did both. Ware spent many years caring for
those facing their own mortality. When she questioned the dying
about any regrets they had or anything they would do differently,
Bronnie found that common themes surfaced again and again. In
descending order, the five most common were these: I wish that I’d
let myself be happier—too late they realized happiness is a choice; I
wish I’d stayed in touch with my friends—too often they failed to give
them the time and effort they deserved; I wish I’d had the courage to
express my feelings—too frequently shut mouths and shuttered
feelings weighed too heavy to handle; I wish I hadn’t worked so
hard—too much time spent making a living over building a life
caused too much remorse.
As tough as these were, one stood out above them all. The most
common regret was this: I wish I’d had the courage to live a life true
to myself not the life others expected of me. Half-filled dreams and
unfulfilled hopes: this was the number-one regret expressed by the
dying. As Ware put it, “Most people had not  honored even a half of
their dreams and had to die knowing that it was due to choices they
had made, or not made.”
Bronnie Ware’s observations aren’t hers alone. At the conclusion
of their exhaustive research, Gilovich and Medvec in 1994 wrote,
“When people look back on their lives, it is the things they have not
done that generate the greatest regret.... People’s actions may be

troublesome initially; it is their inactions that plague them most with
long-term feelings of regret.”
Honoring our hopes and pursuing productive lives through faith
in our purpose and priorities is the message from our elders. From the
wisest position they’ll ever have comes their clearest message.
No regrets.
So make sure every day you do what matters most. When you
know what matters most, everything makes sense. When you don’t
know what matters most, anything makes sense. The best lives aren’t
led this way.
SUCCESS IS AN INSIDE JOB
So, how do you live a life of no regrets? The same way your journey
to extraordinary results begins. With purpose, priority, and
productivity; with the knowledge that regret must be avoided, and can
be; with your ONE Thing at the top of your mind and the top of your
schedule; with a single first step we can all take.
I believe the best way to share this is in a story.
One evening, a young boy hopped up on his father’s lap and
whispered, “Dad, we don’t spend enough time together.” The father,
who dearly loved his son, knew in his heart this was true and replied,
“You’re right and I’m so sorry. But I promise I’ll make it up to you.
Since tomorrow is Saturday, why don’t we spend the entire day
together? Just you and me!” It was a plan, and the boy went to bed
that night with a smile on his face, envisioning the day, excited about
the adventurous possibilities with his Pops.
The next morning the father rose earlier than usual. He wanted to
make sure he could still enjoy his ritual cup of coffee with the
morning paper before his son awoke, wound up and ready to go. Lost
in thought reading the business section, he was caught by surprise
when 
suddenly 
his 
son 
pulled 
the 
newspaper 
down 
and
enthusiastically shouted, “Dad, I’m up. Let’s play!”

The father, although thrilled to see his son and eager to start the
day together, found himself guiltily craving just a little more time to
finish his morning routine. Quickly racking his brain, he hit upon a
promising idea. He grabbed his son, gave him a huge hug, and
announced that their first game would be to put a puzzle together, and
when that was done, “we’ll head outside to play for the rest of the
day.”
Earlier in his reading, he had seen a full-page ad with a picture of
the world. He quickly found it, tore it into little pieces, and spread
them out on the table. He found some tape for his son and said, “I
want to see how fast you can put this puzzle together.” The boy
enthusiastically dove right in, while his father, confident that he had
now bought some extra time, buried himself back in his paper.
Within minutes, the boy once again yanked down his father’s
newspaper and proudly announced, “Dad, I’m done!” The father was
astonished. For what lay in front of him—whole, intact, and complete
—was the picture of the world, back together as it was in the ad and
not one piece out of place. In a voice mixed with parental pride and
wonder, the father asked, “How on earth did you do that so fast?”
The young boy beamed. “It was easy, Dad! I couldn’t do it at
first and I started to give up, it was so hard. But then I dropped a piece
on the floor, and because it’s a glass-top table, when I looked up I saw
that there was a picture of a man on the other side. That gave me an
idea!
“When I put the man together, the world just fell into place.”
I first heard this innocent narrative when I was a teenager and
I’ve never been able to shake it. It became a tale I continually retell in
my head, and ultimately a central theme in my life. What struck me
isn’t the apparent issue with life balance the father had, though I
certainly got that. What grabbed me and stuck with me was the
inspired solution of the son. He cracked a deeper code: a simple and
more straightforward approach to life. A starting point for any

challenge we face personally or professionally. The ONE Thing we
must all understand if we are to achieve extraordinary results at our
highest level possible. Undoubtedly. Unquestionably.
Success is an inside job.
Put yourself together, and your world falls into place. When you
bring purpose to your life, know your priorities, and achieve high
productivity on the priority that matters most every day, your life
makes sense and the extraordinary becomes possible.
All success in life starts within you. You know what to do. You
know how to do it. Your next step is simple.
You are the first domino.

PUTTING THE ONE THING TO
WORK
“In delay there lies no plenty.”
   -William Shakespeare
So what now?
You’ve read the book. You get it. You’re ready to experience
extraordinary results in your life. So, what do you do? How do you tap
into The ONE Thing in the most powerful way? Let’s revisit the heart
of the book and look at ways you can put The ONE Thing to work
right now.
For brevity’s sake, I’ll shorten the Focusing Question, so be sure
to add “... such that by doing it everything will be easier or
unnecessary?” at the end of each question!
YOUR PERSONAL LIFE
Let the ONE Thing bring clarity to the key areas of your life. Here’s a
short sampling.
What’s the ONE Thing I can do this week to discover or affirm
my life’s purpose... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do in 90 days to get in the physical
shape I want... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do today to strengthen my spiritual
faith... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do to find time to practice the guitar
20 minutes a day... ? Knock five strokes off my golf game in 90
days... ? Learn to paint in six months... ?
YOUR FAMILY

Use the ONE Thing with your family for fun and rewarding
experiences. Here are some options.
What’s the ONE Thing we can do this week to improve our
marriage... ?
What’s the ONE Thing we can do every week to spend more
quality family time together... ?
What’s the ONE Thing we can do tonight to support our kid’s
schoolwork... ?
What’s the ONE Thing we can do to make our next vacation the
best ever... ? Our next Christmas the best ever... ? Thanksgiving
the best ever... ?
Please know that these are simply examples. If they apply to you
personally then great. If not, then use them to prompt you to discover
what areas you might explore that matter to you.
And don’t forget time blocking. Time block with yourself to
make sure the things that matter get done and the activities that
matter get mastered. In some cases, you’ll want to block time to find
your answer and, other times you’ll just need to block time to
implement it.
Now, let’s go to work and see how you might take the power of
the ONE Thing with you.
YOUR JOB
Put the ONE Thing to work taking your professional life to the next
level. Here’s a few ways to get started.
What’s the ONE Thing I can do today to complete my current
project ahead of schedule... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do this month to produce better
work... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do before my next review to get the

raise I want... ?
What’s the ONE Thing I can do everyday to finish my work and
still get home on time... ?
YOUR WORK TEAM
Pull the ONE Thing into your work with others. Whether you’re a
manager, executive, or even a business owner, bring ONE Thing
thinking into your everyday work situations to drive productivity
upward. Here are some scenarios to consider.
In any meeting ask, “What’s the ONE Thing we can accomplish
in this meeting and end early... ?
In building your team ask, What’s the ONE Thing I can do in the
next six months to find and develop incredible talent... ?
In planning for the next month, year, or five years ask, What’s
the ONE Thing we can do right now to accomplish our goals
ahead of schedule and under budget... ?
In your department or at the highest company level ask, What’s
the ONE Thing we can do in the next 90 days to create a ONE
Thing culture... ?
Again, these are merely examples to get you thinking about the
possibilities. And, just as in your personal life, once you’ve decided
what matters most, professional time blocking becomes your way of
making sure it gets done. At work, this is usually about either a short-
term project you must complete or an ongoing long-term activity
you’re committed to doing repeatedly. No matter, an appointment
with yourself is the surest path to ensuring you achieve extraordinary
results.
Casual open discussions or short in-house workshops around key
concepts in the book might really help everyone at work find their
own understanding and get on the same page.

If implementing the ONE Thing in an area requires you to
involve others, consider getting them their own copy of the book.
Sharing your ahas is a great start and you may be happily surprised
with the insights you get back when others have a chance to read the
book on their own.
Keep in mind that it takes more than reading the book and a few
conversations or mentions in a meeting to make The ONE Thing a
new habit in your life or in the lives of those around you. You know
from reading the book that it takes on average 66 days to create a new
habit, so approach this accordingly. To ignite your life you must focus
on ONE Thing long enough for it to catch fire.
Let’s look at a few other areas where The ONE Thing might
make a real difference.
YOUR NON-PROFIT
What’s the ONE Thing we can do to fund our annual financial
needs... ? Serve twice as many people... ? Double our number of
volunteers... ?
YOUR SCHOOL
What’s the ONE Thing we can do to decrease our dropout rate to
zero... ? Raise our test scores by 20 percent... ? Increase our
graduation rate to 100 percent... ? Double our parent participation... ?
YOUR PLACE OF WORSHIP
What’s the ONE Thing we can do to improve our worship
experience... ? Double our mission outreach success... ? Max out our
attendance... ? Achieve our finance goals... ?
YOUR COMMUNITY
What’s the ONE Thing we can do to improve our sense of
community... ? Help the homebound... ? Double our volunteerism... ?
Double voter turnout... ?

After my wife Mary read this book, I asked her to do something.
She turned to me and you know what she said? “Gary, that’s not my
ONE Thing right now!” We laughed, high-fived, and I got to do it
myself!
The ONE Thing forces you to think big, work things through to
create a list, prioritize that list so that a geometric progression can
happen, and then hammer away on the first thing—the ONE Thing
that starts your domino run.
So be prepared to live a new life! And remember that the secret
to extraordinary results is to ask a very big and specific question that
leads you to one very small and tightly focused answer.
If you try to do everything, you could wind up with nothing. If
you try to do just ONE Thing, the right ONE Thing, you could wind
up with everything you ever wanted.
The ONE Thing is real. If you put it to work, it will work.
So don’t delay. Ask yourself the question, “What’s the ONE
Thing I can do right now to start using The ONE Thing in my life
such that by doing it everything else will be easier or unnecessary?”
And make doing the answer your first ONE Thing!
Onward...
Gary Keller

ON THE RESEARCH
Although I’ve lived the lessons of this book for some time, we began
researching The ONE Thing in earnest in 2008. Since then, we’ve
archived a collection of well over a thousand scholarly articles,
scientific studies, and academic papers; hundreds of newspaper and
magazine articles; and a large library of books written by the
foremost experts in their fields. Binder after binder of discoveries,
facts, and anecdotes literally covered every inch of our writing space.
If you want to dive deeper into what you’ve learned from this
book, you can find an extensive list of our references organized by
topic and by chapter at ThelThing.com. This website is a gateway
into our minds—we mention the authors who have inspired us,
provide links to articles that are available online, and list those white
papers that educated our thinking. We’ve also thrown in some
additional interesting factoids and even a fun video here and there.
Enjoy the journey.


INDEX
A  |  B  |  C  |  D  |  E
F  |  G  |  H  |  I  |  J
K  |  L  |  M  |  N  |  O
P  |  Q  |  R  |  S  |  T  |  V
A
Accountability Cycle, 176, 183–189, 185
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (Carroll), 146–147
Allen, Paul, 23
Amorico, Angelo, 21
Attention, 51–53. See also multitasking
Avnaim-Pesso, Liora, 68
B
Balance
balancing versus, 72, 82–83
counterbalancing versus, 79–83
genesis of myth of, 73–75
golden mean and, 73
lie of, 72–83
life as balancing act, 82
middle mismanagement and, 75–77, 76, 77, 79
prioritizing versus balancing, 82
time and, 77–79
work-life balance, 74–75, 75, 214–216
Balancing versus balance, 72, 82–83. See also counterbalancing
Begging Bowl, 140–142
Being Together, Working Apart (Gomory), 74
Bhatia, Sabeer, 87
Big

bold actions and, 93
and ceiling for achievement, 86
and fear of failure, 93–94
going big, 87–93, 208–209
growth mindset versus fixed mindset, 91–94
lie of big as bad, 84–94
living big for greatness, 92, 93, 208–209
negative associations with, 84–85
as placeholder for leap of possibility, 86–87
research on thinking big, 91–92
thinking big and acting big, 87–93
Big & Broad questions, 122
Big & Specific questions, 122, 127–128
Big-picture question, 106, 107, 110, 113. See also Focusing Question
Big Why, 144–145. See also purpose
Business. See also ONE Thing; Priority; Productivity; Purpose;
Success
Focusing Question on, 116
reinventing of, 89–90
C
Calendaring, 163, 169–170, 169, 200, 201
Carnegie, Andrew, 102–103
Carroll, Lewis, 146–147
Chaos, fear of, 195–198, 206
Cheng, Ken, 59
Christakis, Nicholas A., 203–204
Christmas Carol (Dickens), 135–139, 147, 156, 157
Coaching, 7–9, 188, 189
Colbert, Stephen, 29
Collins, Billy, 46–47
Connected (Christakis and Fowler), 203–204

Counterbalancing, 79–83. See also balance
Crenshaw, Dave, 52
D
Danziger, Shai, 68
Diamond, Jared, 73–74
Dickens, Charles, 135–139, 147, 156, 157
Discipline
definition of, 55
lie of, 54–60
relationship of habit to, 55–60
selected discipline, 56–57
Disney, Roy, 19
Disney, Walt, 19
Distraction, 51–53. See also multitasking
Domino effect
extraordinary results and, 16
Focusing Question and, 108–110
geometric domino progression, 13–16
priority and, 16
and success built sequentially over time, 16, 210–211
time-blocking and, 170
Dweck, Carol S., 91–92
E
80/20 Principle
definition of, 37–38
extreme Pareto, 39–41
to-do lists and, 38, 41–42
80/20 Principle (Koch), 37
Einstein, Albert, 19, 197
Elite performers, 176–179, 188
Entrepreneurial (“E”) approach, 175–176, 179–183, 189

Ericsson, K. Anders, 177, 188
Expert performance, 176–179, 188
Extraordinary results. See ONE Thing; Priority; Productivity;
Purpose; Success
F
Fear
of chaos, 195–198, 206
of failure, 93–94
Finances
definition of financially wealthy people, 142–143
Focus Questions on, 116
happiness and money, 142–143
and living large, 209
Focusing Question
anatomy of, 108–110
big-picture question, 106, 110, 113
on business, 116
Carnegie on, 102–103
criterion for answer to, 109
definition and statement of, 106, 110
domino effect and, 108–110
on finances, 116
focused action and, 108
Great Answers to Great Question, 119–128, 120, 121
on job, 114, 116
on key relationships, 115–116, 219
leverage test and, 109
life as question, 104–108
on personal life, 115, 219
possible action and, 108–109
and power of questions, 104–106

priority and, 108
reminders for using, 117–118
revision of Great Question to form, 123
small-focus question, 106–107, 110
as Success Habit, 112–118
as way of life, 113–118
Foer, Joshua, 182
Forstall, Scott, 92
Fowler, James H., 203–204
G
Gates, Bill, 22–24
Gates, Melinda, 23–24
Geography of Time, A (Levine), 165
Goal Setting to the Now, 147–155, 150, 153. See also ONE Thing
Godin, Seth, 193
Going big, 87–93, 88, 89, 208–209
Going small, 9–11, 41, 209–210. See also ONE Thing
Golden mean, 73. See also balance
Gomory, Ralph E., 74
Good Samaritan Experiment, 190–191
Graham, Paul, 167–168
Great Answers. See also Focusing Question; Great Question
benchmark and, 126–128
doable answers, 123, 124, 128
path to, 119–128, 120, 121
possibility answers, 123–128, 126–127
stretch answers, 123, 125, 126, 128
Great Question. See also Focusing Question
Big & Broad questions, 122
Big & Specific questions, 122, 127–128
options for asking, 120–123, 121

and path to Great Answers, 119–128, 120, 121
revision of, to form Focusing Question, 123
Small & Broad questions, 122
Small & Specific questions, 121–122
Growth mindset, 91–94
Guns, Germs, and Steel (Diamond), 73–74
H
Habits
building one habit at a time, 59
definition of, 55
Focusing Question as, 112–118
formation versus maintenance of, 57–59
halo effect in formation of, 59
relationship of discipline to, 55–60
research on, 58–59, 117
Success Habit, 112–118
time needed for formation of, 58–60
Hreljac, Ryan, 90
Hyperbolic discounting, 149
I
Isaac, Brad, 169–170
J
Jobs, Steve, 192
Johnson, Eric, 40–41
Juggling, 47–48, 48. See also multitasking
Juran, Joseph M., 36–39
K
Kano, Jigoro, 178
Kayongo, Derreck, 90

Keller, Gary, 236–238, 237
King, Stephen, 166
Koch, Richard, 37
L
Leonard, George, 178
Levav, Jonathan, 68
Levine, Robert, 165
Lies about success
balance, 72–83
big as bad, 84–94
clenching as way to success, 98–100
discipline, 54–60
equality, 32–42
multitasking, 43–53
willpower, 61–71
Lightner, Candace, 90
M
Maker (do or create) time, 167–168
“Makers Schedule, Manager’s Schedule” (Graham), 167–168
Manager time, 167–168
Marshmallow Test with toddlers, 63–64
Martin, George, 20
Mastery, 175, 176–179, 188–189
Mastery (Leonard), 178
Matthews, Gail, 154, 187–188
Matthews, Pat, 21
Megaphobia, 85
Mentoring. See Coaching
Meyer, David, 48
Microsoft, 23, 87
Mischel, Walter, 63–64

Monkey mind, 45–47. See also multitasking
Moving from “E” (Entrepreneurial) to “P” (Purposeful), 175–176,
179–183, 189
Multitasking
automobile accidents and, 51
brain channels and, 48–51
by computers, 45
cost of, 48, 50, 53
distraction and, 51–53
dopamine release and, 51
juggling as illusion, 47–48
lie of, 44–53
media multitaskers, 51
mistakes and, 50
monkey mind, 45–47
research on, 43–44, 50
sense of time and, 50
stress and, 50
in workplace, 46
N
Narrowing of focus. See ONE Thing
Nass, Clifford, 43–44
No regrets, 211–216
No saying, 41, 171, 191–195, 206
O
Oaten, Megan, 59
OK Plateau, 182
On Writing (King), 166
ONE Thing. See also Lies about success; Priority; Productivity;
Purpose; Success
attention and, 51–53

clues of success, 17–24
counterbalancing and, 79–83
domino effect and, 12–16
Focusing Question and, 102–128, 219–222
going big and, 87–93, 208–209
going small and, 9–11, 41, 209–210
and Great Answers to Focusing Questions, 119–128
Great Question and, 120–123, 127–128
habits and, 55–60
implementation of, 218–223
inequality of efforts for results, 32–42
lies getting in the way of, 29–31
one life, 22–24
one passion, one skill, 20–22
one person, 19–20
one product, one service, 17–19
as secret of success, 6–11, 24
Success Habit and, 112–118
time blocking of, 160–163, 165–168, 173–174, 178, 200, 201
website on, 224–225, 239
willpower and, 61–71
P
Papasan, Jay, 238–239
Pareto, Vilfredo, 36–37
Pareto’s Principle, 37–39
Path of Mastery, 175, 176–179, 188–189
Personal life. See also Physical health; Relationships
as balancing act, 82–83
daily energy plan for highly productive person, 201
Focusing Questions on, 115, 118, 219
and going small, 209–210

living big for greatness, 92, 93, 208–209
and no regrets, 211–216
and regrets of the dying, 213–214
support for ONE Thing in, 202–204
and support for time blocking, 173
work-life balance, 74–75, 214–216
work-life counterbalancing, 79–83
Phelps, Michael, 56–57
Physical health
daily energy plan for highly productive person, 201
exercise and, 199, 201
Focusing Questions on, 115
nutrition and, 66–67, 71, 199, 201
productivity and, 198–201, 203–204, 207
sleep and, 200–201
social networks and, 203–204
willpower and, 66–67, 71
Planning fallacy, 152
Planning time, 168–170
Possibility answers, 123–128, 124. See also Great Answers
Priority. See also ONE Thing
balancing versus prioritizing, 82
counterbalancing and, 81–82
Dickens’ Christmas Carol on., 138–139, 147, 156
domino effect and, 16, 153
extraordinary results and, 132–134
Focusing Question and, 108
future purpose connecting to present priority, 149–154
Goal Setting to the Now, 147–155
hyperbolic discounting and, 149
meaning of, 147
present bias and, 149

relationship of purpose, productivity and, 132–134, 146–147, 173
to-do lists and, 41–42
written goals and, 154, 155, 187–188
Productivity. See also ONE Thing and acceptance of chaos, 195–198,
206
extraordinary results and, 132–134
Good Samaritan Experiment on, 190–191
and ONE Thing, 165–168
perseverance and, 169–170
physical environment and, 205–206
physical health and, 198–201, 203–204, 207
relationship of purpose, priority and, 132–134, 173
and saying no, 191–195, 206
social networks and, 202–204
supportive environment and, 202–207, 203
thieves of, 190–207
time blocking and, 159–189
and time management generally, 157–158
Purpose. See also ONE Thing
Begging Bowl tale, 140–142
Big Why and, 144–145
Dickens’ Christmas Carol on., 138–139, 147, 156
extraordinary results and, 132–134
future purpose connecting to present priority, 149–154
happiness and, 139–144, 207
moving from “E” (Entrepreneurial) to “P” (Purposeful), 175–
176, 179–183, 189
power of, 143–144
relationship of priority, productivity and, 132–134, 146–147, 173
Purposeful (“P”) approach, 175–176, 179–183, 189
Q

Quality Control Handbook (Juran), 37
R
Relationships. See also Personal life
emotional energy from, 200, 201
Focusing Questions and, 115–116, 118, 219
regrets about, 213
and support for ONE Thing, 202–204
Richtel, Matt, 51
Rowling, J. K., 90
S
Sanders, Colonel, 17
Saying yes, 191–195
Seinfeld, Jerry, 169–170
Seligman, Martin, 142
Shiv, Baba, 65–66
Small & Broad questions, 122
Small & Specific questions, 121–122
Small-focus question, 106–107, 110. See also Focusing Question
Stretch answers, 123, 125, 126, 128. See also Great Answers
Success. See also Lies about success; Priority; Productivity; Purpose
attention and, 51–53
as built sequentially over time, 16, 210–211
Carnegie on, 102–103
and ceiling for achievement, 86
clenching versus unclenching as way to, 98–101
clues of, 17–24
counterbalancing and, 79–83
domino effect and, 16
extremes and, 76–77
failure as part of, 93–94
Focusing Question and, 102–128

and going big, 87–93, 208–209
going small for, 9–11, 41, 209–210
and Great Answers to Focusing Questions, 119–128
habits and, 55–60
and inequality of efforts for results, 32–42
as inside job, 214–216
leap of possibility and, 86–87
lies getting in the way of, 29–31
ONE Thing as secret of, 6–11, 24
productivity of successful people, 158
as short race fueled by discipline, 55
willpower and, 61–71
Suzannes Diary for Nicholas (Patterson), 81–82
T
Thieves of productivity
environment as not supportive of goals, 202–207
fear of chaos, 195–198, 206
Good Samaritan Experiment, 190–191
inability to say no, 191–195, 206
poor health habits, 198–201, 207
Three-Foot Rule, 194–195
Time. See also Time blocking; Time management
balance and, 77–79
for habit formation, 58–59, 60
multitasking and sense of, 50
success built sequentially over time, 16, 210–211
willpower and timing, 62–65, 69–71
Time blocking
Accountability Cycle and, 176, 183–189
calendar for, 163, 169–170, 200, 201
commitments needed for, 175–189

domino effect and, 170
mastery and, 175, 176–179, 188–189
and moving from “E” (Entrepreneurial) to “P” (Purposeful),
175–176, 179–183, 189
of ONE Thing, 160–163, 165–168, 173–174, 178, 200, 201
of planning time, 168–170
in productive day, 160–162
protection of time block from distractions, 170–174
purpose of, 159
reminders for, 171–172
support for, 172, 173
of time off, 164
in typical day, 160
Time management. See also Time blocking
and productivity generally, 157–158
to-do lists, 34–36, 38, 41–42
To-do lists, 34–36, 41–42
Top Five Regrets of the Dying, The (Ware), 213–214
Truthiness, 28–30
Tuhabonye, Gilbert, 21–22
Twain, Mark, 28, 103, 212
V
Van Halen, Eddie, 177
Victim role, 184–186
Visualization of outcome and process, 152
W
Walton, Sam, 19, 90
Ware, Bronnie, 213–214
Whitehead, Lorne, 13–15
Willard, Nancy, 104
Willpower

brain and, 66–67
default judgment and low willpower, 68–69
lie of, 61–71
as limited but renewable resource, 65–66, 71
Marshmallow Test with toddlers, 63–64
nutrition and, 66–67, 71
research on, 63–68
timing and, 62–65, 69–71
“won’t” power versus, 69–70
Winfrey, Oprah, 20, 205
Work. See also ONE Thing; Priority; Productivity; Purpose; Success
Focusing Questions on, 116, 220–221
reinventing careers, 89–90
Work-life balance, 74–75, 75, 214–216. See also balance
Work-life counterbalancing, 79–83
Written goals, 154, 155, 187–188

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
When we were putting this book together, we agreed to do our best to
organize it using the principles of The ONE Thing. Most books follow
the Chicago Manual of Style’s traditional guidelines and have a half-
title, 
title, 
copyright, 
endorsements, 
author 
bio, 
foreword,
acknowledgments, dedication, and epigraph pages all before you ever
get to the table of contents and the actual text. Really?
It all got tossed out the window. In terms of advocating for you,
the reader, we felt this was the ONE “design” Thing we could do to
improve your experience. As a result, the acknowledgments ended up
in the back of the book. In reality, if you were to reorder the book in
terms of what’s most important to the authors, this section may well
have fallen just inside the front cover.
We began outlining this book in the summer of 2008 and
submitted the first full draft to our publisher on June 1, 2012—a four-
year journey we certainly couldn’t have navigated without help. Lots
of it.
Family comes first. Without the love and support of my wife
Mary and son John, this book wouldn’t be what it is. My writing
partner, Jay, is equally thankful for the love and encouragement from
Wendy and his kids, Gus and Veronica. Spouses, especially wise,
literate ones like ours, get the largely thankless job of reading all the
rough drafts rife with flaws and riddled with errors that eventually
become a finished book.
We also benefited from a great support team. Vickie Lukachik
and Kylah Magee loaded us up with so much research it took us close
to half a year to digest it. Valerie Vogler-Stipe and Sarah Zimmerman
did their ONE Thing and kept our plates and calendars free so we
could stay focused on the book. The rest of our team, Allison Odom,
Barbara Sagnes, Mindy Hager, Liz Krakow, Lisa Weathers, Denice

Neason, and Mitch Johnson, also stayed on their ONE Thing so we
could do ours.
My Keller Williams Realty partners and senior leaders each lent
their ideas and support along the way: Mo Anderson, Mark Willis,
Mary Tennant, Chris Heller, John Davis, Tony Dicello, Dianna and
Shon Kokoszka, and Jim Talbot. Thanks guys! You rock! Our
marketing team, led by Ellen Marks, worked extensively on the
design of the book, including all the ways you likely heard about it:
Annie Switt, Hiliary Kolb, Stephanie Van Hoek, Laura Price, the
super-talented designers Michael Balistreri and Caitlin McIntosh, as
well as Tamara Hurwitz, Jeff Ryder, and Owen Gibbs on our
production team, and the web team of Hunter Frazier and Veronica
Diaz. Cary Sylvester, Mike Malinowski, and Ben Herndon
coordinated our IT work inside and outside the building with partners
like Feed Magnet and NVNTD. Anthony Azar, Tom Freireich, and
Danny Thompson worked with our vendor partners as well as with our
partners in the field to make sure we got the book in as many hands as
possible. Special thanks to Kaitlin Merchant of KW Research and
Mona Covey, Julie Fantechi, and Dawn Sroka of KWU for their work
pre- and post-publication.
We also had the benefit of working with a publisher that truly
gets The ONE Thing and lives it, Ray Bard of Bard Press. He
assembled an excellent team that advised, supported, and encouraged
us when we were writing and later, during the editing, pushed us to
the edge to make it as good as it could be. Our extended publishing
team includes managing editor Sherry Sprague, editor Jeff Morris,
copy/ production editor Deborah Costenbader, Randy Miyake and
Gary Hespenheide of Hespenheide Design, proofreader Luke Torn,
and indexer Linda Webster.
Publicist Barbara Henricks of Cave Henricks Communications
and social media pro Rusty Shelton of Shelton Interactive provided
early feedback and led the media campaign. We also had a group of

veteran readers who, with some select members of our team, provided
feedback on our early draft: Jennifer Driscoll-Hollis, Spencer Gale,
David Hathaway, Robert M. Hooper, Ph.D., Scott Provence, Cynthia
Robbins, Robert Todd, and Todd Sattersten.
Thanks to the super-responsive researchers, professors, and
authors who answered our questions on a variety of topics: Dr. Roy
Baumeister, a Francis Eppes Eminent Scholar at Florida State
University and Social Psychology Area Director; Dr. Myron P.
Gutmann, Directorate for the Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences at the National Science Foundation; Dr. Eric Klinger,
Professor of Psychology Emeritus at the University of Minnesota,
Morris; Dr. Jonathan Levav, Associate Professor of Marketing at
Stanford University; Paul McFedries, author of the unique website
wordspy.com; Dr. David E. Meyer, Professor of Psychology in the
Cognition and Perception Program at the University of Michigan and
director of the University of Michigan’s Brain, Cognition, and Action
Laboratory; Dr. Phyllis Moen, McKnight Presidential Chair in
Sociology at the University of Minnesota; Erica Mosner at Historical
Studies-Social Science Library at the Institute for Advanced Study;
the super-helpful Rachel from Bronnie Ware’s website; Valoise
Armstrong at the Dwight D. Eisenhower Library; Dr. Ed Deiner,
author and Professor Emeritus in the Department of Psychology at the
University of Illinois; and James Cathcart, Senior Leadership
Consultant at Franklin Covey. We’re also grateful to The Keller
Center in the Hankamer School of Business at Baylor University and
Casey Blaine for her research on multitasking early on in our journey.
And last, I’d be remiss if I didn’t thank my business coach Bayne
Henyon for his insights all those years ago that changed the way I
looked at things and reshaped the way I worked.
Thank you everyone for everything!

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
GARY KELLER

Professionally, Gary’s ONE Thing is teaching. He excelled as a real
estate salesperson by teaching clients how to make great home
buying-and-selling decisions. As a real estate sales manager, he
recruited agents through training and helped them build their careers
the same way. As cofounder and chairman of the board, he built
Keller Williams Realty International from a single office in Austin,
Texas, to the largest real estate company in North America by using
his skills as a teacher, trainer, and coach. Gary defines leadership as
“teaching people how to think the way they need to think so they can
do what they need to do when they need to do it, so they can get what
they want when they want it.”
An Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year and finalist for Inc.
magazine’s Entrepreneur of the Year, Keller is recognized as one of
the most influential leaders in the real estate industry. He has also
helped many small business owners and entrepreneurs find success
through three nationally bestselling books: The Millionaire Real
Estate Agent, The Millionaire Real Estate Investor,  and SHIFT: How
Top Real Estate Agents Tackle Tough Times.  A book, after all, is just
another way to teach, but one with an infinitely large classroom. As a
business coach and national trainer, Gary has helped countless others
realize extraordinary results by narrowing their focus to their own
ONE Thing.
Unsurprising to those who know him, Gary believes that his
single greatest achievement is the life he’s built with his wife Mary
and their son John.
JAY PAPASAN
Jay is the executive editor and vice president of publishing at Keller
Williams Realty and president of Rellek Publishing. Professionally,
his ONE Thing is writing. He attempted to write his first book on an
electric typewriter in junior high and was hooked. At least one high
school teacher thought his writing had promise and circulated one of

his essays to the entire staff. Jay paid the bills in college by working
in a bookstore. He got his undergraduate degree in writing and later,
his Master’s. After graduation, Jay took a job in publishing. During
his years at HarperCollins in New York he worked on bestselling
titles like Body for Life by Bill Phillips and Go for the Goal by Mia
Hamm. More recently, in the ten years he’s worked with Gary, Jay
has coauthored numerous award-winning or bestselling titles,
including the Millionaire Real Estate series.
Jay is passionate about sharing the ideas in his books and
regularly speaks at conventions and training events. He is a member
of the Keller Williams University International Master Faculty.
Outside of work, Jay co-owns a successful real estate investment
business and sales team with his wife Wendy. They enjoy life in
Austin, Texas, with their children Gus and Veronica.

Now that you understand the concept, it’s time to put The ONE Thing
into action in your life. Visit The1Thing.com to start thinking big by
going small and focusing on your ONE Thing today! Find up-to-date
information on our seminars and coaching programs, as well as
exclusive ONE Thing tools. See real-time updates from others joining
the worldwide movement and share your ONE Thing. Experience your
ONE Thing today.

The ONE Thing
The Surprisingly Simple Truth Behind Extraordinary Results
Gary Keller with Jay Papasan
Published by Bard Press, Austin, Texas
Copyright © 2012 Rellek Publishing Partners, Ltd.
All rights reserved.
Grateful acknowledgment is made for previously published material used in this book.
From SUZANNE’S DIARY FOR NICHOLAS by James Patterson. Copyright © 2001 by
Sue Jack, Inc. By permission of Little, Brown and Company. All rights reserved.
Permission to reproduce or transmit in any form or by any means—electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying and recording—or by an information storage and
retrieval system, must be obtained by contacting the authors via e-mail at
support@the1thing.com or by fax at 512.328.1433.
Ordering Information
For additional copies contact your favorite bookstore or e-mail support@the1thing.com or
fax 512.328.1433. Quantity discounts are available.
ISBN
13 digit: 978-1-885167-77-4——10 digit: 1-885167-77-6 (Print)
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Keller, Gary, 1957—
The one thing : the surprisingly simple truth behind extraordinary results / Gary Keller,
with Jay Papasan.
pages cm
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-885167-77-4
1. Success in business. 2. Success. I. Papasan, Jay. II. Title.
HF5386.K2676 2013
650.1--dc23    2012045433
A Bard Press book
Credits
Managing Editor: Sherry Sprague
Substantive Editor: Jeff Morris
Copyeditor/Production Editor: Deborah Costenbader
Proofreading: Deborah Costenbader, Luke Torn
Text Design and Illustrations: Caitlin McIntosh
Text Production: Hespenheide Design
Jacket Design: Caitlin McIntosh, Michael Balistreri, Hespenheide Design
Index: Linda Webster

First Edition
First printing: February 2013
 
QED stands for Quality, Excellence and Design. The QED seal of approval shown here
verifies that this eBook has passed a rigorous quality assurance process and will render
well in most eBook reading platforms.
For more information please click here.

Table of Contents
Cover
Title Page
Table of Contents
1. The ONE Thing
2. The Domino Effect
3. Success Leaves Clues
Part 1: The Lies
4. Everything Matters Equally
5. Multitasking
6. A Disciplined Life
7. Willpower Is Always on Will-Call
8. A Balanced Life
9. Big Is Bad
Part 2: The Truth
10. The Focusing Question
11. The Success Habit
12. The Path to Great Answers
Part 3: Extraordinary Results
13. Live with Purpose
14. Live by Priority
15. Live for Productivity
16. The Three Commitments
17. The Four Thieves
18. The Journey
Putting The ONE Thing to Work
On the Research
Index
Acknowledgments
About the Authors

Resources
Copyright

