The Origin of the 
Logic of Symbolic 
Mathematics
Edmund Husserl and Jacob Klein
Burt C. Hopkins

The Origin of the Logic 
of Symbolic Mathematics

Robert Bernasconi
Rudolph Bernet
John D. Caputo
David Carr
Edward S. Casey
Hubert Dreyfus
Don Ihde
David Farrell Krell
Lenore Langsdorf
Alphonso Lingis
William L. McBride
J. N. Mohanty
Mary Rawlinson
Tom Rockmore
Calvin O. Schrag
Reiner Schürmann
Charles E. Scott
Thomas Sheehan
Robert Sokolowski
Bruce W. Wilshire
Studies in Continental Thought
John Sallis, editor
Consulting Editors
David Wood
†

Indiana University Press
Bloomington and Indianapolis
The Origin of the 
Logic of Symbolic 
Mathematics
Edmund Husserl and Jacob Klein
Burt C. Hopkins

This book is a publication of
Indiana University Press
601 North Morton Street
Bloomington, Indiana 47404-3797 USA
iupress.indiana.edu
Telephone orders     800-842-6796
Fax orders     812-855-7931
Orders by e-mail     iuporder@indiana.edu
© 2011 by Burt Hopkins
Published with assistance from the Theiline Piggot McCone Chair in 
Humanities, the College of Arts & Sciences, Seattle University.
All rights reserved
No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying 
and recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, 
without permission in writing from the publisher. The Association of 
American University Presses’ Resolution on Permissions constitutes 
the only exception to this prohibition.
 The paper used in this publication meets the minimum 
requirements of the American National Standard for Information 
Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials,  
ANSI Z39.48-1992.
Manufactured in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hopkins, Burt C.
  The origin of the logic of symbolic mathematics :  
Edmund Husserl and Jacob Klein / Burt C. Hopkins.
       p. cm. — (Studies in continental thought)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-253-35671-0 (cloth : alk. paper) 
— ISBN 978-0-253-00527-4 (electronic book : alk. paper) 
1. Logic, Symbolic and mathematical. 2. Mathematics—Philosophy. 
I. Title. 
  QA9.H66 2011
  511.3—dc23
2011022942
1  2  3  4  5   16  15  14  13  12  11

Die Zeiten, in welche die Entstehung der Zahl- und Zahlzeichensysteme
fällt, kannten keine historische Überlieferung, und so ist den an eine Re-
produktion der historischen Entwicklung nicht zu denken. Gleichwohl
besitzen wir Anhaltspunkte genug . . . , um die psychologische Entwick-
lung derartiger Systembildungen a posteriori und doch in allen wesent -
lichen Punkten zutreffend zu rekonstruieren.
The periods within which the origination of number systems and num-
ber sign systems falls are unknown to any historical tradition. Therefore
there can be no thought of a reproduction of the historical development.
We nevertheless possess sufficient clues . . . in order to reconstruct the psy-
chological development of such systematic formations in an a posteriori
fashion that is still correct in all essential points.
— Edmund Husserl, Philosophy of Arithmetic (1891) 
Es kommt also darauf an, die Rezeption der griechischen Mathematik
im 16. Jahrh. nicht von ihren Ergebnissen aus zu beurteilen, sondern sie
sich in ihrem faktischen Vollzuge zu vergegenwärtigen.
Hence our object is not to evaluate the revival of Greek mathematics in
the sixteenth century in terms of its results retrospectively, but to rehearse
the actual course of its genesis prospectively.
— Jacob Klein, Greek Mathematical Thought and the 
Origin of Algebra (1934)
Gewiß ist die historische Rückbeziehung niemandem eingefallen; und
gewiß ist die Erkenntnistheorie nie als eine eigentümlich historische Auf-
gabe angesehen worden.
Certainly the historical backward reference [from present-day geomet-
rical knowledge to its genesis] has not occurred to anyone; certainly
theory of knowledge has never been seen as a peculiarly historical task.
— Edmund Husserl, “The Origin of Geometry” (1936)


Preface by Eva Brann
Acknowledgments
List of Abbreviations
Introduction. The Subject Matter, Thesis, and Structure of This Study
Part One. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and 
the History of Science
Chapter One. Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations of the Origination 
of Mathematical Physics
§ 1. The Problem of History in Husserl’s Last Writings
§ 2. The Priority of Klein’s Research on the Historical Origination of 
the Meaning of Mathematical Physics over Husserl’s
§ 3. The Importance of Husserl’s Last Writings for Understanding 
Klein’s Nontraditional Investigations of the History and 
Philosophy of Science
§ 4. Klein’s Commentary on Husserl’s Investigation of the History of 
the Origin of Modern Science
§ 5. The “Curious” Relation between Klein’s Historical Investigation of
Greek and Modern Mathematics and Husserl’s Phenomenology
Chapter Two. Klein’s Account of the Essential Connection between 
Intentional and Actual History
§ 6. The Problem of Origin and History in Husserl’s Phenomenology
§ 7. The Internal Motivation for Husserl’s Seemingly Late Turn to History
Chapter Three. The Liberation of the Problem of Origin from Its Natural -
istic Distortion: The Phenomenological Problem of Constitution
§ 8. Psychologism and the Problem of History
§ 9. Internal Temporality and the Problem of the Sedimented History 
of Significance
xxiii
xxix
xxxi
3
11
13
13
14
17
18
20
24
24
26
29
29
31
Contents

Chapter Four. The Essential Connection between Intentional and 
Actual History
§ 10. The Two Limits of the Investigation of the Temporal Genesis
Proper to the Intrinsic Possibility of the Intentional Object
§ 11. The Transcendental Constitution of an Identical Object 
Exceeds the Sedimented Genesis of Its Temporal Form
§ 12. The Distinction between the Sedimented History of 
the Immediate Presence of an Intentional Object and 
the Sedimented History of Its Original Presentation
Chapter Five. The Historicity of the Intelligibility of Ideal Significations
and the Possibility of Actual History
§ 13. The Problem of ‘Ιστορία underlying Husserl’s Concept of 
Intentional History
§ 14. Two Senses of Historicity and the Meaning of the Historical 
Apriori
§ 15. Historicity as Distinct from Both Historicism and 
the History of the Ego
Chapter Six. Sedimentation and the Link between Intentional History
and the Constitution of a Historical Tradition
§ 16. Maintaining the Integrity of Knowledge Requires Inquiry into 
Its Original Historical Discovery
§ 17. Two Presuppositions Are Necessary to Account for the 
Historicity of the Discovery of the Ideal Objects of a Science 
Such as Geometry
§ 18. Sedimentation and the Constitution of a Geometrical Tradition
§ 19. The Historical Apriori of Ideal Objects and Historical Facts
§ 20. The Historical Apriori Is Not a Concession to Historicism
Chapter Seven. Klein’s Departure from the Content but Not the Method
of Husserl’s Intentional-Historical Analysis of Modern Science
§ 21. The Contrast between Klein’s Account of the Actual Development
of Modern Science and Husserl’s Intentional Account
§ 22. Sedimentation and the Method of Symbolic Abstraction
§ 23. The Establishment of Modern Physics on the Foundation of 
a Radical Reinterpretation of Ancient Mathematics
§ 24. Vieta’s and Descartes’s Inauguration of the Development of the
Symbolic Science of Nature: Mathematical Physics
Contents
viii
33
33
35
38
41
41
42
43
46
46
48
49
51
53
55
55
57
58
59

§ 25. Open Questions in Klein’s Account of the Actual Development of
Modern Science
Part Two. Husserl and Klein on the Method and Task of 
Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
Chapter Eight. Klein’s Historical-Mathematical Investigations 
in the Context of Husserl’s Phenomenology of Science
§ 26. Summary of Part One
§ 27. Klein’s Failure to Refer to Husserl in Greek Mathematical 
Thought and the Origin of Algebra
§ 28. Critical Implications of Klein’s Historical Research for 
Husserl’s Phenomenology
Chapter Nine. The Basic Problem and Method of Klein’s Mathematical
Investigations
§ 29. Klein’s Account of the Limited Task of Recovering the Hidden
Sources of Modern Symbolic Mathematics
§ 30. Klein’s Motivation for the Radical Investigation of the Origins of 
Mathematical Physics
§ 31. The Conceptual Battleground on Which the Scholastic and 
the New Science Fought
Chapter Ten. Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of 
the Crisis of European Sciences
§ 32. Klein’s Uncanny Anticipation of Husserl’s Treatment of 
the Historical Origins of Scientific Concepts in the Crisis
§ 33. Historical Reference Back to Origins and the Crisis of 
Modern Science
§ 34. Husserl’s Reactivation of the Sedimented Origins of 
the Modern Spirit
§ 35. Husserl’s Fragmentary Analyses of the Sedimentation Responsible 
for the Formalized Meaning Formations of Modern Mathematics 
and Klein’s Inquiry into Their Origin and Conceptual Structure
Chapter Eleven. The “Zigzag” Movement Implicit in Klein’s 
Mathematical Investigations
§ 36. The Structure of Klein’s Method of Historical Reflection in Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra
Contents
ix
61
65
67
67
69
72
75
75
77
80
83
83
83
89
94
95
95

Chapter Twelve. Husserl and Klein on the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
§ 37. Husserl’s Systematic Attempt to Ground the Symbolic Concept of
Number in the Concept of Anzahl
§ 38. Klein on the Transformation of the Ancient Concept of ’Aριθμός
(Anzahl) into the Modern Concept of Symbolic Number
§ 39. Transition to Part Three of This Study
Part Three. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers 
in Husserl and Klein
Chapter Thirteen. Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl’s 
Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 40. The Shortcomings of Philosophy of Arithmetic and Our Basic 
Concern
§ 41. Husserl on the Authentic Concepts of Multiplicity and Cardinal 
Number Concepts, and Inauthentic (Symbolic) Number 
Concepts
§ 42. The Basic Logical Problem in Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 43. The Fundamental Shift in Husserl’s Account of Calculational 
Technique
§ 44. Husserl’s Account of the Logical Requirements behind Both 
Calculational Technique and Symbolic Numbers
§ 45. Husserl’s Psychological Account of the Logical Whole Proper to 
the Concept of Multiplicity and Authentic Cardinal Number 
Concepts
§ 46. Husserl on the Psychological Basis for Symbolic Numbers and 
Logical Technique
§ 47. Husserl on the Symbolic Presentation of Multitudes
§ 48. Husserl on the Psychological Presentation of Symbolic Numbers
§ 49. Husserl on the Symbolic Presentation of the Systematic 
Construction of New Number Concepts and Their Designation
§ 50. The Fundamental Shift in the Logic of Symbolic Numbers 
Brought about by the Independence of Signitively Symbolic 
Numbers
§ 51. The Unresolved Question of the Logical Foundation for 
Signitively Symbolic Numbers
§ 52. Summary and Conclusion
Contents
x
99
99
100
101
103
105
105
109
110
112
118
119
122
122
127
136
138
140
145

Chapter Fourteen. Klein’s Desedimentation of the Origin of Algebra and
Husserl’s Failure to Ground Symbolic Calculation in Authentic
Numbers
§ 53. Implications of Klein’s Desedimentation of the Origin of Algebra
for Husserl’s Analyses of the Concept Proper to Number in 
Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 54. Klein’s Desedimentation of the Two Salient Features of 
the Foundations of Greek Mathematics
Chapter Fifteen. Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics
and in Plato
§ 55. The Opposition between Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic
Thought
§ 56. Logistic and Arithmetic in Plato
§ 57. Tensions and Issues Surrounding the Role of the Theory of 
Proportions in Nicomachus, Theon, and Domninus
Chapter Sixteen. Theoretical Logistic and the Problem of Fractions
§ 58. The Ambiguous Relationship between Logistic and Arithmetic in
Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
§ 59. The Obstacle Presented by Fractions to Plato’s Demand for 
a Theoretical Logistic 
Chapter Seventeen. The Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
§ 60. The Connection between Neoplatonic Mathematics and Plato’s
Ontology
§ 61. Counting as the Fundamental Phenomenon Determining 
the Meaning of ᾿Αριθμός
§ 62. “Pure” ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 63. Why Greek Theoretical Arithmetic and Logistic Did Not 
Directly Study ᾿Αριθμοί
Chapter Eighteen. Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 64. The Interdependence of Greek Mathematics and Greek Ontology
§ 65. The Pythagorean Context of Plato’s Philosophy
§ 66. Plato’s Departure from Pythagorean Science: The Fundamental 
Role of ᾿Αριθμοί of Pure Monads
§ 67. Διάνοια as the Soul’s Initial Mode of Access to Νοητά
§ 68. The Limits Inherent in the Dianoetic Mode of Access to Νοητά
Contents
xi
149
149
151
154
154
157
162
169
169
171
175
175
176
178
181
185
185
186
190
192
195

Chapter Nineteen. Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s Theory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ
Εἰδητικοί
§ 69. The Inability of Mathematical Thought to Account for the Mode
of Being of Its Objects
§ 70. The Curious Kind of Κοινωνία Manifest in ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 71. The Κοινωνία Exemplified by ᾿Αριθμοί as the Key to Solving 
the Problem of Μέθεξις
§ 72. The Κοινωνία Exemplified by ᾿Αριθμοί Contains the Clue to 
the “Mixing” of Being and Non-being in the Image
§ 73. Partial Clarification of the Aporia of Being and Non-being 
Holds the Key to the “Arithmetical” Structure of the Νοητόν’s
Mode of Being
§ 74. The Κοινωνία among ῎Ον, Κίνησις, and Στάσις Composes 
the Relationship of Being and Non-being
§ 75. The Contrast between ᾿Αριθμοὶ Μαθηματικοί and ᾿Αριθμοὶ
Εἰδητικοί
§ 76. The Foundational Function of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
§ 77. The Order of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί Provides the Foundation for 
Both the Sequence of Mathematical ᾿Αριθμοί and the Relation of
Family Descent between Higher and Lower Γένη
§ 78. The Inability of the Λόγος to “Count” the Μέγιστα Γένη Points to
Its Limits and Simultaneously Presents the First ᾿Αριθμὸς Εἰδητικός
§ 79. Θάτερον as the “Twofold in General” Allows for the Articulation 
of Being and Non-being
§ 80. Recognizing “the Other” as the “Indeterminate Dyad”
§ 81. The “One Itself ” as the Source of the Generation of ᾿Αριθμοὶ
Εἰδητικοί
§ 82. Γένη as ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί Provide the Foundation of an Eidetic 
Logistic
§ 83. Plato’s Postulate of the Separation of All Noetic Formations 
Renders Incomprehensible the Ordinary Mode of Predication
Chapter Twenty. Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos Thesis 
and the Possibility of a Theoretical Logistic
§ 84. Point of Departure and Overview of Aristotle’s Critique
§ 85. Aristotle’s Problematic: Harmonizing the Ontological 
Dependence of ᾿Αριθμοί with Their Pure Noetic Quality
§ 86. Aristotle on the Abstractive Mode of Being of Mathematical 
Objects
Contents
xii
198
198
199
200
201
203
206
207
209
212
214
215
217
219
221
223
226
226
227
228

§ 87. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of the Non-generic Unity 
of ᾿Αριθμός
§ 88. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of the Unity of ᾿Αριθμός as
Common Measure
§ 89. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of the Indivisibility and 
Exactness of “Pure” ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 90. The Influence of Aristotle’s View of Μαθηματικά on Theoretical
Arithmetic
§ 91. Aristotle’s Ontological Conception of ᾿ΑριθμοίMakes Possible
Theoretical Logistic
Chapter Twenty-one. Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
§ 92. Access to Diophantus’s Work Requires Reinterpreting It outside 
the Context of Mathematics’ Self-interpretation since Vieta, 
Stevin, and Descartes
§ 93. Diophantus’s Arithmetic as Theoretical Logistic
§ 94. The Referent and Operative Mode of Being of Diophantus’s 
Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
§ 95. The Ultimate Determinacy of Diophantus’s Concept of Unknown
and Indeterminate ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 96. The Merely Instrumental, and Therefore Non-ontological and 
Non-symbolic, Status of the Εἶδος-Concept in Diophantus’s 
Calculations
Chapter Twenty-two. Klein’s Account of Vieta’s Reinterpretation of 
the Diophantine Procedure and the Consequent Establishment 
of Algebra as the General Analytical Art
§ 97. The Significance of Vieta’s Generalization of the Εἶδος-Concept 
and Its Transformation into the Symbolic Concept of Species
§ 98. The Sedimentation of the Ancient Practical Distinction between
‘Saying’ and ‘Thinking’ in the Symbolic Notation Inseparable 
from Vieta’s Concept of Number 
§ 99. The Decisive Difference between Vieta’s Conception of a 
“General” Mathematical Discipline and the Ancient Idea of a
Καθόλου Πραγματεία
§ 100. The Occlusion of the Ancient Connection between the Theme 
of General Mathematics and the Foundational Concerns of the
“Supreme” Science That Results from the Modern Understanding 
of Vieta’s “Analytical Art” as Mathesis Universalis
§ 101. Vieta’s Ambiguous Relation to Ancient Greek Mathematics
Contents
xiii
230
232
233
234
236
237
237
241
244
247
250
254
254
255
258
261
267

§ 102. Vieta’s Comparison of Ancient Geometrical Analysis with 
the Diophantine Procedure 
§ 103. Vieta’s Transformation of the Diophantine Procedure
§ 104. The Auxiliary Status of Vieta’s Employment of the “General 
Analytic”
§ 105. The Influence of the General Theory of Proportions on Vieta’s
“Pure,” “General” Algebra
§ 106. Klein’s Desedimentation of the Conceptual Presuppositions 
Belonging to Vieta’s Interpretation of Diophantine Logistic
Chapter Twenty-three. Klein’s Account of the Concept of Number 
and the Number Concepts in Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
§ 107. Stevin’s Idea of a “Wise Age” and His Project for Its Renewal
§ 108. Stevin’s Critique of the Traditional ᾿Αριθμός-Concept
§ 109. Stevin’s Symbolic Understanding of Numerus
§ 110. Stevin’s Assimilation of Numbers to Geometrical Formations
§ 111. Descartes’s Postulation of a New Mode of “Abstraction” and 
a New Possibility of “Understanding” as Underlying Symbolic 
Calculation
§ 112. The Fundamental Cognitive Role Attributed by Descartes to 
the Imaginatio
§ 113. Descartes on the Pure Intellect’s Use of the Power of the Imagina-
tion to Reconcile the Mathematical Problem of Determinacy and
Indeterminacy
§ 114. Klein’s Reactivation of the “Abstraction” in Descartes as 
“Symbolic Abstraction”
§ 115. Klein’s Use of the Scholastic Distinction between “First and 
Second Intentions” to Fix Conceptually the Status of Descartes’s
Symbolic Concepts
§ 116. Descartes on the Non-metaphorical Reception by the Imagination
of the Extension of Bodies as Bridging the Gap between 
Non-determinate and Determinate Magnitudes
§ 117. Wallis’s Completion of the Introduction of the New Number 
Concept
§ 118. Wallis’s Initial Account of the Unit Both as the Principle of 
Number and as Itself a Number
§ 119. Wallis’s Account of the Nought as Also the Principle of Number
§ 120. Wallis’s Emphasis on the Arithmetical Status of the Symbol or
Species of the “General Analytic”
Contents
xiv
269
274
277
281
282
294
294
296
297
298
301
302
305
306
310
313
316
317
319
320

§ 121. The Homogeneity of Algebraic Numbers as Rooted for Wallis in
the Unity of the Sign Character of Their Symbols
§ 122. Wallis’s Understanding of Algebraic Numbers as Symbolically 
Conceived Ratios
Part Four. Husserl and Klein on the Origination of the Logic 
of Symbolic Mathematics
Chapter Twenty-four. Husserl and Klein on the Fundamental Difference
between Symbolic and Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 123. Klein’s Critical Appropriation of Husserl’s Crisis Seen within the
Context of the Results of Klein’s Investigation of the Origin of 
Algebra
§ 124. Husserl and Klein on the Difference between Non-symbolic and
Symbolic Numbers
§ 125. Husserl on the Authentic Cardinal Number Concept and Klein 
on the Greek ᾿Αριθμός-Concept
Chapter Twenty-five. Husserl and Klein on the Origin and Structure of
Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 126. Husserl’s Appeal to Acts of Collective Combination to Account 
for the Unity of the Whole of Each Authentic Cardinal Number
§ 127. Husserl’s Appeal to Psychological Experience to Account for 
the Origin of the Categorial Unity Belonging to the Concept of 
‘Anything’ Characteristic of the Units Proper to Multiplicities 
and Cardinal Numbers
§ 128. The Decisive Contrast between Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts of
the Being of the Units in Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 129. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Purity of Mathematical ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 130. Klein on Plato’s Account of the “Being One” of Each Mathematical
᾿Αριθμός as Different from the “Being One” of Mathematical 
“Monads”
§ 131. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Non-mathematical Unity 
Responsible for the “Being One” of the Whole Belonging to 
Each ᾿Αριθμός
§ 132. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Solution Provided by ᾿Αριθμοὶ
Εἰδητικοί to the Aporias Raised by ᾿Αριθμοὶ Μαθηματικοί
§ 133. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Inseparable Mode of the Being
of ᾿Αριθμοί from Sensible Beings
§ 134. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Abstracted Mode of Being of
Mathematical Objects
Contents
xv
322
324
327
329
329
330
334
337
337
338
340
342
342
344
346
348
349

§ 135. Klein on Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Solution to 
the Problem of the Unity of an ᾿Αριθμός-Assemblage
§ 136. Klein on Aristotle’s Answer to the Question of the Unity 
Belonging to ᾿Αριθμός
§ 137. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Origination of the Μονάς as
Measure
Chapter Twenty-six. Structural Differences in Husserl’s and Klein’s 
Accounts of the Mode of Being of Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 138. The Different Accounts of the Mode of Being of the “One” in
Husserl, Plato, and Aristotle
§ 139. The Different Accounts of the “Being One” and Ordered 
Sequence Characteristic of the Wholes Composing Non-
symbolic Numbers in Husserl, Plato, and Aristotle
§ 140. The Different Accounts of the Conditions Responsible for the
Scope of the Intelligibility of Non-symbolic Numbers in Husserl,
Plato, and Aristotle
§ 141. The Structural Differences between Husserl’s and Klein’s 
Accounts of the Mode of Being of Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 142. The Divergence in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts of Non-
symbolic Numbers
Chapter Twenty-seven. Digression: The Development of Husserl’s
Thought, after Philosophy of Arithmetic, on the “Logical” Status of
the Symbolic Calculus, the Constitution of Collective Unity, and
the Phenomenological Foundation of the Mathesis Universalis
§ 143. The Need to Revisit the “Standard View” of the Development of
Husserl’s Thought
Chapter Twenty-eight. Husserl’s Accounts of the Symbolic Calculus, the
Critique of Psychologism, and the Phenomenological Foundation
of the Mathesis Universalis after Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 144. Husserl’s Account of the Symbolic Calculus after Philosophy of
Arithmetic
§ 145. Husserl’s Critique of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s Psychologism
§ 146. Husserl’s Account of the Phenomenological Foundation of the
Mathesis Universalis
Chapter Twenty-nine. Husserl’s Critique of Symbolic Calculation in his
Schröder Review
Contents
xvi
350
351
352
354
354
355
356
357
358
362
362
364
364
367
369
372

§ 147. The Applicability to Mathematics of Husserl’s Critique of 
the Symbolic Calculational Technique in Logic 
§ 148. The Two Foci of Husserl’s Schröder Review: Calculus Is Not 
Deduction and Extensional Logic Is Part of Intensional Logic
§ 149. The Calculus of Pure Deduction is Neither Deduction per se 
Nor Its Logic
§ 150. Extensional Logic’s Subordination to Intensional Logic
Chapter Thirty. The Separation of Logic from Symbolic Calculation in
Husserl’s Later Works
§ 151. The Contrast of the Schröder Review’s Separation of Logic from
Symbolic Calculation with Their Status in Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 152. The Consistency of the Crisis and the Schröder Review 
regarding Symbolic Calculation
§ 153. The Consistency of Formal and Transcendental Logic and the
Schröder Review regarding Symbolic Calculation
§ 154. The Consistency of the Logical Investigations with the Schröder 
Review’s Framework for Addressing Symbolic Calculation
§ 155. Husserl’s Pre-phenomenological Appraisal of Merely Symbolic
Thinking Precludes His Phenomenology from Pursuing Questions
regarding the Essence and Logical Justification of the Calculative
Method 
§ 156. Husserl’s Account of the Doubly Derivative Meaning of the Formal
Nature of the Calculational Procedure Determinative of the 
Symbolic Calculus 
§ 157. Characterization of the Reference to the Empty Universe ‘Any 
Object Whatever’ of the Elements Belonging to Multitudes and
the Units Belonging to Number
Chapter Thirty-one. Husserl on the Shortcomings of the Appeal to the
“Reflexion” on Acts to Account for the Origin of Logical 
Relations in the Works Leading up to the Logical Investigations
§ 158. The Concept of Cardinal Number Is Essentially Different from 
the Concept of Collecting
§ 159. The Loss of the Contrast between Mathematically Collective 
Unity and Logically Categorial Unity in Husserl’s Critical 
Response to Psychologism
§ 160. Husserl’s “Separation” of Logic and Mathematics from 
Psychologism
Contents
xvii
372
373
374
376
378
378
379
380
381
382
383
384
386
386
387
388

§ 161. Husserl and the Systematic Development of the Mathesis 
Universalis
§ 162. Husserl’s Idea of Pure Logic and the Task of Working out the 
Theoretical Relationship between Formal Mathematics and 
Formal Logic
Chapter Thirty-two. Husserl’s Attempt in the Logical Investigations to 
Establish a Relationship between “Mere” Thought and the “In 
Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity by Appealing to Concrete, 
Universal, and Formalizing Modes of Abstraction and 
Categorial Intuition
§ 163. Husserl’s Account in the Logical Investigations of the Fulfillment 
of Signification Categories in Formal Objective Categories: 
Categorial Intuition
§ 164. Formal Categories Comprising the “State of Affairs” Are Not in
Acts of Judgment as Objects of Reflexion But Are the Objects of
These Acts
§ 165. Different Abstractive Modes of Categorial Intuition: Concrete 
and Universal Intuition of Categories
§ 166. Husserl’s Admission That Neither Concrete Nor Universal 
Categorial Intuition Is Independent of All Sensible Relations
§ 167. Formalizing Abstraction as Distinct from Both Abstraction as 
Emphasis on Non-independent Moments and Ideating 
Abstraction
§168. The Categorial Distinction between Synthetic Forms of 
Collectiva and States of Affairs
§169. The Unity of the Collection as Such Is Neither Isomorphic 
Nor Homologous with the Unity of the State of Affairs
§170. The Contrast between Straightforward Perceptions of Sensuously
Unified Multitudes and Authentic Intuitions of the Collection as
Such 
§ 171. The Radical Departure of the Logical Investigations from 
Philosophy of Arithmetic’s Account of Number as the 
Delimitation of an Indeterminate Plurality of Units
§ 172. Husserl’s Account of “Absolute” Numbers Leaves Unanswered 
the Question of Whether Either Kind of Abstract Number 
Has the Status of a Formal Collection
Chapter Thirty-three. Husserl’s Account of the Constitution of 
the Collection, Number, and the ‘Universal Whatever’ in 
Experience and Judgment
Contents
xviii
389
390
392
392
395
396
397
399
400
402
404
405
407
412

§ 173. The “Turning of the Regard” to Grasp the Collection as One
Object
§ 174. The Proximity of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s Psychologism to 
Experience and Judgment’s Account of the Objective Constitution 
of the Collection
§ 175. Experience and Judgment’s Incomplete Account of the Constitution
of Cardinal Numbers
§ 176. The Original Givenness of the ‘Universal Whatever’
§ 177. The Representational Function of the Particular Judgment 
Form ‘Something or Other’ to Bring About Universality Is Not 
Fundamentally Different from the Account in Philosophy of 
Arithmetic of How a Sensuously Unified Multitude Arises
§ 178. Sum and Substance of Husserl’s Accounts of the Unity of 
Indeterminate and Determinate Collections and the ‘Anything 
Whatever’ between Philosophy of Arithmetic and Formal and 
Transcendental Logic
Chapter Thirty-four. Husserl’s Investigation of the Unitary Domain of
Formal Logic and Formal Ontology in Formal and Transcendental
Logic
§ 179. The Focus in Formal and Transcendental Logic on the Relationship
between Formal Ontology and Apophantic Logic
§ 180. Modern Logic and Mathematics Are United by the Formalization 
of Their Relation to Reality
§ 181. The Concept of a Singular Mathematical Manifold and 
the Most Universal Idea of a Theory of Manifolds
§ 182. The Idea of a Theory of Manifolds, as the Form of a Deductive 
Theory, Is “Naturally” Founded on the Categorial Concepts 
Belonging to the Lower Level of Deductive Theories
§ 183. The Categorial Unity of the Collection Itself and the Origination 
of the Form-Concept ‘Any Object Whatever’ Are Relevant to 
the Task of Accounting for the Relationship between Formal 
Apophantics and Formal Ontology
§ 184. The Transition to the Critical Attitude in §§ 44–45 of Formal 
and Transcendental Logic Does Not Account for the Unity of 
Formal Ontology and Formal Apophantics
§ 185. The Analyses in §§ 44–45 of the Transition to the Critical 
Attitude and the Emergence of the Broader and Narrower 
Concepts of Judgment
§ 186. Critical Elaboration of §§ 44–45: The Absence of a Simple Opposi-
Contents
xix
412
414
424
427
429
430
434
434
437
439
441
442
447
449

tion between Straightforward and Critical Foci Precludes 
Phenomenological Clarification of the Shift from Formal 
Ontology to Formal Apophantics 
§ 187. The Unitary Province of Formal Logic and Formal Mathematics
and Their Epistemological Distinction Is Not Resolved by the 
Account of the Alternation between the Attitude of Straight-
forward Judging and That of Supposed Judging as Supposed
§ 188. Logical Psychologism, Husserl’s Logical and Phenomenological
Idealism, and His Failure in Formal and Transcendental Logic to 
Address the Distinction between the Ontic Meaning Proper to 
the Irrealities of Collective and Non-collective Categorial Unity
§ 189. The Formal-Ontological Validity of Formalized Meaning 
Categories Leads Back to a Possible Individual Whatever or 
a Possible Experience
§ 190. The Meaning Relation of Formal (Analytical) Categories to 
Individuals Is Based Not on Phenomenological Analysis 
But on an Ontological Argument
§ 191. The Extension of Formal Analytics’ Epistemological Investigations
to Evidence and Experience and Therefore to Transcendental Logic 
§ 192. The Extension of Both Material and Formal Logical Universalities 
Bears a Relation to Individuals; the Priority of Individual Judgment
§ 193. Phenomenological Backward Reference to the Genesis of 
Judgment Meanings and Judgments
§ 194. The Phenomenological Priority of Objectivities Giving Themselves
over All Other Modes of Consciousness; Genetically Secondary
Empty Consciousness
§ 195. Husserl’s Analyses Do Not Present the Phenomenology of the 
Constitution of the Ideal Existence of the Judgment Content as 
a Formal Universality
§ 196. Husserl’s Phenomenological Theory of Judgment Does Not 
Address the Origin of the Process of Formalization Responsible 
for the “Algebraization” of the Cores of Formal Logical Judgment
Meanings
§ 197. Husserl’s Thesis of the Independence of Formal Judgment and 
Ultimate Formal Structures from Algebraization and the Symbolic
Indication of the Ultimate Members of Different Propositions
§ 198. The Non-self-sufficiency of the Ultimate Members of a Proposi-
tion. The Non-algebraic Ground of the Identity of Propositional
Contents
Contents
xx
451
461
465
475
477
478
480
482
483
484
485
486
488

Chapter Thirty-five. Klein and Husserl on the Origination of the Logic of
Symbolic Numbers
§ 199. Overview
§ 200. Klein on Vieta’s Identification of the Species of Number with
Quantity in General
§ 201. Klein on Stevin’s Identification of the Mode of Being of Number
with the Concept of Number
§ 202. Klein on Descartes’s Algebraic Reformulation of Geometry as 
the Mathesis Universalis
§ 203. Klein on Wallis’s Subordination of Geometry to Symbolic 
Arithmetic in the Mathesis Universalis
§ 204. Klein’s Account of the Origination of the Logic of Symbolic 
Mathematics
§ 205. Husserl’s Account of the Origination of the Logic of Symbolic
Mathematics
Chapter Thirty-six. Conclusion
§ 206. Klein’s de facto Completion of Husserl’s Crisis
§ 207. Desedimentation of the Formalization Constitutive of the Formal
Concept ‘Magnitude in General’
§ 208. Desedimentation of the Historicity of the Origin of Formalization
from the Pregiven Life-world
Coda: Husserl’s “Platonism” within the Context of Plato’s Own Platonism 
Glossary of Greek and German Terms
Bibliography
Index of Names
Index of Subjects
Contents
xxi
491
491
493
497
499
504
507
511
517
517
518
531
538
541
545
553
555


Preface
Jacob Klein’s foundational work on the roots of modernity could not have
been more fortunate in its first comprehensive expositor and interpreter. Burt
Hopkins lays out its argument, which is as intricate as it is bold, with dis-
cerning precision and sympathetic acuity. It is actuated by the judgment that
he is explicating one of the philosophical masterpieces of the twentieth cen-
tury (§ 208).
At the time I translated Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin
of Algebra some forty years ago, I had felt its force and appreciated its com-
plexity sufficiently to achieve a passable rendering. But it was not until I read
and reread the book which is before you that I began to apprehend Klein’s
faithful originality. I mean his ingenious yet unforced use of sources. The
translation has had a favorable publication history. The MIT Press first
brought it out in 1968, and Dover reprinted it in 1992, effectively giving
Klein’s work the status of a classic. 
Nevertheless, though mentioned increasingly often in the scholarly lit-
erature on Plato, Descartes, and the philosophy of mathematics, it was not al-
together well understood, as Hopkins’s detailed critical footnotes show. Not
that the various treatments were grossly mistaken, but that the fine points—
and in this undertaking the devil is in the details—had not been carefully
enough considered. Moreover, the significant relation to Husserl’s work on
arithmetic had not been worked out. 
Hopkins, following up the “scholarly curiosity” of Klein’s silence about
Husserl’s theories of intentionality and symbolic thinking, shows that Klein
had indeed in some respects anticipated and corrected before the fact, as it
were, Husserl’s analysis of the concept of number in particular and of the con-
ceptual presuppositions of modern science in general. What Hopkins does is
to set out in detail how Klein’s analysis undercuts Husserl’s basic assumption
that modern mathematical thinking must be understood from the perspec-
tive of direct experience. Yet he also shows that Klein’s investigation is in fact
a large-scale actualization of Husserl’s historical method (§ 28).

This demonstration does far more than establish priorities (which
would have been of the least imaginable interest to Klein himself). It is, in its
penetrating meticulousness, an invaluable introduction to Husserl’s defining
works. Moreover, the very closeness of Hopkins’s critical treatment serves to
bring out Husserl’s human probity and philosophical depth, the fundamen-
tal well-directedness of his search for the nature of the modern scientific
achievement, and the cognitive crisis it has brought in its train.
Certainly in 1966 I had no clear notion of the explanatory force re-
siding in the kind of history sketched out by one man and actually pursued
by the other, an enterprise totally different from the crude historicism then
quite prevalent in the academy, according to which all the works of thought
were simply attributed to the spirit of the times.
I will not preempt Hopkins’s careful delineations of Husserl’s “inten-
tional history,” except to say that it enjoins on the historian one chief task, that
of “desedimentation” and, as Hopkins says, “reactivation.” These terms refer
to the scraping away of the accumulated strata of tradition and the reani-
mating recollection of the thinking that had been skewed, superseded, and
“ruptured” at crucial moments, but had remained embalmed—one might
say, semi-consciously preserved—within those modern concepts that are so
effective precisely because the burden of their origin is ignored.
It seems to me now a major finding that the revolution in the concep-
tuality of “number” both marked and characterized the inception of moder-
nity. I say ‘conceptuality’—as opposed to ‘concept’—advisedly. Such abstract
“second-intentional” terminology (see below) was deeply, even passionately
repugnant to Klein; it was the personal consequence of his studies. Yet the
revolution in question was not about this or that individual notion, but about
the mode of concept-formation itself, which is properly called ‘conceptuality’.
The much abused word ‘revolution’ is also in order: Although long in prepa-
ration, the new number concept came abruptly upon the world, its prime
agent being Vieta (§ 101), its clarifier Descartes (§ 111), and its finalizer Wal-
lis (§ 117). Moreover, number was not only an emblem of the new order of
the age, meaning that the way of conceiving that produced it showed up in
non-mathematical theorizing, but also perhaps the moderns’ most powerful
tool. For it was algebra, the first, powerful fruit of the new conceptualizing,
that made analytic natural science possible.
The desedimentation of our concept of number, while a work of
philosophical inquiry, required large scholarly means: the ability to deal di-
rectly with sources in ancient and modern languages, because translations
tend to the heedless use of merely apparent modern equivalents; some com-
petence in ancient and early modern mathematics, which, though elemen-
Preface
xxiv

tary, uses notation that is at once obsolete and significant; and a willingness
to let the sources speak for themselves. 
What this desedimenation, this philosophical archaeology, recovered,
then, were the foundation stones of our modernity, and with them a proper
estimation of the huge gain in efficacy and the great loss in immediacy that
comes—to state the prime thesis summarily—with ceasing to think of the
objects of mathematics and nature in the ancient mode—namely, directly—
as things that come to us through the senses or as ideal beings discerned by
intellect, and endeavoring instead, in the mode definitive of modernity, to
operate with “symbols,” understood as signs designating the derivative prod-
ucts of abstract reasoning but now deliberately used as if they themselves were
primary things.1 This seems to be an interpretation, at once potent and plau-
sible, of our condition, our life as it is affected by modern science, which takes
nature, including human nature, as mathematicizable, not primarily by means
of the beautifully figurative geometry of the ancient astronomers but by the
powerfully symbolic non-figurative algebra of the modern physicists. 
It was not until I read Hopkins’s book, however, that Klein’s reach in
delineating the moderns’ renunciation of direct apprehension and imagina-
tive concreteness in favor of manipulative facility and lawful generality came
home to me with much distinctness.
Those just embarking on this study might be interested in a brief ac-
count of the situation in which I produced the translation that made Klein’s
work accessible in America under the title of Greek Mathematical Thought
and the Origin of Algebra. I had been told by Seth Benardete, whom I suc-
ceeded at St. John’s College in Annapolis in 1957, that, if I wanted to un-
derstand the intellectual basis of the Program then and now pursued at the
school I was about to join, I must read Klein’s “Die Griechische Logistik und
die Entstehung der Algebra,” published in two parts in 1934 and 1936, but
even after the war scarcely available in this country. His advice was to the
point. The St. John’s Program is, as it were, an elementary preparation for the
kind of “intentional history” realized in Klein’s book. All students learn some
Greek and French, study first ancient and then analytical geometry, read in
Preface
xxv
——————
1. The new “analytical art,” algebra, used these symbols in equations that were based on
an adaptation of the ancient proof-method called “analysis,” that is to say, “backward solution.”
The proof began by assuming the solutions sought and working back through the consequences
to something admitted as true. In the modern adaptation, the unknowns (now symbolized as
x, y, . . .) are involved in an equation on an equal footing with the knowns (a, b, . . .); thus, a ma-
nipulation that isolates the unknown on one side easily yields the solution in terms of the
knowns on the other. The above renders, in simplified form, the outcome of a complex devel-
opment in which by intricate stages the symbolic terms and the analytic method grow together
and in which Vieta played the decisive role (§§ 97–106).

ancient and modern physics, replicate experiments—and do all this mostly
through original texts: Euclid, Apollonius, Descartes, Newton, Einstein. All
these studies are to be in aid of seminar discussions based on wide, chrono-
logically arranged readings in the philosophical and literary tradition of the
West. Moreover, the Program clearly has as one crux the early modern “Quar-
rel between the Ancients and the Moderns”; its problematic is welcomed as
an issue for the students. 
As for myself, I was German-speaking by birth, had studied classics and
archaeology before I came to St. John’s, and had worked my way through the
mathematics part of the Program, from Euclid’s Elements through Descartes’s
analytical geometry to Lobachevsky’s Theory of Parallels, since teachers are
expected to teach everything that students study in this all-required Program.
So I was at least minimally prepared to tackle so immensely learned a book. 
The rub was in Klein’s willingness. The finding of the college had been
doubly serendipitous for him: as a haven from the Nazis and as a place seem-
ingly ready-made for his preoccupations. The Program indeed antedated his
coming and what hand he had in it was mostly that of providing, ex post facto,
its philosophical rationale. What really won his heart about the school was
that it made the perfect venue for his pedagogic genius, whose exercise in Eu-
rope, where he had been a private scholar, was limited. The unabashed do-it-
yourself directness encouraged in these naively intelligent American youths
and their forthright, unmediated confrontation with the original texts were
deeply congenial to him, as were they themselves. He began to regard the
eliciting of thought from the young as more valuable than the production of
scholarly books. This distancing of his own activity from the scholarly mode
shows up in the “Author’s Note” to the translation. Here he says that he would
now have written in a less scholarly vocabulary and have taken a wider per-
spective on the change from the ancient to the modern mode of thinking. 
He went further: he had a positive aversion to publishing. Since bring-
ing alive texts, and particularly the Platonic dialogs, was a mission for him
and for the school, I am persuaded that he was simply living out the attack
on writing mounted in Plato’s Phaedrus: “because those who put trust in
writing recollect from the outside with foreign signs rather than themselves
recollecting from within by themselves” (275a). This frame of mind may
partly account for the second “scholarly curiosity” Hopkins observes: that
Klein never explicitly refers to Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin
of Algebra in his American lectures.2
Preface
xxvi
——————
2. Perhaps his reluctance also had a little to do with an unfortunate earlier attempt at
translation. The clueless young man had produced a title page—I saw it with my own eyes—

At any rate, my proposal to translate the work found so little encour-
agement that I set about the task surreptitiously, over the course of a year.
When the thing was done, I had, of course, to bring my midnight labors to
his notice so that I could ask the dozens of questions I had accumulated.3 He
quickly forgave my unauthorized activity and became, in fact, quite inter-
ested in the book’s publication. 
It is not entirely implausible that Klein’s Origin of Algebra might, for all
its scholarship, eventually play a role in the ever-current effort to revivify the
liberal arts in American higher education. It is, after all, itself an example of
the kind of inquiry that can be carried out only on the basis of broad liberal
learning that unites language studies, ancient and modern, as well as mathe-
matics and science with the discipline of letting the textual sources speak for
themselves. Moreover, it is a model of the value of such learning to us, now,
in achieving self-knowledge and self-orientation in our own speech.
If Klein had written an American version purged of scholarly termi-
nology and the book’s first expositor had simplified its argument, the influ-
 ence of the work might have been more immediate and wider. Yet the
illumination and conviction that arise from the meticulous detail of the ar-
gument would have been lost. It seems fortunate that Klein desisted and that
Hopkins explicates Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra
paragraph by paragraph, preserving the cumulative continuum that consti-
tutes the stream of intentional history. 
Since it is the history of a rupture—the transformation of arithmos, a
counted assemblage of definite objects, be they sensible things or pure mon-
ads, into “number,” a symbol signifying magnitude in general and designed to
be involved in an equation (§§ 99–100)—the work has its high point. It oc-
curs, or so it seems to me, in its second part, where the transition to the mod-
ern mode of concept-formation is treated.4Klein borrows the scholastic notion
of intentionality to characterize the two-step operation by which Descartes
Preface
xxvii
——————
to a book whose author was one “Jake Little.” (Jacob Klein, a Russian Jew, was, incidentally,
universally known as “Jasha.”)
3. There is only one change of interest in the English version. ‘Symbol-generating ab-
straction’ is, of course, a key term. The German phrase was ‘symbolic abstraction’. This, I ar-
gued, was at best ambiguous. “Abstraction” is a mode of conceptualization, the production
by the intending mind of a derivative new object, the symbol, but “abstraction” is obviously
not itself symbolic; Klein welcomed the new term.
4. There is, I think, a high point in the first, ancient part as well. It is Klein’s interpre-
tation, by way of establishing the concept of arithmos, of Aristotle’s brief report that the Pla-
tonic forms (eide) were organized in arithmological assemblages (eidetic arithmoi) and were
thus themselves number-like: unique assemblages of incomparable monads—a bold contra-
diction in ordinary terms (§§ 69–83). Klein’s theory gives substantial clues to the structure of
the Platonic forms individually and as a realm.

finally establishes the new concept of symbolic number with full clarity. The
intellect first operates on an object given directly and primarily, an object of
“first intention” (in this instance, a definite amount of definite units), to con-
vert it into an abstract concept, a being of thought or of “second intention”
(now a “mere” indeterminate multitude). In a second operation, performed
not by the intellect but by the imagination, this derivative abstraction is in turn
represented as primary in the form of an algebraic symbol (§§ 106, 111–15). 
The recovery of the conceptual history of symbolic number, which
leads to a coherent understanding of the mainstay of modern mathematics
and mathematical science, is, as Hopkins shows, absent in Husserl’s work,
even from his later self-corrections. The last part of Hopkins’s book is, con-
sequently, largely devoted to establishing this case. Here, too, it is the detail
that leads to depth, but I might venture a summary: While for Husserl the
logical operations of symbolic mathematics work on an ultimately alien ob-
ject opaquely abstracted or generalized from a perception-based counted col-
lection (Anzahl), for Klein this object, symbolic number (Zahl), is intimately
related to its method of calculation by that “symbol-generating abstraction”
which produces a symbol that is then conceived as an actual object. 
Jacob Klein often indicated that this result, the recovery of a new type
of conceptualization, had the widest significance for the understanding of
modernity, one of whose deepest features was the sometimes deliberate, more
often thoughtless, choice of subjective construction over given object.5 One
might think that these arcana could scarcely bear so much real-life signifi-
cance, but Husserl and Klein clearly agree on this matter, and Hopkins is
working entirely in their spirit: Not impressionistic, broad strokes can ex-
plain us to ourselves but closely reasoned conceptual analysis of our terms
and the patient desedimentation of the strata of occulted meanings that di-
rected their genesis. 
Hopkins, then, presents these conceptual events, whose topical ex-
ploitation might easily be oversimplified, with all care for detail and nuance.
Thus, he positions Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra
for playing its role in facing our epochal predicaments. 
Eva Brann
Annapolis, 2008
Preface
xxviii
——————
5. As exemplified in the privileging, e.g., of method over matter, process over product,
mentation over immediacy, formalism over content, experiment over experience, and, in gen-
eral, in a preference for abstract terms over concrete words.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the following publishers for kind permission to use ma-
terial from works for which they continue to hold the copyright: “Jacob Klein
and the Phenomenology of History, Part I,” New Yearbook for Phenomenol-
ogy and Phenomenological Philosophy I (2001), 67–110; “Authentic and Sym-
bolic Numbers in Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic,” New Yearbook for
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy II (2002), 39–71; “Jacob
Klein on François Vieta’s Establishment of Algebra as the General Analytical
Art,” Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 25, no. 2 (2004), 51–85; “On the
Origin of the ‘Language’ of Formal Mathematics: An Intentional-Historical
Investigation of the Discovery of the Formal,” in Filip Mattens, ed., Meaning
and Language: Phenomenological Perspectives (Dordrecht: Springer, 2008),
149–68; and “Husserl’s Psychologism, and Critique of Psychologism, Revis-
ited,” Husserl Studies 22 (2006), 91–11.
This work owes a great deal to institutional support provided by the
College of Arts & Sciences and the Philosophy Department at Seattle Uni-
versity over the past ten years, as well as to intellectual support provided by the
community of tutors at St. John’s College’s Annapolis and Santa Fe campuses.
I therefore thank Seattle University, and especially my former dean, Wallace
Loh, for the one-year Philosophy Fellowship that marked the inception of this
book and for the two-year Endowed Chair that eight years later coincided
with its completion. Likewise, I thank St. John’s College for a number of in-
vitations to lecture on and discuss extensively the ideas behind the book.
I owe a substantial debt to numerous individuals who have generously
read and commented on various versions of this book in manuscript. But
even so, it would be unjust not to single out Eva Brann, colleague and friend
of Jacob Klein and translator of his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Ori-
gin of Algebra, who read in their entirety two complete versions of the man-
uscript and who provided crucial support for my project from the very
beginning, and Joe Sachs, whose encouragement and wise counsel became

indispensible for the book’s completion. I have also benefited greatly from
discussions and correspondence with Joshua Kates, Robert Tragesser, Richard
Hassing, John Drummond, and Steven Crowell, all of whom engaged the is-
sues discussed below and made incisive suggestions that led to their revision.
Stefania Centrone, who generously shared with me the manuscript of her
book, Logic and Philosophy of Mathematics in the Early Husserl, Dallas
Willard, who likewise shared the manuscript of his translation of Husserl’s
Philosophy of Arithmetic, together with Claudio Majolino, Dieter Lohmar,
Olav Wiegand, and Mark van Atten, all discussed with me—to my immense
benefit—their knowledge of Husserl’s philosophy of arithmetic and logic.
The final form of this book owes much to the care of Marcus Brainard. Fi-
nally, I owe special thanks to Robert Pippin, James Risser, and John Sallis for
their support of this book’s publication and to Dee Mortensen for her con-
summate professionalism.
I dedicate this book to my teachers, James Sheridan (in memoriam),
Algis Mickunas, and Parvis Emad, and to my wife and soul mate, Olga
Vishynakova. 
Burt C. Hopkins
Seattle, 2010
Acknowledgments
xxx

Abbreviations
Caton 
Caton, “Review of Jacob Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought
and the Origin of Algebra”
CM
Husserl, Cartesian Meditations
Crisis
Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental
Phenomenology
Early Writings
Husserl, Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and 
Mathematics
EJ
Husserl, Experience and Judgment
Frege 
Frege, “Review of Dr. E. Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic”
FTL
Husserl, Formal and Transcendental Logic
GMTOA
Klein, Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra
Ideas I
Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a 
Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction 
to a Pure Phenomenology
ILI
Husserl, “Introduction to the Logical Investigations” (1913)
LI
Husserl, Logical Investigations
Origin
Husserl, “The Origin of Geometry” (F = Fink’s edition; K =
Biemel’s edition; C = Carr’s translation)
PA
Husserl, Philosophy of Arithmetic
PHS
Klein, “Phenomenology and the History of Science”
Prolegomena
Husserl, Prolegomena to Pure Logic, in LI, vol. I
PRS
Husserl, “Philosophy as Rigorous Science”
Schröder
Husserl, “Review of Ernst Schröder’s Vorlesungen über
die Algebra der Logik”
Semiotic
Husserl, “On the Logic of Signs (Semiotic)” 
Stumpf Letter
Husserl, “Letter from Edmund Husserl to Carl Stumpf”
WP
Klein, “The World of Physics and the ‘Natural’ World” 


e Origin of the Logic 
of Symbolic Mathematics


Introduction
The Subject Matter, Thesis, and Structure 
of This Study
This study is concerned with the origination of the logic of symbolic math-
ematics as investigated by Edmund Husserl and Jacob Klein. The ‘logic’ of
symbolic mathematics at issue here is that which allows everyone—from barely
literate school children to master mathematicians—to employ sense-percep-
tible letter signs, without a second thought, in a “mathematical” manner. The
content of mathematics, like the content of its logic, is immaterial to its topic,
which is how it has come about that such signs are self-evidently perceived to
represent an “indeterminate” conceptual content as readily and unproblem-
atically as, for example, the perception of the color and shape of this book.
What is responsible for this topic is uncontroversially referred to as
‘formalization’. What formalization is, however, is controversial. At one ex-
treme, formalization is understood as the employment of letter signs or other
marks to, at the very least, “stand for” or “symbolize” any arbitrary object or
content—“whatever”—belonging to a certain “domain.” Let ‘3’ stand for the
number of any arbitrary objects whatever; let ‘X’ stand for any arbitrary num-
ber whatever; let ‘S’ stand for any arbitrary subject member of any proposi-
tion whatever—all these expressions are examples of formalization, and when
“interpreted” in a manner that finds nothing especially problematic to speak
of here, these examples illustrate pretty much all that is needed—or the min-
imum needed—to begin formalization. At the other extreme is the view that
formalization is the fulcrum for an unprecedented transformation in how
the science of the so-called West forms its concepts, a transformation that is
as all-encompassing as it is invisible to this day—especially to those who study
the history of this science or are engaged in scientific inquiry.
The present study has as its subject matter the latter understanding of
formalization. In it we shall investigate the major work of its first proponent,
the twentieth-century historian and philosopher of mathematics, Jacob Klein.
The work in question is entitled “Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung

der Algebra,” which was originally published in two parts in 1934 and 1936
and then in English translation as Greek Mathematical Thought and the Ori-
gin of Algebra in 1968.1 Klein’s major thesis there is that the history of the
transformation of what he calls the “conceptuality” of the most basic con-
cept employed by science, that of number, from a non-conceptual and non-
linguistic multitude of determinate things to a concept that is identical with
a symbolic language, is inseparable from the meaning of the symbolic em-
ployment of letter signs—from the most elementary, such as ‘2’, to the most
universal, say, ‘X’.
This history is important for Klein because it discloses that the con-
ceptuality of the symbolically transformed concept of number represents, in
a paradigmatic way, a radically different (and philosophically significant) ap-
prehension of things from how they were apprehended before that transfor-
mation. Prior to it, things were apprehended “directly,” first through the senses
and then through the employment of concepts that were apprehended as dif-
ferent from both the things whose apprehension they permitted and from the
language that made use of concepts in order to bring about this apprehension.
Subsequent to that transformation, things are apprehended “indirectly,”
through the mediation of both the concepts and language that now “define”
them. In other words, Klein’s thesis is that before that historical transforma-
tion, knowledge of the “being”—however mysterious or unknown—of things
was incapable, in principle, of being identified with the concepts and language
employed to apprehend them, while, subsequent to it, knowledge of the
“being” of things—again, however mysterious or unknown—is approached
only through the concepts and language used to apprehend them. Or put more
succinctly: Klein’s thesis is that prior to this transformation what things are
was not understood to be conceptual and linguistic, while now it is. 
Connected with this thesis is Klein’s sub-thesis that this transforma-
tion in conceptuality has gone unnoticed because, simultaneously with its
occurrence, the conceptuality it superseded was, unwittingly, apprehended
from the conceptual level engendered by its transformation. On his view, the
conceptuality of number both illustrates this and is the paradigm for the
transformation. Prior to its symbolic transformation, ‘number’ was identical
with a determinate amount of a multitude of determinate things. The con-
cepts of number, such as the ‘odd’ and the ‘even’, were employed to appre-
hend numbers, non-conceptual beings that are both one and many, but these
concepts were not understood to be numbers, that is, to be determinate
e Origin of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
4
——————
1. See the Bibliography for complete bibliographic information on works referred to
here, as well as the conventions followed in citing texts throughout this study.

amounts of a multitude of determinate things. Subsequent to its symbolic
transformation, number is no longer identical with a determinate amount of
a multitude of determinate things, but with the concept of a determinate
amount of a multitude of things or, more concisely, with the concept of a
multiplicity. As a concept, ‘number’ is no longer identical with non-concep-
tual things in their multiplicity but rather with the letter sign that now “rep-
resents” its concept. However, because this concept and its representation are
understood, simultaneously, to refer (indirectly, to be sure) to the multitude
of things identical with the pre-symbolic number, the “being” of the latter is
now taken to be, as a matter of course, the symbol that represents it.
The stated purpose of Klein’s study of Greek mathematical thought and
the origin of algebra is to take note of this transformation and therefore make
it visible, as a propaedeutic to the philosophical exploration of its broader sig-
nificance for exact science and philosophy. From the standpoint of the tradi-
tional practices of the history of exact science and philosophy, both when the
study was first published and still today, the novelty of Klein’s thesis, which is
inseparable from its radicality, presents formidable challenges to those who
would comprehend it. The proposition that an abstract idea like number is
subject to historical change strikes at the heart of the most basic presupposi-
tion of the dominant conception of exact science, namely, that its basic con-
cepts are essentially a priori and therefore timeless or, at the very least, invariant
through time. Moreover, the methodological enlistment of history—which, as
an empirical discipline, is devoted to “facts” whose very meaning, as facts, is
that they could be otherwise and thus seem to be contingent or accidental—
is hardly suited to an investigation of the “ideal” truths of mathematics. Rather
than address these and other potential methodological objections, Klein’s
study, guided by the thesis that the conceptuality responsible for symbolic
numbers is first found in François Vieta’s invention of modern algebra as an
“analytical art” in the sixteenth century, discloses the character of the concep-
tual transformation responsible for this innovation by presenting in its proper
context the Greek mathematics that formed its conceptual horizon.
Klein accomplishes this by approaching, for the first time in the history
of mathematics, the concepts of both Greek mathematics and the Greek phi-
losophy of mathematics in their own terms. This means that rather than as-
sume the universal mathematical applicability of the conceptual level repre-
sented by the modern symbolic mathematics made possible by Vieta’s invention
of algebra, Klein returned to the original Greek sources and rediscovered the
basic arithmetical evidence that guided their concept formation. The recovery
of that evidence permitted Klein to re-construct the Greek concept of num-
ber (ἀριθμός), independently of the conceptuality of the modern symbolic
Introduction
5

concept of number, as a “determinate number” in the exact sense of a definite
amount of definite items. And it also permitted him to re-construct the con-
ceptual transformation that occurred with respect to precisely this concept of
number when Vieta employed a logistice speciosa, a method that calculates with
the “species-symbols” of “magnitude in general” rather than with determinate
numbers, as part of his analytical art. 
Klein’s study broadens its philosophical perspective by showing the
connection of Vieta’s analytical art with Descartes’s and John Wallis’s devel-
opment of the mathesis universalis. Again employing the original sources,
Klein documents the eclipse of the fundamental ontological concerns of
Greek science, especially the highest sciences of Platonic dialectic and Aris-
totelian first philosophy, in Descartes’s and Wallis’s writings. Klein shows that
both Descartes’s identification of the substance of the world, extension, with
the symbolic subject matter of his “analytic geometry” and Wallis’s absorption
of the ratios and proportions of Euclidian geometry into an arithmetical “an-
alytical art” conceived of entirely in symbolic terms, obviate, in “one stroke,”
the Greek methodological preoccupation with the mode of being proper to
the objects investigated by means of the cognitively general methods of math-
ematics and philosophy. Especially the specific problem encountered by these
general methods, namely, the nature of the “unity” belonging to mathemat-
ical and other kinds of multitudes, is eliminated with the symbolic rendering
of unity enabled by the analytical art, and definitely so when this art is iden-
tified with symbolic mathematics in the “pure” mathesis universalis. The “pure
unity” of the latter is now entirely symbolic, which means that its mode of
being is identical with the unambiguous meaning of the symbols employed
by its symbolic calculus. 
In 1935 and 1936, Edmund Husserl wrote two papers that drew a con-
nection between the formalization that characterizes the mathematics of mod-
ern physics and the crisis of European humanity, “The Crisis of European
Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology” and “The Origin of Geome-
try as an Intentional-Historical Problem.” He proposed as a response to this
crisis a radical “historical reflection” on the Galilean origin of modern physics
and the Greek origin of the geometry Galileo employed. The goal of Husserl’s
reflection was to “reactivate” the original evidence that led to the establish-
ment of these sciences and thereby to clarify their genuine meaning, which
Husserl was convinced had become lost in the impulse toward formalization
initiated by Galileo and in that toward idealization initiated in the Euclidean
geometry relied upon by the Galilean impulse. Husserl remarked that never be-
fore had epistemology been viewed as a peculiarly historical task, and in frag-
mentary historical reflections he attempted to reawaken the evidence that led
e Origin of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
6

to the original accomplishments that “anticipated” the meanings of these sci-
ences, evidence that he maintained was somehow still present—though ob-
scured due to what he termed ‘sedimentation’—in the contemporary meanings
that compose these sciences. 
Husserl worked out the nature of the method required to undertake
these “epistemological-historical” investigations, which he characterized as a
“zigzag” reflection that moves from the present meaning of a science to his-
torically prior meanings, then back again to the present meaning, all with the
goal of “reactivating” in the prior meanings evidence that anticipated the con-
temporary meaning. He also worked out the philosophical basis of these in-
vestigations, distinguishing the “historiography” of contingent facts, which is
rooted in an empirical science, from the “historicity” of a cultural tradition, in-
cluding the cognitive achievements of a science, which (in the case of science)
has as its medium the textual embodiment of meaning made possible by writ-
ten language. Because the meanings embedded in this medium can be accessed
only on the basis of a cognitively intentional relation that brings them to evi-
dence, Husserl characterized the radical epistemological-historical reflection
required to de-sediment and reactivate the original meanings of a science as an
“intentional investigation” of their history. Eugen Fink, Husserl’s assistant and
close collaborator and the original editor of the two papers just mentioned,
made explicit the connection between intentionality and history in them with
the phrase ‘intentional-historical’, which he included in the title he gave to
Husserl’s second essay. 
In 1940 Klein published “Phenomenology and the History of Science,”
which was the first discussion in the literature on Husserl’s two essays. There
he showed that, far from signaling a relapse into “historicism,” Husserl’s last
essays represent an internally consistent deepening of his phenomenology’s
guiding concern, from beginning to end, with the problem of the non-em-
pirical “origins” of cognitive meaning. Klein linked Husserl’s programmatic
announcement and execution of the epistemological-historical “reactivation”
of sedimented meanings in these essays to Husserl’s recognition of the need to
deepen the genetic analyses of the meaning of logical objectivity presented in
Formal and Transcendental Logic in order to get at its phenomenological ori-
gin. By establishing this linkage, Klein demonstrated that he saw more clearly
than Husserl’s other commentators that Husserl’s late turn to history was not
related to historicism’s basic thesis of the historical contingency and therefore
relativity of human knowledge. But Klein also “corrected” Husserl’s account
of the content of the historical reflection needed to reactivate the “sedi-
mented history” of the origin of mathematical physics by adding a third task
to the two enunciated by Husserl. In addition to the tasks of de-sedimenting
Introduction
7

and reactivating the original evidence sedimented in 1) the geometry relied
upon by the Galilean impulse to mathematization that led to the anticipation
of physics as an “exact” science and 2) the evidence connected with this an-
ticipation itself, Klein also identifies 3) the task of de-sedimenting and reac-
tivating the original evidence that led to Vieta’s establishment of modern
algebra.
Klein’s sketch of the third task seamlessly weaves a concise synopsis of
the results of the mathematical-philosophical investigations in his Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra into the fabric of Husserl’s
articulation of the epistemological-historical methodology belonging to the
Crisis’s project of de-sedimenting the origins of modern mathematical physics.
Oddly enough, however, Klein makes no mention of his study in his 1940
essay and therefore the fact that this task had already been accomplished. 
The scholarly curiosity of Klein’s elision of what can only be character-
ized as his own contribution to the phenomenologically historical investiga-
tion of the origin of mathematical physics is compounded by his study’s lack
of reference to Husserl’s phenomenological investigations of the origin of sym-
bolic mathematics. The superficial similarity of their investigations, especially
Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic but also his Logical Investigations, has led
commentators to assert both Husserl’s priority over and influence on Klein’s
investigations. Indeed, detailed study of Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic re-
veals not only that Husserl, like Klein, draws a basic distinction between de-
terminate and symbolic numbers but also that they each arrive at the same
conclusion regarding the independent origins of such numbers. 
Careful study of these investigations discloses, however, that the un-
deniable similarity of Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of the nature of and re-
lationship between non-symbolic and symbolic numbers is underpinned by
a fundamental difference that gets to the heart of their radically different
accounts of the origination of the “logic” of symbolic mathematics. This dif-
ference is located in their respective accounts of the mathematical concept
of unity. Husserl’s account involves what, from the standpoint of Klein’s
study, can only be characterized as a major equivocation. 
On the one hand, Husserl understands ‘unity’ in terms of its mathe-
matical and logical function in the “pure” mathesis universalis, and thus as a
formalized concept with absolutely no individual or materially generic con-
tent. On the other hand, he understands ‘unity’ to be that which is responsi-
ble for the perceptual apprehension of an object as an individual and thus as
a concept that has individual and material ontological content. From the per-
spective of Klein’s study, Husserl’s equivocation becomes problematic when
he attempts to account for the origin of the formalized meaning of unity on
e Origin of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
8

the basis of a modification of the unity characteristic of its perceptual mean-
ing. The source of this equivocation proves to be that Husserl’s attempt relies
upon Aristotelian abstraction and presupposes that this manner of abstrac-
tion has the ability to generate a concept of unity that is formalized. 
The guiding thesis of the present study is twofold: that Klein’s histor-
ical-mathematical investigation of the origin of algebra seeks to demonstrate
the impossibility of an Aristotelian origin of the unity that makes possible
the logic of symbolic mathematics, and that it is Husserl’s articulation of the
methodology belonging to the de-sedimentation of the sedimented mean-
ing responsible for the origin of an exact science and the reactivation of the
evidence in which this meaning is originally given that makes Klein’s demon-
stration philosophically compelling. 
The study’s structure is dictated by its content and thus is divided into
four unequal parts. 
Part One treats Klein’s interpretation of the historical character of
Husserl’s investigations in the Crisis by providing a detailed explication and
analysis of their separation by Klein from historicism and his articulation of the
phenomenological continuity of Husserl’s genetic and “intentional-historical”
investigations of the constitution of the unity proper to meaning in the exact
sciences.
Part Two provides an overview of Klein’s historical-mathematical study
and substantiates the claim made in Part One that the third task he adds to
Husserl’s project of de-sedimentation had in fact already been completed in
Klein’s own study on Greek mathematics and, moreover, executed there using
a method that is in implicit accord with the methodology laid out in Husserl’s
Crisis. 
Part Three begins with a detailed exposition and analysis of Husserl’s
investigation of the nature of and relationship between non-symbolic and
symbolic numbers in his Philosophy of Arithmetic. This discussion is followed
by an equally detailed exposition and analysis of Klein’s presentation of this
relationship in his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra.
The detailed level of exposition and analysis of both of these studies is re-
quired, in part, by the relative lack of discussion of these texts in the literature,
especially in relation to the main topic of concern, the origination of the logic
of symbolic mathematics. 
Part Four begins with a detailed comparative analysis of the structure
and origin of non-symbolic numbers in Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic and
Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra. At the con-
clusion of this analysis, a major digression is presented, the topic of which is
Husserl’s account of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics as
Introduction
9

he elaborated it after Philosophy of Arithmetic. The purpose of this digression
is to “correct” two prevalent standard views of the development of Husserl’s
thought subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic: 1) that his doctrine of “cat-
egorial intuition” overcomes the latter’s psychologism in its account of the
origin of the “collective unity” that composes non-symbolic numbers, and 2)
that Husserl’s analyses in Formal and Transcendental Logic present a mature
phenomenological theory of judgment that provides the foundation for both
the distinction and the unity of the formal logic and formal mathematics that
make up the “pure” mathesis universalis. The results of this digression, to-
gether with those of the initial sections of Part Four, form the basis of the
final analysis of Husserl’s and Klein’s respective accounts of the origination of
the logic of symbolic mathematics. That analysis concludes with a synoptic
account of the historicity of formalization on the basis of its origination in the
pre-scientific life-world.
Following Part Four is a brief coda, in which we situate Husserl’s logi-
cal “Platonism” in the context of Plato’s own mathematical and eidetic “Pla-
tonism.” On the one hand, Husserl’s Platonism, which is connected with his
“break” with psychologism, is distinguished from Platonism’s typical formu-
lation as the straightforward thesis of the existence of mind-independent ideal
mathematical objects. On the other hand, it is distinguished from the suppo-
sition (in Plato’s own Platonism) of the non-mathematical, eidetic being of
the “one” that is responsible for the defining characteristic of the “one over
many” unity proper to mathematical objects. Finally, Husserl’s attempt to sep-
arate his thought from psychologism by appealing to the “numerical identity”
of the content of logical cognition is shown to presuppose the eidetic being of
the “one” supposed by Plato’s own Platonism.
e Origin of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
10

Part One
Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology
and the History of Science


Chapter One
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations 
of the Origination of Mathematical Physics
§ 1. The Problem of Histor y in Husserl’s Last Writings
Some seventy years have passed since the first publication of two fragmentary
texts on history and phenomenology that Husserl wrote in his last years,1
texts that unmistakably link the meaning of both the crowning achievement
of the Enlightenment (the new science of mathematical physics) and that of
his own life’s work (the rigorous science of transcendental phenomenology)
————————
1. Edmund Husserl, “Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzen-
dentale Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie,” Philosophia
I (1936), 77–176 (reprinted as §§ 1–27 of Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die
transzendentale Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie, ed.
Walter Biemel, Husserliana VI [The Hague: Nijhoff, 1954; 2d ed., 1976]; henceforth cited as
‘Hua VI’ where reference is specifically to the German edition) and “Die Frage nach dem Ur-
sprung der Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem” [The Question Concerning the
Origin of Geometry as an Intentional-Historical Problem], ed. Eugen Fink, Revue interna-
tionale de Philosophie I (1939), 203–25; subsequently republished in newly edited form as
Beilage III in Hua VI, 365–86, here 379; English translation of the latter: “The Origin of
Geometry,” in The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, trans. David
Carr (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1970), 353–78, here 370. Because the
only version of the second text available to Klein when he wrote “Phenomenology and the
History of Science” (see n. 3 below) was Fink’s edition, page numbers will refer wherever pos-
sible to this text and then to Carr’s translation. Where the deviation between Fink’s edition
and Biemel’s precludes reference to Carr’s translation of the latter, reference will be exclusively
to Fink’s text, in which case all translations will be mine. Exclusive reference to Biemel’s edi-
tion and Carr’s translation of it will signal the absence of the relevant passage in Fink’s edition.
To make these differences more readily perspicuous to the reader, references to the pagination
of Fink’s edition will be immediately preceded by ‘F’, whereas those to the pagination of
Biemel’s edition will be preceded by ‘K’ (i.e., Krisis); the English translation will be preceded
by ‘C’ whenever it is Carr’s. Note that where at issue is the main text of the Crisis, it is cited as
Crisis with German and English page references, respectively.
See the prefatory note to the Bibliography for a clarification of the conventions used
here in citing texts.

to the problem of their historical origination. It is striking that in the years fol-
lowing the original publication of these works and their republication in 1954
in Walter Biemel’s Husserliana edition of the Crisis, commentary on them
has, with one significant exception, passed over what Husserl articulated as
the specifically phenomenological nature of the problem of history. It has been
ignored in favor of mostly critical discussions of Husserl’s putative attempt to
accommodate his earlier “idealistic” formulations of transcendental phe-
nomenology to the so-called “problem of history.” 
As it is typically understood, this problem begins with the notion of a
contingent sequence of events that shape cultural formations and human ex-
perience in a manner that defies rational calculation. History in this sense be-
comes a problem when its contingency is understood to condition the
intellectual content of cultural formations, such as philosophy and science.
The problem here concerns the influence of the historically conditioned her-
itage of taken-for-granted ideas, meanings, and attitudes on the knowledge
claims made by philosophy and science. When the intellectual content of the
latter is understood to have as its insuperable limit the particular historical sit-
uation of the philosopher and the scientist, as well as of philosophy and sci-
ence, the knowledge claims of both are correspondingly understood to be
incapable of ever achieving “universality.” Formulated in this manner, the
“problem of history” assumes, as is well known, the guise of what since the be-
ginning of the twentieth century has been called ‘historicism’. 
The reception of Husserl’s last works has been preoccupied with the
story of their departure from his own early rejection of historicism and his
late attempts to establish what many have deemed oxymoronic and therefore
impossible: a phenomenology of the apriori proper to the historical origi-
nation of meaning. Motivated by the goal of establishing phenomenology as
a presuppositionless universal science of a priori meanings, Husserl’s early
thought had identified the “facticity” of history as among those presuppo-
sitions standing in the way of a “pure” phenomenology. Husserl’s late turn to
the problem of history has therefore led many to suspect that pure phe-
nomenology and the historical preoccupation of his last texts are intrinsi-
cally incompatible.
§ 2. The Priority of Klein’s Research on the Historical 
Origination of the Meaning of Mathematical Physics 
over Husserl’s 
Part One of this study is concerned with the major exception to the trend in
the literature to overlook the significance assigned to history in Husserl’s Cri-
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
14

sis alluded to above, namely, the work of Jacob Klein.2 Its twofold aim is to
elaborate Klein’s understanding of the phenomenological problem of history
sketched by Husserl in his last works3 and to introduce Klein’s own contribu-
tion to the understanding of the problem of the historical origination of the
meaning of mathematical physics. The latter’s contribution occurs in his little
known but remarkable works on Greek mathematics and the origin of alge-
bra.4 On the assumption that Klein’s contribution to that understanding came
after his appropriation of Husserl’s formulation of the phenomenological
problem of history, the execution of this twofold aim would seem to be a fairly
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations
15
————————
2. The only other thinker to pay sustained attention to the theme of history in Husserl’s
Crisis was Jacques Derrida, in his introduction to Edmund Husserl, L’Origine de la géométrie,
trans. Jacques Derrida (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1962; 2d ed., 1972); English
translation: Jacques Derrida, Edmund Husserl’s Origin of Geometry: An Introduction, trans.
John. P. Leavey, ed. David B. Allison (Lincoln, Nebr.: University of Nebraska Press, 1989). De-
spite the merits of his discussion, Derrida fails to identify what Klein alone among Husserl’s
commentators correctly recognizes as the crux of the phenomenological problem of history in
Husserl’s late texts, namely, the formalization of the mathematical “language” of natural science
accomplished by modern mathematics. We shall show that it is precisely Husserl’s encounter
with the crisis posed by the “unintelligibility” of the formalized language of modern mathe-
matics and mathematical physics—where “intelligibility” is measured by our pre-formalized
encounter with the world—that engenders his method of historical reflection on the origin of
modern science. For a critical discussion of Derrida on this point, see Burt C. Hopkins, “Klein
and Derrida on the Historicity of Meaning and the Meaning of Historicity in Husserl’s Crisis-
Texts,” Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 36, no. 2 (2005), 179–87. For a discus-
sion of the merits of Derrida’s discussion, see Joshua Kates, “Modernity and Intentional History:
Edmund Husserl, Jacob Klein, and Jacques Derrida,” Philosophy Today 49, no. 5 (Supplement
2005), 193–203. 
For an instructive survey of the Crisis and the texts it comprises, see Ernst Wolfgang
Orth, Edmund Husserls ‘Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale
Phänomenologie’. Vernunft und Kultur (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2001).
3. Jacob Klein, “Phenomenology and the History of Science,” in Marvin Farber, ed.,
Philosophical Essays in Memory of Edmund Husserl (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1940), 143–63; reprinted in Jacob Klein, Lectures and Essays, ed. Robert B. Williamson
and Elliott Zuckerman (Annapolis, Md.: St. John’s Press, 1985), 65–84. The later version will
be cited in what follows as PHS with page reference.
4. See Jacob Klein, “Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung der Algebra,” Quellen
und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik, Abteilung B: Studien, vol.
3, no. 1 (1934), 18–105 (Part I), and no. 2 (1936), 122–235 (Part II); English translation: Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, trans. Eva Brann (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1969; reprint: New York: Dover, 1992); henceforth cited as GMTOA, with German and
English page references, respectively (exceptions will be noted), and occasionally referred to
simply as Origin of Algebra. See also Jacob Klein, “The World of Physics and the ‘Natural’
World,” ed. and trans. David R. Lachterman, in Lectures and Essays, 1–34; henceforth cited as
WP. (This German original of this text was delivered as a talk at the Physikalisches Institut of
the University of Marburg on February 3, 1932. The manuscript, which was not published dur-
ing Klein’s lifetime, appears to have been lost.) See the following studies from Klein’s Lectures
and Essays: “On a Sixteenth Century Algebraist [Simon Stevin]” (35–42), “The Concept of
Number in Greek Mathematics and Philosophy” (43–52), and “Modern Rationalism” (53–64). 

straightforward matter. One would need only to show how the method and
content of Husserl’s path-breaking investigations influenced or otherwise pro-
vided the context for Klein’s own research. However, Klein’s work on the his-
torical origination of the meaning of mathematical physics actually preceded
Husserl’s work on this same issue by a number of years.5 Thus, Hiram Caton’s
felicitous characterization—in another context, and one that will be taken up
shortly—of Klein’s relationship to Husserl as “a scholarly curiosity”6 proves
apt here as well, since Klein’s work on the history of mathematics represents an
uncanny anticipation of Husserl’s own work. 
In 1959 Leo Strauss characterized Klein’s magnum opus, “Die griechi -
sche Logistik und die Entstehung der Algebra,” then still untranslated, as a
work that is “much more than a historical study.”7 Strauss continued: “But
even if we take it as purely a historical work, there is not, in my opinion, a
contemporary work in the history of philosophy or science or in ‘the history
of ideas’ generally speaking which in intrinsic worth comes within hailing
distance of it. Not indeed a proof but a sign of this is the fact that less than
half a dozen people seem to have read it, if the inference from the number of
references to it is valid.” Strauss’s characterization of this work as “much more
than a historical study,” along with his comparison of it—without limiting
it—to both the “history of philosophy” and the “history of ideas,” is instruc-
tive here. For while it claims that Klein’s treatment of his topic is of unparal-
leled historical import, the cryptic suggestion that its true significance
transcends contemporary studies in the history of philosophy or science, as
well as studies in the history of ideas generally, gives occasion to formulate a
major thesis of the present study: that both the methodology and the content
of Klein’s mathematical studies fall outside the traditionally distinct method-
ological approaches to the likewise traditionally distinct domains staked out,
respectively, by the history and the philosophy of science. Before developing
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
16
————————
5. As indicated in the previous note, Klein’s “The World of Physics and the ‘Natural’
World” was given as a talk in 1932, and his “Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung der
Algebra” was published in two parts, in 1934 and 1936, respectively. Husserl began working on
the Crisisin 1934, whereas his work on the origin of geometry dates from 1936; see the editor’s
introduction to Edmund Husserl, Die Krisis der europaischen Wissenschaften und die transzen-
dentale Phänomenologie.Ergänzungsband. Texte aus dem Nachlass 1934–1937, ed. Reinhold N.
Smid, Husserliana XXIX (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1992), xi and lvi. The former was first pub-
lished, in part, in 1936 and the latter, posthumously in 1939 in Fink’s edition. See n. 1 above.
6. Hiram Caton, “Review of Jacob Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin
of Algebra,” Studi Internationali di Filosofia 3 (1971), 222–26, here 225; henceforth cited as
‘Caton’ with page reference.
7. Leo Strauss, “An Unspoken Prologue to a Public Lecture at St. John’s [In Honor of
Jacob Klein, 1899–1978],” Interpretation 7 (1978), 1–3, here 3. Strauss penned these remarks
in 1959, on the occasion of Klein’s sixtieth birthday.

this thesis within what here will be argued to be the proper context for con-
sidering both the method and the content of Klein’s mathematical studies, it
is necessary to digress briefly so as to situate this context in relation to how
the methods and the contents of the history of science and the philosophy of
science are typically understood to differ. The goal thereby is to provide a
context in contrast to which the radicality of Klein’s approach to both his-
torical and systematic issues in his mathematical studies can be demonstrated. 
With respect to method the difference in question here concerns the
traditional contrast between the “empirical” approach to science character-
istic of the history of science and the “epistemological” approach character-
istic of the philosophy of science. Accordingly, the history of science is usually
defined by its investigation of the contingent series of mathematical, scien-
tific, and philosophical theories involved in the formation and development
of a given science. By contrast, the philosophy of science is usually defined by
its investigation of the cognitive status of the philosophical problems posed
by the employment of logic, mathematics, and metaphysics in the knowledge
claims advanced by the systematic sciences. Corresponding to these method-
ological differences are the differences in content of the domains typically
treated by the historical and the philosophical investigations of science. Thus,
the content of the history of science reflects the changes over time that mark
the development of a science, whereas the content of the philosophy of sci-
ence reflects the temporal stability that defines scientific knowledge. 
§ 3. The Importance of Husserl’s Last Writings 
for Understanding Klein’s Nontraditional Investigations 
of the Histor y and Philosophy of Science
Rather than work within the context of this traditional understanding of the
difference and indeed opposition between these methods and their domains,
Klein’s mathematical studies are characterized by a method—albeit one that
largely remains implicit—that overcomes the opposition between historical
explanation and epistemological investigation in the study of science. His stud-
ies are thus historical without being limited to empirical contingencies and
epistemological without being cut off from the historical development of sci-
entific knowledge. In other words, Klein’s work overcomes the problem of his-
tory that leads to historicism by showing, in effect, that the disclosure of the
“historicity” of scientific knowledge does not lead to an opposition between
the contingency of history and the universality of knowledge. His work shows
this by uncovering the heritage of ideas, meanings, and attitudes that under-
lie the basic concepts of the modern mathematics that makes mathematical
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations
17

physics possible; that is, he uncovers aspects of what Husserl will refer to as
the “historical apriori” (Origin, K380/C375) of modern physics. Yet it is
Husserl who in his last works was the first to articulate explicitly the method-
ological issues involved in overcoming the opposition in question here. The as-
sessment of both i) the scope and limits of Klein’s implicit method and ii) the
cogency of its results must take Husserl’s reflections on this methodology as its
point of departure. Husserl’s later articulation of the “theory of knowledge . . .
as a peculiarly historical task” (F220/C370), a task he assigns to his final
formulation of transcendental phenomenology and its now defining goal of
overcoming “[t]he ruling dogma of the principial separation between episte-
mological elucidation and historical explanation” (ibid.), provides the proper
perspective from which to assess Klein’s work. It is Husserl’s formulation of
the “universal apriori of history” (K380/C371) as “nothing other than the
vital movement of the coexistence and the interweaving of original formations
and sedimentations of meaning” (F221/C371) that serves as the “guiding
clue” for overcoming the “ruling dogma” in question. The methodology that
discloses this “vital movement” thus is indispensable for taking the measure of
Klein’s investigations, and it is to be found in Husserl’s sketch of phenomeno-
logically historical reflection. Husserl characterizes such reflection in terms of
a “‘zigzag’ back and forth” from the “‘breakdown’ situation of our time, with
its ‘breakdown of science’ itself,” to the historical “beginnings” of both the orig-
inal meaning of science itself (i.e., philosophy) and the development of its
meaning leading up to the “breakdown” of modern mathematical physics (see
Crisis, 59/58).
§ 4. Klein’s Commentar y on Husserl’s Investigation of 
the Histor y of the Origin of Modern Science
Klein himself provides the warrant for this account of the significance of
Husserl’s methodology for understanding his own mathematical studies in his
article “Phenomenology and the History of Science” from 1940. After first ex-
plicating Husserl’s articulation of the phenomenological problem of history in
the original published versions of the Crisis and “The Origin of Geometry,”
Klein goes on to outline “[t]he problem of the origin of modern science”
(PHS, 82) in a manner that corresponds to Husserl’s formulation of the prob-
lem, save for one significant deviation. There Klein adds a third task to the
two tasks that Husserl articulates in connection with this problem. Whereas
for Husserl the problem of the origin of modern science involves the “reacti-
vation of the origin of geometry” (83) and “the rediscovery of the prescientific
world and its true origins,” (84) according to Klein there is yet another aspect
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
18

to this problem. He articulates this aspect in terms of “a reactivation of the
process of symbolic abstraction” (83) whose “‘sedimented’ understanding of
numbers is superposed upon the first stratum of ‘sedimented’ geometrical ‘ev-
idences’” (83–84). Klein therefore positions this additional task between the
twin tasks that Husserl articulates in the Crisis.8
Klein’s introduction of this third task is significant for a number of rea-
sons, all of which will be taken up here in due course. At this point, however,
only one requires comment, namely that the task of the “reactivation of the
process of symbolic abstraction” had in fact already been undertaken and in-
deed completed by Klein himself in “Die griechische Logistik und die Entste-
hung der Algebra.” There can be no mistake about this. In the final section of
his “Phenomenology and the History of Science” (see 79–83), Klein presents
a synopsis of the development of the symbolic transformation of the tradi-
tional Greek theory of ratios and proportions, as well as of the ancient Greek
“concept” and science of number, into François Vieta’s “‘algebraic’ artof equa-
tions” (80). In addition, he discusses the “formalization” of Greek mathemat-
ics that was prepared for with the “anticipation” of an exact geometrical nature
by Galileo and his predecessors and realized with the symbolic transforma-
tion of Euclidean geometry into Descartes’s analytic geometry—the latter
being made possible by Vieta’s “invention” of modern mathematics. The for-
malization of Greek mathematics, upon which are “laid the foundations of
mathematical physics” (82), is said by Klein to “have already lost the original
intuition” (81) of the Greek mathematics underlying it. He traces this loss to
modern mathematics’ technique of operating with symbols. As a result of this,
the “reactivation of the process of symbolic abstraction” (84) that makes pos-
sible the formalization of the mathematics that prepares the way for mathe-
matical physics is held by Klein to involve, “by implication, the rediscovery of
the original arithmetical evidences.” For him these original evidences concern
“the original ‘ideal’ concept of number, developed by the Greeks out of the
immediate experience of ‘things’ and their prescientific articulation” (81).
What Klein lays out in this synopsis amounts to a précis of the “argu-
ment” of his work on Greek mathematics and the origin of algebra from
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations
19
————————
8. Husserl is, of course, well aware of the importance of “thinking with . . . ‘symbolic’ con-
cepts” (Crisis, 48/48) for the origination of mathematical physics, and Klein is aware that he is
aware of this (see PHS, 81–82 nn. 43–44, 46–48, 50, 52, where Klein cites Husserl’s discussion
in the Crisis of both the importance of the “formalization” of arithmetic and geometry for the
new physics and the resultant emptying of the original intuitive meaning of these disciplines).
However, Husserl nowhere explicitly articulates the task of reactivating the original evidence
that is sedimented in symbolic concepts and the calculational techniques that operate with
them, as he does in the case of the sedimented meanings characteristic of the “idealization” of
geometry.

1934–36. This fact calls attention to a second “scholarly curiosity” charac-
teristic of Klein’s relationship to Husserl, namely, his failure to provide any ref-
erence to that work in an article that articulates—in effect—both the
historical design and the philosophical significance of its results in terms of
Husserl’s transcendental phenomenological formulation of the problem of
history. In other words, in that article Klein situates his mathematical stud-
ies within the context of Husserl’s understanding of the theory of knowledge
as a historical task, the peculiar character of which is bound up with the phe-
nomenological characterization of the “interlacement of original production
and ‘sedimentation’ of significance9 [that] constitutes the true character of
history” (78).10 This curiosity is compounded by the reference to this article
in the 1968 English translation of his magnum opus, Greek Mathematical
Thought and the Origin of Algebra.11
§ 5. The “Curious” Relation between Klein’s Historical 
Investigation of Greek and Modern Mathematics 
and Husserl’s Phenomenolog y
This second “scholarly curiosity” provides occasion to discuss a third and final
curiosity, the context for which is provided by Hiram Caton’s characteriza-
tion of the relation of Klein’s thought to Husserl’s. In the aforementioned re-
view of Eva Brann’s English translation of Klein’s book, Caton remarked upon
Klein’s “failure to cite Husserl as the source of his Husserlian terminology”
(Caton, 225), that is, the terminology of the “theory of symbolic thinking”
and the “concept of intentionality.” It is Caton’s contention that precedence for
both of these should go to Husserl. In the case of the former, he appeals to
Husserl’s “remarkably similar theory in the Logische Untersuchungen(Vol. II/1,
par. 20).” In the case of the latter, he points to how, “by citing the scholastic Eu-
stachias as illustrating the sources of the thinking of Vieta and Descartes,”
Klein “ingeniously capitalizes on . . . [the] genealogy” of intentionality, which
Husserl took “from Brentano, who in turn took it from medieval logic.”
Before commenting on Caton’s claims in light of our own estimation
of Klein’s relation to Husserl, it should be mentioned that the context of his
remarks concerns the “question of the purpose and achievement of Klein’s
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
20
————————
9. Klein’s rendering of Sinn as ‘significance’ or ‘significant’ will be followed in Part One
in order to avoid the awkwardness that would be introduced to the text by changing the large
number of citations of this word to its preferred translation as ‘meaning’. In the remainder of
this study, however, Sinn will be consistently translated as ‘meaning’.
10. This is Klein’s paraphrase of Husserl’s statement found in Origin, F220.
11. Klein, GMTOA, 118 (the reference occurs only in the English translation). 

historical method.” Caton situates this question in terms of his judgment
regarding the “overpowering scholarship of its [i.e., Klein’s book’s] argu-
ment” (222), a judgment he buttresses with the remark that “Klein’s erudi-
tion is so great and thorough that one imagines that there are few men living
who can move familiarly on his terrain: certainly I am not one of them”
(226).12
Regarding the purpose and achievement of Klein’s historical method,
Caton maintains that while Klein’s bypassing of Husserl’s concept of inten-
tionality in favor of the medieval Eustachias “lends plausibility to his claim
to interpret these Renaissance figures [i.e., Vieta and Descartes] in accor-
dance with the conceptuality of their milieu” (225), what Klein actually does
is project “Husserl back upon Vieta and Descartes via Eustachias.” Thus,
Caton concludes that “although Klein’s analysis of symbolic abstraction is ac-
ceptable, his claim to find it in the self-conscious thought of Vieta, Descartes
and Stevin produces no conviction.”
However, Caton is wrong in both the essentials and the details of his
assessment of the significance of Klein’s relation to Husserl, despite the acuity
of his discernment of what indeed is “a scholarly curiosity” with respect to
Klein’s “failure” to acknowledge both Husserl’s theory of intentionality and
his theory of symbolic thinking. To begin with, the original “precedence”13
for the “theory of symbolic thinking” is to be found in Husserl’s sustained in-
vestigation of the relationship between the “authentic” and “symbolic presen-
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations
21
————————
12. In The Origins of Subjectivity (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1973),
224, Hiram Caton also avers that “[f]or understanding Descartes’ mathematical background,
and how it leads to his Geometry and to his stress on the mind’s ‘turning to itself’ method,
utility, and art, Klein’s book is the best available.” Caton’s own considerable achievement in the
study of Descartes’s philosophy lends authority to this claim. 
13. The significance of Klein’s referring (in “Die griechische Logistik und die Entste-
hung der Algebra”) neither to Husserl’s phenomenological “theory” of intentionality nor to his
phenomenological investigations of symbolic thinking has nothing to do with Husserl’s think-
ing on these matters somehow being the unacknowledged source of or inspiration for Klein’s
thought in that work. In the early 1930s (when Klein wrote this work), Husserl had not yet
linked either intentionality or symbolic thinking to the issue of their historical origination,
whereas it is the remarkable achievement of Klein’s thinking during this period to have estab-
lished precisely this connection. Therefore, notwithstanding the “scholarly curiosity” of Klein’s
“failure” to acknowledge the “precedence” of Husserl’s thought to his own with respect to the
matters in general pertaining to intentionality and symbolic thinking, there can be no question
of Husserl’s thought having “priority” over Klein’s on the specific issue of the connection of
these matters to the history of mathematics. While the last part of this study will investigate the
complicated matter of the significance of this precedence in detail, it needs to be stressed here
that the conclusion Caton draws from it, that Klein—in effect—simply projected Husserl’s
theories of intentionality and symbolic thinking back upon the history of mathematics, cannot
be maintained without distorting the nature of both the relation of Klein’s thought to Husserl’s
and the originality of Klein’s mathematical investigations.

tation of multiplicities,” along with the relation of calculational technique and
arithmetic, in Philosophy of Arithmetic,14 and not in the few brief remarks to
which Caton refers under the heading of “Thought without Intuition and the
‘Surrogative Function’ of Signs”15 in the Logical Investigations.16 Furthermore,
Caton’s attribution to Klein of the view that the Renaissance mathematicians
were “self-conscious” of the effects wrought by their innovation of “symbolic
abstraction” cannot withstand careful scrutiny of Klein’s text. Such a view sug-
gests that they were aware of the implications of their innovation for the shift
in the “conceptuality” of the concept of number that Klein’s research demon-
strates. However, while Klein does indeed argue that a major change in the
concept of number was precipitated by their innovation, he also argues that a
fundamental lack of awareness of it characterizes both their self-understand-
ing and the science born of this change.17Ultimately, “the purpose and achieve-
ment of Klein’s historical method,” as worked out in his text, possesses a
subtlety that precludes assessing it by separating (as Caton does) its themes of
a historical development “immanent to mathematics” (225) and a “philo-
sophical purpose” supposedly beyond this development (225–26). This is not
to suggest, however, that the connection between these two themes is readily
apparent. Without the guiding clue for rendering Klein’s methodology per-
spicuous that is provided by Husserl’s articulation of the phenomenological
problem and method of history, the internal connection between the histor-
ical development of a science’s basic concepts and their philosophical meaning
is not at all evident. Husserl’s thesis that the clarification of the philosophical
meaning of the mathematics that makes modern physics possible is insepara-
ble from the investigation of the history of the development of its most basic
concepts is indispensable for grasping this point. By not recognizing the op-
erative role of this insight in Klein’s work, Caton could not help but see a “ten-
sion” (225) between Klein’s putative history of a technical innovation (i.e.,
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
22
————————
14. Edmund Husserl, Philosophie der Arithmetik, ed. Lothar Eley, Husserliana XII (The
Hague: Nijhoff, 1970), 245; English translation: Philosophy of Arithmetic, trans. Dallas Willard
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003). Henceforth cited as PA with German page references, which are
included in the margins of the English translation.
15. Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band, Erster Teil: Unter-
suchungen zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis, ed. Ursula Panzer, Husserliana
XIX/1 (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1984), 73; English translation: Logical Investigations, trans. J. N.
Findlay, 2 vols. (New York: Humanities Press, 1970), I: 304 (Investigation I, § 20). Henceforth
cited as LI with Investigation number in roman and German and English page references, re-
spectively.
16. See § 154 below, where we discuss these remarks in detail.
17. See Caton’s related statement (225) that, according to Klein, “the originators” of
modern mathematics “were aware of the ontological dimension of the problem” presented by
the symbolic concept of number.

“symbolic abstraction”) immanent to mathematics understood (by Caton, not
Klein) to be a science whose significance is ultimately “non-historical” (226),
and his (again, putative) philosophical projection of a non-mathematical (in
Caton’s sense) “ontological dimension of the problem” (225) into this his-
tory.18
Klein’s and Husserl’s Investigations
23
————————
18. See Part III, n. 146 below, where Caton’s review of the English translation of Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra is discussed in detail.

Chapter Two
Klein’s Account of the Essential Connection
between Intentional and Actual History
§ 6. The Problem of Origin and Histor y 
in Husserl’s Phenomenolog y
Klein’s interpretation of Husserl’s articulation of the phenomenological prob-
lem of history in his last writings capitalizes on Husserl’s lifelong concern
with “the problems of origin” (PHS, 65) in order to argue that there is an “es-
sential connection, as Husserl understood it,” between “the approach to the
‘true beginnings’” formulated in his earlier writings and his adumbration of
“the aims which should control research in the history of science” in his last
works. Klein locates this essential connection precisely in Husserl’s concern,
from beginning to end, with the constitutive problems of origin (true begin-
nings). According to Klein, Husserl’s phenomenological preoccupation with
the “ῥιζώματα πάντων, ‘roots’ of all things” (69), traced a continuous path
from his early rejection of historicism as a means of accounting for the origin
of logical, mathematical, and scientific propositions, to his late formulation
of “the historicity (as the ‘historical apriori’) which makes intelligible not
only the eternity or supertemporality of the ideal significant formations but
the possibility of actual19 history within natural time as well, at least of the his-
torical development and tradition of a science” (74–75). Thus, in marked
contrast to later commentators who see in Husserl’s Crisis and “The Origin
of Geometry” “the conflict between transcendental philosophy and histori-
————————
19. The German term that Klein translates here (and elsewhere) as ‘actual’ is no doubt
faktisch. Throughout this book, ‘actual’ is used to render faktisch, following Klein. Wherever it
translates wirklich, the latter will be included in brackets following the English term. Wherever
‘actual’ occurs in a text cited that has been translated from the German and that is not Klein’s
(or does not occur in a work of Klein’s or in the context of a discussion of his thought), ‘actual’
renders wirklich; in such cases, the German term is not included in brackets. See the Glossary
below for translations commonly used in the present study.

cism,”20 Klein aims to show that in these works “Husserl actually confronted
the two greatest powers of modern life, mathematical physics and history,
and pushed through to their common ‘root’” (74).
On Klein’s view the common “root” that Husserl uncovered is the “‘sed-
imentation of significance’” (78). ‘Sedimentation’ is an important concept
that Husserl introduced in his last writings to indicate the status of significant
formations that are no longer present to consciousness but that nevertheless
can still be made accessible to it. This status pertains both to the temporal
modification of the experience of significant formations and the role that pas-
sive understanding plays in the apprehension of the signification of concepts
and words. In either case, it is sometimes possible to render the sedimented for-
mations present to consciousness again in a process called ‘awakening’. In the
case of the passive understanding of significant formations, because it does not
reproduce the cognitive activity that originally produced their signification,
Husserl contends that the original meaning becomes diminished and in some
sense forgotten. Insofar as the original meaning has not completely disap-
peared, however, it can still be “awakened” by phenomenological reflection.
The key to understanding Husserl’s articulation of the phenomenological
problem of history is to be found, on Klein’s reading, in the former’s account
of the involvement of both kinds of sedimentation in the problem of “‘con-
stitutive origins’” (72) and the two distinct yet interrelated aspects of the con-
tent of what is sedimented in each case. Klein characterizes these aspects in
terms of i) the “‘intentional history’” (70)21 of “the essential and objective pos-
Klein’s Account of Intentional and Actual History
25
————————
20. David Carr, Phenomenology and the Problem of History (Evanston, Ill.: North-
western University Press, 1974), 238.
21. Klein’s article makes repeated reference to “Husserl’s notion of ‘intentional history’”
(PHS, 70; see 72–74, 76, 78, 82). However, Klein’s consistent use of quotation marks when re-
ferring to “intentional history” is misleading, since the expression comes from him and not
Husserl; hence, they are to be taken as scare quotes. 
One possible source for Klein’s expression may be a passage in Formal and Transcen-
dental Logic where Husserl introduces the term ‘sedimented history’ (to which Klein refers on
PHS, 72 n. 20). There intentionality is said to involve “a complex of accomplishments that are
included as sedimented history in the currently constituted intentional unity and its current
manners of givenness—a history that one can always uncover by following a strict method”; see
Edmund Husserl, Formale und transzendentale Logik, ed. Paul Janssen, Husserliana XVII (The
Hague: Nijhoff, 1974), 217; English translation: Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. Do-
rion Cairns (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1969); henceforth cited as FTLwith original page reference,
which is included in the margins of both the German and the English editions cited. This
method is articulated as “uncoverings of intentional implications” (ibid.). Thus, while there is
no mention by Husserl of the term ‘intentional history’ in this passage (or in any other passage
I know of), it is plain from what is stated here that he understands the method of uncovering
the sedimented history of the accomplishments (Leistungen) responsible for the constitution
of both an intentional unity and its manners of givenness as the “uncoverings of the intentional
implications” that manifest this history. 

sibility of each single significant phenomenon” (67) and ii) the “actual his-
tory” (69) connected to the “original ‘presentation’” (73) of the significant
phenomenon within “natural time.” As will become clear, the “true character
of history” (78) shows up for Klein when neither of these two “histories” is
taken in isolation. Rather, the “essential necessity” of intentional history’s
“being subjected to a history in the usual sense of the term” is disclosed by
Husserl in the Crisis and “The Origin of Geometry” when he “faced in those
papers . . . precisely the relation between intentional history and actual his-
tory” (74). 
§ 7. The Internal Motivation for Husserl’s Seemingly Late
Turn to Histor y
In order to explicate how Klein arrives at his interpretation of Husserl’s ar-
ticulation of the phenomenological problem of history, we shall show that he
situates the phenomenological motive for Husserl’s putative “late” turn to
history in the radicalization of his “early” concern with the problem of “con-
stitutive origins.” Then we shall make clear how Klein, alone among Husserl’s
commentators, correctly pinpoints the locus of the phenomenological prob-
lem of history articulated in Husserl’s last works. 
The locus in question is the inability of the constitutive analysis of the
“internal temporality” (72) of each intentional “significant formation” (67)
to reactivate “the ‘original foundations,’” and therefore “the ‘roots,’ of any sci-
ence and, consequently, of all prescientific conceptions of mankind as well”
(78). For Klein, Husserl’s phenomenology is internally motivated to widen
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
26
————————
Another possible source of Klein’s expression is Eugen Fink’s edition of “The Origin of
Geometry”—again, the only version available when Klein wrote his article. There the expres-
sion intentional-historisches Problem occurs in the full title, “Die Frage nach dem Ursprung der
Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem,” and once in the text: “Freilich hat diese ihrer-
seits selbst wieder Wissenstraditionen und ihnen entsprechende Seinsgeltungen, die wiederum
in einem weiteren und noch radikaleren Rückfragen zu einem intentional-historischen Prob-
lem werden müssen” (Origin, F219). Klein’s article does make one reference to “Husserl’s ‘in-
tentional-historical’ analysis of the origin of mathematical physics” (PHS, 79), though without
citing the source of his quotation. The real author of the expression ‘intentional-historical prob-
lem’, however, was Fink, as the absence of the expression from the publication of Husserl’s orig-
inal version of the article in Biemel’s edition of the Krisis makes clear. Klein, of course, had no
way of knowing this when he wrote his article. 
Notwithstanding the philological issue of the origin of the expression ‘intentional his-
tory’, its aptness in characterizing what both Fink’s and Biemel’s versions of “The Origin of
Geometry” refer to as “das eigentliche Problem, das inner-historische” (Origin, F225/K386; only
Fink’s version is italicized) cannot be denied. That the ‘inner’ at issue in inner-historische has its
basis in intentionality is clear from Husserl’s reference in the Crisis to “the hidden unity of in-
tentional inwardness which alone constitutes the unity of history” (Crisis, 74/73).

the scope of its inquiry into the origins of intentional objects beyond the evi-
dence manifest in the analysis of their temporal genesis. This motivation is
therefore provided not by any newfound interest in history on Husserl’s part
but by his recognition that the phenomenology of internal temporality is not
up to the task of disclosing these original foundations. Thus, in marked con-
trast to those who argue that Husserl’s turn to history in his last works has its
source in his response to the situation whereby “the most radical and funda-
mental (i.e., going to the deepest roots and seeking the most extensive impli-
cations) rationalization of the factualis ‘historically’ not forthcoming,”22 Klein
identifies this source in Husserl’s continued interest in the problem of ac-
counting for evidence that discloses the origin of ideal significant formations
that are non-factual and therefore, in precisely this sense, “rational.” For Klein,
then, the locus of the problem proper to history in Husserl’s mature phenom-
enology is inseparable from the problem of the origin of non-factual meaning,
that is, from the “ideal” meanings of Galilean Geometry and the “symbolic
formulae” (PHS, 82) that make mathematical physics both possible and—so
long as the origin of these meanings is investigated in the “genetic intentional
analysis” of their “temporal genesis” (FTL, 278)—unintelligible. 
Hence for Klein the phenomenological problem of history as sketched
by Husserl does not involve what some have formulated as the question,
“How is the facticity of history compatible with the claim of phenomenology
that it leads to insights into essences which have unconditioned universal-
ity?”23 It does not involve this question because it is precisely the “uncondi-
tioned universality” or the “a priori” status of the essences of any significant
or meaning-formations—beginning with the “exemplary”24 considerations
of the ideal meanings that are constitutive of mathematical physics—which,
when traced to their constitutive origins, are revealed to contain within them-
selves the “sedimented history” of their origination in “actual history.” It will
become clear, then, that for Klein, Husserl’s articulation of the phenomeno-
logical problem of history does not lead to the problem of the opposition be-
tween the “facticity” of history and the “aprioricity” of essences, but rather
uncovers their essential connection. Indeed, according to Klein, Husserl not
only shows this essential connection, one that renders “untrue” the “generally
Klein’s Account of Intentional and Actual History
27
————————
22. Gerhard Funke, “Phenomenology and History,” trans. Roy O. Elveton, in Mau-
rice Natanson, ed., Phenomenology and the Social Sciences, 2 vols. (Evanston, Ill.: North-
western University Press, 1973), II: 3–101, here 34 (my emphasis).
23. Ludwig Landgrebe, “A Meditation on Husserl’s Statement: ‘History is the Grand
Fact of Absolute Being’,” Southern Journal of Philosophy 5 (1974), 111–25, here 118.
24. Husserl, Origin, K365/C353. Husserl understands his considerations to have “ex-
emplary significance” for the “problems of science and the history of science in general, and
indeed in the end for the problems of a universal history in general” (ibid.). 

accepted opposition between epistemology and history, between epistemo-
logical origin and historical origin” (PHS, 78), but he also discloses its “uni-
versal and transcendental meaning” (74). This meaning uncovers “the real
problem of historicity” in terms of the “nexus of significance between the
‘[tran scendental] subjectivity at work’25 and its intentional products (Lei -
stungs gebilde)” (74), a nexus that yields the “interlacement of original pro-
duction and ‘sedimentation’ of significance” (78).
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
28
————————
25. ‘Work’ is Klein’s translation of Leistung (see PHS, 67). This translation results in
Klein’s articulation of the “manner of being” of transcendental subjectivity in terms of “an ‘in-
tentionality’ at work” (ibid.). It is interesting to note that Klein translates Aristotle’s notion of
ἐνέργεια as ‘at work’ and thus maintains that for Aristotle the “manner of being of an εἶδος is
that it is altogether ‘at work.’” See Jacob Klein, “Aristotle, an Introduction,” in his Lectures and
Essays, 171–95, here 181; this text is an enlarged version of a lecture first given in 1962 and
published in Joseph Cropsy, ed., Ancients and Moderns: Essays on the Tradition of Political Phi-
losophy in Honor of Leo Strauss (New York: Basic Books, 1964), 50–69. See also Jacob Klein,
“Aristotle (I),” ed. Burt C. Hopkins, New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological
Philosophy III (2003), 295–313, esp. 310–11.

Chapter ree
e Liberation of the Problem of Origin
from Its Naturalistic Distortion: 
e Phenomenological Problem 
of Constitution
§ 8. Psychologism and the Problem of Histor y
Turning now to Klein’s account of the problem of history in Husserl’s early
work, we find him maintaining that in “attacking ‘psychologism,’ Husserl was
in fact facing the problem of ‘history’” (65). Indeed, Klein maintains “that
Husserl in criticizing the attitude of historicism [in ‘Philosophy as Rigorous
Science’] puts it on the same level with psychologism. In fact, the former is
but an extension and amplification of the latter” (68). Thus:
Any “naturalistic” psychological explanation of human knowledge will in-
evitably be the history of human development with all its contingencies. For
in such an account any “idea” is deduced from earlier experiences out of which
that idea “originated.” In this view, the explanation of an idea becomes a kind
of historical legend, a piece of anthropology. The Logical Investigations
showed irrefutably that logical, mathematical, and scientific propositions
could never be fundamentally and necessarily determined by this sort of ex-
planation. (65–66)
For Klein, “Husserl’s radical criticism of psychologism implies anything but
a simple opposition between never-changing ‘abstract’ principles and ever-
changing ‘empirical’ things” (68). Thus, he holds that Husserl’s exposure of
the inability of the psychologistic and historicistic appeals to the “natural
time” of empirically conceived experience to account for the origin of the
eternity or supertemporality of ideal meanings and significations did not rule
out all connection of time to the problem of their origin. Rather, Husserl’s
recognition of the “naturalistic distortion” (66) of the account of the origin
of ideal meanings in psychologism and historicism was followed by his at-

tempt to “liberate” the problem of their origin from this distortion by dis-
closing it in terms of “phenomenological” time. 
On Klein’s view the fact that the phenomenological descriptions
grounding Husserl’s account of the “internal temporality” of phenomenolog-
ical time “were immediately interpreted as psychological descriptions . . . shows
not merely that a great many readers of Husserl were not able to understand
his thought, but that there is a definite affinity between psychological and
phenomenological research” (69). Klein expresses this affinity in terms of the
commonality of the “mental phenomena” with which each is concerned. In
support of this he refers (69 n. 11) to Husserl’s Formal and Transcendental
Logic, where Husserl writes that the mistaking of “psychologically inner ex-
perience” for “transcendentally” inner experience “is a falsification that could
not become noticeable before the advent of transcendental phenomenology”
(FTL, 224). And thus: “every mode of intentionality, including every mode of
evidence and every mode of the fulfilling of meanings through evidence, can
also be encountered and treated psychologically”—and not just transcenden-
tally—“in the psychological attitude toward experience.”
Despite this affinity, however, Klein discerns the following:
The real difference [between psychology and phenomenology, or “more ex-
actly . . . between psychological phenomenology and transcendental phe-
nomenology”] can only be found in the fundamentally different attitude of
the thinker toward his objects: on the one hand, the psychologist considers
them in “mundane apperception,” taking them as existing elements or parts
or qualities of the existing world; on the other hand, the phenomenologist
deprives these same objects of their “index of existence.” (PHS, 69)
The phenomenological reduction, which deprives the mind (das Psychische)
of its “index of existence,” of its being understood as a “natural object” exist-
ing in “natural time,” considers “the mind as the transcendental subjectivity.”
And thereby “transcendental phenomenology, as the universal theory of ‘con-
stitution,’ is primarily concerned with the problems of origin, the problem of
true beginnings.” Husserl’s characterization of the latter in “Philosophy as
Rigorous Science” as the ῥιζώματα πάντων26 is noteworthy on Klein’s view be-
cause in contrast to the traditional ἀρχή—which “in the ‘classical’ sense of the
term” denotes the “perfect shape” of things—“the (Empedoclean) term . . .
‘root’ is something out of which things grow until they reach their perfect
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
30
————————
26. Edmund Husserl, “Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft,” Logos I (1910–11), 289–
341, here 340; English translation: “Philosophy as Rigorous Science,” trans. Marcus Brainard,
New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological PhilosophyII (2002), 249–95; hence-
forth cited as PRS with the original German page reference, which is reproduced in the mar-
gins of the English translation.

shape.” Klein interprets this to mean that the “‘radical’27 aspect of phenome-
nology is more important to Husserl than its perfection,” and he finds in this
“the attitude of a true historian.”
§ 9. Internal Temporality and the Problem of the Sedimented
Histor y of Significance
For Klein, then, Husserl’s liberation of the problem of origin from the natu-
ralistic distortion of psychologism and historicism was achieved through the
phenomenological reduction, which brings about the phenomenologist’s
“fundamentally different attitude” over against the “empirical” psychologist’s
toward the mind or psyche. The result of this liberation was anything but
Husserl’s abandonment of the problem of history. On the contrary, his analy-
sis of the “roots” of the origin of the “eidos,” of the “a priori form” of each “sig-
nificant formation” presupposed by both human knowledge and the misguided
empirical attempts of psychologism and historicism to account for such mean-
ing, resulted in the phenomenological problem of uncovering its “history of
significance” (67).28
According to Klein, Husserl’s awareness of this problem followed “the
first step—first in the actual development of Husserl’s thought, and first in
any phenomenological analysis”—of “finding the ‘invariables’ within the ab-
solute flow (the ‘internal temporality’) of the mind,” of “determining the ‘in-
variants’ which remain unchanged by reason of an essential necessity.” Thus
Husserl’s “reflection upon this kind of analysis, its implications and signifi-
cance,” led to the realization that, “[f]ar from being complete in itself, the
finding and facing [of] an ‘essence’ requires a further investigation into its
intrinsic ‘possibility.’” This is the case because the “possibility” of an eidos is
not exhausted by the process that initially yields it, that is, the “continuous
and arbitrary ‘variation’ of a given ‘example,’ a variation that takes place in the
‘freedom of pure fantasy.’” Rather, whatever is discovered “as having a defi-
 nite significance—an essence, its ‘inflections,’ its essential characteristics, the
compresent ‘halo,’ and so forth—has also a ‘backward reference’ to a more
original ‘significant formation.’” It is precisely this “backward reference” that
allows for the uncovering of the history of significance of each significant
formation, which “describes the ‘genesis’ of that mental product.”29 The “his-
e Phenomenological Problem of Constitution
31
————————
27. Klein probably has in mind here the Latin etymology of ‘radical’ (radic-, radix, root);
see Husserl’s characterization of phenomenology in “Philosophy as Rigorous Science” as “the
method of a radical science” (PRS, 340; see Klein, PHS, 65).
28. The reference, unattributed by Klein, is to Husserl, FTL, 184.
29. The source of this quote, as well as of Klein’s paraphrase here, is Husserl’s FTL, 184.

toricity”30 at issue in this genesis is characterized by Klein as “a curious kind
of ‘history,’ . . . a peculiarity of the mind, whose manner of being is nothing
but ‘work’ (Leistung), a constructive work, tending toward the formation of
‘units of significance’—an ‘intentionality at work.’”
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
32
————————
30. Klein does not use this term—‘historicity’ (Historizität)—here, though Husserl
does. See FTL, 184.

Chapter Four
e Essential Connection between 
Intentional and Actual History
§ 10. The Two Limits of the Investigation of the Temporal
Genesis Proper to the Intrinsic Possibility 
of the Intentional Object
Klein unpacks Husserl’s account of how it is that the “intrinsic possibility” of
an object’s intentional unity “contains the ‘sedimented history’ of its ‘consti-
tution’” (72) in view of two “limits.” These emerge in the analysis of the “uni-
versal eidetic ‘form’ of the intentional genesis” of each such object’s unity, that
is, in the analysis of “internal temporality” (72–73).31 The first limit concerns
the “general substratum of consciousness” that the “continuous modification
of the retentional consciousness approaches and beyond which the ‘promi-
nence’ of the object flows away” (73). The second limit concerns the “‘past
history’ of the original ‘presentation’ of the object.” Both limits point to sed-
imented meanings that can be “awakened” (FTL, 280) such that the “inten-
tional genesis” of the meaning in question is “reproduced” as the “history” of
————————
31. Husserl’s phenomenological investigations of internal time-consciousness are well
known and therefore need only be briefly rehearsed here. For Husserl, the consciousness of
temporal phenomena is manifest in accordance with a structure he terms the ‘living present’. The
living present is a complex whole comprised of a focal Now phase that is horizonally girt by
Past and Future phases. The living present, therefore, is not structurally equivalent with the
Now phase of time since its structure is made up of all three phases of time. In addition, these
three phases of time are not structurally independent. This means that “internal time” is not
manifest in terms of the successive appearance and therefore successive ordering of its phases;
rather, the three phases of time are interrelated and interdependent. Husserl expresses this state
of affairs with the metaphor of “flow” or “flux.” This metaphor suggests that the focal Now of
time’s living presence is manifest in terms of its inextricable reference to the “slippage” of both
just-past Nows, which comprise the horizon of the past, and of the Nows to come, which com-
prise the horizon of the future. Husserl terms consciousness of the Now ‘impression’, whereas
he terms consciousness of the “past” ‘retention’, and consciousness of the “future” ‘protention’.

its constitution, a history that, “of course, did not take place within ‘natural
time’” (PHS, 72). For Klein, then, two “histories” are initially at issue in
Husserl’s phenomenological account of the intrinsic possibility of an object’s
intentional unity. The first history concerns the possibility of such an object’s
retaining its unity as an enduring “presence” once it has been presented to con-
sciousness. This history concerns the object’s intentional genesis as an objec-
tive “prominence,” its persistence throughout the temporality that is the
essential characteristic of the experience of that object. The second history
concerns the possibility of the object’s “original presentation” to conscious-
ness. This possibility is more fundamental than that of its persistence as a
“prominence,” for what is at issue here is its presentation to consciousness prior
to any modification in accordance with consciousness’s structure of internal
temporality. It is important to note, however, that neither of the possibilities
or “histories” at issue here concern the “natural” existence of objects and their
histories. This has been precluded by the phenomenological reduction’s re-
moval of the “index of existence” from the experience of both the object and
its history. As a result, what is at issue in the priority of the original presenta-
tion of the intentional object to consciousness is decidedly not its being expe-
rienced “first” in a supposed natural succession of awareness. Rather, the
priority involved here is methodological, in the sense—to be discussed in detail
below—that the evidence uncovered by these analyses discloses an “indica-
tion” that points to a more original “possibility” belonging to the object than
its enduring presence in experience. 
For example, the significant formation ‘S is P’ is immediately presented
to consciousness when one studies logic. So long as one is attentive to its sig-
nificant formation, it is experienced as an objective prominence. When an-
other object becomes the focus of attention, say, a knock at the door, the
prominence of ‘S is P’ recedes into the general substratum of consciousness.
When, after this interruption, one’s logical studies are resumed, ‘S is P’ can be
awakened and thereby made prominent once again. After intensive study,
the awareness that this particular significant formation has a “past history,”
one that exceeds its sedimented history as a prominence in one’s experience,
becomes unavoidable as soon as one realizes that ‘S is P’ as a significant for-
mation does not originate with its presentation to one’s consciousness as an
“immediate prominence.” Therefore, subsequent to the initial phenomeno-
logical access to and analyses of the intrinsic possibility of an object’s inten-
tional unity as the eidetic form of its intentional genesis (which is manifest
as its internal temporality), Husserl’s analysis indicates the possibility of its
“original presentation” to consciousness. As the discussion below will show,
for Klein it is precisely this inquiry into the original presentation of an object’s
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
34

intentional unity that “may reveal the essential necessity of a historical de-
velopment within natural time” (73).
The phenomenological problem of evidentially uncovering the possi-
bility of the enduring “prominence” of an intentional object, an object “given
originally in the mode of immediate ‘presence,’” is therefore what is at issue in
the “awakening” of the sedimented meanings to which the first “limit” points.
Inseparable from “this immediate ‘presentation’” of the object is its being “fol-
lowed, of necessity, by a ‘retention’ of the object, in which the object appears
in the mode of ‘just-having-been-experienced.’” The continuous retentional
modification of the originally given “prominence” of an object “accompanies
every living present,” such that “the initial part of the constitution of an iden-
tical object” comes about as “one that, in the broadest sense, persists” (FTL,
280). The limit of this continuous modification, the general substratum of
consciousness wherein the prominence of the object recedes, is what points to
objects that are at once no longer prominent while still being capable of being
made prominent again. Thus, when the “sedimented prominences” connected
with the “possibility” of the object’s givenness in the mode of immediate pres-
ence are “awakened,” what is uncovered by the intentional analyses of the evi-
dence experienced in these sedimentations is the “sedimented history” of its
intentional genesis as an object given to inner experience precisely in the mode
of immediate presence. Such evidence is therefore mediated by the retentional
modifications that are inseparable from the object’s initial givenness to inner
experience in the mode of an immediate presence. 
§ 11. The Transcendental Constitution of an Identical Object
Exceeds the Sedimented Genesis of Its Temporal Form
According to Husserl, “every [retentional] modification obviously refers back,
either immediately or mediately, to its absolute original mode—to a con-
sciousness that, to be sure, is modified at once yet is no longer a [retentional]
modification” (FTL, 280). And it is precisely here, at the “limit” manifest in
this reference back to the “original ‘presentation’ of the object” (PHS, 73),
Klein maintains, “that the ‘evidence’ experienced in the immediate presenta-
tion assumes the character of a transcendental problem of constitution.” It is
at this point that “the intrinsic ‘possibility’ of the object is revealed out of its
categorial formations,32 that the ‘intentional genesis’ leads back to the ‘consti-
e Essential Connection between Intentional and Actual History
35
————————
32. The phenomenological problem of revealing the intrinsic possibility of an object in
terms of its “categorial formations” is connected to Husserl’s theory of parts and wholes. Husserl
initially formulated this theory in Philosophy of Arithmetic, where it is articulated with respect
to the arithmetic activities of collecting and counting. This formulation was followed by his 

tutive origins,’ that the ‘sedimented history’ is reactivated into the ‘intentional
history.’”33 Further, it is here that Klein states that “such a transcendental in-
quiry into an object may reveal the essential necessity of its being subject to a
history in the usual sense of the term. In other words, it may reveal the essen-
tial necessity of a historical development within natural time.”
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
36
————————
articulation of the theory in terms of “pure logic” in the Logical Investigations. In subsequent
stages of the development of his phenomenology, i.e., in Ideas I and Experience and Judgment,
Husserl returned to the theory in order to refine it in accordance with the new resources that
on his view were made available by this development, most notably his theory of “formal on-
tology.” However, the text Klein is working with, Formal and Transcendental Logic, does not
contain an explicit discussion of the theory. Nevertheless, the theory is relevant to the “judica-
tive formations” and “categorial formations” he treats in the context of the phenomenological
development of transcendental logic. A brief consideration of Husserl’s theory is therefore nec-
essary here so as to provide a context for Husserl’s (and Klein’s) consideration of the constitu-
tion of the intentional object out of its categorial formations.
The theory of parts and wholes is formulated as the phenomenological project of pro-
viding an account of the logical unity of an object on the basis of the internal relations between
the logical “parts” composing it and its initially experienced “wholeness.” In the context of
Klein’s discussion, the logical unity in question refers to the object understood as an intentional
unity, whereas its parts refer to its “categorial formations.” Husserl calls the phenomenological
status of these parts the ‘moments’ of the whole in order to signal that they cannot be given to
experience independently of the whole to which they refer, the universal unity of the inten-
tional object as it is initially given to experience. Moments, as non-independent parts of a whole,
are thus characterized as being “foundationally related” to the whole insofar as their givenness
is inseparable from and therefore “founded” upon the givenness of the whole. Yet because these
moments make up the essential components of the intentional object’s unity, Husserl likewise
characterizes the whole in terms of its foundational relationship to the parts that, as its mo-
ments, make it up and therefore “constitute” it. Husserl characterizes the two-way relationship,
manifest in the non-independence of the whole from the part and the part from the whole, in
terms of a foundational relationship that is “reciprocally founding/founded.” Husserl’s concern
in Formal and Transcendental Logic with the investigation of the intentional genesis of the cat-
egorial formations of the intentional object therefore represents in effect a deepening of the
phenomenological problem of the constitution of the wholeness of an object out of its parts.
By focusing his discussion upon this aspect of the problem of constitution, Klein thus sees what
even today many readers of Husserl do not see: that Husserl’s later “genetic” investigations of the
intentional genesis of the “categorial formations” of the intentional object do not represent a self-
critical departure from his earlier “static” phenomenological investigation of the logic of
whole/parts relations. Rather, in these later investigations Husserl attempts to bring to com-
pletion his life-long preoccupation with the goal of accounting for the “constitutive origins” of
ideal objects. Klein’s recognition that the genetic investigations adumbrated in Formal and
Transcendental Logic (like the static investigations before them) were seen by Husserl in his last
works to fall short of the goal of accounting for these origins (though this did not cause him to
question or abandon the phenomenological goal of accounting for the constitutive origins of
ideal objects) likewise sets Klein’s understanding of Husserl apart from his contemporary read-
ers. Indeed, it is precisely Klein’s account of this realization by Husserl, and its role in motiva-
tion of the need to turn to “actual history” in order to fulfill the enduring goal in question, that
is the subject of his discussion here. 
33. Regarding Klein’s use of the expression ‘intentional history’, see n. 21 above.

Before considering more closely Klein’s understanding of how Husserl
worked out the “essential necessity” of intentional history’s subordination to
an actual history in his last works, it will be helpful to elaborate on the dis-
tinction, as well as the relation, that Klein articulates between: i) the sedi-
mented history of the intentional genesis of an object’s immediate presentation
and ii) the reactivation of this sedimented history into intentional history in
the investigation of the object’s transcendental constitution. This discussion
will highlight the basis of Klein’s argument that Husserl recognized an essen-
tial connection between intentional history and the historical development
that takes place within natural time.
Husserl’s analyses of the constitutive origins of “the intrinsic ‘possibility’
of the identity of an object” suggest for Klein that this possibility cannot be re-
vealed by the “‘evidence’ experienced in the immediate presentation” of the ob-
ject (PHS, 73). The transcendental problem of intentional history, which Klein
understands to emerge out of the phenomenological investigation into the ori-
gins that are constitutive of an object’s intrinsic possibility as an identity, in-
volves a mode of access to the object that exceeds its mode of being given as an
intentional object that persists as a “prominence” present to inner experience.
This is clear from the analyses in Formal and Transcendental Logic on which
Klein bases his articulation of these issues (67 n. 5 and 73 n. 22). These analy-
ses take the universality of an identical object to reveal—when “studied more
closely”—“its peculiarity as the constitution of persisting categorial formations”
(FTL, 280). According to Husserl’s analyses, prior to this closer study, which in-
vestigates the history belonging to the significance of the formations, the “ideal
formation” (183) of each identical object appears as “the finished products of
a ‘constitution’ or ‘genesis’” (184). Husserl’s analysis of the initial appearance of
these ideal constituents—as the universality of an identical object—refers to
this appearance as the object’s “immediate presentation” to inner experience as
a persisting prominence. Klein situates the transcendental problem of the “in-
tentional genesis” of the intrinsic possibility of this identity, as it “is revealed
out of its categorial formations,” in the investigation of the constitutive origins
of these formations. According to Klein, then, it is precisely the problem of
these constitutive origins that leads Husserl’s inquiry back to an “intentional
history” that exceeds the “universal eidetic ‘form’ of the intentional genesis”
(PHS, 72–73) belonging to this identity’s immediate presentation. Husserl’s
analysis of the need to investigate the genesis of these constituents makes it ev-
ident that the constitutive origins of these categorial formations, which com-
prise the intentional significance (Sinn) of an object’s unity, exceed the
sedimented history of this significance as it is “reproduced” in terms of its in-
ternal temporality. Husserl articulates this need as follows:
e Essential Connection between Intentional and Actual History
37

The essential peculiarity of such products [i.e., the “ideal or categorial for-
mations” of an identical object] is precisely that they are significances [Sinne]
that bear within themselves, as a significance-implicate of their genesis, a kind
of historicity; that in them, level by level, significance points back to original
significance and to the corresponding noetic intentionality; that therefore
each signiﬁcant formation can be asked about its essential significance-history.
(FTL, 184)
§ 12. The Distinction between the Sedimented Histor y of 
the Immediate Presence of an Intentional Object and 
the Sedimented Histor y of Its Original Presentation
The distinction Klein makes between the history of the significance belong-
ing to the categorial formations of an object’s identity, when this identity is
immediately given to consciousness as the finished product of a constitution,
and the “sedimented history” proper to this significance’s original “constitu-
tion” by intentional “accomplishments,” becomes clear when the two limits
he identified in Husserl’s analysis of any object’s intentional genesis are con-
sidered. These two limits concern two distinct but nevertheless interrelated di-
mensions of an object’s possibility as a “‘significant’ or ‘intentional’ unit” (PHS,
72). Our discussion has shown the first limit to involve the reactivation of the
sedimented history that is responsible for an intentional object’s persisting
identity, a reactivation that reveals the intentional history of its immediate
presentation to inner experience as a finished product of constitution. The
“history” at stake in the persisting identity of an intentional object is there-
fore quite different from the history to which psychologism implicitly appeals
and that which historicism explicitly invokes. The latter concept of history is
empirical, which means that its meaning is inseparable from the contingency
and accidental nature of natural “reality.” Because the identity of a categorial
formation is neither contingent nor accidental, empirical history can con-
tribute nothing in the way of an account of the origin of this identity as some-
thing that persists as identical throughout “inner” experience, as an “ideal”
object. The failure of empirical history to address on its own terms the origin
of an ideal object does not, however, rule out this origin’s having a history.
Klein points out that Husserl initially sought to account for this history’s
source in the flowing away (via the continuous modification of retentional
consciousness) into the general substratum of the consciousness of the inten-
tional object’s prominence “as one and the same (identical, ‘invariant’) object”
(73). Our discussion has also shown that the second limit that Klein identified
concerns Husserl’s recognition that the reactivation of the sedimented history
of just these continuous retentional modifications is unable to disclose the
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
38

“original presentation”—unmodified by retentions—of a categorial object.
Klein thus links i) the problem of the “original presentation” of the object with
ii) the investigation of the categorial formations comprising its significance as
an initially given, finished product of a constitution, whose original presenta-
tion is investigated through the reactivation of the intentional history of these
formations. 
Once these two issues have been linked, the evidence experienced in
the universal eidetic form of internal temporality—an evidence that repro-
duces the intentional genesis of an intentional object’s enduring presence—
can be seen to account for its constitution only in terms of the “possibility”
of this enduring prominence for an “inner experience.” The constitution of
the intrinsic possibility of an object’s original presentation to consciousness,
prior to the sedimented “history” of its temporal modification, is therefore
kept distinct from the constitution of its intrinsic possibility subsequent to
its having been given to inner experience and modified in accordance with the
internal temporality that essentially characterizes such experience. For Klein,
then, Husserl’s analyses show that the intrinsic possibility of an object’s “orig-
inal presentation” to consciousness and therefore “original” constitution in
consciousness is “not itself a modification” of its “immediate presentation”
to inner experience as an “enduring prominence” constituted by internal time.
In other words, the constitution of an object in accord with the form of in-
ternal time is derivative, in the sense that the awakening of the intentional
history of the sedimented history belonging to this constitution points to a
more basic constitution, wherein the object’s unity is originally fashioned.
On the basis of this, Klein is able to reveal that for Husserl the derivative con-
stitution of the object’s identity is inseparable from its significance (Sinn) as
an identity that already involves the retentional modifications of conscious-
ness manifested by the universal structure of internal temporality. In contrast
to this, the problem of the transcendental constitution of the “intrinsic pos-
sibility” of the object’s significance points to the temporally unmodified but
nevertheless “historical” intentionality that discloses the radical beginnings of
the categorial formations that compose its significance. Such formations,
however, do not initially appear, according to Husserl’s analyses, as tempo-
rally unmodified. Rather, they are first encountered in accord with con-
sciousness’s retentional modification of their significance as unities whose
formation has already been accomplished. It is therefore only when the prob-
lem of the constitution of the intrinsic possibility of the significance of these
categorial formations is investigated with a view to its transcendental origin
that “every [retentional] modification” of such formations is encountered as
referring back to a consciousness that “is not itself a [retentional] modifica-
e Essential Connection between Intentional and Actual History
39

tion” (FTL, 280). In other words, the transcendental inquiry into the origin
of its unity is led from the retentional modification of the experience of the
enduring identity of a categorial formation to the phenomenological problem
of its original constitution. 
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
40

Chapter Five
e Historicity of the Intelligibility 
of Ideal Significations 
and the Possibility of Actual History
§ 13. The Problem of ‘Ισ τορία Underlying Husserl’s Concept
of Intentional Histor y
In the foregoing discussion we have indicated that for Klein the transcen-
dental inquiry into the problem of the “intentional history” of the categorial
formations of the significance making up an object’s identity “may reveal the
essential necessity of its being subject to a history in the usual sense of the
term.” That is to say, the transcendental inquiry into the intentional history
of an object’s categorial unity may disclose an essential connection between
the origin of this unity and its historical development within natural time. For
Klein, “[h]istory, in the usual sense of the term, is not a matter-of-course at-
titude. The origin of history is itself a non-historical problem” (PHS, 72).
This is the case because history in its usual sense is “the ‘story’ of a given ‘fact.’”
Thus, the telling of any such story about the “fact” of the historical attitude
will of necessity presuppose, rather than account for, the “historical attitude”
that gives rise to the “telling of the telling” of the story of the historical ori-
gin of this attitude: “Whatever historical research might be required to solve
it [i.e., the origin of history], it leads ultimately to a kind of inquiry which is
beyond the scope of a historian.” Such research “may, indeed, lead back to
the problem of inquiry, the problem of ἱστορία as such, that is, to the very
problem underlying Husserl’s concept of an ‘intentional history.’”34
For Klein the connection between the problem of inquiry that under-
lies historical research and Husserl’s concept of ‘intentional history’35 is estab-
————————
34. Klein’s linking of the meaning of “historical research” here to “problem of ἱστορία”
includes the reference of the latter to its source in Plato’s Phaedo (96a ff.).
35. See n. 21 above.

lished when Husserl—in the works that present the final phase of his
thought—once again takes “up a task that psychologism could not solve with
its own premises but had attacked in its own way” (74):the investigation of the
origin of the unity of the “significant formation” of any intentional object. In
these works, Husserl showed that the inquiry into the constitution of any “sig-
nificant formation” as an invariant that transcends the natural time presup-
posed by psychologism is itself “but a mode of ‘eternal’ time: its identity is an
intentional product of the transcendental subjectivity which is ‘at work’
through all the categorial determinations that constitute a significant unit.”
Hence, the inquiry into the origin of an invariant, as identically the same, leads
Husserl to the problem of the “nexus of significance between the ‘subjectivity
at work’ and its intentional products (Leistungsgebilde).” According to Klein,
this problem “is the real problem of historicity taken in its universal and tran-
scendental meaning.” For the inquiry into the intrinsic possibility of the in-
variant—if it is to pursue this possibility in terms of the transcendental origin
of its status as an intentional product—must push beyond the articulation of
this possibility in terms of its intentional genesis as an identity that is “imme-
diately present” to inner experience. It must do so if the origins of the catego-
rial formations are to be investigated with respect to their original (unmodified
by retention) presentation to experience. And it is precisely here that the in-
quiry into origins reveals that the “intentionality at work” that constitutes this
original presentation “implies historicity (as ‘the historical a priori’)” as that
“which makes intelligible not only the eternity or supertemporality of the ideal
significant formations but the possibility of actual history within natural time
as well” (74–75). 
§ 14. Two Senses of Historicity and the Meaning 
of the Historical Apriori
Klein therefore understands Husserl’s inquiry into the intelligibility of the in-
trinsic possibility of an invariant to involve ‘historicity’ in two distinct senses.
One concerns the intentional history of an invariant’s intrinsic possibility.
‘Historicity’ in this sense is indicated at the limit of the inquiry into the in-
variant’s sedimented history, an inquiry guided by the eidetic form of its in-
ternal temporality. This limit concerns the original presentation of an
intentional unity as a significant unit that has not yet been retentionally mod-
ified and, therefore, not yet structured as an enduring unity within internal
time. The other sense of historicity concerns the “actual (faktische) history”
that is indicated by the limit of the inquiry into the intentional history of pre-
cisely this unmodified origination of the invariant’s intrinsic possibility. It
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
42

therefore concerns the “actual history” indicated when the categorial forma-
tions that manifest an ideal significant formation are interrogated with respect
to their transcendentally original constitution. Because both senses of ‘his-
toricity’ are inseparable from the phenomenological inquiry into the “intrin-
sic possibility” of the ideal signification belonging to the intentional object’s
identity, the status of the meaning of the ‘history’ in each of these senses of
historicity is different from that of the “empirical” history of accidents and
contingencies that may be associated with the identity of an object. Indeed, it
is precisely the inseparable link between each of these senses of historicity and
the inquiry into the intrinsic possibility of the ideality of an intentional object’s
significance that allows Husserl—and thus Klein following him—to speak of
this historicity in terms of the historical apriori. The aprioricity of the apriori
in question here cannot be derived in the manner in which it is typically de-
rived, that is, from a supposed opposition between the contingent and the
non-contingent. This opposition establishes the apriori as something that is
somehow priorto the contingent. Such an understanding of the apriori is “for-
mal” in a sense that is irrelevant in the present context, which is concerned
with what is itself prior to all formal significance and therefore also to the apri-
ori understood formally. As the apriori of the formal apriori, however, the his-
torical apriori, in its very aprioricity, nevertheless remains inseparable from
the intrinsic possibility of both formal significance and the formal apriori. It
is in this latter sense, and in it alone, therefore, that the apriori of the phe-
nomenological notion of the historical apriori is to be understood: that is, as
the non-contingent and non-formal condition that makes intelligible both
the “supertemporality” of ideal significant formations and the possibility of ac-
tual history in natural time. It is Klein’s achievement—and in this he stands
alone among Husserl’s commentators—to have recognized that in Husserl’s
last works the condition of possibility for this condition, the condition of pos-
sibility therefore for the historical apriori, is the transcendental accomplish-
ment of intentionality “at work.” That this accomplishment is only accessible
via the sedimentations of significance that are manifest as a given (historical)
tradition is also something that, as we shall see, Klein alone has recognized.
§ 15. Historicity as Distinct from Both Historicism 
and the Histor y of the Ego
Thus for Klein what is indicated at this second limit—the fact that Husserl re-
gards the historicity of actual history as implicit in the historicity of “inten-
tional history”—does not mean, as some have argued, that Husserl belatedly
recognized “the engagement of consciousness in a particular historical situa-
e Historicity of the Intelligibility of Ideal Signiﬁcations
43

tion.”36 It neither signals a reassessment of his earlier attack on historicism nor
accords “considerable legitimacy to [historicism’s] notion of the socially and
historically conditioned character of consciousness.”37 In addition, for Klein
the issue here is not a historical meaning derived from the “universal genesis of
the ego,” in which “[t]he ego constitutes itself for itself in, so to speak, the unity
of a ‘history.’”38
Regarding the first point, Klein’s discussion of the “real problem of his-
toricity” in Husserl’s last works shows that Husserl does not call into ques-
tion—in light of historicism’s insistence on the social and historical condition-
ing of all significance—the ideal status of the significant formations, such as
mathematical and scientific objects, that are the accomplishments of tran-
scendental subjectivity. Rather, what Husserl does in these works is to reveal
how the inquiry into the origin of the ideal significance inseparable from these
objects has an “essential connection” to their “‘creation’ in actual history”
(PHS, 76), a connection that “does not refer to any known or even knowable
historical event” (78). This connection, to be discussed in greater detail below,
is established on the basis of the inability of the reactivation of the “intentional
history” of the original presentation of the categorial formations proper to the
ideal significance of mathematical and scientific objects to bring to evidence
the origin of this significance in an “intelligible” manner. For Klein, Husserl’s
transcendental inquiry into the origin of these significant formations discloses
that the significance of these formations paradoxically “appear[s] almost de-
void of ‘significance,’” unless the connection to the actual history of their ori-
gin is investigated. The phenomenological inquiry into the origin of the
significance of these formations discloses not only that this origin is insepara-
ble from their “intelligibility” but also that these formations’ status necessarily
remains “emptied of significance” (Origin, F218/C368) unless the inquiry
into the intentional history of their origin is extended to include the inquiry
into their “actual” history. Klein’s understanding of how Husserl’s inquiries
show that this paradoxical state of affairs is possible, that is, the state in which
mathematical and scientific objects are at once significant and yet almost de-
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
44
————————
36. Carr, Phenomenology and the Problem of History, 239.
37. Carr, “Translator’s Introduction,” in Crisis, xxxvii.
38. Edmund Husserl, Cartesianische Meditationen, in his Cartesianische Meditationen
und Pariser Vorträge, ed. S. Strasser, Husserliana I (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1950), 109; English
translation: Cartesian Meditations, trans. Dorion Cairns (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1960), 109;
henceforth cited as CM, with German pagination, which is included in the margins of the
translation. The German version of this text was not available to Klein when he wrote “Phe-
nomenology and the History of Science.” However, he may well have had access to the French
translation: Méditations cartésiennes. Introduction à la phénoménologie, trans. Gabrielle Peiffer
and Emmanuel Lévinas (Paris: A. Colin, 1931).

void of real significance, as well as his understanding of Husserl’s “admirable
attempt to restore the integrity of knowledge, of ἐπιστήμη” (PHS, 78), which
is threatened by this state of affairs, will be considered shortly. At this point,
it is important to note that rather than call into question the possibility of the
ideality of mathematical and scientific objects, the problem of actual history
in Husserl’s last works emerges within the context of his response to “the de-
mand, which has spread throughout the modern period and has finally been
generally accepted, for a so-called ‘epistemological grounding’ of the sciences”
(Origin, F218/C368).
This account of the emergence of the problem of actual history in
Husserl’s phenomenology also tells against the attempt to trace the meaning
of history at issue here to the historicity of the transcendental ego’s universal
genesis (the second point above). This is the case because the status of the
transcendental ego as “the universal unity-form of the flux” (CM, 109)—
whereby “[i]n each present moment of the existence of an ego its past coop-
erates in the manner of sedimentation”39—would clearly have as its analog the
“history” of the sedimented prominences that make possible an intentional
object’s givenness in the “mode of immediate ‘presence.’” What is at issue,
then, in the sedimentation of the ego’s past would be the retentions of its uni-
versal unity-form, retentions that are inseparable from its constitution as an
enduring unity present to inner experience. Thus, the reactivation of the in-
tentional historicity of these sedimented retentions would be disanalogous to
the reactivation of the sedimented history of the “absolute mode” of the un-
modified (by retentions) “original presentation” to consciousness of the cat-
egorial constituents of an intentional unity. For Klein, as shown above,
Husserl’s analyses establish the phenomenological problem of actual history
in terms of its essential connection with the inquiry into the intentional his-
tory of just such unmodified original presentations. Hence, the historicity of
the transcendental ego’s enduring presence as a “universal unity-form” would
be incapable of providing a basis, analogical or otherwise, for the connection
between actual history and intentional history that Klein maintains Husserl
established in his last works.40
e Historicity of the Intelligibility of Ideal Signiﬁcations
45
————————
39. Landgrebe, “A Meditation on Husserl’s Statement,” 116.
40. This state of affairs raises the interesting question of whether the possibility of the
“immediate presence” of the transcendental ego’s unity likewise refers back to its “absolute orig-
inal mode” of unmodified presentation to consciousness, that is, to a sedimented history that,
in a manner analogous to the sedimented history of the intentional object’s original presenta-
tion, likewise “may reveal the essential necessity of a historical development within natural
time.” The implications of this question, however, will not be pursued in this study.

Chapter Six
Sedimentation and the Link between 
Intentional History and the Constitution 
of a Historical Tradition
§ 16. Maintaining the Integrity of Knowledge Requires 
Inquir y into Its Original Historical Discover y
According to Klein, then, it is Husserl’s phenomenological inquiry into the
transcendental constitution of the origins of the ideal formations proper to
mathematical and scientific objects that reveals that the “‘evidence’ of all the
‘significant formations’ belonging to a science such as geometry” presupposes
“the link between ‘intentional history’ and actual history” (PHS, 76). For
Klein, this link is established by Husserl on the basis of the following con-
siderations: i) the “ideal ‘intentional units’” at issue in these significant for-
mations are the product (das Erwirkte) of an “accomplishment” (gelingende
Ausführung; Verwirklichung) that arises in their “anticipation” (Vorhabe)41—
not in their “retention”; ii) “‘accomplishment or [sic]42 what is anticipated
means evidence to the active subject: herein the product shows itself origi-
nally as itself’”; iii)
since the product, in the case of geometry, is an ideal product, “anticipation”
and the corresponding “accomplishment,” as acts of the subject . . . , are
founded upon the “work” of transcendental subjectivity: the ideal forma-
tions of geometry are products of the “intentionality at work.” “Anticipa-
tion” and “accomplishment” translate into terms of “reality” what actually
takes place within the realm of “transcendental subjectivity”;
————————
41. Carr translates Vorhabe as ‘project’. See Husserl, Origin, K356/C208 et passim.
42. The German text translated by Klein here reads “Gelingende Verwirklichung einer
Vorhabe,” which makes it probable that the ‘or’ here is a typographical error, since the correct
translation would be ‘accomplishment of what is anticipated’. The original version of Klein’s
text published in Philosophical Essays in Memory of Edmund Husserl also prints an ‘or’ here.

and iv)
the constitution of those ideal “intentional units” presupposes, of necessity,
the whole complex of experiences leading to the situation in which geometry
as a science is capable of being “anticipated” and“intended.”43 In other words,
“science, especially geometry, as a subjective intentional product, had to have some
definite historical beginning,”44 i.e., a beginning within the course of actual his-
tory. At this definite moment the “original foundation” (Urstiftung) of geom-
etry occurred.
Klein fills out the “necessity” belonging to the presupposition of a def-
inite historical beginning that is inseparable from the constitution of these
ideal “intentional units” with two additional presuppositions. They are dis-
closed by Husserl’s transcendental inquiry into the origin of the ideal signifi-
cant formations belonging to a science such as geometry. Both presuppositions
are inseparable from the “anticipation” and “accomplishment” that yield these
formations on the basis of the “work” of transcendental subjectivity. They are
inseparable in the sense that the transcendental inquiry into the “nexus of sig-
nificance” between this subjectivity and its “intentional products” points to
the “discovery” of geometry in an “anticipation” of a “first geometer” whose
accomplishment brought about “geometry as a supertemporal product of the
mind.” 
Before addressing Klein’s account of these additional presuppositions,
however, it is necessary to consider more closely the inquiry into the origin of
the ideal significant formations “pointing to” the “discovery” in question.
What is at issue here is not a known or knowable historical event. Rather, it is
Husserl’s realization that an inquiry into the constitutive origins of the signif-
i cance of the ideal formations of mathematical and scientific objects guided by
exclusively “epistemological” concerns cannot fulfill “the presupposition that
the foundations of [their] deductive structure have truly been produced and
objectified in original evidence, thus have become universally accessible ac-
quisitions” (Origin, F216/C366). Husserl’s phenomenological investigations
have, of course, taken it for granted from the beginning that the significance
Sedimentation, Intentional History, and Historical Tradition
47
————————
43. Klein refers here to Formal and Transcendental Logic, where Husserl writes: “ge-
netic intentional analysis . . . is directed to the whole concrete nexus in which each conscious-
ness and intentional object as such in each case stands. Immediately the problem becomes
extended to include the other intentional references, those belonging to the situation . . . and to
include, therefore, the immanent unity of the temporality of the life that has its ‘history’ therein,
in such a fashion that every single conscious lived-experience, as occurring temporally, has its
own ‘history’—that is: its temporal genesis” (FTL, 278).
44. In Biemel’s version of “The Origin of Geometry,” the phrase als subjektive Lei stungs-
 gebilde found in Fink’s version (F208) is replaced by mit diesem Seinssinn (K367). Also, only
historischen Anfang (F208) appears in italics in the passage in Fink’s version, which Klein
quotes and translates here.

(Sinn) of the deductive structure of these ideal formations necessarily had to
have been produced and objectified in such original evidence. Indeed, Husserl
never wavers in holding this “assumption” to be inseparable from the integrity
of knowledge itself. However, only in his last investigations does one find the
realization that “what is lacking [in the ‘epistemologically’ guided inquiry into
this original evidence] is precisely what had given and had to give significance
to all propositions and theories, a significance arising from the primal sources
that can be made evident again and again” (K376–77/C367). Moreover, this
realization is manifest in the paradoxical situation that these investigations de-
scribe—the situation Klein characterizes in terms of what “has been becom-
ing increasingly the state of affairs in recent centuries and is the case now”
(PHS, 78)—that the “‘sedimentation of significance’ can reach such a degree
that a particular science, and science in general, appear almost devoid of ‘sig-
nificance.’” In this case, the primal sources whose evidence is productive of the
foundations of scientific propositions and theories is “lacking.” And it is just
this realization that leads Husserl’s transcendental inquiry into the intelligi-
bility of the significant formations of the science of geometry to uncover the
reference to the essential necessity of their having to have been the product of
a “discovery.” The intelligibility of such formations is therefore inseparable
from the original production of the significance that is now at stake in the
transcendental inquiry into their intelligibility.
§ 17. Two Presuppositions Are Necessar y to Account for 
the Historicity of the Discover y of the Ideal Objects 
of a Science Such as Geometr y
The need to inquire into the “discovery” of the original evidence that is the
source for the sought-after intelligibility of a science such as geometry there-
fore has its basis in the fact that such original evidence is not forthcoming so
long as the “ruling dogma of the separation between epistemological elucida-
tion and historical . . . explanation” (Origin, F220/C370) is maintained. Ac-
cording to Klein, it is precisely Husserl’s inquiry into the “transcendental
problem” of the “constitutive origins” of the original evidence in question here
that overcomes this ruling dogma by disclosing that such evidence implies
“historicity.” On Klein’s view, this historicity is disclosed by the two additional
presuppositions alluded to above, presuppositions that are essentially con-
nected with the constitution of the ideal “intentional units” of a science such
as geometry having “of necessity” some definite historical beginning. The first
presupposition concerns the discovery that geometry is inseparable from “a
characteristically articulated world, . . . the acquaintance with a definitely
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
48

shaped and featured ‘material,’ . . . in short, the experience of ‘things’” (75).
The second presupposition concerns the first geometer’s “‘anticipation’ (Vor -
habe) of what comes into being through his ‘accomplishment’ (gelingende Aus-
führung),”namely, geometry as “a supertemporal product of the mind” (when
the mind, deprived of its index of existence, is understood as transcendental
subjectivity). By not recognizing and inquiring into these two presupposi-
tions, the phenomenological inquiry into the transcendental constitution of
the origins of the evidence that yields the ideal significant formations belong-
ing to a science such as geometry becomes incapable of disclosing the “true
significance” (Crisis, 53/53) of these formations, “the significance that is au-
thentic, true to the origin.”
§ 18. Sedimentation and the Constitution of a Geometrical
Tradition
For Klein, Husserl’s analysis of the “essential connection” between these two
presuppositions and the discovery of geometry is but the first step in his ac-
count of the constitution of the historicity of geometry as a science, a con-
stitution whereby geometry’s “ideal objectivity” becomes “the property of
many individuals” (PHS, 76). Only when this occurs does geometry and any
science dealing with ideal objects become capable of assuming the meaning
of a “tradition” with a “historical development.” It is the first step because
“the original evidence, experienced during the first actual production,” does
not “transcend the personal sphere of the subject” (77). Thus, what is at
issue in the “discovery” of geometry is not the finding of some historical
“fact”—understood as an abiding possession of many subjects—but the tran-
scendental conditions of possibility that give rise to such “facts,” conditions
of possibility that are necessarily inseparable from establishing the intelligi-
bility of geometry as it is presently experienced. For the significant forma-
tions whose ideality manifests the intentional objects of the science of
geometry as it is “handed down” in the guise of a tradition are inseparable
from the original production that had to initiate the historicity of its tradi-
tion. And it is precisely the latter that is referred to when, in Husserl’s tran-
scendental inquiry into the origin of the significant formations of the science
of geometry, it is shown that the full intelligibility of the ideal significance
of these formations is not forthcoming so long as the inquiry is guided ex-
clusively by “epistemological” interests. This state of affairs, which comes to
light in Husserl’s analysis of the role and status of geometry in the founda-
tions of Galileo’s physics, is captured in his term ‘sedimentation’. When used
in this context, ‘sedimentation’ describes the superficial and passive under-
Sedimentation, Intentional History, and Historical Tradition
49

standing of the significance of a science such as geometry that accrues to its
significant formations as a result of a “‘forgetting’” (Origin, F212)45 of the
original evidence that produced these formations. 
According to Klein, “[a]t least three steps are required” (PHS, 76) for
geometry to reach the stage of an ideal objectivity “capable of being handed
on.” The first step involves the state of affairs whereby “the original evidence,
experienced during the first actual production [of geometry as a supertem-
poral product of transcendental subjectivity], passes over into a ‘retentional’
consciousness and finally fades away into forgetfulness.” This evidence, which
“presupposes, of necessity, the whole complex of experiences leading to the
situation in which geometry as a science is capable of being ‘anticipated’ and
‘intended’” (76), that is, presupposes the “experience of things” and the “han-
dling” (75) of their “shape and measurability” according “to a more or less
satisfactory technique,” “does not disappear completely: it can be reawak-
ened, and the ‘active’ remembrance of the original production of any ideal
significant formation carries with it the evident experience of the sameness of
that formation, carries furthermore the insight into its unlimited repro-
ducibility” (76–77). A “second necessary—and decisive—step” is required,
however, if such experience is “to transcend the personal sphere of the sub-
ject,” namely, “the embodiment of that experience in words, which makes it
communicable to other subjects” (77).Such embodiment enables these others
“to reproduce the same evident experience out of their own mental activity.”
Thus, for Klein the “‘ideal significant unit’ acquires its peculiar manner of
existence only through speech and in speech.” A last step is required “in order
to secure the lasting existence of the ‘ideal objects,’ to establish their perfect
‘objectivity.’” This step involves “the translation of the spoken word into the
written word.” According to Klein, “[a]t this stage the real history of a science
may begin.”
Klein summarizes Husserl’s account of the real history of a science in
terms of its being, “of necessity, not only the history of ‘progress,’ of the accu-
mulation of knowledge, but also a history of failure.”For the “means which se-
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
50
————————
45. The explicit connection between ‘sedimentation’ and ‘forgetting’ is found only in
Fink’s edition of “The Origin of Geometry” (F212: “Alle Sedimentierung ist in einer gewissen
Weise ein ‘Vergessen’”; translation: “in a certain way, all sedimentation is a ‘forgetting’”), and not
in Biemel’s publication of presumably Husserl’s original version of the essay. Klein, of course, had
no way of knowing this when he wrote “Phenomenology and the History of Science.” However,
in a lecture delivered in 1973, he remarked upon the absence of the sentence in question in the
version of “The Origin of Geometry” published by Biemel, and expressed the following view
of the matter: “I assume, however, that this sentence [found in Fink’s] is based on Husserl’s own
words, uttered in conversation with Fink.” See Jacob Klein, “Speech, Its Strength and Its Weak-
nesses,” in his Lectures and Essays, 361–74, here 372.

cure the objectivity of a science at the same time endanger its original integ -
rity.” Specifically:
No science, in its actual progress, can escape the “seduction” emanating from
the spoken and written word. For the signifying function of a word has, by its
very nature, the tendency to lose its revealing character. The more we become
accustomed to words, the less we perceive their original and precise “signifi-
cance”: a kind of superficial and “passive” understanding is the necessary re-
sult of the increasing familiarity with spoken and written words. The original
mental activity, the production of significance, embodied in sounds and signs,
is not reproduced in the course of actual communication. Yet it is there, in
every word, somehow “forgotten” but still at the bottom of our speaking and
our understanding, however vague the meaning conveyed by our speech might
be. The original “evidence” has faded away but has not disappeared completely.
It need not be “awakened” even; it actually underlies our mutual understand-
ing in a “sedimented” form.
The “reactivation” of the original evidence, “in order to restore the full sig-
nificance of all the previous steps leading to a given stage within the devel-
opment of a science” (77–78),is what for Klein “constitutes the true character
of history” (78). Indeed, for Klein it is the “interlacement of original pro-
duction and ‘sedimentation’ of significance”46 that manifests the only “legit-
imate form of history: the history of human thought” (78). As a result, “the
main problem of any historical research is precisely the disentanglement of all
these strata of ‘sedimentation,’ with the ultimate goal of reactivating the ‘orig-
inal foundations.’ . . . Moreover, a history of this kind is the only legitimate
form of epistemology.” Thus, “the problem of history cannot be restricted to
the finding out of ‘facts’ and their connection. They embrace all stages of the
‘intentional history.’ History, in this understanding, cannot be separated from
philosophy.”
§ 19. The Historical Apriori of Ideal Objects 
and Historical Facts
For Klein the historical apriori at issue in Husserl’s last works concerns both
the historicity of transcendental subjectivity’s original production of the ideal
significant formations that form the basis of a science such as geometry and
the transcendental conditions of possibility that constitute such a science
Sedimentation, Intentional History, and Historical Tradition
51
————————
46. This is Klein’s paraphrase of the following passage in Fink’s edition (Origin, F220):
“Geschichte, wie wir sie verstehen, ist nichts anderes als die lebendige Bewegung des Miteinan-
der und Ineinander von ursprünglicher Sinnbildung und Sinnsedimentierung”; translation:
“history, as we understand it, is nothing other than the vital movement of the original forma-
tion and sedimentation of meaning with and into each other.” In Biemel’s version (K380), von
vornherein (from the beginning) is substituted for wie wir sie verstehen.

with the status of a “historical fact” (Origin, F220/C371)—that is, of some-
thing that is “tradition and at the same time a handing-down” (F220/C370).
On Klein’s view, the historical apriori and the historical fact are each grasped
differently.
On the one hand, Klein shows that the key to grasping the historical
apriori of the origin of a science such as geometry lies in the “historicity” of the
twin presuppositions necessarily entailed in this origin: i) the origin’s necessary
“anticipation” by a “first” geometer and ii) a “characteristically articulated
world,” that is, the “experience of things” and the “handling” of their “shape
and measurability” according to “a more or less satisfactory technique.” The
historicity here emerges from the problem of “‘epistemological’ grounding or
clarification” (Origin, K381/C373) insofar as the production of the original
evidence that “had given and had to give” significance to geometry’s proposi-
tions and theories is not made manifest so long as these twin presuppositions
are not invoked. For Klein, it is precisely the historicity implicit in these pre-
suppositions that provides the basis for rendering intelligible what according
to Husserl would otherwise remain unintelligible—namely, the epistemolog-
ical presupposition that the “deductive structure” of the ideal significant for-
mations of geometry’s propositions and theories “have truly been produced
and objectified in original evidence.” Clearly, what is at issue in the inquiry
into the historicity thematized here is neither a known nor a knowable “his-
torical event,” but rather the historical apriori that the transcendental inquiry
into the “intelligibility” of the ideal significant formations discloses as insep-
arable from their significance as such.
On the other hand, Klein shows that the key to grasping the historical
apriori that manifests the transcendental conditions of possibility that en-
able a science such as geometry to assume the status of a “historical fact,” of a
tradition that is still being handed down, lies precisely in Husserl’s account of
the written embodiment of the “ideal significant units” comprising its propo-
sitions and theories. It is therefore the translation of these “ideal significant
formations,” from their peculiar manner of existence in speech into the writ-
ten word, that both secures their lasting existence as “ideal objects” and also
establishes the possibility of the “sedimentation” of their original evidence.
That is, the possibility of their assuming the guise of a tradition capable of
being “handed down” is coincident with the forgetfulness of the evidence
that is inseparable from the “original establishment” (Urstiftung) of these very
“ideal significant formations.” Thus what Husserl calls the “universal apriori
of history” (Origin, K380/C371) can be seen to consist in “nothing other”
(F220/C371) than this “interlacement of original production and ‘sedimen-
tation’ of significance” (PHS, 78). 
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
52

§ 20. The Historical Apriori Is Not a Concession to Historicism
Hence Klein shows that rather than representing a radical departure from
Husserl’s earlier critique of historicism, this critique remains in force in
Husserl’s formulation of these issues in his last works. It does so because the
connection they establish between history and both the origination of a sci-
ence such as geometry and the existence of its “ideal objects” does not have its
basis in “the relativity of everything historical, of all historically developed
apperceptions” (Origin, F221/C373), as historicism maintains, but rather in
the following state of affairs:
All factual history remains unintelligible, always merely drawing its conclu-
sions naively and straightforwardly from facts; it never makes thematic the
general ground upon which all such conclusions rest, has never investigated
the immense structural apriori that is proper to it. Only the disclosure of the
essential general structure lying in our present and then in every past or fu-
ture historical present as such, and, in its totality, only the disclosure of the
concrete, historical time in which we live, in which our total humanity lives
with respect to its total, essentially general structure—only this disclosure
can make possible historical inquiry which is truly understanding, insightful,
and in the genuine sense scientific. This is the concrete, historical apriori that
encompasses everything that exists as its historical becoming and having-be-
come or exists in its essential being as tradition and handing-down. (Origin,
F221/C371–72)47
Thus, the apriori in Husserl’s concept of a historical apriori is not rooted in
the attempt to overcome the supposed opposition between the a priori status
of the “ideal significant formations” that compose the propositions and theo-
ries of a science such as geometry and the contingency of historical facts.
Rather, it is rooted in the necessary connection between the very “aprioricity”
of the “ideal significant formations” in question and the “actual” history of
both their origination and their historical development. It is precisely the lat-
ter state of affairs, or the being in question of the “intelligibility” of the “ideal
objectivity” of these “significant formations,” that motivates the need to ex-
tend the transcendental phenomenological inquiry into the origin of such in-
telligibility, moving beyond the scope of the question of its “epistemological”
Sedimentation, Intentional History, and Historical Tradition
53
————————
47. In Fink’s edition, the second sentence reads: “Nur die Enthüllung der konkreten
historischen Zeit hinsichtlich ihrer totalen wesensallgemeinen Struktur, die alles Seiende im his-
torischen Gewordensein und Werden oder in seinem wesensmässigen Sein als Tradition und
Tradierendes umgreift, kann eine wirklich ‘verstehende Historie’ ermöglichen, die die ver-
borgene ‘Vernunft in der Geschichte’ an den Tag bringt.” Translation: “A truly ‘understanding
historical inquiry,’ which brings to the light of day the ‘reason concealed in history,’ is possible
only in the disclosure of the concrete historical time with regard to its total, essentially universal
structure, which encompasses the historical having-become and becoming of everything that
exists, or its essential being as tradition and handing-down.”

grounding. The being-in-question of intelligibility, which Husserl regarded
as characterizing the “crisis” situation of the European sciences that prevailed
in his day, leads to the question and questioning of origin that results in turn
in the “exposition of the horizon” of the present (F223/C374). According to
Husserl, what is disclosed in this exposition “is not something learned, not
knowledge that had ever been current and then sank back [into oblivion],”
but something whose “horizon-certainty had to be already there in order to be
capable of being explicated thematically”as “a past present” (F220/C374).In-
deed, “[t]he thematically emphatic explication of this implicit meaning, the re-
activation of the inner tradition of meaning, the awakening of a sediment that
is perhaps centuries old, is historical disclosure” (F220).48 And it is precisely
here—and nowhere else—that the “necessary connection” becomes manifest
between the immediate presentation of the significant formations of a science
such as geometry—formations that manifest an “ideal” aprioricity—and the
historical apriori. Inseparable from both the origination of their significance
and its “present” status as a “historical fact” in a tradition that is still being
handed down, the historical apriori makes intelligible both the non-contin-
gent meaning of science and its existence as a historical fact.
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
54
————————
48. The passage in Biemel’s edition reads as follows in translation (Origin, C370):
“Every explication and every transition from making explicit to making evident . . . is noth-
ing other than historical disclosure.”

Chapter Seven
Klein’s Departure from the Content 
but Not the Method of Husserl’s Intentional-
Historical Analysis of Modern Science
§ 21. The Contrast between Klein’s Account of the Actual 
Development of Modern Science and Husserl’s 
Intentional Account
Klein’s discussion in “Phenomenology and the History of Science” does not
“follow Husserl’s pattern” (PHS, 79) in his last works of providing an “‘in-
tentional-historical’ analysis of the origin of mathematical physics,” an analy-
sis that for Klein, “although not based upon actual historical research, is on
the whole an amazing piece of historical ‘empathy.’” Thus, rather than follow
Husserl and analyze the foundations of Galileo’s physics by treating “Galileo’s
name [as] somewhat of a collective noun, covering a vast and complex his-
torical situation,” Klein tries “to give a general outline of that actual histori-
cal development” of mathematical physics. In so doing, he situates his account
of this development within the context of his articulation of the significance
of Husserl’s late confrontation with the problem of “the relation between in-
tentional history and actual history” (74), and thus within the context of
Husserl’s analysis of the “increase of ‘sedimentation’ [that] follows closely the
establishment of the new science of nature, as conceived by Galileo and
Descartes” (79). By proceeding in this manner, Klein operates on the as-
sumption that Husserl’s phenomenological analysis of the problem of “true
beginnings” has “adumbrated the aims which should control research in the
history of science” (65), an assumption that discloses the understanding of
history here as being inseparable from philosophy itself. In addition, Klein’s
outline of the actual historical development of mathematical physics also op-
erates on the assumption of the aptness of Husserl’s characterization of the
method of historical reflection in the Crisis. This is because, for Husserl, the

problem of “sedimentation” emerges from out of the “unique situation” (78)
that held sway for him at the time he wrote the Crisis, the situation in which
both a particular science and science in general “appear almost devoid of ‘sig-
nificance.’” This method characterizes historical reflection as involving “the
‘zigzag’ back and forth” from the “‘breakdown’ situation of our time, with its
‘breakdown of science’ itself,” to the historical “beginnings” of both the orig-
inal meaning of science itself (i.e., philosophy) and the development of its
meaning which leads to the “breakdown” of modern mathematical physics. 
By focusing on the implications of Husserl’s investigations of the his-
torical apriori for research in the history of science, Klein’s discussion of
Husserl’s phenomenology leaves aside both Husserl’s mostly undeveloped sug-
gestions regarding the implications of these investigations for “the problems of
a universal history in general”49 and his more developed suggestions that
(Husserlian) transcendental phenomenology represents the “final establish-
ment” of the Greek “primal establishment” of philosophy (Crisis, 73/72).50
By contrast, Klein’s outline of the actual historical development of mathe-
matical physics does provide an account—albeit in the form of an extremely
condensed discussion—of an aspect of the problem of the origin of modern
science that Husserl’s “careful, if incomplete, analysis” (PHS, 74)in “The Ori-
gin of Geometry” and the Crisisdoes not “seem to appreciate” fully (70).Klein
acknowledges that Husserl “realizes that the discovery of a formal symbolism
by Vieta in his establishment of algebra (ars analytice, logistice speciosa) is at
the basis of modern mathematics as well as modern science.” However, Klein
maintains that Husserl fails to appreciate, “in this connection, the importance
of Stevin’s algebraic work and, strangely enough, the Cartesian idea of a math-
esis universalis, based at least partly on Stevin and leading directly to the cor-
responding, if modified, Leibnizian concept.”Klein’s outline thus supplements
Husserl’s account of the sedimentation involved in Galileo’s “‘Euclidean’ ap-
proach to the world” (83) with an account of the “‘sedimented’ understand-
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
56
————————
49. See n. 24 above.
50. Regarding this last point, however, it is interesting to note that the last of the three
tasks articulated in Klein’s outline of the actual historical development of modern mathemati-
cal physics—all of which will be discussed in the final part of this study—concerns the prob-
lem of “sedimentation” posed by the origin of the hypothesis of an “exact” nature. Carrying out
this task involves—for Klein no less than for Husserl—the “rediscovery of the prescientific
world and its true origins.” Klein’s apparent approbation of this task thus gives rise to the ques-
tion of whether the disclosure of these “true origins” compels him, as it does Husserl, to embrace
transcendental phenomenology as the “final establishment” of Greek philosophy. This question
will be addressed in the final part of our study. In addition to posing this question, that last part
will also explore the possibility that Klein’s research into the history of mathematics may pro-
vide guidance for the discovery of sedimented meanings at work in Husserl’s understanding of
transcendental phenomenology as the “final establishment” of Greek philosophy.

ing of numbers” (84) that made the discovery of the formal symbolism possi-
ble. Although Husserl’s analyses did not pursue the sedimentation inseparable
from this discovery, he nevertheless recognized the discovery’s importance,
having characterized it as leading to a “completely universal ‘formalization’”
(Crisis, 44/45) of nature by mathematical physics. 
§22. Sedimentation and the Method of Symbolic Abstraction
Klein’s account of the sedimentation involved in the discovery of formal
symbolism focuses on what he calls the “method of symbolic abstraction”
(PHS, 83). He writes:
It is the method used consciously by Vieta in his establishment of a “general”
algebra and by Descartes in his early attempt to set up the mathesis universalis.
It amounts to a symbolic understanding of magnitudes and numbers, the re-
sult of which is an algebraic interpretation of geometry. The roots of this de-
velopment can be found in the adoption of the Arabic system of numeration
which leads to a kind of indirect understanding of numbers and ultimately to
the substitution of the ideal numerical entities, as intended in all Greek arith-
metic, by their symbolic expressions.
The “indirect” understanding of numbers in the method of symbolic abstrac-
tion amounts to a “complicated network of sedimented significances [that]
underlies the ‘arithmetical’ understanding of geometry” (84), an understand-
ing that “is superposed upon the first stratum of ‘sedimented’ geometrical ‘ev-
idences,’”which Husserl analyzes in his last works. As we have already pointed
out, Klein positions the task of “the reactivation of the process of symbolic
abstraction and, by implication, the rediscovery of the original arithmetical
evidences”between the two other tasks he identifies within the tripartite prob-
lem of the origin of modern science. His articulation of these other tasks ad-
heres to Husserl’s presentation of the sedimentation that “follows closely the
establishment of the new science of nature” (79), tasks formulated in terms of
both “the intentional-historical reactivation of the origin of geometry” (83)
and “the rediscovery of the prescientific world and its true origins” (84). But
whereas for Husserl the latter is articulated in terms of an “intentional-histor-
ical” analysis that links “all our considerations to his [i.e., Galileo’s] name, in a
certain sense simplifying and idealizing the matter” (Crisis, 58/57), Klein’s
discussion of the “rediscovery” in question outlines the “more exact historical
analysis [that] would have to take into account how much of his thought he
owed to his ‘predecessors.’” Moreover, Klein maintains that the history “an-
ticipated” by the “‘anticipation’ of an exact nature” (PHS, 84) is precisely “the
development of the method of symbolic abstraction.”This development goes
beyond Galileo, “who has not yet at his disposal the powerful instrument of
Klein’s Departure from Husserl’s Intentional-Historical Analysis
57

symbolic formulae” (82), and comes to characterize the modern scientific at-
titude itself.
§ 23. The Establishment of Modern Physics on the Foundation
of a Radical Reinterpretation of Ancient Mathematics
Klein’s outline of the “more exact historical analysis” maintains that “[t]he
establishment of modern physics is founded upon a radical reinterpretation
of ancient mathematics, handed on through the centuries and acquiring a
new dignity in the middle of the sixteenth century” (79). Crucial to this
“reinterpretation” is the careful study of Euclid’s Elements, along with the
rediscovery of Archimedes, Apollonius, and Diophantus. In addition, the
“publication and translation of Proclus’ commentary on the first book of
Euclid allows a fusion of the traditional theory of ratios and proportions
with the ‘algebraic’ art of equations” (80). He continues:
The algebra (leading back, at least partly, to a Greek tradition represented
by Diophantus and Anatolius) and especially the Arithmetic of Diophantus
are understood as an immediate application of the theory of ratios and pro-
portions. Moreover, the (Eudoxean) “general” theory of proportions, as laid
down in the fifth book of Euclid, seems to indicate that the “vulgar” algebra
as well as the Arithmetic of Diophantus is but a remnant of a more general
theory of equations, of a true and more general algebra.
On Klein’s view, it is François Vieta “who works out the logical and mathe-
matical consequences of this insight and becomes thus the ‘inventor’ of mod-
ern mathematics.” Vieta’s invention is based in part on his application of the
Greek procedure of geometrical analysis to the method Diophantus used in his
Arithmeticto solve indeterminate numerical equations. As a result, “Vieta pos-
tulates a reckoning (logistice, λογιστική) using not number but merely ‘species’
(taking over the Diophantean term ‘species,’ εἶδος, applied by Diophantus to
the various powers of the unknown)” (81). He thus “opposes a ‘restored’ and
‘pure’ algebra, the logistice speciosa, to the commonly used Diophantean logis-
tice numerosa. At the same time, this pure algebra represents, in his mind, the
general theory of proportions.”The latter, “[d]escribed by Proclus as the ‘high-
est’ mathematical discipline, . . . in the form of Vieta’s pure algebra becomes
from now on the fundamental discipline not only of mathematics but of the
system of human knowledge in general.” In order “to designate this highest
mathematical discipline,” Barocius, “the Latin translator of Proclus, . . . uses
the term mathesis universalis, referring to it on the margin as scientia divina.”
Thus, Klein says, “[i]t is from this source that Descartes, and the entire sev-
enteenth century, have derived the term and the conception of a ‘universal sci-
ence’ which includes all possible sciences of man.”
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
58

Diophantus’s method consisted in “setting up an indeterminate equa-
tion which is immediately converted into a determinate one by the arbitrary
assumption of a numerical value” (80). According to Klein, “[t]his equation
has a purely numerical character: apart from the unknown quantity, the
‘given’ quantities as well as the coefficients of the unknown are definite num-
bers.” Diophantus is said to have referred frequently to “the easily performed
checking of the result [of equations that he had solved] in these terms: καὶ ἡ
ἀπόδειξις φανερά(and the demonstration [the ‘proof’] is obvious).” Because
in Greek mathematics a “demonstration” means the “synthesis” that both fol-
lows from and reverses the preceding “analysis,” “Vieta calls the Diophantean
solution an ‘analytical’ process, referring himself to the traditional definition
of analysis as ‘the way from the unknown taken as known, through the con-
sequences, down to something which is known.”51 However, Vieta’s “analyt-
ical” interpretation of Diophantus’s method represents an innovation, for
Greek analysis was limited to treating the unknown in terms of magnitudes.
Thus, Vieta’s innovation of a “restored” and “pure” algebra is based on the as-
sumption “that the ‘general’ method behind the ‘Diophantean analysis’ must
be applicable to the numerical as well as to the geometrical procedure” (80–
81). In creating an ars analytice that reckons not with numbers but with their
species, Vieta, on Klein’s view, “introduced for the first time, fully conscious
of what he was doing, the notion of a mathematical symbol and the rules gov-
erning symbolic operations: he was the creator of the mathematical formula”
(81).
§ 24. Vieta’s and Descartes’s Inaug uration of the Development
of the Symbolic Science of Nature : Mathematical Physics
As a result of Vieta’s invention of a “general” algebra, the mathesis universalis
“bears from the outset a symbolic character.” And although the method of
“symbolic abstraction” used by Vieta to establish symbols and symbolic oper-
ations “preserved . . . the original ‘ideal’ concept of number, developed by the
Greeks out of the immediate experience of ‘things’ and their prescientific ar-
ticulation,” his innovation nevertheless prepared the way for the loss of this
“original intuition”of numbers. According to Klein, this is precisely what hap-
pens to his “immediate successors, Ghetaldi, Harriot, Oughtred, and Wallis
(partly under the influence of Stevin and, as far as Wallis is concerned, of
Descartes’ Geometry),” with the result that “[t]he technique of operating with
symbols replaces the science of numbers.”Moreover, Klein holds that Descartes,
Klein’s Departure from Husserl’s Intentional-Historical Analysis
59
————————
51. The source of the Greek definition of analysis in Klein’s quote is Pappus, ed.
Hultsch, II 634. He also refers to the scholium to Euclid xiii, prop. 1–5.

“aiming at the all-comprehensive mathesis universalis, and following the alge-
braic doctrine of Stevin, transforms the traditional understanding of Euclid-
ean geometry into a symbolic one, which transformation is at the basis of his
analytic geometry” (81–82).
Klein thus considers it the symbolic understanding of numbers and
magnitudes first made possible by Vieta and Descartes, respectively, that “in-
augurates the development of a symbolic science of nature, commonly known
as mathematical physics” (82). For Klein, it is the method of symbolic ab-
straction underlying this understanding that solves “the problem of finding
the adequate means” (83) for “the anticipated conversion of all ‘natural’ ap-
pearances into geometrical entities,” an anticipation at work in Galileo’s “con-
cept of an ‘exact’ nature as a great book written in mathematical characters”
(82). Klein’s general outline of the “actual historical development” of modern
science deviates from Husserl’s “intentional-historical” analysis thereof by ex-
plicitly calling attention to the sedimented understanding of the numerical
entities intended by Greek arithmetic. What is at issue in this deviation, how-
ever, is not Klein’s recognition of something that Husserl failed to recognize,
namely, the importance of the role of symbolic formulae in the universal for-
malization of nature accomplished by mathematical physics.52 On the con-
trary, what Klein claims to see that Husserl does not is the explicit linkage of
mathematical physics’ use of symbolic concepts to an arithmetical sedimenta-
tion, which—in addition to the geometrical sedimentation uncovered by
Husserl’s intentional-historical analyses—is likewise involved in the establish-
ment of the new science of nature. Thus, Klein’s outline of the actual history
of this establishment represents a more complex view of the matter than
Husserl’s “simplifying and idealizing” view insofar as the former’s extremely
condensed account of the method of symbolic abstraction suggests that a “net-
work” of sedimented significances underlies the origin of modern science.
Klein’s outline also deviates from Husserl’s intentional-historical account
by noting the importance of the nominalistic school of the fourteenth century
to what Husserl’s analysis refers to as the Galilean anticipation of the “possibil-
ity of reducing all appearances to geometrical entities” (82). Here Klein men-
tions “Nicolaus Oresmus (Nicole Oresme), whose work De uniformitate et
difformitate intensionumhas profoundly influenced all following thinkers up to
Galileo, Beeckman, and Descartes” (83). Klein also questions Husserl’s analy-
sis of the Galilean “Euclidean” approach to the world when he calls attention
to the fact that the latter understood the geometrical conversion of appearances
to involve, in addition to the geometrical magnitudes on which Husserl’s analy-
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
60
————————
52. See n. 8 above.

sis focuses, their treatment as “definite ratios and proportions.” This latter de-
viation is of major significance because, on Klein’s view, it is precisely Vieta’s
understanding of his “general” algebra as an immediate application of the Greek
theory of ratios and proportions that provides the means for realizing what
Husserl’s analysis refers to as the Galilean geometrization of nature.
§ 25. Open Questions in Klein’s Account of the Actual 
Development of Modern Science
Klein’s general outline of the actual historical development of modern science
raises a number of questions. To begin with, there is the question of precisely
what the method of symbolic abstraction entails. Klein mentions that this
method “is quite different from the ancient ἀφαίρεσις.” Yet beyond hinting that
this method leads to “a kind of indirect understanding of numbers and ulti-
mately to the substitution of the ideal numerical entities, as intended by Greek
arithmetic, by their symbolic expressions,” Klein sheds no light on it in his dis-
cussion. How the modern method of abstraction differs from the ancient
method, to say nothing of what is involved in the ideal numerical entities in-
tended by Greek arithmetic, is not considered. Indeed, insofar as Klein explic-
itly ties the sedimented understanding of numbers underlying the modern
“arithmetical” understanding of geometry to the “task” of reactivating both the
process of symbolic abstraction and the “original arithmetical evidences” at issue
in Greek mathematics, it would appear that he regards the “rediscovery” of
these evidences as something that had yet to be made at the time he wrote “Phe-
nomenology and the History of Science.” In addition, it remains unclear why
it is that Vieta understands his logistice speciosa to be a “restored” algebra in op-
position to both the “vulgar” algebra and the Diophantean logistice numerosa.
And, finally, the question remains open whether—and if so, how—what Klein
characterizes as the “third task arising from the attempt to reactivate the ‘sedi-
mented history’ of the ‘exact’ nature” (84), that is, the task of “the rediscovery
of the prescientific world and its true origins,” differs from Husserl’s formula-
tion of this problem. In other words, the question of the relation of Klein’s
thought to Husserl’s is raised by Klein’s very deviation from the “pattern” of
Husserl’s intentional-historical analysis of the sedimented history of modern
science—when Klein turns to the actual history of this sedimentation. 
Regarding the first set of questions, it is important to recall that prior
to writing “Phenomenology and the History of Science”53 Klein had in fact
Klein’s Departure from Husserl’s Intentional-Historical Analysis
61
————————
53. In a letter to Klein, dated November 10, 1939, Marvin Farber, editor of Philo-
sophical Essays in Memory of Edmund Husserl, invited him to submit a paper to the volume. 

already done extensive historical research on both the process of symbolic
abstraction and the ideal numerical entities intended by Greek arithmetic.
Indeed, his work on these issues was already completed54 before both
I. Klein on Husserl’s Phenomenology and the History of Science
62
————————
He wrote that Husserl’s son, Gerhart, “has written to me about your ability to have a paper
ready for the E. H. memorial volume within a week, or very soon thereafter,” and that “un-
usual circumstances . . . make it possible at this late date to consider another paper.” In reply
to Farber, Klein wrote on November 12, 1939: “Although the time is very short I can get the
article written before the deadline. I shall be grateful to you, if you can extend the time limit
to the end of November.” Farber eventually extended the deadline to December 5, in response
to Klein’s November 27, 1939 telegram to Farber requesting an extension to that date.
In his letter to Farber of November 12, Klein described his proposed paper as follows:
“The subject of my paper would be something like Phenomenology and History with special
reference to the History of science. I have in mind the Philosophica essay which you mention in
your letter and, in addition, Husserl’s article “Die Frage nach dem Ursprung der Geometrie als
intentional-historisches Problem” published in the Revue internationale de philosophie(Janvier
1939). (It goes without saying that I should have to refer to other publications of Husserl as
well.)” “I should like to add that my intention is not to give simply a commentary on those texts
but also to examine the notion of History of science as such.”
All of the correspondence referred to and cited above may be found among Klein’s pa-
pers, which are housed in the St. John’s College Library in Annapolis, Maryland. I wish to ex-
press my thanks to Mr. Elliot Zuckerman, the literary executor of Klein’s estate, for permission
to cite from Klein’s correspondence.
54. The first part of Klein’s “Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung der Alge-
bra” was published in 1934, while the second part was published in 1936. According to
Klein’s wife, Else “Dodo” Klein, his research for these two extended articles was done during
the late 1920s. (Else Klein’s recollection is contained in the transcript of a tape recording [the
original tape is apparently lost] among Klein’s papers, which are housed in St. John’s College
Library, Annapolis, Maryland.) In a letter to Leo Strauss, dated April 17, 1934, Klein men-
tions that “the entire part relating to antiquity” was “really done a year ago,” but that, “since
then the 16th century has intervened.” He characterizes the work dealing with antiquity as
“really amounting to a discrete whole,” and relates that the just mentioned “intervention”
permitted him to grasp, “for the first time, a sense of the shape of the whole thing.” See “Kor-
re spondenz Leo Strauss – Jacob Klein,” in Leo Strauss, Gesammelte Schriften, ed. Heinrich
Meier (Stuttgart: Metzler, 2001), III: 455–605, here 497–500 (letter 25), esp. 499. 
Klein’s own assessment (in that same letter) of the entire work is interesting, esp. in
light of the obscurity into which it fell soon after its publication: “This presently bears the
pompous title ‘Greek Logic and the Origins of the Language of Algebraic Formulae,’ com-
prising a little more than seven proof sheets and, at that, compressed to an extreme state of
terseness. Much about this work is not good. Much is certainly good. How this work will be
received by the available public is, unfortunately, only too easy to predict. Since it will be ob-
vious that really substantial work went into this project, ‘respect’ will not be withheld. The
mathematicians will certainly not be persuaded with respect to some of the points. Perhaps,
they will accept some of the arguments, and, even, those that are not unimportant. The
philosophers will find scarcely anything with which to make a beginning. Most importantly,
only a very few—on account of the materials—will understand this book. (So far as I am
competent to judge, I can only say: this work is the first attempt to develop a fundamentally
different approach to the history of the exact sciences and philosophy as it is ordinarily prac-
ticed. Probably no one will notice this point, just as it’s likely no one will point out the actual,
factual weaknesses in this work.)” See also n. 5 above.

Husserl’s Crisis and Fink’s version of “The Origin of Geometry” were origi-
nally published.55 This chronology raises a number of interesting issues and
questions, especially when one compares Klein’s “general outline” of the ac-
tual development of modern science in the “Phenomenology and History of
Science” with his analyses of Greek mathematics and the origin of algebra in
his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra. As has already
been indicated above, what Klein delineates in the “Phenomenology and His-
tory of Science” as the “task”of “the reactivation of symbolic abstraction and,
by implication, the rediscovery of the original [Greek] arithmetical evidences,”
he himself had already completed in effect in the early 1930s and published
in the German original of Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Al-
gebra. This chronology therefore raises the additional question of the rela-
tion of Klein’s investigations in the latter work to Husserl’s phenomenological
investigations prior to the publication of the latter’s final investigations in
the Crisis and “The Origin of Geometry.” Moreover, the similarity of Klein’s
treatment of symbolic thinking to Husserl’s treatment—first noted by Caton56
and in effect corroborated by Klein himself when he observes that “Husserl’s
logical researches amount in fact to a reproduction and precise understand-
ing of the ‘formalization’ which took place in mathematics (and philosophy)
since Vieta and Descartes paved the way for modern science” (PHS, 70)—
adds considerable force to this question. The remainder of this study will be
devoted to investigating the answers to each and every one of these questions.
Klein’s Departure from Husserl’s Intentional-Historical Analysis
63
————————
55. See n. 1 above.
56. See § 5 above.


Part Two
Husserl and Klein on the Method
and Task of Desedimenting the
Mathematization of Nature


Chapter Eight
Klein’s Historical-Mathematical Investigations
in the Context of 
Husserl’s Phenomenology of Science
§ 26. Summar y of Part One
Part One of our study explored Klein’s interpretation of Husserl’s turn to the
problem of history in his last works. We argued that Klein, alone among
Husserl’s commentators, recognized that this turn is in harmony with Husserl’s
lifelong investigation of the phenomenological origins of the ideal meaning
formations that make both philosophy and science possible. We also argued
that prior to Husserl’s account (in the final phase of his work) of the essential
connection between historical inquiry and the quest for the epistemological
foundations of scientific knowledge, Klein’s own investigations of the history
of mathematics recognized the same essential connection. We showed, how-
ever, that the priority and thus independence of Klein’s investigations in rela-
tion to Husserl’s is a complicated affair. 
To begin with, Klein does not hesitate—though necessarily after the
fact—to situate his own mathematical investigations in terms of Husserl’s ar-
ticulation of the phenomenological problem of the sedimentation of signifi-
cance. As we have seen, this problem concerns forgetting the original evidence
belonging to the origination of the meaning formations that make a given sci-
ence (e.g., geometry) possible. Klein accepts Husserl’s argument that sedimen-
tation is inseparable from both the primal establishment of science and the
historicity of its phenomenal status as a tradition. We have also seen that Husserl
characterizes the method of historical reflection that reactivates the forgotten
original evidence as involving a back-and-forth or zigzag movement. Beginning
with what for Husserl was the present crisis situation of the sciences, reflection
strives to uncover the original accomplishments that gave and had to give their
formations meaning. As for the crisis itself, we singled out Husserl’s account of

the role that the unintelligibility of the epistemological foundations belonging
to the meaning formations that make science possible played in the breakdown
situation of his time. Finally, we advanced the thesis—but not yet supported
it—that the operativemethod of Klein’s mathematical investigations is captured
by Husserl’s articulation of the peculiar zigzag movement characteristic of the
method of historical reflection. And we suggested that it is precisely this
method that permits—explicitly in Husserl’s case and implicitly in Klein’s—
their historical investigations to overcome the traditional opposition between
the epistemological investigation and the historical explanation of science,
which is to say, to overcome the problem of historicism.
Despite the fact that Klein situates his own investigations in terms of
Husserl’s account of the historicity belonging to the a priori foundations of
the meaning formations of science, he nevertheless argues that Husserl’s ac-
count is incomplete. Klein locates the source of this incompleteness in
Husserl’s “intentional-historical” analysis of the origins of mathematical
physics. Thus, while Klein credits Husserl with showing that there is an es-
sential connection between 1) the reactivation of the intentional history
proper to the intrinsic possibility of the unity of the meaning formations of sci-
entific objects presented to consciousness and 2) the actual history of their
development within natural time, he finds Husserl’s intentional-historical in-
vestigation of this connection wanting. Despite his appreciation for what he
refers to as the historical “empathy” that characterizes Husserl’s intentional-
historical investigation of the sedimentation inseparable from the develop-
ment of modern physics, Klein provides a general outline of this development
that he purports is based on its actual history. His outline deviates from
Husserl’s discussion of this development in the Crisis on two related counts.
First, he identifies the “superposition” of a sedimented understanding of num-
bers upon the stratum of sedimented geometrical evidence analyzed in
Husserl’s account of the Galilean spirit of modern physics. Secondly, he ex-
plicitly singles out the task of reactivating the process of “symbolic abstrac-
tion” responsible for this sedimentation. We noted that Klein’s outline is
extremely condensed and that it amounts to a précis of the results of his own
research—which he does not mention in his discussion of Husserl—on Greek
mathematics and the origin of algebra published before Husserl’s Crisis. Thus,
we called attention to the curiosity of Klein’s failure to mention his own math-
ematical investigations in connection with his discussions of this issue, a fail-
ure that is highlighted by his formulation of both the reactivation of the
sedimented evidence in question and the consequent rediscovery of the orig-
inal arithmetical evidence as a task. This formulation suggests, of course, that
neither the reactivation nor the rediscovery had been achieved at the time of
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
68

his writing about them, a state of affairs that, as will be shown in detail, clearly
was not the case.1
§ 27. Klein’s Failure to Refer to Husserl in Greek Mathematical
Thought and the Origin of Algebra
We also called attention to the curiosity of Klein’s failure to refer to Husserl in
his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra. Because Husserl’s
published works on mathematics at the time Klein published this work had
not yet established the connection between the history of mathematics and the
investigation of the epistemological foundations proper to mathematical
knowledge, the issue of Klein’s failure was not seen to involve any question of
his unacknowledged debt to Husserl on this score. Klein’s precedence in es-
tablishing this connection is thus secure and therefore manifestly not what is
in question with respect to the relation of his thought to Husserl’s. Rather,
what is in question is the relation between i) Husserl’s pre-Crisis logical inves-
tigations of the foundations proper to the formalized meaning formations that
make possible both modern symbolic mathematics and the mathesis universalis
of modern philosophy and ii) Klein’s own investigations of the historicity of
these foundations. 
Klein himself invites scrutiny of this relationship when he writes:
Husserl’s earliest philosophic problem was the “logic” of symbolic mathemat-
ics.2 The paramount importance of this problem can be easily grasped, if we
think of the role that symbolic mathematics has played in the development of
modern science since the end of the sixteenth century. Husserl’s logical re-
searches amount in fact to a reproduction and precise understanding of the
“formalization” which took place in mathematics (and philosophy) ever since
Vieta and Descartes paved the way for modern science. (PHS, 70)
Klein goes on to say that “In all of this Husserl is the great interpreter of mod-
ern thought—he reveals its hidden implications and presuppositions, he fol-
lows and judges its essential tendencies” (71). Just how easy it is to grasp the
“paramount importance” of the problem of the “‘logic’ of symbolic mathe-
matics,” however, is an open question. Certainly, it was easy enough for Klein,
Klein’s Historical-Mathematical Investigations
69
————————
1. Unlike the curiosity regarding the absence of any reference to Husserl in Klein’s Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, which, as we shall argue below, provides the
occasion for raising fundamental questions about the relationship between historical explana-
tion and epistemology in both Husserl’s phenomenology and Klein’s thought, the curiosity
connected with Klein’s lack of reference to his own work in his 1938 essay lacks philosophical
significance. This is the case because the latter essay employs the basic argument of his own
work, even though it remains unmentioned.
2. Klein refers in a footnote here to Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic. This is the only
reference to this work that I know of in either his published or unpublished writings.

since his mathematical investigations in Greek Mathematical Thought and the
Origin of Algebra dealt with precisely the role of symbolic mathematics in the
development of modern science. Indeed, Klein’s investigations purport to trace
this development on the basis of the shift in the conceptuality of the concept
of number that occurred with the modern innovation of formalization and
the consequent invention of the mathematical symbol. Yet, as we have also
noted, Klein makes no reference in that work to Husserl’s thought in his ar-
ticulation of this shift. Inasmuch as Klein does not hesitate to recognize a close
connection between Husserl’s logical research and the formalization that he
maintains took place in modern mathematics and philosophy, one is left won-
dering why Husserl’s thought, especially his investigations of the logic of sym-
bolic mathematics, did not warrant so much as a footnote in Klein’s study.
Klein’s 1939 essay, “Phenomenology and the History of Science,”
makes clear his awareness not only of these dimensions of Husserl’s thought
but also of their significance for understanding the history of modern math-
ematics. While this essay was written after the publication of his own math-
ematical studies, it is unlikely that Husserl’s thought was unknown to him in
the early 1930s, when they were first published. Indeed, it is more than likely
that Klein was, at the very least, familiar with Husserl’s thought when he was
engaged in the research for his mathematical studies.3 So we are faced with the
question: why did Klein not refer to Husserl in his Greek Mathematical
Thought and the Origin of Algebra? 
A closer look at the passage referred to above, combined with an antic-
ipatory sketch of the main lines of the argument and conclusion of Klein’s
mathematical studies, provides a plausible answer to this question, an answer
that the remainder of our study will endeavor to substantiate. What Klein says
in this passage is that Husserl’s logical research “amount[s] to in fact a repro-
duction and precise understanding of the ‘formalization’ which took place”
(my emphasis) in modern mathematics and philosophy; he does not say that
Husserl was aware of the fact that this is what his researches amounted to.
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
70
————————
3. Klein’s wife, Else “Dodo” Tammann Klein (who, it is significant in this context to
mention, had been married to Husserl’s son Gerhart), reported that Klein worked on this re-
search during the late 1920s. She also reported that Klein had visited Husserl in Freiburg in
1919 with the hope of studying with him. The postwar housing situation prevented Klein from
being able to rent a room there (preference was given to returning veterans), so he went to Mar-
burg to study with Nicolai Hartmann, under whose direction he completed his dissertation in
1922. Moreover, in 1933 Klein became a friend of the Husserl household at the invitation of
Husserl’s daughter, Elisabeth “Ellie” Rosenberg (née Husserl), who had taken one of the semi-
nars on Plato that Klein had offered in order to support himself. Else Klein’s reminiscences of
her husband are contained in the untitled typed transcript of the tape recording (see Part I, n.
54) among Jacob Klein’s papers.

And therein lies a crucial difference. Klein’s main thesis in Greek Mathemati-
cal Thought and the Origin of Algebra is that the proper evaluation of the epis-
temological significance of this formalization cannot take place independent
of a consideration of its historical context, which is inseparable from it. Klein
argues that such a consideration cannot take place if the historical inquiry into
this context “starts out from a conceptual level which is, from the very begin-
ning, and precisely with respect to the fundamental concepts, determined by
modern modes of thought” (GMTOA, 20/5). An inquiry that presupposes
the “fact of symbolic mathematics” will therefore miss the conceptual trans-
formation of Greek mathematics that makes this fact possible. 
Klein’s thesis and argument, of course, represents what we called atten-
tion to in Part One as his uncanny anticipation of Husserl’s central thesis in the
Crisisthat the theory of knowledge is a peculiarly historical task. Prior to these
texts, Husserl explicitly rejected the connection between epistemological elu-
cidation and historical explanation. For instance, in Philosophy of Arithmetic
he writes: “The periods within which the origination of number systems and
number sign systems falls are unknown to any historical tradition. Therefore
there can be no thought of a reproduction of the historical development” (PA,
245). So the perspective from which Husserl’s logical research could be seen
as “in fact” a “reproduction and precise understanding” of the formalization
that took place in modern mathematics and philosophy is a perspective that
Husserl himself lacked when he was engaged in that logical research. Presum-
ably, Klein did not lack this perspective during his own research into the for-
malization that made modern symbolic mathematics possible. However, for
him to connect this perspective with Husserl’s research at that time, he would
no doubt have been compelled—by “the things themselves”—to elucidate the
historical dimension absent from Husserl’s own research, a dimension that
Husserl himself did not begin to recognize until his historical investigations in
the Crisis. Such an elucidation would involve, in effect, the “desedimentation”4
Klein’s Historical-Mathematical Investigations
71
————————
4. Neither Husserl nor Klein uses the term ‘desedimentation’ to refer to the methodi-
cal process of reflectively uncovering the sedimented history of meaning bound up with the
origin of a science. Rather, as we have seen, Husserl and Klein (following Husserl) both use the
term ‘reactivation’ to refer to this process. Jacques Derrida was the apparent innovator of this
term, using it once in his Edmund Husserl’s Origin of Geometry: An Introduction. There he
refers to “an appropriate de-sedimentation” (35/50) as that which makes possible “a phenom-
enology of the experience” of the origin of “geometrical idealities.” Caton also uses the term
once in his review of Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, where he
parenthetically characterizes “the philosophic rationale for Klein’s historical procedure” as
“de-sedimentation,” which he describes as involving “a historical investigation which exhibits”
the “origin” of “our own ‘intentionality’” (Caton, 225). In the present study, the term ‘desed-
imentation’ is used to refer to the methodical uncovering of the sedimented history of mean-
ing inseparable from the origin of the scientific concepts that compose the origin of a science, 

of the meaning in Husserl’s work prior to the Crisis that Husserl himself iden-
tifies in the Crisis as the sedimented historical condition for the formalization
accomplished by modern mathematics and philosophy. Given both what we
shall see is the complexity of Klein’s argument in Greek Mathematical Thought
and the Origin of Algebra and its fundamental conclusion, we can speculate
that avoiding the added burden of situating this work in terms of Husserl’s
early (pre-Crisis) research would have been a most reasonable, and indeed pru-
dent, course for its young author to take. 
§ 28. Critical Implications of Klein’s Historical Research 
for Husserl’s Phenomenolog y
A brief anticipation of the main conclusion of Klein’s book and the arguments
on which it is based will provide support for our speculation about the reason
for the absence of any reference to Husserl in the work. This conclusion may
be stated as follows: “the conceptual difficulties arising within mathematical
physics today” (19/4) have their source in the fact that “the fundamental on-
tological science of the ancients is replaced by a symbolic discipline whose on-
tological presuppositions are left unclarified” (193–92/184). According to
Klein, “The condition for this whole development is the transformation [ef-
fected by its ‘formalization’] of the ancient concept of ἀριθμός and its transfer
into a new conceptual dimension” (194/185). This transfer results in the an-
cient ontological understanding of “the things in this world . . . as countable
beings, . . . [and] the world itself as a taxisdetermined by the order of numbers,”
being replaced by a discipline whose ontological investigations are guided by
“the structure of the world which is grasped by means of a symbolic calculus
and understood as a ‘lawfully’ ordered course of events.” Hence, for Klein, with
this transfer the “whole complex of [ontological] problems which presented
itself to the ancients because their ‘scientific’ interest was centered on ques-
tions concerning the mode of being of mathematical objects is obviated at one
stroke” (126/122). Klein argues that the fundamental methodological pre-
occupation of ancient science with the meaning of ‘abstraction’ is replaced in
“modern mathematics, and thereby also the modern interpretation of ancient
mathematics,” by “its attention first and last to method as such” (126/123). On
Klein’s view, the objects of ancient mathematics are yielded by their “abstrac-
tion” from the things proper to “‘natural’ prescientific experience” (125/120),
with the result that “the conceptual character of any concept is determined”
by its dependence on such experience. In the sharpest possible contrast to this,
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
72
————————
while ‘reactivation’ is used for the reawakening of the original evidence in which original mean-
ings of these concepts are “anticipated.”

modern mathematics “determines its objects by reflecting on the way in which
these objects become accessible through a general method” (127/123). Thus, for
Klein, whereas “ancient mathematics is characterized precisely by a tension
between method and object” (126/122), which it attempted to resolve on the
basis of the “‘general’ applicability” (127/122) of its method to the “‘general-
ity’ of the mathematical objects themselves,” that is, “on the basis of an ontol-
ogy of mathematical objects” (127/122–23), the “new science” is no longer
concerned with the 
thing presumed by the concept [as] an object of immediate insight. Nothing
but the internal connection of all the concepts, their mutual relatedness, their
subordination to the total edifice of science, determines for each of them a
univocal sense and makes accessible to the understanding their only relevant,
specifically scientific, content. (125/121)
In sum, Klein concludes that ancient mathematics is notsymbolic. It al-
ways deals with “determinate numbers of units of measurement, and it does
this without any detour through a ‘general notion’ or a concept of a ‘general mag-
nitude’.” Modern mathematics is symbolic in the sense that it identifies “the
object represented with the means of its representation,” and it replaces “the
determinateness of an object with a possibility of making it determinate, such
as would be expressed by a sign which, instead of illustrating or making intu-
itive a determinate object, would signify possible determinacy” (127/123).
As will be developed below, Husserl’s pre-Crisis research on the logic of
symbolic mathematics and formalization has two basic characteristics. First,
this research is preoccupied with the problem of the foundation proper to
the logic operative in the symbolic cognition characteristic of both modern
mathematics and modern formal logic. Secondly, the key to resolving this
problem for Husserl is a phenomenology of the origin of the basic concepts
(and their fundamental relations) that are presupposed, but unaccounted for,
by these modern formal disciplines. Husserl characterizes as formal ontology
the discipline that is concerned with the formal objectivity investigated by
both modern mathematics and formal logic. And Husserl’s phenomenology
is driven, from beginning to end, by the conviction that the latter’s proper
foundation can be provided only on the basis of
the meaning-relation of all categorial meanings to something individual, which
considered noetically is directed to individual evidences, to experiences—a
relation springing from the genesis of the meaning in question and one that
therefore characterizes every possible kind of example used by formal ana-
lytics. (FTL, 190)
He goes on to say that such evidence and experiences “surely cannot be in-
significant for the meaning and possible evidence of the laws of analytics, in-
Klein’s Historical-Mathematical Investigations
73

cluding the highest ones, the principles of logic. Otherwise, how could these
laws claim formal-ontological validity?”
When these two characteristics of Husserl’s thought are seen from the
angle of the brief—and necessarily condensed—synopsis of the results of
Klein’s research on the historical context of modern formalization presented
above, two things stand out. First, Klein’s account of the historical context
of the origin of symbolic mathematics pertains to the very same basic con-
cepts and relations that Husserl investigates. Secondly, Klein’s conclusion
that the symbolic discipline of modern mathematics originates from unclar-
ified ontological presuppositions calls into question the basic conviction of
Husserl’s phenomenology. That is, it calls into question Husserl’s conviction
that the proper foundation of formal ontology originates in the modification
of evidence drawn from the experience of individual objects.
These preliminary considerations point to the following conclusion.
The angle from which Husserl’s pre-Crisis research on logic is seen to have
a fundamental significance for understanding the formalization that is the
defining trait of both modern symbolic mathematics and the mathesis uni-
versalis to which this mathematics gives birth is an angle whose logical con-
clusion calls into question the basic conviction underlying Husserl’s
phenomenology of formal ontology. This is to say, the perspective provided
by Klein’s historical understanding of the formalization of meaning in mod-
ern mathematical thought calls for a fundamental critique of the basic in-
tention of Husserl’s phenomenology. Such a critique would have as its focal
point the latter’s fundamental aim to account for the origin of the basic con-
cepts proper to formal ontology in the immediate experience and intuition
of individual objects. What Klein’s research shows is that, above all, the ori-
gin of these concepts occurs at a higher conceptual level than the ontology
of individual objects on which both ancient Greek science and Husserl’s
phenomenological science are based.
Because Husserl evidently was unaware—both prior to his Crisis and,
as we shall endeavor to show, in these texts themselves—of the implications
for his phenomenology that lay sedimented in the meaning of the ontology
of individual objects, to relate the argument and basic conclusion of Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra to this phenomenology
would have, of necessity, led to its fundamental critique. For obvious reasons,
such a critique would have taken its author very far afield from the explicit
topic of his own research. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that Klein judged
it best to leave it to others to undertake the task of such a critique. It is just
this task, however, that we propose to take on and see through in the re-
mainder of our study. 
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
74

Chapter Nine
e Basic Problem and Method of Klein’s
Mathematical Investigations
§ 29. Klein’s Account of the Limited Task of Recovering the
Hidden Sources of Modern Symbolic Mathematics
In Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, Klein situates his
historical investigation of mathematics in terms of the “fact that it is impos-
sible, and has always been impossible, to grasp the meaning of what we nowa-
days call physics independently of its mathematical form” (GMTOA, 19/4).
He maintains that this is the case because, “[a]fter three centuries of intensive
development, it has finally become impossible to separate the content of
mathematical physics from its form” (18/3). This state of affairs is the result
of the “intimate connection of the formal mathematical language with the
content of mathematical physics,” a connection that stems from “the special
kind of conceptualization which is a concomitant of modern science and
which was of fundamental importance in its formation” (19/4). Klein argues
that because of this connection, any discussion of the problems faced by con-
temporary mathematical physics must have as its necessary propaedeutic “the
limited task of recovering to some degree the sources, today almost com-
pletely hidden from view, of our modern symbolic mathematics.” Thus, his
study completely bypasses “the fundamental question concerning the inner
relations between mathematics and physics, of ‘theory’ and ‘experiment,’ of
‘systematic’ and ‘empirical’ procedure within mathematical physics”—though,
“[h]owever far afield it may run, its formulation will throughout be deter-
mined by this as its ultimate theme.”
According to Klein the “creation of the formal language of mathemat-
ics is identical with the foundation of modern algebra.” His study thus sets as
its task an inquiry “into the origin and the conceptual structure of this formal
language.” Klein indicates that this origin may be traced to diverse sources, in-
cluding the absorption by the West from the thirteenth to the middle of the

sixteenth century of the Arabic science of “‘algebra’ (al-g’ abr wa’l-muqa‾bala)
in the form of the theory of equations,” and “the special influence of the Arith-
metic of Diophantus on the content, but even more so on the form, of this
Arabic science” (19–20/4–5). However, Klein holds that “it was not until
the last quarter of the sixteenth century” (20/5) that modern algebra was in-
vented, when “Vieta undertook to broaden and to modify Diophantus’ tech-
nique in a really crucial way,” with the result that Vieta “thereby became the
true founder of modern mathematics.” Thus, even though prior to Vieta a
form of algebra developed that “continually elaborated [it] in respect to tech-
niques of calculation . . . , its self-understanding” failed “to keep pace with
these technical advances” (148/151).5 Klein writes that, consequently, “This
algebraic school becomes conscious of its own ‘scientific’ character and of the
novelty of its ‘number’ concept only at the moment of direct contact with
the corresponding Greek science, i.e., with the Arithmetic of Diophantus”—
that is, at the moment of Vieta’s “introduction of a general mathematical sym-
bolism” (149/152).
Klein notes that while conventional accounts of the history of this de-
velopment recognize the significance of the “revival and assimilation” of Greek
mathematics in the sixteenth century, “they always take for granted, and far too
much as a matter of course, the factof symbolic mathematics.” As a result, they
“are not sufficiently aware of the character of the conceptual transformation
which occurred in the course of this assimilation and which constitutes the
indispensable condition of modern mathematical symbolism.” As a result,
“most of the standard histories attempt to grasp Greek mathematics itself with
the aid of modern symbolism, as if the latter were an altogether ‘external’ form
which may be tailored to any desirable ‘content.’” Their inquires, therefore,
begin from a conceptual level that is foreign to the fundamental concepts of
their subject, determined as it is by “modern modes of thought.” Thus, for
Klein, “[t]o disengage ourselves as far as possible from these modes of thought
must be the first concern of our enterprise.”
Klein articulates the goal of his investigation of modern algebra’s origin
as follows: “Hence our object is not to evaluate the revival of Greek mathe-
matics in the sixteenth century in terms of its results retrospectively, but to re-
hearse or to make present the actual course of its genesis prospectively.” Rather
than take up the immense task of attempting to trace all the diverse sources re-
sponsible for this, which would include “the ‘Arabic’ positional system of ci-
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
76
————————
5. Klein outlines this development as follows: “From Leonardo of Pisa (beginning of the
thirteenth century), via the ‘cossic’ school and up to Michael Stifel (1544), Cardano (1545),
Tartaglia (1556–1560), and Petrus Nonius (Pedro Nuñez, 1567)” (GMTOA, 147/151).

phers, which had been spreading in the West since the twelfth century” (184
n. 130/277 n. 259), Klein focuses his investigation on Vieta’s appropriation
and transformation of the Diophantine technique. According to Klein, the
latter represents, “as it were, a piece of the seam whereby the ‘new’ science is at-
tached to the old” (20/5–6). Indeed, he rules out the attempt to investigate
more than this “seam” because “[t]he acceptance of this sign language [i.e., the
Arabic ciphers] in the West itself presupposes a gradual change in the under-
standing of number, whose ultimate roots lie too deep for discussion in this
study” (184 n. 130/277 n. 259).
§ 30. Klein’s Motivation for the Radical Investigation 
of the Origins of Mathematical Physics
As we suggested above and shall demonstrate below, Klein’s prospective re-
hearsal and making present of the genesis proper to the results of the revival
of Greek mathematics in the sixteenth century traces precisely the back-and-
forth zigzag movement that Husserl identifies as the basic characteristic of
the method of historical reflection, a method, moreover, that Husserl argues
is required in order to redress the then current crisis situation of European sci-
ence. Before turning our attention to this, however, it is instructive first to
consider the account that Klein’s 1932 talk, “The World of Physics and the
‘Natural’ World,” provides of what is rather tersely referred to in Greek Math-
ematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra as “the problem which mathe-
matical physics faces today.” Presented in 1932 (and thus more or less
contemporaneous with his writing of his Origin of Algebra), the lecture con-
tains a much more detailed elaboration than the latter of the motivation for
turning to the history of science in general and of mathematics in particular
in order to respond to the problem confronting contemporary physics.6 This
problem is described there as follows:
Basic Problem and Method of Klein’s Mathematical Investigations
77
————————
6. Richard Kennington, in his review of the volume in which the text of Klein’s talk ap-
pears (“Rev. of J. Klein, Lectures and Essays,” Review of Metaphysics41 [1987], 144–49), rightly
observes that Klein’s talk “is a useful introduction” (145) to Greek Mathematical Thought and
the Origin of Algebra. 
Given the final form of Klein’s talk, it is interesting to note that he had originally in-
tended to speak to an audience of philosophers, but that the organizer of the talk, Gerhard
Krüger, apparently also invited physicists. Klein describes the change in the theme of his talk
in a letter to Krüger dated December 17, 1931 (“Selected Letters from Jacob Klein to Gerhard
Krüger, 1929–1933” [German/English], ed. and trans. Emmanuel Patard, New Yearbook for
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy VI [2006], 308–29, here 318–19):
But I have meanwhile continuously considered the theme of the talk, because
your proposal, and especially the “official” participation of the physicists, does not
really correspond to my original plan. I first wanted to speak only to the “philoso-

[P]hysics now sees itself faced by questions in its own fundamental work
which have always been taken to fall within the domain of philosophy. In its
own right physics raises questions about the limits of possible knowledge and
the epistemic sense of scientific statements and experimental results. Conse-
quently, it now considers turning to “philosophy” as a reliable and valid court
of appeal, if not for solutions to these questions, then at least for advice or new
points of view. (WP, 2)
Notwithstanding this encroachment of physics upon the traditional domain
of philosophy, “at the present time physics and philosophy . . . oppose one an-
other more or less uncomprehendingly” (1). This is the case because “it is clear
that no agreement [between physicists and philosophers] about the meaning
of the most fundamental concepts which both physics and philosophy em-
ploy can be achieved” (2). According to Klein, the root of this disagreement
can be traced to the situation that while both physics and philosophy deal with
the problem of the world, each speaks about it in a language incomprehensi-
ble to the other. Thus, 
the physicists are inclined—not always, certainly, but for the most part—to
regard the language of philosophy as unscientific, while the philosophers—
not always, to be sure, but frequently enough—suspect themselves of some-
thing like bad conscience . . . simply because they are incapable of getting to
the bottom of the physical concepts amidst the formalistic thicket of differ-
ential equations, tensor calculus, or group-theory. 
For Klein, the result of this is that “[b]y the nineteenth century a real and
hence mutual understanding between philosophers and physicists concern-
ing the methods, presuppositions, and the meaning of physical research had
already become basically impossible” (1).
Klein writes that the consequence of this situation is 
a long-standing controversy over how the experiential bases of physics fit to-
gether with its specific conceptuality. [. . .] The reciprocity of experiment
————————
phers” about “history.” But now the basis of the talk has changed, and I considered
how one could satisfy everybody without running the risk of satisfying nobody.
Provisionally, I have come up with the following:
1) I shall by no means speak about special problems of the latest physics (causal-
ity, etc.), and this for very good reasons, which I shall spell out for you in person.
Instead, I shall say something—to the physicists—about the remarkable relation
of present-day physics to modern “philosophy.” I shall trace the problem of phi-
losophy of physics back to the problem history of physics.
2) This makes it necessary to speak—to both the physicists and the philoso-
phers—about the particular situation of the 17th century.
3) Finally, I shall then speak—to the philosophers—about the foundation of
mathematical natural science in its relation to the “natural” world and about the
significance of the historical horizon.
78
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature

and theory, of observation and hypothesis, the relation of universal constants
to the mathematical formalism—all of these issues point again and again to
the two antithetical tendencies pervading modern physical science and giv-
ing it its characteristic stamp. [. . .] Nowadays, depending on the side one
takes, one speaks of Empiricism or Apriorism; physicists themselves cus-
tomarily side with the so-called empiricists and confuse apriorism with a kind
of capriciously speculative philosophy. (6–7)
Rather than “take sides in this controversy” (7), Klein maintains that “[w]e
must first of all try to find a common ground, a basis of shared questions,
such that our questions are not in danger of missing their target from the
start” (3). Since a common ground is not to be found in the present, he ar-
gues that “we have to consider whether we can find it in the past.” Indeed,
he finds it in the seventeenth century, “an age that did not know this hard
and fast division between philosophy and physics,” because for the thinkers
of that age “the true philosophy coincides with the true science of the struc-
ture of this world.” Noting that it was not until the middle of the eighteenth
century that “the paths of the new science of nature and the new philosophy
parted, even though their common origin could never be forgotten” (4),
Klein maintains that “the contemporary tense division just noted between
physics and philosophy has its roots in precisely this history of the two dis-
ciplines, a history which leads them from an original unit to an increasing
mutual estrangement.”
Klein therefore says that “we must try to gain purchase on that com-
mon ground by going back to the initial situation, the situation of science in
the seventeenth century; from this we might possibly gain a measure of en-
lightenment concerning present-day difficulties, even if we simply come to
understand the nature of these difficulties better.” Klein defends the turn to
the historical foundations of physics by calling attention to the fact that
“physics itself, even in its most recent phase, has been forced again and again
to look back to the past in order to recognize the limited character of many
of its basic concepts.” He cites as examples the “designation of ‘classical
physics’ . . . [which] arises from the debate between quantum mechanics and
relativity theory and the basic concepts of Galilean and Newtonian me-
chanics,” along with “the debates between the mechanistic and the energetic
conceptions within physics,” which “led to the historical investigations of
Mach and Duhem.” However, Klein sees that what has to be done now is to
“make this turn to historical origins even more radical. Not only is this de-
manded by the issue itself, it is most intimately connected with the basic pre-
suppositions of our knowledge of the world” (4–5). 
Basic Problem and Method of Klein’s Mathematical Investigations
79

§ 31. The Conceptual Battleground on Which the Scholastic
and the New Science Fought
Klein begins his radical turn to history “by picturing the general situation of
science in the seventeenth century: A new science, desirous above all of being
a science of Nature and moreover a ‘natural’ science opposed an already extant
science” (5). The extant science was, of course, the “traditional and dominant
science of the Scholastics.” The founders of the new science, “[a]s has been
emphasized time and again . . . were moved by an original impulse quite alien
to the erudite science of the Scholastics.” Nevertheless, for Klein the claim of
men like Galileo, Stevin, Kepler, and Descartes to communicate “true sci-
ence, true knowledge, necessarily took its bearings from the firmly-estab-
lished edifice of traditional science.” Consequently, “[t]he battle between the
new and the old science was fought on the ground and in the name of the
one, uniquely true, science. One or the other had to triumph; they could not
subsist side by side.” On Klein’s view, “What especially characterizes this bat-
tle is not only the commongoal marked by those most general presuppositions,
viz., the one, unique science, but, over and above this, a definite uniformity
of the weapons with which the battle was fought” (6). Thus, on the one hand,
for him this battle was fought by its antagonists in the name of the one true
science. On the other hand, the proponents on each side were largely in ac-
cord among themselves regarding the way in which “the contents designated
by their concepts” were to be interpreted, “the way in which the concepts in-
tend what is meant by them whenever they are employed.” Klein refers to this
accord as “the conceptual framework or intentionality (Begrifflichkeit)7 in
which their antithetical opinions are expressed.” According to him, “[t]his
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
80
————————
7. The translator of Klein’s Marburg talk, David Lachterman, follows Eva Brann, the
translator of Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, by rendering Be-
grifflichkeit as ‘conceptual framework’ and ‘intentionality’ here, though he primarily uses the
latter word. The reasons for rendering this key term in Klein’s thought more straightforwardly
as ‘conceptuality’ are discussed in my essay “Eva Brann and the Philosophical Achievement of
Jacob Klein,” in Eric Salem and Peter Kalkavage, eds., Essays in Honor of Eva Brann (Philadel-
phia: Paul Dry Books, 2007), 106–19, esp. 110–14. These reasons may be summarized as fol-
lows. First, Klein himself maintains the distinction in Greek Mathematical Thought and the
Origin of Algebra between Begrifflichkeit and the first and second intentions of the scholastic
Eustachias that he enlists in his description of the transformation in modern symbolic math-
ematics of the Begrifflichkeit proper to the ancient concept of number. Secondly, Klein could
easily have used the term ‘intentionality’ (Intentionalität) instead of Begrifflichkeit, but obvi-
ously had good reasons for not doing so. The main reason is no doubt connected with the fact
that Husserl’s concept of intentionality brings with it philosophical suppositions from which
Klein wished to maintain a distance (see below, Part IV, §§ 207–8). In the interest of termi-
nological consistency, we shall replace Lachterman’s rendering here of Begrifflichkeit as ‘in-
tentionality’ with ‘conceptuality’. 

accord has all too frequently been overlooked.” Once this accord is taken into
account, “[t]he only issue is: Which of them handled these weapons most
suitably, which of them filled in the conceptuality common to both with con-
tents in harmony with it?” The new science won the battle hands down, of
course, because the Scholasticism of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
in Klein’s words, was “unable to detect the tension between the contents of
its concepts and the use it made of these.” Specifically, its unquestioning em-
ployment of “the physics of ‘substantial forms’” points for Klein to what “an
unquestioning understanding of oneself always exhibits,” namely, “a failure
to comprehend one’s own presuppositions and thus a failure to grasp what
one pretends to know.” Klein writes that “[t]his is the danger to which science
is always exposed,” and it is “the danger to which science in the sixteenth and
seventeenth century succumbed as no other science had done before.” 
For Klein, then, the turn to the historical origins of the new science,
that is, to the origins of mathematical physics, has “to keep this general situ-
ation of science in the seventeenth century constantly in mind. It determines
in the most basic way the horizon of this new science, as well as its methods,
its general structure. It determines, above all, the [conceptuality] of its con-
cepts as such.” Thus, Klein understands the return to the common origin of
modern science and philosophy in the seventeenth century—in order to bet-
ter understand the present-day difficulties and indeed the gulf between these
two disciplines—to disclose that “What is primarily at stake is an under-
standing of the particular [conceptuality], the particular character of the con-
cepts with whose aid the mathematical physics which arose in the seventeenth
century erected the new and immense theoretical structure of human expe-
rience over the next two centuries” (7). Only in this way can the nature of
the “fundamental conceptual shift which took place in the modern era, a
shift we can nowadays scarcely grasp,” be determined such that the “special
character of these new concepts can be brought to light” (8). Klein identifies
the particular conceptuality at issue here as that of Scholasticism. 
According to Klein, the Scholasticism contemporary with the emer-
gence of the new science in the seventeenth century understood itself to be
“reproducing ancient doctrine, especially ancient cosmology, in exactly the
same way it was understood and taught by the Greeks, that is, by Aristotle” (7).
On Klein’s view, the new science also interpreted the ancients in this way, that
is, in terms of contemporary Scholastic science, although it was “certainly not
content with this. Rather, it called upon the things themselves in order to re-
buke the untenable doctrines of the Scholastic science.” In addition, the new
science “went back to the sources of Greek science, neglected by Scholastic
science; these sources, too, were interpreted in terms of the [conceptuality] it
Basic Problem and Method of Klein’s Mathematical Investigations
81

shared with Scholastic science. And this interpretation of the legacy of ancient
teachings, involving a characteristic modification of every ancient concept, is
the basis of the whole concept formation of the new science” (7–8). In other
words, for Klein the conceptualities proper to both Scholastic science and the
new science are related to “the specific [conceptuality] of Greek science” (17).
Consequently, Klein maintains that the special character of the conceptuality
proper to the new science “can be brought to light in two ways” (8). Either
“we can contrast the Scholastic science of the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies with genuine Aristotelianism,” or “we can confront Aristotle himself as
well as the other sources of Greek science, most importantly Plato, Democri-
tus, Euclid, Archimedes, Appolonius, Pappus, and Diophantus, with the in-
terpretations” given to them by the moderns. 
Both of these ways involve a turn to the history of science—or, more
precisely, to the history of ideas—in order to attempt to overcome the present
gulf between physics and philosophy by taking up the “scientific” problem of
the natural world prior to their emergence as distinct disciplines. In both his
Marburg lecture and in his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Al-
gebra,Klein opts for the latter approach, one that involves the attempt to clar-
ify the present problem confronting contemporary physics by articulating the
transformation of ancient concepts, and therefore the transformation of the
specific conceptuality of Greek science, which resulted in the specifically mod-
ern conceptuality that makes this physics possible.
Klein’s method can thus be seen to represent, in effect, the anticipa-
tion of the “back-and-forth” zigzag movement of the historical reflection
Husserl characterized as the most appropriate method for responding to the
crisis situation of modern science. And while Klein’s articulation of the mo-
tive for the turn to history makes no mention of a crisis in contemporary sci-
ence, his description of the problem of modern physics comes remarkably
close to stating what Husserl will identify as the basis of the crisis, namely: the
unintelligibility to contemporary epistemology of the meaning belonging to
the formalized concepts that make physics possible.
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
82

Chapter Ten
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and
Roots of the Crisis of European Sciences
§ 32. Klein’s Uncanny Anticipation of Husserl’s Treatment of
the Historical Origins of Scientific Concepts in the Crisis
We shall now highlight Klein’s uncanny anticipation in his Greek Mathemat-
ical Thought and the Origin of Algebra of Husserl’s formulation of the nature
and roots of the crisis of European sciences, together with the method of his-
torical reflection, by elaborating Husserl’s thought on these matters. We shall
discuss the fragmentary nature of Husserl’s desedimentation of the origins of
modern mathematical physics with a view to showing that Klein’s account of
the genesis of modern algebra “desediments” precisely those aspects of Hus -
serl’s historical analyses of the origins of modern mathematics that remain frag-
mentary in his Crisis. 
§ 33. Historical Reference Back to Origins and the Crisis 
of Modern Science
Husserl’s investigation of the origin of the intrinsic possibility belonging to
the objective unity of any meaning formation was shown in Part One to ex-
tend to the a priori structure of its genesis as an intentional unity. It was also
shown that the latter holds the key to the insight that Husserl’s turn to his-
tory in his last writings is the consistent outcome of the phenomenological
project of investigating the radical beginnings proper to the things them-
selves. Far from representing a significant departure from his early rejection
of the ability of psychologism and historicism to account for these begin-
nings, Husserl’s late turn to history is motivated by his realization that the
investigation of the origins of certain things themselves is not exhausted by
uncovering the sedimented history of their genesis in the stream of con-
sciousness. The backward reference (Rückbeziehung) to the “past history”

belonging to the original presentation of the ideal meaning formations
proper to mathematical and scientific objects proves unable to account for
their possibility so long as the genesis of this history is “reactivated” in accord
with immanent time’s a priori form. The original presentation of such mean-
ing formations therefore transcends the limit of their temporal genesis. This
limit is the general substratum of consciousness and it is uncovered in the a
priori form of the continuous retentional modifications in which their ob-
jective prominence as meaning formations is maintained. Thus, the genesis
of these meaning formations transcends the a priori temporal form of the in-
dividual stream of consciousness. 
That for Husserl the possibility of the ideal meaning formations proper
to mathematical and scientific objects transcends the individual stream of con-
sciousness is clear from the distinction he draws between “the intrapsychically
constituted structure” (Origin, K370/C359) of such “‘ideality’” and its “in-
tersubjective being of its own as an ideal object.” He characterizes the former
in terms of the structure of immanent time insofar as he holds “the original
being-itself-there” of ideality, “in the immediacy of its first production,” to
turn “into the passivity of the flowing fading consciousness of what-has-just-
now-been.” On Husserl’s view, “this ‘retention’ disappears, but the ‘disappeared’
passing and being past has not become nothing for the subject in question: it
can be reawakened.” Husserl likewise understands the reawakening of ideality
in accordance with the structure of immanent time, that is, as a “recollection”
(K370/C360) that establishes “the capacity for repetition at will” of “the iden-
tity” proper to the structure of ideality. However, for Husserl “even with this,
we still have not gone beyond the subject . . . we still have no ‘objectivity’ given.”
The latter for him requires, as we have seen in Part One (§ 18), first oral and
then written communication, whereby “[i]n the unity of the community of
communication among several persons the repeatedly produced structure be-
comes an object of consciousness, not as a likeness, but as the one structure
common to all” (K371/C360). 
According to Husserl it is precisely the transcendence—vis-à-vis the in-
trasubjective genesis of ideality—of the objectivity of the meaning formations
of mathematical and scientific objects that is responsible for the primal estab-
lishment of a science and therewith a scientific tradition. Husserl holds that
this primal establishment can be accessed methodically through the historical
reflective method of phenomenology, which provides a “historical reference
back” to “the concrete, historical apriori that encompasses everything that ex-
ists as historical becoming and having-become or exists in its essential being as
tradition and handing-down” (K380/C372). It is Husserl’s phenomenologi-
cal quest for the true beginnings of the ideal meaning formations of mathe-
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
84

matics and scientific objects, of the ideal meaning formations proper to the
mathematical objects that are inseparable from the possibility of mathemati-
cal physics, that renders necessarythe connection between the sedimented his-
tory that belongs to the genesis of these formations’ objective prominence in
the stream and the whole of consciousness and the actual history of their be-
ginnings, which is handed down by the tradition to which these meaning for-
mations belong.
We need look no further than to the phenomenological problem of the
genetic origin proper to ideal meaning formations in order to find the moti-
vation for Husserl’s turn to history. This is not to say, however, that Husserl’s
notion of “concrete history” can be reduced to the epistemological problem
of “genetic” origins, but that, instead, Husserl came to recognize that this prob-
lem conceals “the deepest and most genuine problems of history” (K379/
C370). As he puts it, so long as the “ruling dogma of the separation in princi-
ple between epistemological elucidation and historical . . . explanation, be-
tween epistemological and genetic origin” is maintained, these problems will
remain concealed. This separation is therefore unwarranted on Husserl’s view,
and its overcoming is necessary in order to uncover the concrete historical
apriori identified in his last works, an apriori inseparable both from the be-
ginnings proper to the development of the ideal meaning formations that
make mathematical physics possible and from the very intelligibility of the
formations themselves. 
Overcoming the separation between epistemology and history is there-
fore rooted in the fact that the ideal meaning formations that render the sci-
ence of mathematical physics possible are, for Husserl, at present unintelligible.
Their unintelligibility is first manifest in the “feeling of obscurity that asserts
itself” (Crisis, 55/55) concerning the epistemological grounding of this sci-
ence. Husserl’s “historical deliberation or meditation” in the Crisis should
therefore be understood as his personal attempt to unpack this feeling. He says
as much when he discusses the historical manner of their investigation: “A his-
torical meditation backwards of the sort under discussion is thus actually the
deepest kind of self-meditation aimed at self-understanding in terms of what
we are truly seeking as the historical beings we are” (73/72). This self-medi-
tation manifests itself in “a constant critique, which always regards the total his-
torical complex as a personal one, [in which] we are attempting ultimately to
discern the historical task that we can acknowledge as the only one that is per-
sonally our own” (72/70). 
Husserl’s personal self-meditation unpacks this “feeling of obscurity”
by tracing it to its roots in what he felt to be the present crisis situation of the
sciences. In articulating this crisis, he focuses on two interrelated points. The
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of the Crisis
85

first concerns the “feeling of hostility among the younger generation” (4/6)
in their evaluation of what the sciences or science in general can mean for
human existence. “Merely fact-minded sciences,” we are told, “make merely
fact-minded people,” the implication being that, having abstracted from
everything subjective, neither can possibly have anything meaningful to say
about “questions of the meaning or meaninglessness of the whole of this
human existence.” The second focal point concerns his experience of the un-
intelligibility of the “completely universal ‘formalization’” (44/45) to which
the instinctive and unreflective praxis of theorizing begun in Galileo’s day
leads. As a result, “until now” “there has been no unambiguous characteriza-
tion of what in fact, and in a way practically understandable in mathemati-
cal work, a coherent mathematical field is.” This lack of clarity for Husserl
then spills over into the self-enclosed idea of a mathesis universalis first made
possible by this formalization and its development into a formal logic of the
‘something in general’ (Etwas-überhaupt). 
To be sure, the first focal point for Husserl is grounded in the second,
which he identifies as the source of the “breakdown” of science and the con-
sequent crisis situation of European humanity. Yet the breakdown is the con-
sequence not of formalization per se but of how it is understood and employed
by practitioners of the science of mathematical physics that formalization first
made possible. When the latter is not carried out in a “fully conscious” (46/47)
manner, “dangerous shifts in meaning” occur. Husserl characterizes these shifts
as follows. First, what is in truth a method whose goal is to achieve knowledge
aboutthe natural world is mistaken for the reality of the world itself. Secondly,
the tradition that provided the basis for the invention of this method is mis-
takenly treated as self-evident, which results in unquestioned assumptions that
allow “elements of obscurity to flow into its [i.e., the method’s] meaning.” And,
thirdly, owing to both of these mistakes, human subjectivity is misunderstood
as an epiphenomenon of the formalized natural world and, consequently, it
loses its autonomy as a being possessing a relation to the world independent of
scientific intervention. 
Husserl’s diagnosis of these shifts in meaning is frequently understood
to be made possible by his later emphasis on a pair of phenomenological con-
cepts that he had not stressed in his earlier work: the environing world
(Umwelt) and the life-world (Lebenswelt). Husserl’s concern with the life-
world, so the story goes, is what allows him to call attention to both the un-
warranted abstractness of the modern scientific view of the world and its
derivative status in relation to the ontologically more original life-world. On
our view, however, this account is wrong in a number of crucial respects. First,
it reverses the phenomenological order of things. Rather than bring to his
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
86

analysis of modern science a fully developed concept of the life-world—which,
in its contrast to the overly formalized meaning of the scientific view of the
world, would permit him to articulate science’s dangerous shifts in meaning—
Husserl’s analysis in fact moves in the opposite direction. That is, the point of
departure for Husserl’s analysis of modern science is precisely his personal ex-
perience of its unintelligibility, an experience that initially has nothing to do
with a developed concept of the life-world. Secondly, Husserl’s thematic con-
sideration of the life-world is mediated by his critique of the manner in which
modern science is traditionally handed down. Thus, Husserl’s critical turn to
history is not motivated by his concept of the life-world. Instead, this con-
cept—or, more precisely, this phenomenon—becomes thematic only on the
basis of Husserl’s historical questioning back to the beginnings of the modern
scientific tradition. Thirdly and finally, Husserl’s historical deliberation on the
unnoticed occlusion of the life-world that he comes to maintain characterizes
these beginnings—and the consequent need to render evident for the first
time their “true meaning” in relation to this phenomenon—articulates a task
rather than an argument. So, rather than argue that the true meaning of mod-
ern science is to be located in its derivative status vis-à-vis the life-world,
Husserl’s Crisis endeavors to lay the methodological groundwork for showing
that and how this meaning is inseparable from its origin in the life-world. And
this means that for Husserl the phenomenological access to both these begin-
nings and the life-world is only arrived at through historical critique. In other
words, for Husserl the access to—or better: the ‘constitution’ of—the life-
world is inseparable from his investigation of the concrete apriori of history.
For Husserl the unintelligibility of modern science initially shows up
in terms of the referential obscurity of the formalized meaning-structures that
make it possible. This obscurity is in turn bi-directional. On the one hand,
what in the world these structures refer to is not at all clear to Husserl. On the
other hand, insofar as these structures, as a function of their expression of a
mathesis universalis, also refer to themselves as a self-enclosed “mathematical
manifold” that seems to exclude—in principle—all relation to the natural
world, how in the world it is even possible for this manifold to be applied to
the natural world is likewise unclear to Husserl. That the formalized mean-
ing-structures that characterize physics must refer to the natural world is
never in doubt for Husserl. Nor does he ever doubt whether, in order for this
reference to occur, the “universal manifolds” that characterize the mathesis
universalis must lend themselves to being applied to the “definite manifolds”
of pure space and time, manifolds that function as the system of axioms that
make possible the predictions of modern physics. What is in doubt, however,
is the foundation that makes possible both this reference and application.
87
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of the Crisis

And it is precisely Husserl’s experience of the feeling of obscurity flowing from
the dubiousness of this foundation that motivates what for him holds the
promise of resolving it, that is, motivates the need for a historical reference
back to the beginnings of the scientific tradition, a tradition that, in its pres-
ent ungrounded state, he now experiences in its “breakdown.” To stress
Husserl’s expression of the felt dimension of his encounter with the obscurity
of modern physics is not to suggest that feeling per se somehow provides him
with a direct link to the historical reference back that he maintains is all that
“could be of help here” (16/17). Rather, it is to suggest that this feeling itself
is conditioned by the lack of fulfillment of “the demand, which has spread
throughout the modern period and has finally been generally accepted, for a
so-called ‘epistemological grounding’ of the sciences” (Origin, K377/C368).
Thus the claim here is that it is Husserl’s endorsement of this demand, com-
bined with the inadequacy of an exclusively epistemological attempt to meet
it, that results in his feeling in question and his realization that “in the case of
the sciences genuine historical explanation comes together with ‘epistemo-
logical’ grounding or clarification” (K381/C373). It is precisely in this sense,
we maintain, that the felt obscurity in question motivates the need for a his-
torical reference back to the beginnings of the scientific tradition in order to
provide the epistemological grounding that Husserl seeks for modern physics.
That the formalized meaning-structures that make modern science pos-
sible must refer to the world is rooted in Husserl’s conviction that there is a
continuity between what philosophy in its primal establishment (Urstif tung)
conceived of as its task and what now needs to be accomplished in order to
bring about its final establishment (Endstiftung). That is, for Husserl a conti-
nuity must exist between the “exalted idea of universal knowledge concerning
the totality of what is” (Crisis, 11/13) of ancient Greek philosophy and the
modern attempt “to put metaphysics or universal philosophy on the strenuous
road to realization” (13/15). Establishing this continuity involves bringing
the “reason latent” in the telos that is inseparable from the primal establish-
ment of philosophy “to the understanding of its own possibilities and thus . . .
to the insight of the possibility of metaphysics as a true possibility.” Hence,
the overarching task of Husserl’s historical deliberation is to restore faith in
“reason itself and its (object) ‘that which is’” (11/13), a restoration made nec-
essary by the “collapse” of reason in “the actual situation of the present”
(16/17) and the consequent skepticism about the possibility of reason, its
ideas, and the worldly objects to which they relate. 
Philosophy in Husserl’s sense is therefore inseparable from history. And
history is in turn inseparable from “science as it is given in its present-day form”
(59/58). Indeed, it is precisely by following the reference back to science’s
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
88

beginnings as a tradition that Husserl hopes to uncover the meaning of its
development and thereby the true meaning of its accomplishment. Tracing
this development, as we have already suggested in Part One and will now ar-
ticulate in greater detail, requires a method that proceeds “back and forth in
a zigzag pattern.” It moves backward from science’s present form to its be-
ginnings and then forward to its present situation, such that relative clarifi-
cation of the one yields some clarification of the other, which in turn provides
further clarification of the former. Husserl’s aim here is to reactivate the “orig-
inal activity” (Origin, K372/C361) that produced the meaning formations
presently experienced in terms of their felt obscurity. Only by proceeding in
this way is the “hidden unity of intentional inwardness that alone constitutes
the unity of history” (Crisis, 74/73) revealed. It is revealed because, when re-
activated, the beginnings of present science themselves refer back to their be-
ginnings, namely, to the primal beginnings of science as such in Greek
philosophy and mathematics. Thus, for Husserl the task of revealing the
intentional unity of history holds the promise of bringing about the final es-
tablishment of the telos that belongs to the primal establishment of philoso-
phy, that is, the establishment of philosophy as the universal science of what
is.
§ 34. Husserl’s Reactivation of the Sedimented Origins 
of the Modern Spirit
For Husserl philosophy, as the universal science of what is, has but one goal:
intuitive knowledge of what is. As we have seen, both what in the world the
formalized meaning formations of mathematical physics refer to and there-
fore make intuitable, and how in the world this reference and correspon-
ding intuition is possible, is obscure on Husserl’s view. He traces this
obscurity back to the fact that the formalized meaning at issue in modern
mathematics is made possible by the progressive “emptying of its meaning”
(44/44) in relation to the “real” (35/37), that is, to the intuitive givenness of
the things manifest to everyday sense experience in the environing world.
Husserl’s historical reflection on the beginnings of the development of mod-
ern, Galilean science reveals that it is first made possible by this progressive
emptying of meaning. The meaning formations of the mathematics that
make physics possible are themselves made possible by their “becoming lib-
erated from all intuited actuality” (43/44), including the “magnitudes”
(44/44) that “numbers are supposed to signify” and of course from the in-
tuitively given shapes of actual things. More precisely, the ideal shapes of
Euclidean geometry are substituted for the intuited shapes of things, while
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of the Crisis
89

algebraic calculation with “‘symbolic’ concepts” (48/48) that express num-
bers in general—as opposed to determinate numbers—excludes the “origi-
nal thinking that genuinely gives meaning to this technical process and truth
to the correct results” (46/46). 
Husserl’s investigations in the Crisis of the emptying of meaning that
makes modern physics possible are fragmentary, however. Their focus is on
the origin of geometry and on what he refers to as the “sedimentation”
(52/52) involved in the Galilean impulse to treat Euclidean geometry in a
taken-for-granted, and therefore straightforward, manner. Husserl uses the
term ‘sedimentation’ to designate the “constant presuppositions . . . [of the]
constructions, concepts, presuppositions, theories” that characterize the sig-
nifications of the meaning formations of a science—in the case at hand, of
Galilean natural science—insofar as they are not “‘cashed in’” (Origin, K376/
C366), that is, reactivated in terms of the original activities that produced
their meaning. Cashing in the meaning formations in question requires that
we eventually reactivate the “historical beginning” (K367/C356) that this
science “must have had,” which in the case of Galilean natural science means
that we eventually have to reactivate the origin of the Euclidean geometry
that was taken for granted when its meaning formations were first established.
Husserl’s fragmentary analyses of the “origin of the modern spirit” (Cri-
sis, 58/57)—in which, as we have seen, he links to Galileo’s name “all of our
characterizations . . . in a certain sense simplifying and idealizing the matter”—
therefore serve in effect to desediment the meaning formations accomplished
by this spirit and thereby to reactivate their historical beginnings. Husserl’s
desedimentation of these meaning formations cashes in both the direct and in-
direct impulse of the Galilean spirit to mathematize the world by tracing this
accomplishment back to its origin in “the sphere of immediately experienc-
ing intuitions and the possible experience of the prescientific life-world”
(42/43). Husserl’s access to the latter is mediated by the historical reference
back to beginnings that issues from the obscure or unintelligible meaning for-
mations of present-day mathematical natural science, the reference back he
traces in accord with the back-and-forth zigzag pattern that characterizes his
epistemological-historical method. Thus, it is not as if Husserl, sitting in his
study, was somehow able to conjure up the direct experience of the prescien-
tific life-world, the primordial experience of which would then provide the
basis for a comparison disclosive of the abstract view of the world presumably
found in the meaning formations that make up mathematical physics. Rather,
it is his experience of the empty meaning formations of physics that—when
combined with his expectation that they must somehow be ultimately founded
in a reference to (or, more precisely, an intention toward) the world that is ca-
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
90

pable of being intuitively fulfilled at some level—leads to his discovery (or,
more properly, his re-discovery) of the prescientific life-world and its true ori-
gins. 
However, rather than rehearse Husserl’s well-known analyses that lead
to the rediscovery of the life-world in his Crisis, what is necessary here is to
thematize their salient results and highlight their fragmentary character. Re-
garding the former, Husserl shows that the Galilean impulse rests on both a
direct mathematization of the appearances of bodies and an indirect math-
ematization of their sensuous modes of givenness as they show up in the in-
tuitively given environing world. Husserl’s attempt to cash in the ideal
meaning formations of the pure shapes of Euclidean geometry, which Galileo
took for granted as the “true” shapes of nature, reveals that our direct expe-
rience of nature never yields geometrical-ideal bodies but “precisely the bod-
ies that we actually experience” (22/25). The abstractive directing of our
regard to the mere shapes of these bodies cannot yield what the “pure geom-
etry” (21/24) pregiven to Galileo understands as “geometrical ideal possibil-
ities,” nor can their arbitrary transformation in fantasy. This is because even
though the latter yields “‘ideal’ possibilities” in a certain sense, these possi-
bilities remain tied to sensible shapes, which can only manifest their trans-
formation into other sensible shapes and thus not the “ideal possibilities” in
question. 
The method of operating with the pure or ideal shapes that character-
izes Euclidean geometry therefore does not point directly back to the sensi-
ble shapes of the bodies we actually experience in the life-world, but rather to
“the methodology of determination by surveying and measuring in general,
practiced at first primitively and then as an art in the prescientific, intuitively
given environing world” (24/27). It is therefore the practice of perfecting
such measuring, “of freely pressing toward the horizon of conceivable per-
fecting ‘again and again’” (23/26), that yields “limit shapes [Grenzgestalten]
as invariant and never attainable poles” toward which the sequence of per-
fecting tends. Euclidean geometry is then born when “we are interested in
these ideal shapes and are consistently engaged in determining them and in
constructing new ones out of those already determined.” This is the geome-
try that was pregiven to Galileo as an established tradition, one that as such
was taken for granted. Consequently, the original activity in which its ideal
meaning formations were accomplished, the original activity that on Husserl’s
telling his historical mediations reactivated in order to cash in and therefore
make intuitively evident their reference to the world, remained concealed to
Galileo. So when Galileo mathematized the intuitive shapes of bodies di-
rectly and their sensuous manners of appearing indirectly by substituting for
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of the Crisis
91

them the “anticipation” (Origin, K367/C356) of their true being in the ideal
shapes of Euclidean geometry, the original intuition of the sensible shapes of
bodies, along with their transformation into limit shapes by the practice of
measuring, became sedimented. As a consequence of Galileo’s methodical
construction of the “true nature” through the substitution of the ideal shapes
of Euclidean geometry for the experience of sensible shapes proper to bodies,
the original intuition of the latter was lost. It is this state of affairs that Husserl
has in view when he characterizes Galileo as “at once a discovering and a con-
cealing genius” (Crisis, 53/52).
Husserl’s analyses of the mathematization that makes possible the
“‘method of the true knowledge of nature’” (43/43) takes cognizance of the
fact that “one thing more is important for our clarification.” This “one thing
more” is the “‘arithmetization of geometry’” (44/44). Aided by “the algebraic
terms and ways of thinking that have been widespread in the modern period
since Vieta,” this arithmetization transforms the ideal shapes of Galileo’s Eu-
clidean approach to the world into algebraic structures whose symbolic formula-
meaning displaces—“unnoticed” (44/45)—the signification of magnitudes.
Husserl considers this the “decisive accomplishment” (42/43) of the natural sci-
entific method, which in accord with its “complete meaning” makes possible
the anticipation of systematically ordered, determinate predictions about the
practical life-world. Accomplished through the hypothetical substruction of
undetermined generality by the mathematical idealities that comprise the for-
mula-meaning, the determinate prediction arises through the projection of
empirical regularities in advance of the immediately experienced intuitions
that ground the possibility of knowledge of the prescientific life-world. Con-
sequently, “[t]his arithmetization of geometry leads almost automatically, in
a certain way, to the emptying of its meaning” (44/44). Husserl points out that
this unnoticed emptying of meaning eventually “becomes a fully conscious
methodical deplacement, a methodical transition from geometry, for instance,
to pure analysis, treated as a science in its own right” (44/45). Thus, this
process of methodical transformation leads beyond arithmetization to “a com-
pletely universal ‘formalization,’” which, in the guise of a mathesis universalis,
transcends both the pure theory of numbers in algebra and that of magnitudes
in analytic geometry. Thought of in “empty, formal generality,” manifolds are
“conceived of as defined by determinate modalities of the something-in-gen-
eral.” And although Husserl does not explicitly mention it here, the theory of
the “formal-logical idea of a ‘world in general’” at issue in a “systematic devel-
opment” (44/45) of the mathesis universalis is what he elsewhere refers to as
the task of the discipline of “formal ontology” (FTL, 94). In contrast to his
analyses of the Galilean geometrization of nature, however, Husserl’s clarifi-
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
92

cation of the meaning formations that make up the mathesis universalis and
formal ontology does not attempt to reactivate the historical beginnings of
the original accomplishment that makes them possible. For instance, he makes
no attempt to cash in the sedimentation of meaning that is inseparable from
the displacement of the immediate intuitive experience of the life-world that
takes place in the arithmetization of geometry, a displacement accomplished
in Descartes’s formulation of the mathesis universalis. 
Despite the fragmentary character of Husserl’s analyses of formaliza-
tion, it is clear that he is of the view that the desedimentation of the “actual
coordination among the mathematical idealities” (Crisis, 42/43) that makes
formalization and hence the mathematization of the life-world possible
would lead to immediate intuitions in the life-world. This is evident from
the following passage in the Crisis: “If one still has a vivid awareness of this co-
ordination in its original meaning, then a mere thematic shift of one’s regard
toward this meaning is sufficient in order to grasp the ascending orders of in-
tuitions (now posited as approximations) indicated by the functionally coor-
dinated quantities (or, more briefly, formulae); or rather, one can, following
these indications, vividly render present the ascending order of intuitions.”
Likewise, as we have already mentioned, Husserl expresses the conviction in
Formal and Transcendental Logic that 
the meaning-relation of all categorial meanings [Meinungen] to something
individual, which considered noetically is directed to individual evidences,
to experiences—a relation springing from the genesis of the meaning in ques-
tion and one that therefore characterizes every possible kind of example used
by formal analytics—surely cannot be insignificant for the meaning and the
possible evidence of the laws of analytics, including the highest ones, the prin-
ciples of logic. Otherwise, how could those laws claim formal-ontological va-
lidity . . . ? (FTL, 190)
However, neither the Crisis-texts nor, as we shall see, Formal and Transcen-
dental Logiccontain, respectively, concrete analyses that vividly render present
the ascending order of intuitions in the original meaning of symbolic formu-
lae-meaning or that trace the meaning-genesis of the categorial meanings em-
ployed by formal analytics back to individual objects and individual evidence.
The question of whether the absence of such analyses is a reflection of their
fragmentary nature, or whether it points—as we have suggested—to deeper
and perhaps unresolved issues in Husserl’s phenomenology, is something we
shall not pursue until we have discussed in detail Klein’s investigation of the
origin of modern algebra. 
Husserl’s Formulation of the Nature and Roots of the Crisis
93

§ 35. Husserl’s Fragmentar y Analyses of the Sedimentation
Responsible for the Formalized Meaning Formations of 
Modern Mathematics and Klein’s Inquir y into 
Their Origin and Conceptual Structure
We can now state our most basic thesis concerning Husserl’s project of “cash-
ing in” the formalized meaning formations of modern mathematics and
Klein’s inquiry into the origin and conceptual structure of this formal lan-
guage. Our thesis is that Klein’s execution of this task represents precisely
the desedimentation of this “decisive accomplishment.” Husserl’s analyses
identify the “unnoticed emptying of meaning” that accompanies this ac-
complishment, but do not pursue its desedimentation. To support our the-
sis, we shall have to show that Klein’s research pursued and achieved precisely
this desedimentation, when he distinguished “Vieta’s ‘Ars analytice’ from
its Greek foundations, and, thus, revealed the conceptual transformation
which is expressed in it” (GMTOA, 20/6). Yet because, as we suggested
above, this transformation on Klein’s view entails unclarified ontological
presuppositions, we shall argue that the desedimentation of the formalized
meaning formations of modern mathematics is not tantamount to cashing
in their meaning in terms of their genesis in the individual objects of the
pregiven life-world. Thus, we shall argue that, in the case of these meaning
formations, Klein’s research shows that their desedimentation does not re-
alize Husserl’s aim of tracing their meaning-genesis to evidence based in
something individual. In other words, we shall show that Husserl’s convic-
tion that the latter plays a crucial role in the origin of the formalized meaning
formations of modern mathematics is rooted in the unclarified ontological
presuppositions that Klein shows to be sedimented in its origin, and that
we demonstrate (based on Klein’s research) are consequently sedimented in
Husserl’s phenomenology.
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
94

Chapter Eleven
e “Zigzag” Movement Implicit in 
Klein’s Mathematical Investigations
§ 36. The Structure of Klein’s Method of Historical Reflection
in Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra
We shall now set about demonstrating the implicit “zigzag” movement be-
longing to the method of historical reflection operative in Klein’s desedimen-
tation of the formalized meaning formations that characterize modern
mathematics. This movement can best be seen by way of an overview of the
structure of his investigations in Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin
of Algebra. Rather than begin his investigation with a consideration of what he
argues is the proximate origin of modern mathematics, namely, Vieta’s assim-
ilation and transformation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic, Klein begins with a
consideration of the Neoplatonic literature “which forms its [i.e., the Arith-
metic’s] background.” His rationale for this is that “we must first of all see the
work of Diophantus from the point of view of its own presuppositions” (20/6).
Klein discloses these in terms of the categories of Neoplatonic mathematics
and its classification of mathematical sciences, and shows that these “go back
to the corresponding formulations in Plato.” Yet because the Neoplatonic cat-
egories and classifications “were such as to prevent the integration of the Arith-
meticinto this literature,” and because the corresponding formulations in Plato
are not “identical with them,” Klein’s task of seeing Diophantus’s work “from
the point of view of its own presuppositions” must first desediment the Neo-
platonic and Platonic background of Diophantus’s Arithmetic. 
Uncovering these presuppositions results in desedimenting the basis in
Plato’s philosophy for the Neoplatonic division of the science of numbers into
theoretical and practical parts, that is, theoretical arithmetic and practical lo-
gistic (the art of calculation). This leads, in turn, to Klein’s reactivation of the
source of Plato’s account of a very different configuration of this science,
wherein both arithmetic and logistic are assigned theoretical and practical

parts. Klein shows that for Plato “Both theoretical disciplines arise directly,
on the one hand from actual counting, and on the other from calculating”
(21/6). Klein also shows that the Neoplatonists ignored Plato’s “postulation
of a theoretical logistic as a noetic analogue for, and as the presuppositions
of, any art of calculation” (21/7), because of an essential peculiarity of “the
ἀριθμός-concept which forms the basis of all Greek arithmetic and logistic,”
including therefore of Plato’s postulation of a theoretical logistic as well. It is
this state of affairs that leads Klein to desediment the ἀριθμός (number) con-
cept operative both in Plato’s thought in particular and in Greek mathemat-
ics in general. Klein accomplishes this by reactivating the most basic meaning
of this concept along with the original process of counting that, in making
“use of a prior knowledge of ‘counting-numbers’ which are already in our pos-
session” (22/7), gives rise to the basic problem of theoretical arithmetic: un-
folding the true presuppositions of this practical activity. His reactivation of
the most basic meaning of the ἀριθμός shows that it “never means anything
other than ‘a definite amount of definite objects.’”8 This meaning forms the
basis of the theoretical mathematical understanding of the ἀριθμόςthat makes
counting possible, inasmuch as this activity is possible only on the basis of
“definite amounts of ‘undifferentiated’ objects, namely assemblages of ‘pure’
units or monads, which must already be in our possession prior to the practi-
cal activity of counting.”
Klein’s reactivation of the original meaning of the ἀριθμός concept op-
erative in Greek mathematics shows that Greek arithmetic is originally con-
cerned with the theoretical “problem of the possibility of such assemblages, i.e.,
the question how it is possible that many ‘ones’ should ever form one definite
amount of ‘ones.’” This “leads to the search for the εἴδη with definite ‘specific
properties’ such as will give unity to, and permit a classification of, all definite
amounts.” Greek arithmetic, then, is not a theory of numbers but a theory of
the εἴδη of numbers.9 Klein also shows that for Greek mathematics the art of
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
96
————————
8. Klein renders the Greek word ἀριθμός as Anzahl to distinguish it from Zahl, which
he uses for the modern symbolic number concept. Anzahl and Zahl are translated as ‘number’
in the English translation of Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, notwith-
standing Brann’s “Translator’s note,” wherein she states that “it is a chief object of this study to
show that Greek ‘arithmos’ and modern ‘number’ do not mean the same thing, that they differ
in their intentionality, for the former intends things, i.e., a number of them, while the latter in-
tends a concept, i.e., that of quantity” (vii). (Regarding the choice of ‘intentionality’ as the
translation of Begrifflichkeit, see n. 7 above.) In order to reflect in English the distinction at
issue in Klein’s German choice of terms, Anzahl will be translated in this study as ‘definite
amount’ or ‘definite amount of definite objects’, depending on the context, while Zahl will be
translated simply as ‘number’. 
9. In his The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1975), 134,
Wilbur Richard Knorr substantiates this claim, and holds that “Jacob Klein reasonably inter-

calculating, and therefore theoretical logistic, considers these determinate
amounts “only with reference to their ‘material,’ their ὕλη, that is, with refer-
ence to the units as such. The possibility of theoretical logistic is therefore to-
tally dependent on the mode of being which the pure units are conceived to
have” (22/8).
Klein’s reactivation of the meaning of the fundamental problems of
Greek mathematics shows that the reason why the Neoplatonists ignored
Plato’s postulation of a theoretical logistic is rooted in the latter’s account of
the indivisibility of the mode of being proper to these pure units or monads.
Specifically, “the use of fractional parts of the unit of calculation, which is
unavoidable in calculations, cannot be justified on the basis of such monads”
(21/7). Klein’s desedimentation of Plato’s account of this mode of being
discloses that it is rooted, in turn, in the ontological presuppositions of his
philosophy. Klein reactivates these presuppositions by showing, first, the
Pythagorean horizon of “cosmological ‘mathematics’ and its connection with
the ἀριθμός concept” (22/8) that inform Plato’s ontological presuppositions.
Second, he reactivates “the significance which is attached to ‘the ability to
count and calculate’ in Platonic philosophy.” This leads to a consideration of
the “privileged position he assigns to the theory of number” for the ontolog-
ical problem of participation (μέθεξις), a problem “to which his ‘dialectic’ nec-
essarily leads, without, however, being of itself able to provide a solution.” The
theory of number, however, is shown to lead to the discovery of a fundamen-
tal solution to this problem, a solution that is based on the distinction be-
tween eidetic and mathematical ἀριθμοί. Klein thus shows that Plato’s
philosophy repeats in the realm of the ideas themselves “the Pythagorean at-
tempt at an ‘arithmological’ ordering of all being,” a repetition, moreover,
“which amounts to a decisive correction of the Eleatic thesis of the ‘One.’” 
Klein’s desedimentation of the ontological presuppositions proper to
Plato’s conception of eidetic and mathematical ἀριθμοίprovides the basis for
his reactivation of Aristotle’s critique of the mode of being attributed to
them in Platonic philosophy. Rather than have a being that is “self-subsistent
and originally ‘separate’ from sense perception,” Aristotle, on Klein’s view,
“shows that the ‘pure’ units are merely the product of a ‘reduction’
[αφαίρεσις] performed in thought, which turns everything countable into
‘neutral’ material” (22–23/8). Having no being of their own, “[t]heir indi-
visibility is only an expression of the fact that counting and calculating al-
ways presuppose a last, irreducible ‘unit,’ which is to be understood as the
e “Zigzag” Movement of Klein’s Mathematical Investigations
97
————————
prets . . . Plato’s intent to define with full scientific rigor the fields of the theory of number (i.e.,
logistic and arithmetic) without reference to the concepts of number or numbered things.”

given measure” (23/9). Aristotle’s critique therefore allows the introduction
of “a new and ‘smaller’ measure,” which provides the ontological basis for
realizing the demand for a “scientific” logistic that is made, but cannot be re-
alized—because of the indivisibility of the unit—in Platonic philosophy.
Having desedimented the work of Diophantus “from the point of view
of its own presuppositions,” Klein then shows that his Arithmetic has the sta-
tus of a “theoretical logistic.” As such, it “always retains a dependence on the
Greek ἀριθμός concept, although it apparently incorporates a more general,
pre-Greek ‘algebraic’ tradition as well.” The reactivation of the Diophantine
technique provides the context for Klein’s reactivation of Vieta’s transforma-
tion of this technique, which in turn amounts to the desedimentation of the
Greek context for his innovation of the algebraic symbolism that makes mod-
ern mathematics possible. This desedimentation has as its consequence both
the reactivation of the process proper to the “symbolic abstraction” that makes
possible the symbolic language of algebra and modern mathematics and the
articulation of the unclarified ontological presuppositions that are insepara-
ble from this process. Finally, Klein desediments these presuppositions as
they function in Stevin’s, Descartes’s, and Wallis’s thought, which allows him
to “trace out the general transformation, closely connected with the symbolic
understanding of number, of the ‘scientific’ consciousness of later centuries.”
By way of a summary, we can articulate the main lines proper to the
zigzag movement of Klein’s historical reflections as follows. The questions
facing the physics of Klein’s day, in the guise of the philosophical unintelli-
gibility of the significance of its cognitive achievement, motivate a histori-
cal reflection on the seventeenth-century origins of its basic concepts. This
reflection represents the beginning of the “zig” movement, whose aim is to
reactivate these origins in order to prepare the way for the reflective “zag”
movement, which, guided by the insight into the basic concepts attained by
the previous “zig” movement, will be better able to understand the prob-
lems facing physics in its historical present. However, for the initial reflec-
tive “zig” movement to accomplish its aim, it must extend its scope beyond
the seventeenth century, back to the origins of the Greek concepts that
played a crucial role in the origination of physics. This extended “zig” move-
ment reactivates four—namely, Neoplatonic, Platonic, Pythagorean, and
Aristotelian—levels or strata sedimented in these origins, each of which al-
lows the corresponding reflective “zag” movement to clarify the key con-
cepts of Greek mathematics that were transformed by the originators of
modern mathematics in the seventeenth century.
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
98

Chapter Twelve
Husserl and Klein on the Logic  
of Symbolic Mathematics
§ 37. Husserl’s Systematic Attempt to Ground the Symbolic
Concept of Number in the Concept of Anzahl
As Klein notes, the logic of symbolic mathematics was Husserl’s first philo-
sophical problem. Husserl’s investigations in Philosophy of Arithmetic seek to
establish the foundation of symbolic mathematics, which he also calls ‘uni-
versal arithmetic’, on the authentic concept of cardinal number (Anzahl).10 To
anticipate the results of our own investigation of Husserl’s treatment of this
problem in the next chapter, it begins with the assumption of the logical
equivalence, in the sense of the identity of their object, of the contents of the
authentic and symbolic concepts of number: Husserl initially presents each
as referring to the determinate unity of a determinate multitude of units, al-
beit directly in the case of the authentic concept of cardinal number and in-
directly in the case of the symbolic concept of number. Husserl’s investigation
seeks to show that the foundation of symbolic mathematics, and thus its logic
as well, lies in the authentic concept of Anzahl. 
In the final chapters of Philosophy of Arithmetic, however, Husserl con-
cludes that the calculative algorithms manifested by the sense-perceptible signs
of the symbolic calculus have a “signitive” status that rules out their foundation
in arithmetical concepts generally and in the concept of cardinal number
specifically. In other words, Husserl rejects his initial thesis of the logical equiv-
alence proper to the contents of the concept of Anzahl and the concept of
symbolic number, and therefore no longer thinks it possible to ground the
logic of the calculation with the latter in the concept of the former.
————————
10. See Part III, n. 2, for a discussion of this translation.

§ 38. Klein on the Transformation of the Ancient Concept of
’Aριθμός (Anzahl) into the Modern Concept of 
Symbolic Number
Our overview above of the content of Klein’s method of historical reflection
in his Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra allows us to see
that its investigations purport to reach historically the same conclusion that
Husserl’s investigations arrive at systematically, namely, that the logic of sym-
bolic mathematics cannot be grounded in the concept of Anzahl. Klein’s re-
search establishes that the Greek ἀριθμός, defined as the determinate unity of
a determinate multiplicity of units, is the paradigm of the pre-modern, non-
symbolic concept of ‘number’ as Anzahl. The identity of their conclusions in
this regard has led one commentator, J. Philip Miller, to assume that Klein
simply uses the “categories” generated by Husserl’s a priori analyses in Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic “in studying the actual history of mathematical thought.”11
Klein himself, however, points the way to a different interpretation of the rea-
son that his research in Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Alge-
bra arrives at the same conclusion as Husserl’s “a priori” analyses, namely, his
view, discussed above, that Husserl’s foundational approach to the problem of
the logic of symbolic mathematics, in effect, amounts to “a reproduction and
precise understanding of the ‘formalization’ which took place in modern
mathematics and philosophy” (PHS, 70). And this occurrence, of course, is
precisely what Klein’s Origin of Algebra purports to present within a major
strand belonging to its historical development.
Our analyses of Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of non-symbolic num-
bers will demonstrate, moreover, that Miller’s assumption cannot withstand
critical scrutiny. Despite the fact that both Husserl and Klein define the con-
cept of Anzahl as the determinate (delimited) unity of a determinate mul-
titude of units, they nevertheless define these units in radically different
ways. According to Husserl, the “unity” of the “units” in the multitude that
composes an Anzahl is established “logically,” by their “falling” (abstractively)
under the materially empty (and therefore “formalized”) concept of the Etwas
(‘anything’; later, Etwas überhaupt, or ‘something in general’). According to
Klein, the “unity” of the “units” composing an Anzahl as ἀριθμός is estab-
lished ontologically, in the precise sense of the theoretical supposition of a
multitude of beings that are both identical and indivisible. Miller’s claim
————————
11. J. Philip Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence: A Study of Husserl’s Philosophy of
Mathematics (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982), 132. The passage in full runs as follows: “Although
Husserl’s own analyses [i.e., in Philosophy of Arithmetic] move on the level of a priori possibil-
ity, Klein’s work shows how fruitful these analyses can be when the categories they generate are
used in studying the actual history of mathematical thought.”
100
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature

that Klein’s study uses the categories of Husserl’s analyses overlooks their
different accounts of this very basic “category.”
The guiding  aim of the present study is to establish the immense im-
portance of these different accounts of the “unity” of the units that compose
an Anzahl, that is, a non-symbolic number, for Husserl’s and Klein’s respec-
tive accounts of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics. We shall
demonstrate that Husserl’s account of this “unity”—and, indeed, any “unity”—
as a formalized concept, prevents his thought (both his pre- and properly phe-
nomenological thought) from accounting for the origination of formalized
unity. Because Husserl’s account of what is properly the content of a non-for-
malized concept, the concept of Anzahl, introduces a formalized concept to
account for the “unity” of its component “units,” his thought, from beginning
to end, remains incapable of providing an account of the origin or genesis of
“formalization” that satisfies his own requirements regarding such an account.
These requirements are stipulated in his demand for a “theory of judgment”
that provides foundational evidence derived from the “pre-formalized” expe-
rience and givenness of individual objects. Husserl’s presupposition of “for-
malized” unity and therefore formalization in his account of the units in a
non-symbolic number, and in his account of unity per se, consequently pre-
vents his analysis from satisfactorily establishing the phenomenological ori-
gin of the logic of symbolic mathematics—or so it will be our burden to
establish in support of an underlying argument of this study. 
Klein makes no such presupposition about the unity of the units com-
posing non-symbolic numbers. Indeed, the fundamental finding of his Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra is that precisely the his-
torical-philosophical discovery of this presupposition not only permits it to
be withdrawn, but that its withdrawal holds the key to providing a philo-
sophical account of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics
that does not tacitly assume that the formalization coincident with this orig-
ination has already occurred. 
§ 39. Transition to Part Three of this Study
Owing to the priority of Husserl’s systematic investigations of the structure
and origin of the concept of Anzahl, of the structure and origin in the case of
the concept of symbolic number, and of his conclusion that the logic of sym-
bolic mathematics cannot be grounded in the concept of Anzahl(and, indeed,
in any concept), Part Three of our study begins with a detailed exposition and
analysis of Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic. Our account of these issues will
provide the context for the detailed exposition and analysis of Klein’s histori-
Husserl and Klein on the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
101

cal-philosophical investigations of what we suggest here are the very same is-
sues. And these expositions and analyses will provide the basis for Part Four’s
demonstration of our thesis that, while it is Klein, and not Husserl, who pro-
vides the most compelling account of the philosophical origination of the logic
of symbolic mathematics, it is Husserl who (in his Crisis) provides the philo-
sophical rationale that renders Klein’s account the most compelling.
II. Desedimenting the Mathematization of Nature
102

Part ree
Non-symbolic and Symbolic 
Numbers in Husserl and Klein


Chapter irteen
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in
Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 40. The Shortcomings of Philosophy of Arithmetic
and Our Basic Concern
Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic is an attempt to establish the foundation
of arithmetic by means of a psychological account of what he refers to as
“cardinal number [Anzahl]1 in the true and authentic sense of the word”
——————
1. In Philosophy of Arithmetic, Husserl uses the German terms Zahl and Anzahl inter-
changeably, e.g.: “Die allbekannte Definition des Begriffes der Zahl – so dürfen wir konform
mit der gemeinüblichen Sprechweise kurzweg für Anzahl sagen” (PA, 14). While both may be
rendered as ‘number’, the latter has a more determinate meaning than the former and would best
be translated as ‘counting number’ or ‘amount or quantity of things’. Yet because such a trans-
lation would be awkward, we adopt the convention of translating Anzahl as ‘cardinal number’,
defined as ‘the number used in simple counting to indicate how many items there are in an as-
semblage’. As a consequence of our adoption of this convention, we deviate from Dallas Willard,
the English translator of Philosophy of Arithmetic, who renders Anzahlvariously as ‘whole num-
ber’, ‘number’, and ‘cardinal number’. Husserl himself, however, seems to provide warrant for
the convention we have chosen. On the very first page of his introduction to Philosophy of Arith-
metic, he equates Anzahlen with cardinal numbers. Thus, in connection with the observation
that the “Begriff der Zahl ist ein vielfacher” (10), he articulates as one such concept “die An-
zahlen oder Grundzahlen (numeralia cardinalia)” and goes on to say with respect to Anzahlen
that “the other characteristic names they also bear—basic [Grund-] or cardinal numbers [Kar-
dinalzahlen]—are not founded on mere convention.” In his Numbers in Presence and Absence
(42 n. 11), however, J. Philip Miller rejects ‘cardinal number’ as a translation of Anzahl in
Husserl’s text. Miller’s reasons for rejecting this translation are the following: “Anzahl is some-
times translated as ‘cardinal number,’ Zahlsimply as ‘number.’ But in the context of Husserl’s phi-
losophy, this seems somewhat inappropriate. It suggests that the mathematical concept of
number is the basic one, while Anzahl is merely a special case. But Husserl’s central point is pre-
cisely that the fundamental sense of number is Anzahl.” While we would agree with Miller that
the fundamental sense of number for Husserl is Anzahl, we cannot, especially in light of the
explicit connection that Husserl makes between Anzahlen and Kardinalzahlen, follow Miller’s
argument for rejecting ‘cardinal number’ as a translation of Anzahl.

(PA, 116).2 His critical self-understanding of the failure of this attempt has
met with general acceptance in the literature. There is, however, no con-
sensus regarding exactly why Husserl’s attempt failed. Gottlob Frege’s criti-
cal review of Philosophy of Arithmetic,3 in which he took Husserl to task for
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
106
————————
2. That arithmetic, in the sense of a “universal arithmetic,” including all the higher op-
erations of arithmetical analysis, has its foundation in cardinal numbers is a view Husserl took
over from his mathematics teacher, Karl Weierstrass. See Miller, Numbers in Presence and Ab-
sence, 1–5; see also Carlo Ierna, “The Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy, Part 1: From Über
den Begriff der Zahl to Philosophie der Arithmetik,” New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phe-
nomenological Philosophy V (2005), 1–56, here 39, 51–52; and “The Beginnings of Husserl’s
Philosophy, Part 2: Philosophical and Mathematical Background,” New Yearbook for Phe-
nomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy VI (2006), 23–71, here 38–43. The view that
to properly establish this foundation in the logical structure of the concept of cardinal num-
ber one must employ psychological analysis can be traced back to Husserl’s philosophy teacher,
Franz Brentano (see Ierna, “Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy, Part 2,” 20–34). 
Husserl came to abandon the view of the foundational status of cardinal numbers for
universal arithmetic in the time period between the completion of his Habilitationsschrift in
1887 and the publication of Philosophy of Arithmetic (which is largely based upon the Habilita-
tionsschrift) in 1891. In a letter to the director of his Habilitationsschrift, Carl Stumpf, written in
1890, Husserl explicitly states that he has abandoned his commitment to the foundational status
of cardinal numbers and gives his reasons for doing so. The letter will be discussed in detail below.
The introduction to Philosophy of Arithmetic also reflects, though less clearly, Husserl’s change of
mind, as he characterizes the work’s claims regarding the foundational status of cardinal numbers
as, in effect, a working hypothesis, which is adopted “in no way to anticipate any definitive res-
olution of the issue” (PA, 12). However, the text of Philosophy of Arithmetic itself does not ex-
plicitly discuss the philosophical implications of its author’s abandonment of his commitment
to the foundational role of cardinal numbers for arithmetic, but it rather contains, in some cases
literally side by side, analyses that maintain this thesis and others that call it into question. 
In 1906, Husserl himself, after rereading Philosophy of Arithmetic, remarked “how naive
and almost childlike that work appeared to me!” And that “it was not without reason that I
was conscience-stricken upon its publication.” He goes on to say, “Actually, I had already gone
beyond it as I published it. Indeed, it was drawn in essentials from the years 1886 and 1887.”
See Edmund Husserl, “Personal Notes,” in Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and Math-
ematics, trans. Dallas Willard (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1994), 490–500, here 490 (notes dated
September 25, 1906); henceforth cited as Personal Notes. 
Our discussion of Philosophy of Arithmetic will be concerned with neither philological
questions about its genesis nor historical questions about exactly when Husserl abandoned its
underlying mathematical thesis. Rather, our focus in this chapter will be on its—however im-
perfect—analyses and the conclusions these permit to be drawn regarding Husserl’s initial en-
counter with the problem of the origin of the logic proper to symbolic mathematics. (For an
instructive discussion of the philological and historical issues surrounding the composition of
Philosophy of Arithmetic, see Parts 1 and 2 of Ierna, “The Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy.”)
3. Gottlob Frege, “Rezension von: E. G. Husserl, Philosophie der Arithmetik. I,” Zeit -
schrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik n.s. 103 (1894), 313–32 (reprinted in Gottlob
Frege, Kleine Schriften, ed. Ignacio Angelelli [Hildesheim: Olms, 2d ed., 1990], 179–92; orig-
inal pagination is noted in the headers); English translation: “Review of Dr. E. Husserl’s Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic,” trans. E. W. Kluge, in Frederick A. Elliston and Peter McCormick, eds.,
Husserl: Expositions and Appraisals (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1977),
314–24; henceforth cited as ‘Frege’ with German and English page references, respectively.

“the influx of psychology into logic” (Frege, 324/332)—to the mutual detri-
ment of each—along with certain of Husserl’s remarks have lent credence
to a widely held view that Husserl’s main dissatisfaction with Philosophy of
Arithmetic can be traced to the work’s psychologism, that is, to its reduction
of both the objects of logical concepts and the objectivity of these concepts
themselves to psychological presentations. On this view, Husserl’s statement
in the Foreword to the first edition of the Logical Investigations about his
“doubts of principle, as to how to reconcile the objectivity of mathematics,
and of all science in general, with a psychological foundation for logic,”4
along with his remark recorded by W. R. Boyce Gibson “that Frege’s criti-
cism of the Philosophy of Arithmetic . . . hit the nail on the head,”5 are inter-
preted as endorsing Frege’s criticism. However, as Dallas Willard has noted,
“one searches in vain for passages in [Husserl’s] earlier writings where he ad-
vocated such a psychologistic logic.”6 In addition, J. N. Mohanty has shown
that Husserl did not acquire the distinction between ‘object’, ‘concept’, and
‘presentation’ from Frege.7
It is our contention that any interpretation and assessment of Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic must keep in mind Husserl’s own understanding of the
work as a “sequence of ‘psychological and logical investigations’” (PA, 5, my
emphasis) that “claims to prepare the scientific foundations for a future con-
struction” of arithmetic. Consequently, the presentation of arithmetic in
that work must be kept distinct from its psychological-philosophical ac-
count of arithmetic’s foundations. Husserl’s grasp of the basic concepts and
operations of the former should not be equated with his—admittedly “psy-
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
107
————————
4. Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Band: Prolegomena zur reinen
Logik, ed. Elmar Holenstein, Husserliana XVIII (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975), 6–7; English
translation: Logical Investigations, trans. J. N. Findlay, 2 vols. (New York: Humanities Press, 1982),
I: 2. Henceforth referred to as Prolegomena, whereas the investigations are referred to collectively
as Logical Investigationsor simply Investigationsor individually by number; quotations are cited
as LI followed by German and English page references, respectively.
5. W. R. Boyce Gibson, “From Husserl to Heidegger: Excerpts from a 1928 Diary by W.
R. Boyce Gibson,” ed. Herbert Spiegelberg, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology 2
(1971), 58–81, here 66.
6. Dallas Willard, “Husserl on a Logic that Failed,” Philosophical Review 89 (1980),
46–64, here 46–47.
7. J. N. Mohanty, “Husserl and Frege: A New Look at their Relationship,” Research in
Phenomenology 4 (1974), 51–62. Consider Miller, who also argues that Husserl’s admission
in the Logical Investigations of the psychologism of his earlier work “does not imply that the
analyses which make up the bulk of the published volume of PA were psychologistic in the per-
nicious sense criticized in the Prolegomena to LU” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence,
23). Miller bases his argument on the fact that “[t]he basic thought of PA is that numbers can
be presented both authentically and symbolically . . . , [which] would be inconceivable if num-
bers were regarded as identical with the acts of presentation themselves” (21).

chological”—account of the origination of their foundations in “experi-
ence.”8 Only by keeping this distinction in view can clarity be achieved re-
garding that for which Husserl is attempting to provide foundations, namely,
both a specific understanding of arithmetical concepts and operations and a
specific understanding of their logic. This is not to say, however, that by main-
taining this distinction the shortcomings of Husserl’s psychological attempt
to found arithmetic and its logic can be obviated. Rather, the claim here is
that this attempt—and its failure—can be properly assessed only on the basis
of a precise understanding of Husserl’s formulation of these concepts and
operations together with their logic. 
Mohanty and Willard maintain this distinction insofar as they both
recognize that what is at issue for Husserl in Philosophy of Arithmetic is the
attempt to enlist certain concepts from Brentano’s psychology in order to
ground the objectivity of arithmetical concepts and arithmetical knowledge.
For this reason, they are able to defend Husserl successfully against Frege’s
criticism that Philosophy of Arithmetic is pervaded by a crude form of psy-
chologism, that is, by the reduction of the objectivity proper to both arith-
metical concepts and the logic of arithmetical operations to psychological
presentations. They do so by showing how the “psychologism” of Philosophy
of Arithmetic is much subtler: while Husserl is not guilty therein of reducing
the objectivity of arithmetic and logic to psychological presentations, he
nevertheless attempts to clarify the fundamental genesis and meaning of this
objectivity by way of analyses of psychological “acts.”9
However, Mohanty’s and Willard’s entirely legitimate concern to show
that the development of Husserl’s phenomenology—or, at the very least, his
phenomenological investigations of the foundations of logic—in effect
amounts to his “correction” of this early mistake is not the concern of the
present study. Rather, it is to demonstrate the truth of Klein’s thesis that
“Husserl’s logical researches amount in fact to a reproduction and precise
understanding of the ‘formalization’ which took place in mathematics (and
philosophy) ever since Vieta and Descartes paved the way for modern sci-
ence” (PHS, 70). Consequently, the present interpretation of Husserl’s log-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
108
————————
8. For an excellent account of the historical context (and esp. the contributions of the
work of Hermann Lotze and Carl Stumpf to this context) that informed Husserl’s under-
standing of psychology in general and psychological experience in particular, see Dallas Willard,
Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1984), 32–33.
9. Miller argues that the problem with Husserl’s psychologism in Philosophy of Arith-
metic is not that he reduces the objectivity “of multitudes and numbers to mental entities, but
rather that he construes them as curious halfbreeds, as wholes consisting partly of objects
and partly of mental acts” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 71). See § 45 below,
where the exact character of Husserl’s understanding of mental acts is discussed in detail.

ical investigations in Philosophy of Arithmetic will focus on the issue of pre-
cisely what the basic concepts of arithmetic and logic are that guide his psy-
chological quest to provide their foundations.
§ 41. Husserl on the Authentic Concepts of Multiplicity and
Cardinal Number Concepts, and Inauthentic (Symbolic) 
Number Concepts
In Philosophy of Arithmetic Husserl distinguishes between two kinds of num-
ber concepts: authentic and inauthentic (symbolic) (see PA, 15–16).10 By
the former is meant a species of the concept of multiplicity, which answers
the question of “How many?” (15). The authenticity of the authentic num-
ber concept has its basis in the authenticity of that to which the concept of
multiplicity refers: “the intuition in consciousness of some concrete multi-
plicity” (79). “The cardinal number concept thus encompasses, though only
indirectly through the extensions of its species concepts, which are the num-
ber two, three, four, . . . , the same concrete phenomena as the concept of
multiplicity” (15). The inauthenticity of symbolic number concepts is
grounded in “a presentation by means of signs. If a content is not given di-
rectly to us as what it is, but only indirectly through signs that univocally
characterize it, then we have a symbolic presentation of it instead of an au-
thentic one” (193). 
For Husserl both the authentic and symbolic number concepts are
“empty” (see 49 and 51) in the sense that the multiplicity of “determinate
objects” (16) upon which they are based—directly in the former and indi-
rectly in the latter—are “completely arbitrary.” Thus, he writes:
Indeed, for the formation of concrete assemblages there are no restrictions at
all with respect to the particular contents concerned. Any imaginable object,
whether physical or psychical, abstract or concrete, whether given through
sensation or fantasy, can be united with any and arbitrarily many others to
form an assemblage, and accordingly can also be counted. For example, sev-
eral of certain trees, the sun, the moon, Earth, and Mars; a feeling, an angel,
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
109
————————
10. Miller correctly maintains that “the distinction between authentic and symbolic
modes of givenness is central to PA as a whole” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 28).
However, his study’s focus on the presentation of authentic and symbolic numbers in Husserl’s
analyses tends to overlook the authentic number concepts and “symbolic formations” (PA,
16) that these analyses are intended to clarify.
Willard maintains in connection with Philosophy of Arithmetic’s investigation of the
distinction between authentic and symbolic presentations and concepts: “It is not a great or a
pointless exaggeration to say that the analysis of symbolic representations and knowing is the
main problem for investigation throughout Husserl’s career” (Willard, Logic and the Objectiv-
ity of Knowledge, 89).

the moon, and Italy; etc. In these examples we can always speak of an assem-
blage, a multiplicity, and a determinate number. The nature of the particu-
lar contents therefore makes no difference at all. 
The emptiness of the authentic number concept shows up in the process of
enumeration or counting. This process is directed to the concrete contents
that belong to the concept of multiplicity, contents Husserl characterizes “as
some content or other, each one as a certain anything, a certain one” (79).
Consequently, “the concept of multiplicity also contains that of the any-
thing [Etwas]” (80). For Husserl, then: 
One can with full justification designate the concepts anything and one,
multiplicity and cardinal number—these concepts that are most general and
emptiest of content—as form concepts or categories. What characterizes
them as such is the circumstance that they are not concepts of contents of a
determinate genus, but rather in a certain manner take in any and every con-
tent. (84)
Being empty of content yet inseparable from the multiplicity of anythings
or ones to which it refers, the generic cardinal number concept is related to
its “parts,” that is, the determinate species of cardinal numbers, in a manner
analogous to “the relationship between the logical part and logical whole
(e.g., between color and the difference red)” (82). Therefore, just as there is
no “color in general,” likewise “[t]here is no cardinal number in general.” 
Because the authentic meaning belonging to the cardinal number con-
cept is a species of the concept of multiplicity, and because the response to
the question of ‘how many’ with respect to a multiplicity is never zero or
one, Husserl flatly denies “that zero and one belong among the number con-
cepts” (130). Moreover: “If we arrange the numbers in the ‘natural’ sequence,
that is, in such a way that each arises following upon the preceding one by
the collective addition of one unit, then 1 + 1 is the first number, inasmuch
as it has no predecessor” (132). Consequently, ‘two’ is the first number.
§ 42. The Basic Logical Problem in Philosophy of Arithmetic
The last chapter of Philosophy of Arithmetic articulates the logical11 prob-
lematic of arithmetic as the clarification of its calculational methods, a clar-
ification that leads to an investigation of the origin of the symbolic methods
of arithmetic. Husserl writes, “The individual numbers, considered by them-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
110
————————
11. Willard identifies the meaning of the term ‘logical’ “most frequently used by
Husserl” (Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 127 n. 1) in Philosophy of Arith-
metic as “devices which enable us to extend knowledge with absolute assurance . . . , or the
needs or conditions of such extension.”

selves, give no occasion for treatment with a view to knowledge of them”
(256). Thus, “[o]nly out of the relationships of numbers to one another do
there arise problems that require a logical treatment.” The logical treatment
of arithmetic, under the heading of “universal arithmetic” (283), has as its
task the elaboration of a “universal theory of operations,” that is, a theory of
calculation and calculational technique. And because the calculational tech-
nique is “almost always confined to symbolic presentations of number,” the
philosophy of arithmetic detects in the latter “the logical origin of universal
arithmetic” (287). 
On Husserl’s view the concept of calculation “admits of various broader
and narrower significations” (256). In its broadest sense, it signifies “any mode
of derivation of numbers sought starting from numbers given.” In its narrower
sense, calculation signifies “mechanical-exterior sign formation” (257), that
is, a calculational technique. With respect to “the method of derivation of
sought numbers,” there are thus two possibilities: 
Either this derivation is an essentially conceptual operation, in which case the
designations play only a subordinate role, or it is an essentially sensible opera-
tion that, utilizing the system of number signs, derives sign from sign accord-
ing to fixed rules, claiming only the final result as the designation of a certain
concept, the one sought.
From Husserl’s understanding of calculation and calculational technique, it
follows that “[a]ny arithmetical method would eo ipso be a calculational
method. The calculational technique would be the technique of arithmetical
cognitions, and arithmetic only their systematically arranged entirety.” The
answer to the question of what method is “logically more perfect” is a practi-
cal affair, in the sense that it “can be only a question of what they are capable
of accomplishing.” For Husserl, it is calculational technique “that has the pref-
erence in our domain [i.e., arithmetic], and also abundantly deserves it.” This
is the case because calculation with concepts is “highly abstract, limited, and,
even with the most extensive practice, laborious.” Calculation with “signs is
concrete, sensible, all-inclusive, and . . . already with a modest degree of prac-
tice, easy to work with.” Moreover, “there is no conceivable [arithmetical]
problem that it would not be capable of solving.” This means that calcula-
tional technique “makes the conceptual method entirely superfluous,” and,
because of this, calculational technique is “the logical method of arithmetic.”
On account of his insight (in the last chapterof Philosophy of Arithmetic) into
the superfluity of the conceptual method of calculation for universal arith-
metic, Husserl comes to understand its method as one that “encompasses any
symbolic derivation of numbers from numbers that is substantively based on rule-
governed operations with sensible signs” (257–58). 
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
111

§ 43. The Fundamental Shift in Husserl’s Account of 
Calculational Technique
Husserl’s initial investigations in Philosophy of Arithmetic into the logical
origin of universal arithmetic, in sharp contrast to its last chapter, are in-
formed by the view that the “true basis” (90) of the mechanical operations
of calculational technique “lies in the elementary relations between [au-
thentically presented] numbers.” Moreover, he maintains, “it is certain” that
“authentic presenting [of the items in an assemblage] is present at least in
the first stages” (92), for instance, in the “inauthentic (symbolic) present-
ing” of several assemblages together as unified into one assemblage”—“[f]or
otherwise the very thought of such a composite structure would be absurd.”
In the last chapter of Philosophy of Arithmetic, however, precisely this view
is characterized as “a rigorous consequence of the standpoint we adopted
there [i.e., earlier in the book]: namely, the widespread prejudice to the ef-
fect that arithmetic has to do with true and authentic number concepts and
the laws of their combination or ‘operation’” (262). This and other state-
ments in Philosophy of Arithmetic, especially in the last chapters, make it clear
that Husserl’s position on the logical origin of universal arithmetic under-
went what can only be characterized as a radical shift regarding the relation
of symbolic number concepts and their presentation to authentic number
concepts and their presentation.12 Moreover, it is clear that he was cognizant
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
112
————————
12. Husserl’s letter to Carl Stumpf written in 1890, before Philosophy of Arithmetic was
complete, relates that “[t]he view by which I was still guided in the elaboration of my Habili-
tationsschrift, to the effect that the concept of cardinal number forms the foundation of universal
arithmetic, soon proved to be false”; see “Husserl an Stumpf, ca. Februar 1890,” in Edmund
Husserl, Briefwechsel, ed. Karl Schuhmann with Elisabeth Schuhmann, 10 vols. (Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1994), I: 157–64, here 158; English translation: “Letter from Edmund Husserl to Carl
Stumpf,” in Early Writings, 12–19, here 13—henceforth cited as ‘Stumpf Letter’ with German
and English pagination, respectively. This means, among other things, that “[b]y no clever de-
vices, by no ‘inauthentic presenting,’ can one derive negative, rational, irrational, and the vari-
ous sorts of complex numbers from the concept of cardinal number.” Instead, universal
arithmetic “finds application to the cardinal numbers (in ‘number theory’), as well as to ordi-
nals, to continuous quantities, and to n-dimensional manifolds (time, space, color, force, con-
tinua, etc.).” 
Husserl goes on to relate how, with the realization that “no common concept under-
lies these various applications of arithmetic,” he had to confront the question about its content,
about its “conceptual objects,” and that he had to reject his original supposition that this con-
tent is intrinsically conceptual. That is, he had to reject his initial view that to all of the signs
of universal arithmetic there correspond, “at least potentially” (159/15), “designated concepts”
(160/15). The view that a “system of signs and operations with signs can replace a system of
concepts and operations with judgments, where the two systems run rigorously parallel”
(159/14), only holds (within the context of mathematics) in the case of “ordinary arithmetic.”
Thus, e.g., if arithmetic “deals with discrete magnitudes, then ‘fractions,’ ‘irrational numbers,’ 

of the fact that, because of this, Philosophy of Arithmetic documents this shift,
as it were, insofar as the published text contains analyses that reflect both the
view that the authentic numbers provide the foundation for the logic of
arithmetic and the view that they do not.13 For instance, in the last section
of Chapter X, under the heading “Arithmetic Does Not Operate with ‘Au-
thentic’ Number Concepts,” Husserl writes:
The presupposition from which we set out at the first, as from something
self-evident—namely, that each arithmetical operation is an activity with and
upon actual numbers—cannot correspond to the truth. All too hastily we al-
lowed ourselves to be guided by the common and naive view which does not
take into account the distinction between symbolic and authentic presenta-
tions of number, and which does not do justice to the fact that all number
presentations that we possess, beyond the first few in the number series, are
symbolic, and can only be symbolic. (190)
Quoting from Eugen Dühring’s Logik und Wissenschaftstheorie,14 where the
author maintains that “‘there would be no distinct arithmetic whatsoever if
the various forms that are possible in the grouping of units were not an
issue’” (191), Husserl makes it clear that he now considers “such views” un-
feasible, and he also indicates why he has arrived at this consideration. The
“diverse ‘forms in the composition of units,’” which Dühring (and others
who hold such views) understand to be “‘only more precise determinations
of the peculiar combinations in which the activities corresponding to the
simplest signs, plus and minus, find an application of a specialized nature,’”
are, Husserl says, “nothing more than turns and forms of the symbolism,
grounded in the fact that all operating which reaches beyond the very first
————————
imaginary numbers and, in the case of cardinal numbers for example, also the negative num-
bers, lose all sense” (160/15), because the signs for these numbers, in contrast to the signs that
refer to the concepts proper to discrete magnitudes, are “representatives of ‘impossible’ con-
cepts.” But rather than have to get clear about “how operations of thought with contradictory
concepts could lead to correct theorems,” which is what Husserl says he originally tried to do,
he came to realize that “through the calculation itself and its rules (as defined for those fictive
numbers), the impossible falls away, and a genuine equation remains.” Therefore, the system
of arithmetica universalis“is not a matter of the ‘possibility’ or ‘impossibility’ of concepts,” but
“an accomplishment of the signs and their rules” (160/16). Universal arithmetic is, therefore,
“no science, but a part of formal logic” (161/17), which Husserl defines here “as a technique
of signs (etc., etc.)” and designates “as a special—and one of the most important—chapters of
logic as the technology of knowledge.” Husserl also adds, very significantly, that “these inves-
tigations appear to push toward important reforms in logic, and that he knows “of no logic that
would even do justice to the possibility of an ordinary arithmetic.”
13. All references to the “shift” in Husserl’s view on the matter of the origin of the
logic of arithmetic, unless otherwise stated, will be based in what can be discerned in this re-
gard from the content of the analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic.
14. Eugen Dühring, Logik und Wissenschaftstheorie (Leipzig: Fues, 1878), 249.
113
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic

numbers is only a symbolic operating with symbolic presentations.” Husserl
promises to “supply yet more direct positive proofs” of this fact “in the fur-
ther course of [his] investigations.”
In these subsequent investigations, Husserl shows how his initial sup-
position—that the calculational technique of universal arithmetic and the
calculational technique of arithmetical knowledge (i.e., knowledge in the
sense of calculations based on operations with authentic number concepts)
are identical—gave way to his subsequent view that “obviously the calcula-
tional technique is no longer identical with the technique of arithmetical
knowledge” (259).15
Husserl attributes this shift in the understanding of these matters to
his having “achieved the insight” (262) that “the pure calculational mecha-
nism that underlies arithmetic and constitutes the technical aspect of its
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
114
————————
15. Walter Biemel was the first to call attention to the shift in Husserl’s understanding
of the origin of universal arithmetic, though without discussing it in terms of his analyses in
Philosophy of Arithmetic. See Walter Biemel, “Die entscheidenden Phasen in Husserls Philoso-
phie,” Zeitschrift für philosophische Forschung 13 (1959), 187–213, here 192 (“The Development
of Husserl’s Phenomenology,” in R. O. Elveton, ed. and trans., The Phenomenology of Husserl:
Selected Critical Readings(Seattle: Noesis Press, 2d ed., 2000), 140–63, here 145). While Biemel
rightly comments that “we can see how the difficulties encountered by Husserl in defining arith-
metic as a theory of signs brought him to the study of logic” (146), he does not identify the
precise nature of these difficulties.
Willard was the first to call attention to fact that the shift in Husserl’s understanding of
the origin of universal arithmetic is already evident in Philosophy of Arithmetic. He argues that
Husserl’s rejection of “the dependence of calculation upon the concept of number” (Willard,
“Husserl on a Logic that Failed,” 62) amounts to his “acknowledgement of the momentous fact
that the conceptualization which had guided . . . the Philosophy of Arithmetic, is in fact aban-
doned in the book’s final chapter” (63). His explanation of Husserl’s reason for abandoning
this conceptualization focuses on Husserl’s coming to view “the numeral system itself” as some-
thing that is “presupposed in, and cannot be explained by, symbolic (or inauthentic) repre-
senting and knowing within the domain of mathematics” (64). Willard’s explanation is based
on the observation (with which we agree) that Husserl came to the realization that the con-
ceptualization of symbols as inauthentic presentations of the same contents as authentic pre-
sentations (which is basically the view he adopted from Brentano) cannot provide an adequate
account of the numeral system operative in arithmetica universalis. However, we shall argue in
detail below (see §§ 48–50) that what Husserl abandoned was the appeal to this conceptual-
ization of “symbols” and not the appeal to symbols per se to account for the number system.
Miller also calls attention to the shift in Husserl’s understanding of the origin of uni-
versal arithmetic, noting that due to the shift Philosophy of Arithmetic “poses some extremely
difficult questions of interpretation, questions which have almost never been addressed or
even acknowledged” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 10). For example, he quotes
Marvin Farber’s view that Philosophy of Arithmetic is “‘a well-organized and, in the main, re-
markably clear treatise’” (25). However, beyond arguing that “[b]y the time Husserl wrote the
Introduction (presumably in 1890 or 1891), he had already come to realize analysis [i.e., uni-
versal arithmetic] was in fact not based on the concept of number” (12), Miller does not draw
any connection between this issue and Husserl’s analyses of the relation between symbolic and
cardinal numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic.

methodology” (259) has, as its “true underlying substance” (262), “symbolic
number formations.”16 He traces this insight, in turn, to his taking “into ac-
count that the mechanism of the symbolic methodology can break com-
pletely free of the conceptual substrates of its employment” (258). With the
detachment of the symbolic methodology from its conceptual basis, calcu-
lation can be conceived of as “any rule-governed mode of derivation of signs
from signs within any algorithmic sign-system according to ‘laws’—or better:
the conventions—for combination, separation, and transformation peculiar to
that system.”17 Husserl notes that with this algorithmic conception of calcu-
lation, “The relationship between arithmetic and calculational technique
now, with this new concept of calculating (which from now on is the only
one we wish to use), certainly has changed. If we disengage the number signs
from their conceptual correlates and work out, totally unconcerned with
conceptual application, the technical methods that the sign system permits”
(259), we have the “calculational methods in arithmetic . . . already given to
us in the systematic forms of the sequence of natural numbers,18 or in the
higher forms of the ‘system’ of numbers (in the specific sense of the term).”19
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
115
————————
16. See n. 12 above.
17. Strictly speaking, for Husserl this conception of calculation is “more restricted in one
sense” (PA, 258) than the derivation of numbers based on rule-governed operations with sen-
sible signs (symbols), “but in another, by contrast, [it] is broader.” It is more restricted because,
not being guided by the “logical interests” of the arithmetica numerosa of concern to Husserl in
Philosophy of Arithmetic, it is not numerical. However, it is broader because the “higher level log-
ical interests” that “require this delimitation of the concept” are “significant for the deeper un-
derstanding of mathematics,” insofar as “one and the same system of symbols can serve in several
conceptual systems that, different as to their content, exhibit analogies solely in their structural
form.” According to Husserl, this “new formulation of the concept of calculating”—which, we
should mention even though Husserl does not, is tantamount to its “formalization”—“recom-
mends itself still further in that it places in our hands a logically clear separation of the differ-
ent stages required by problem-solving in those domains that are susceptible to treatment by
technique.” In the case at hand, that is, the “domain of numbers,” the broader sense of calcula-
tion permits clarity to be achieved with respect to what is involved in the first stage of their
symbolic derivation, namely, “that in the complexes of concepts and names [i.e., the symbolic
number signs] given in each case, one abstracts from the former and only holds to the latter.”
18. That is, in the forms generative of the symbolic number signs that are formed by
the concepts proper to the idealizing method of expanding numbers beyond their authentic
presentation, concepts that indirectly refer to the latter. See §§ 48–49 below.
19. That is, in the forms generative of the symbolic number signs that are formed by the
calculational algorithm, which, being unrealizable in terms of the conceptual content of sym-
bolic numbers that are characterized as idealizations of authentically presented cardinal num-
bers, can only be signitively symbolized. In his “Double Lecture: On the Transition through the
Impossible (‘Imaginary’) and the Completeness of an Axiom System” from 1901 (Essay III in
Willard’s translation of Philosophy of Arithmetic, 409–73), Husserl makes clear what his analy-
sis in Philosophy of Arithmetic of numbers that can only be “signitively symbolized” (see § 49
below) does not, namely, that numbers belonging to the “imaginary,” which he takes “in the 

Husserl’s account of the shift in his understanding of the calculational
methods in arithmetic is thus tied to a shift in his understanding of the sta-
tus of the numbers that function as the substrate for arithmetical calcula-
tion. More precisely, the latter shift has its basis in a gradual transformation
of his understanding of the logic proper to symbolic numbers themselves.
Husserl initially speaks about symbolic numbers “as a matter of symbolic
formations for those species of the number concept that are not accessible
to us in the authentic sense” (234). Accordingly, the signs involved in the
symbolic number formations were conceived of as making “possible, through
a complex of indirectly characterizing (but themselves authentically pre-
sented) relative determinations, an unrestricted expansion of the domain of
number” (240). Husserl characterized this expansion in terms of “an ideal-
ization of our finite mental capacities,” whereby the symbolic number for-
mations were understood to be surrogates for actual cardinal numbers that
are incapable of being authentically presented, that is, of being presented as
concrete multiplicities “in which each of their terms as something separately
and specifically noticed” (192) is grasped “together with all of the others,
in one act.” Husserl therefore initially considers “[t]he sensible signs involved
here . . . in the manner of language signs, mere accompaniments of concepts”
(241). As such, he understood these signs, the numerals composing sym-
bolic number formations, to be general names that refer to the completely
arbitrary objects that happen to fall under whatever inauthentic concept of
number with which each such sign is associated. Moreover, Husserl under-
stood these objects, being completely arbitrary, to fall under the generically
empty concept of ‘anything’ (Etwas), and therefore to compose concrete
multiplicities of units that, because of the finitude of the human mind, are
capable of being accessed only by arithmetic in an indirect manner, through
the expedient of its systematic expansion of the few cardinal numbers that
the human mind is capable of properly intuiting.20
Husserl eventually arrived at the view, however, that this idealized ac-
count of the formation of symbolic numbers, and therewith of their logic,
“was an incorrect way of speaking, adopted for the sake of a simplified pre -
sentation” (240). The correct way of considering the sensible signs involved
in symbolic number formations and therefore of understanding the sym-
bolic numbers is to recognize that sensible signs
116
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
————————
widest possible sense, according to which the negative, indeed, even the fraction, the irrational
number, and so forth, can be regarded as imaginary” (416), are not “ever in any way represented
in cardinal arithmetic.”
20. Husserl’s account of the size of such numbers varies in Philosophy of Arithmetic,
from 3 to 12. 

participate in a far more striking manner in our symbolic formations than we
have asserted to this point; indeed, so much so that they ultimately dominate
nearly the entire field. In fact, the rigorous parallelism between the system
of the number concepts and that of the number signs makes it possible to re-
gard the systematic continuations of the sequence of signs as representatives
of the (inauthentically presented) systematic continuations in the sequence
of concepts. (241)
It will be the concern of the remainder of this chapter to establish what, ex-
actly, Husserl means when he characterizes number signs as “representatives”
of the inauthentically presented systematic sequence of concepts. At this
point, however, it should be clear that he does not understand such signs as
“language signs, mere accompaniments of concepts,” because he has clearly
labeled such an understanding a mistake. The “representative” status of the
signs that compose the symbolic number formations proper to arithmetic,
therefore, has to be differentiated from what is now viewed as the incorrect
“linguistic” understanding of such signs. Symbolic number signs, as “repre-
sentatives” of inauthentically presented number concepts, thus are not general
names accompanying such concepts, concepts that, as the result of a process
of idealization tied to the mind’s limited capacity to present numbers au-
thentically, function as the surrogates for their unrealizable—but neverthe-
less signified—presentation. Husserl therefore makes the distinction, within
the very domain of symbolic number formations themselves, between “the
numbers it is still possible to symbolize conceptually” (242), numbers whose
“conceptual content could still be brought before the mind,” “and those that
can only be signitively symbolized.”21
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
117
————————
21. The fact that, in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s analyses of the calculational technique
proper to universal arithmetic, Husserl comes to distinguish between these two distinct “con-
cepts” of symbolic numbers, and, therefore, the fact that correlative to this distinction, two dis-
tinct accounts of the symbolic presentation of number can be found to be operative in these
analyses, seems to have been entirely overlooked in the literature on his philosophy of arith-
metic. The results of this oversight present significant obstacles to a proper grasp of the failure
of Husserl’s attempt to account for the origin of universal arithmetic in the authentic concept
of number and to a proper understanding of the development of his thought subsequent to
this failure. For instance, Miller argues that the distinction between ‘authentic’ and ‘symbolic’
presentation in Philosophy of Arithmetic is equivalent to the distinction Husserl introduced in
the Logical Investigations between, respectively, ‘filled’ and ‘empty’ acts (see Miller, Numbers in
Presence and Absence, 38). Further, following Robert Sokolowski, he uses “the terms ‘absence’
and ‘presence’ as alternatives to Husserl’s own talk of ‘empty’ and ‘filled’ intentions” (42 n. 21).
Although Miller is aware “that we should not exaggerate the extent to which the distinctions
Husserl worked out only later are found already in PA”—“in particular that there is no explicit
discussion in this work of the ‘fulfillment’ of an empty (or ‘symbolic’) act by an intuitive (or ‘au-
thentic’) one” (39), he nevertheless justifies his employment of these terms for his interpreta-
tion of Husserl’s philosophy of arithmetic by stating, “[n]onetheless Husserl does regard
authentic and symbolic acts as capable of being directed toward the same object, even in this 

§ 44. Husserl’s Account of the Logical Requirements behind
Both Calculational Technique and Symbolic Numbers 
Corresponding to each of these different symbolic number formations is a
distinction in the logic of their formation, in the sense that the “logical re-
quirements imposed” (232–33) on their formation is different. To appreci-
ate better the basis for this radical shift in Husserl’s understanding of the
logic that characterizes the symbolic status of the numbers that function as
the substrate for arithmetical calculation, it is necessary to consider in more
detail Husserl’s understanding of the logical requirements that give rise to the
necessity of both a calculational technique and symbolic numbers. The log-
ical considerations of Philosophy of Arithmetic stem from two sources. The
first concerns the status of the unity proper to the multiplicity that forms the
basis for authentic number concepts. The second concerns the “finitude of
human nature” (191). At issue in the first consideration is the peculiar char-
acter of the “whole” (76) proper to the concept of multiplicity that forms the
basis of the authentic number concept. Owing to its categorial status as one
among the “concepts that are most general and emptiest of content” (84), for
Husserl the logical status proper to the unity of this whole cannot be de-
rived from the “physical” or “metaphysical”22 combination of the elements
(and thus their relations) that make up its contents. At issue in the second
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
118
————————
early work.” However, as we shall show (see §§ 49–50 below), because Husserl’s analyses of the
calculational technique operative in universal arithmetic led him to make the distinction be-
tween numbers that are “conceptually” symbolic (i.e., numbers that indirectly refer to authen-
tic numbers) and numbers that are “signitively” symbolic (i.e., numbers that, as a result of their
representation of inauthentic numbers, lack any reference to authentic numbers), he in effect
abandons (in the last two chapters of Philosophy of Arithmetic) his earlier view of authentic and
symbolic presentations of numbers “as capable of being directed toward the same object” (see
§ 46 below). One of the consequences of Miller’s inattentiveness to this state of affairs is that his
interpretation of the symbolic presentation of number in general (in the PA) as a mode of ab-
sence relative to the authentic presentation of number (69) misses Husserl’s characterization
(in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s final chapters, XII and XIII) of the mode of symbolic number and
its presentation that is distinguished by its lack of even an indirect reference to authentic num-
bers and their presentation. Moreover, the failure to see this renders untenable the thesis that
guides Miller’s attempt to develop a Husserlian phenomenology of number, namely, “that num-
bers are available to us as identities in presence and absence” (65).
22. Husserl indicates that he has in mind here Franz Brentano’s notion of “‘meta-
physical’ combination” (PA, 19 n. 1), which he characterizes as a whole whose parts are united
insofar as they “reciprocally penetrate and connect with each other” (19); e.g., the manner in
which, “in the case of any arbitrary visual object, spatial extension and color (and color, in
turn, and intensity)” combine to form a whole. Thus, in the case at hand, Husserl’s point is
that the status of the unity proper to the “whole” peculiar to the concept of multiplicity (and
therefore the status of the unity proper to the “wholes” of its species, the authentic number
concepts) cannot be derived from either the physical or the metaphysical combination of the
parts of the multiplicity which it both refers to and unifies.

consideration are “the limits imposed upon us by the de facto weakness of
our capacities for presentation” (228), limits that impact upon our ability
both to count and to calculate with authentic numbers. 
§ 45. Husserl’s Psychological Account of the Logical Whole
Proper to the Concept of Multiplicity and Authentic 
Cardinal Number Concepts
Husserl’s original conviction that “not only is psychology indispensable for
the analysis of the concept of number, but this analysis even belongs within
psychology,”23 is a conviction that, paradoxically, is tied to a specifically log-
ical concern. The logical unity of the whole that characterizes the concept of
multiplicity for Husserl is empty of physical and metaphysical contents, and,
therefore, the composition of this unity cannot be properly understood as a
logical part of such contents. In order to account for the logical unity of both
the concept of multiplicity and the authentic number concepts (which, as
the species of the former, are based upon it), then, it is “necessary to obtain a
precise view of the concrete phenomena from which they are abstracted”
(64). As Husserl sees it, the phenomena at issue here are “psychological,” and
as such they are manifest in “inner experience itself” (73). He maintains that
the latter presents evidence belonging to acts of “collective combination” (75)
wherein originates the “assemblage” (83) united in a multitude. Husserl de-
scribes the acts in which “[a]n assemblage originates” (74) in terms of “a uni-
tary interest—and simultaneously in and with it, a unitary noticing—[that]
picks out and encompasses various contents.” Such acts of collective combina-
tion provide the basis for “the peculiar abstraction process” (79) that yields
both the concept of multiplicity and the authentic number concepts. Husserl
describes 
the abstraction to be carried out . . . in the following manner: Individual con-
tents that are in some way determinate are given in collective combination.
In abstractively passing over to the general concept, then, we do not attend
to them as contents determined thus and so. Rather, the main interest is con-
centrated upon their collective combination, whereas they themselves are
considered and attended to only as some content or other, each one as a cer-
tain anything, a certain one. 
Husserl holds that “Collective combination plays a highly significant
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
119
————————
23. Edmund Husserl, Über den Begriff der Zahl. Psychologische Analysen (Habilitations -
schrift) (Halle a. d. Saale: Heynemann’sche Buckdruckerei, 1887; reprinted in Hua XII, 289–
338, here 295); English translation: “On the Concept of Number: Psychological Analysis,” in
Philosophy of Arithmetic, 305–56, here 295.

role in our mental life as whole” (75). For “Every complex phenomenon
which presupposes parts that are separately and specifically noticed, every
higher mental and emotional activity, requires, in order to be able to arise at
all, collective combinations of partial phenomena.” Indeed, not only com-
plex phenomena but likewise “simple relations (e.g., identity, similarity, etc.)”
could not be presented “if a unitary interest and, simultaneously with it, an
act of noticing did not pick out the terms and hold them together as uni-
fied.” Moreover, Husserl maintains that notwithstanding “the elemental
character of the collective combination,” “ordinary language possesses no in-
dependent name” for it, but rather gets by with “the little syncategorematic
word ‘and’.” This word, “[i]n and of itself . . . without signification,” never-
theless represents the “imprint in ordinary language” of the “collective com-
bination,” such that “where it links two or more names, it indicates the
collective combination of the contents named.” 
Husserl “capitalizes” (79) on the result of the abstraction process that
yields the concept of multiplicity from the collectively combined assemblage
“by combining” the result with the observation about the indication of the
act of collective combination “in language by the conjunction ‘and’” to ex-
press the content of the concept of “multiplicity in general” (80). Hence, on
his view, what is meant by this content “is nothing other than: a certain any-
thing and a certain anything and a certain anything, etc.; or, some one and
some one and some one thing, etc.; or, more briefly, one and one and one, etc.”
Because this expression “refers by means of the ‘etc.’ to a certain indetermi-
nateness” (81), by which “nothing else is meant than that no determination
is set with respect to an upper bound, or else that the actually present limita-
tion is something that should be seen as something of no consequence,”
Husserl maintains that “there are many possibilities” “to do away with this
indeterminateness”—“if we want to.” More precisely, on Husserl’s view, “cor-
responding to these [possibilities], the concept of multiplicity immediately
divides up into a manifold of determinate concepts that are most sharply de-
limited from one another: the numbers.” The number concepts thus arise, ac-
cording to Husserl, as: “one and one; one,one and one; one,one,one and one, and
so forth.” It is important to note, however, that for him, “It is of course not
necessary to assume the universal and indeterminate concept of multiplicity
as mediator in the derivation of the number concepts.” This holds because
“We come by them directly, setting out from arbitrary concrete multiplicities;
for each of these falls under one, and indeed a determinate one, of those con-
cepts.” These concepts, in turn, designated by the “names ‘two’, ‘three’, etc.” (82
n. 3), are what the term ‘cardinal number’ (Anzhal) arose “as a general name
for.” 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
120

Husserl’s analysis of “[t]he abstraction process which yields the deter-
minate number accruing to a given concrete multiplicity” (81), in the case
where this process does not involve the mediation of the concept of multi-
plicity, nevertheless builds upon his analysis of the collective combination
that yields the latter. He writes:
Disregarding the specific character of the particular contents grasped together,
one considers and retains each content only insofar as it is an ‘anything’ or
‘one’. And thus one obtains, in taking account of the collective combination
of them, the universal form of the multiplicity appertaining to the multiplic-
ity at hand: one and one, . . . and one—a form with which a definite number
term is associated. (82)
And he concludes that this analysis of the process “is completely clear.”
Thus, while “[t]he enumerated contents certainly can be physical as
well as psychical . . . the number concepts and the one belong exclusively to
the domain of reflexion” (85). Husserl’s appeal here to the “domain of reflex-
ion” makes it clear that he is under the influence of “the influx of logic into
psychology” on which Frege’s critique of Philosophy of Arithmetic focused
and from which Husserl later distanced himself in the Logical Investigations,
when he characterized the error of the “doctrine put about since the time of
Locke, that . . . the logical categories, such as . . . unity . . . or cardinal number
arise through reflexion upon certain psychical acts, and so fall in the sphere of
‘inner sense,’ of ‘inner perception’” (LI, 668/278). Notwithstanding the in-
fluence in Philosophy of Arithmetic of this subsequently discredited view of
the origin of these concepts, it is important for our purposes that we not
lose sight of precisely what it is that Husserl was attempting to clarify in his
first work by enlisting psychology in the service of a philosophical analysis
of the authentic concept of number: the peculiar logical unity proper to the
whole characteristic of the logical concept of multiplicity and therewith the
logical unity proper to the whole belonging to each of the cardinal numbers
that are the logical parts of this concept. And, again, what is peculiar about
the logical status of this unity in each case is that its basis can be derived nei-
ther from the qualities of the unified objects nor from their relations. Thus,
even though Husserl will come to see in his logical investigations subsequent
to Philosophy of Arithmetic the difficulties in defending the position that the
view expressed here does not “maintain that the act involved creatively pro-
duces its content” (43),24 the problem of philosophically accounting for the
————————
24. Husserl had maintained this in Philosophy of Arithmetic, because “[c]ertainly one
distinguishes in complete universality the relational psychical activity from the relation itself”
(PA, 43).
121
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic

origin of the logical unity proper to the empty form concepts of the collec-
tive wholes in question nevertheless remains for his latter investigations. 
§ 46. Husserl on the Psychological Basis for Symbolic 
Numbers and Logical Technique
The second source of Husserl’s logical considerations in Philosophy of Arith-
metic also derives from what he will later characterize as his attempt “to rec-
oncile the objectivity of mathematics . . . with a psychological foundation for
logic” (LI, 6–7/2). His initial account of the “logical requirements” (PA,
237) for symbols and calculational technique in arithmetic is based on what
he considers to be a fact, namely, that “In the purposeful carrying out of a
collective combination under the most favorable of conditions (i.e., with ex-
ertion of all our psychic power, presupposing contents that are especially
easy to perceive and that present themselves for apprehension in a succession
that does not move too quickly), we take in not more than a dozen elements”
(196–97).25 This psychological condition is the basis for the logical re-
quirement that the presentation of multiplicities beyond the scope of their
authentic presentation must be a symbolic presentation. “The symbolic pre -
sentation of multitudes” (222), in turn, composes “the foundation for the
symbolic presentations of numbers” (likewise) beyond their authentic pres-
entation. This state of affairs also forms the basis of the logical requirement
for logical technique, because “All logical technique is aimed at the over-
coming of the original limits of our natural mental abilities” (234). Indeed,
“If we had authentic presentations of all numbers, as we do of the first ones
in the sequence, there would be no arithmetic, since it would then be com-
pletely superfluous” (191). Moreover, through the “idealization of our fi-
nite mental capacities” (240), the symbolization of multitudes and numbers
can be expanded beyond its initial reference to determinate multitudes and
numbers, such that eventually the “idea” (221) of the concept of infinite
multitude and infinite number becomes “actually admissible logically.”
§ 47. Husserl on the Symbolic Presentation of Multitudes
Husserl’s initial account of symbolic presentation is guided by his view 
that the authentic presentation and a symbolic presentation correlative to it
stand in the relationship of logical equivalence. Two concepts are logically
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
122
————————
25. See n. 20 above.

equivalent when each object of the one is also an object of the other, and
conversely. That, for the purposes of our interests in forming judgments,
symbolic presentations can surrogate, to the furthest extent, for the corre-
sponding authentic presentations rests upon this circumstance. (194, my
emphasis) 
The object that characterizes the logical equivalence of authentic and sym-
bolic presentations of numbers is a multiplicity of units. Authentic number
concepts, as a result of their basis in the authentic presentations of numbers,
are directly related to this “object,” while the symbolic number concepts, be-
cause they have their basis in the symbolic presentation of number, are in-
directly related to it. That the object that establishes the logical equivalence
of authentic and symbolic concepts in the case of numbers is indeed the de-
terminate collection of separate contents and not the concept of such con-
tents is clear from Husserl’s discussion of the “logical content” (218) proper
to the symbolization of the presentation of multitudes. He writes, “the sym-
bolization involved does not effect its logical content. Multiplicity remains
the concept of a totality, of a determinate collection of separate contents.
Only, in the cases now considered [i.e., symbolic presentations], the segre-
gation of contents and their collection, instead of coming to actual realiza-
tion, remains either wholly or largely a mere intention.” As our preceding
discussion of the transformation in Husserl’s understanding of calculational
technique has indicated, however, the importance for universal arithmetic
of numbers that “can only be signitively symbolized” (242) comes to be
stressed in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s last chapters. That is, what is stressed are
the symbolic numbers whose status as “symbolic” is fundamentally differ-
ent from numbers that are “symbolic” by virtue of their inauthentic presen-
tation of multitudes. Whereas the latter type of symbolic numbers are
properly understood as general names that refer, albeit indirectly, to the seg-
regation of contents and their collection, symbolic numbers that are sym-
bolic owing to their function as the signitive “representatives” of precisely
these symbolic numbers, namely, the symbolic numbers that are characterized
by their inauthentic presentation of multitudes, do not refer to multitudes
at all. As we shall see below, this recognition amounts to the abandonment
of the view expressed here that authentic and symbolic presentations are log-
ically equivalent, which is the view that formed the point of departure for
Husserl’s investigation of the symbolic presentation of multitudes and num-
bers. In the remainder of this chapter, we shall retrace the key steps in
Husserl’s analyses that present this transformed understanding of the rela-
tionship between the authentic and symbolic numbers and thus to his trans-
formed understanding of their concepts.
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
123

The symbolic presentation of a multitude for Husserl has its basis in
acts of collective combination that confirm “the existence of quasi-qualitative
moments” (203) in the experience of multitudes, moments that “can be
grasped at one glance” (204) to present what he calls a “figural moment”
(209).26 By this he understands instances of “unified intuitions analogous to
sense qualities,”27 which are expressed by “such names as ‘file’, ‘gaggle’, ‘covey’,
‘heap’, etc.” (210). These arise when, after “partial intuitions” (204) of mem-
bers of a multitude, “the peculiarities of the contents or their primary rela-
tions fuse with one another such that the unified moments are something
more than mere sums.” Moreover, “[t]he general concept of the configura-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
124
————————
26. Husserl’s account of the symbolic presentation of a multitude is guided by the the-
sis—which, as we have already suggested and will show in detail below in §§ 49–50, is eventu-
ally abandoned in the last two chapters of Philosophy of Arithmetic—that the logical function
of symbolic numbers is to act as surrogates for the authentic presentation of multitudes and
thus that all symbolic numbers are inauthentic presentations of multitudes. His interest here,
therefore, is to trace the origin of this surrogate (i.e., “symbolic”) function from the presentation
of multitudes grasped as “quasi-qualitative” or “figural” moments in order to provide the basis
for his investigation of the symbolic presentation proper to the symbolic concept of number.
Their failure to attend properly to this context of Husserl’s discussion of the collective combi-
nation proper to multitudes has led commentators to overlook the fact that at issue in the analy-
sis of the presentation of multitudes in terms of “figural moments” is not the origin of number
per se but rather the origin of symbolic numbers. For instance, Miller claims: “The importance
of sensuous multitudes is obscured somewhat by the organization of PA. Instead of beginning
his investigation of the origin of number with a discussion of sensuous multitudes, as we have
done in the present study, Husserl introduces this topic only in Part Two, in connection with the
phenomenon of ‘symbolic presentation’” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 61 n. 14).
Miller’s need to speculate about Husserl’s motivations for this arrangement, evident in his sug-
gestion that “[p]erhaps Husserl’s aim in selecting this arrangement was to make vivid the point
that number is not itself a ‘visible and tangible phenomenon,’ as Mill, for example, had claimed
numbers themselves are visible or tangible,” highlights his confusion on this point.
27. Although Husserl’s examples of the figural moments of multitudes in Philosophy of
Arithmetic are predominately based on multitudes of visible sensible objects, it is clearly not his
view that they are limited to either visible or sensible objects. Thus, he writes: “All of what we
here have stated for multitudes within the field of vision can obviously be carried over to sen-
sible multitudes of every type, likewise to multitudes in general, whether multitudes of sensi-
ble objects presented in fantasy, or multitudes of psychical acts. In the latter case, for example,
temporal succession, and, in general, temporal configuration (the exact analogue of the spa-
tial), forms a moment of this kind” (PA, 209, my emphasis). Most commentators miss Husserl’s
important qualification of this point. Miller, e.g., not only equates Husserl’s concern with mul-
titudes in Philosophy of Arithmetic with a concern for sensuous multitudes (see Miller, Numbers
in Presence and Absence, chap. III), but also argues that “[s]uch multitudes provide the sensu-
ous foundation for the ‘authentic counting’ which generates an original presence of number.
They underly [sic] the original determination of ‘how many’ that leads to a constitution of num-
ber” (50). The latter claim, of course, misses the importance of Husserl’s claim that the multi-
plicity of objects that make up the concrete totalities that are counted is “‘completely arbitrary’”
(PA, 16; see also § 41 above) and therefore cannot be reduced to a single genus—here, sensible—
of objects.

tion [i.e., the figural moment] is the exact analogue of the concept of a genus
of sensible qualities” (207), and it is “that from which there develops a genus
concept in the rigorous Aristotelian signification of the term.”
Husserl characterizes the way in which the collective combination of
an intuitively collocated multitude comes to be indirectly signified and thus
“symbolized” as follows:
The rudimentary process [of “actually carrying out the requisite psychical
activities on at least a few members selected”] then serves as the sign for the
full process intended [of actually carrying out the psychical activities of the
collective combination of multitude members], whereby the unified figural
quality of the intuition of the multitude guarantees us that the process
begun can be continued—especially since the intuitive multitude-unity of
the members picked out is recognized as part of the total intuition of the
multitude. (213)
From this account, it can be seen that the sign involved in the symbol-
ization of the multitude designates both the intuitive collective combination
of individual members of the multitude and the multitude as a whole. This
dual designation comes about because
from early life on we have brought transversive apprehensions of individu-
als into play with the most heterogeneous types of sensible multitudes, those
characteristics (or else their various generic types) had to become associated
with the concept of such processes, and, in further consequence, with the
concept multitude, and thus produce in each case bridges to the immediate
recognition of what is at first a unified sensible intuition, of the type here
considered as a multitude. (203)
The sign and what it designates (or symbolizes) therefore enter into a me-
diating relation with one another that is founded in the associative connec-
tion between the actual, “term-by-term” (211) collective combination of the
contents of the multiplicity and the presentation of the figural moment of
the multitude.28 The latter “is separated out only by abstraction” (209), with
the result that the inauthentic presentation of the multitude signified by the
figural moment becomes the “symbolic concept of multitude” (211) and as
125
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
————————
28. Husserl’s point here is not that “the experience of sensuous groups involves . . . the
taking of one thing (the figural moment) as a ‘sign’ of another (the sensuous group as such)”
(Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 50), since on his view not all sensuous multitudes
(groups) are grasped in terms of figural moments. Moreover, Husserl does not explain the latter’s
signitive function solely by “taking such a moment as a ‘sign’ (Anzeichen) of the group as such”
(48), because, in addition to designating the multitude as a whole, the figural moment desig-
nates the intuitive collective combination of its members (see Willard, Logic and the Objectivity
of Knowledge, 97, 99). The latter point is important because it is crucial to Husserl’s account
in Philosophy of Arithmetic of the emergence (and role) of the signs that figure in the symbolic
presentation of multitudes.

such the replacement for the authentic presentation and concept of the mul-
titude.29
According to Husserl this process “can also extend the concepts of the
elementary operations and relations to symbolically presented multiplici-
ties, in which once again the figural moments will often serve as mediators”
(217). Thus, when “several sensible multitudes are simultaneously given to
us, marked as such by the familiar symbolizing moments, then there belongs
to them also a total intuitive unity. They have it in virtue of a figural moment
encompassing them all, which in turn characterizes the whole as a multi-
tude.” Finally, Husserl stresses the logical equivalence of the authentically
presented multitude and its symbolic presentation:
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
126
————————
29. Frege finds in Husserl’s account of the inauthentic presentation of a multitude an in-
consistency with Husserl’s view “that the number belongs to the extension of the concept, i.e.,
to the totality” of units that comprise the content of the concept of multiplicity (Frege,
318/322). Frege pinpoints the inconsistency in Husserl’s claim that number conceived as a “fig -
ural moment” is “something predicated of a concept” and therefore precisely not something
predicated of its extension. Thus, for Frege, “This much is certain, that neither the extension
of a concept nor a totality are designated directly, but only a concept” (319/322). Frege con-
cludes from this, “Herewith everything I maintain [i.e., that predications about numbers are
statements about a concept] has really been admitted” (318/322). However, Husserl’s alleged
inconsistency dissolves when one realizes that his account of figural moments is the basis for a
concept of number that is fundamentally differentfrom his account of number as the “extension”
proper to species of the concept of multiplicity. In the latter case, what is at stake for Husserl is
the authentic content of the concept proper to number, i.e., number as the determination of a
multiplicity of units, of completely arbitrary “anythings.” In the former case, his concern lies
with the basis for the inauthentic concept of number, i.e., the symbolic concept of number.
Consequently, Frege’s critique of Husserl on the point is based on an equivocal use the term
‘number’, of which he but not Husserl is guilty. David Bell accepts this equivocation when he
writes: “As Frege himself noted, this [i.e., Husserl’s notion of ‘figural moment’] makes Husserl’s
theory, in spite of initial appearance to the contrary, not dissimilar to that according to which
an ascription of number involves an assertion about a concept.” See David Bell, Husserl (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1991), 56.
Frege also identifies what he maintains is yet another inconsistency in Husserl’s account
of figural moments insofar as instances of the latter, e.g., “the presentation of a swarm” (Frege,
319/323), would seem to present the unity of the multiplicity in question in terms of the ho-
mogeneous qualities of its contents. On Frege’s view, this is in direct opposition to Husserl’s
earlier view in Philosophy of Arithmeticthat a multiplicity is “a presentation of parts whose union,
though present, is not presented with them.” In other words, Frege considers Husserl’s appeal
to the figural moment as confirming “the existence of quasi-qualitative moments” (PA, 203) to
be at odds with Husserl’s account of the emptiness of the concept of multiplicity, such that the
genus of its contents are “completely arbitrary” (16). However, what Frege’s critique overlooks
here is the “signitive” function of the figural moment in Husserl’s account. For Husserl, the fig-
 ural moment functions as a sign that designates the psychical capacity to continue the collec-
tive unification of this (e.g., the multiplicity of bees in a swarm) or any other multiplicity
whatever. Thus, the unification at issue for Husserl has its basis not in the genus of the contents
that are unified by the figural moment in question but in the—however problematic (see § 45
above)—psychical process of “collective combination.”

Lastly, I emphasize that the modifications that the multiplicity-presentation
undergoes through all the symbolizations described do not affect its logical
content. Multiplicity remains the concept of a totality, of a determinate col-
lection of separate contents. Only, in the cases now considered, the segrega-
tion of contents and their collection, instead of coming to actual realization,
remains either wholly or largely a mere intention. (218)
The process of the symbolic presentation of a multitude considered thus far
concerns the symbolization of finite multitudes. However, Husserl maintains
that it is also possible to extend “the original concept in such a manner that it
surpasses not merely the, so to speak, accidental limits, but also those necessary
for the essence of all knowledge, and thereby also attains what is basically an es-
sentially new content.” He does so because, in his words, “We speak of infinite
multitudes” (219). For Husserl, “whenever the talk is of an infinite multitude,
we come upon the symbolic presentation of a process of concept formation
that can be continued without limit.” He describes this process as follows:
Already in the symbolic presentation of multitudes in the ordinary sense
there often surrogates, as we saw earlier, the idea of a process whose unity re-
ceives its determinacy through some figural moment of intuition. It is sim-
ilar here; only now it is a more removed conceptual principle that confers
upon the process its determinacy, and that gives the presentation a sure grasp
on all that is attainable through it, which it “includes.” But whereas in the
first case its finitude belonged to the concept of the process, in such a way
that in the succession of steps one must be its last, here, to the contrary, what
belongs to the concept [of the process] is its being unlimited: The concept
of a last step, and thus a last reached member of the multitude, becomes
senseless. (220–21)
Although the two processes are “essentially distinct logically . . . the analogy
. . . awakens a natural inclination to insert into the presentation of the infinite
multitude the intention toward the formation of the corresponding actual
collection—in spite of the absurdity of the thought” (221). As a consequence,
“there arises a concept that is, as it were, imaginary.” While for Husserl it is
clear that what this process yields is “an essentially new concept that is no
longer a concept of a multitude, in the true [finite] sense of the word,” it is also
clear that “The presentation of a determinate, unrestricted process is logi-
cally irreproachable, as is the idea of all that which falls within its range, which
it encompasses by means of its own conceptual unity.”
§ 48. Husserl on the Psychological Presentation of 
Symbolic Numbers
Husserl’s account of the presentation of “symbolic number concepts and their
infinite multiplicity” (222) begins with the consideration that “the symbolic
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
127

presentations of multitudes form the foundation for the symbolic presenta-
tions of numbers.” Thus, the “obvious lack of restriction on the symbolic ex-
pansion of multitudes . . . is also given for numbers.” Husserl’s account also
begins with the conviction that numbers, as “the distinct species of the gen-
eral concept of multiplicity,” have their basis in “a determinate multiplicity of
units” that corresponds to “each concrete multiplicity” and as such presents
their “number.” Therefore, whether this multiplicity is presented authenti-
cally or symbolically, “the concept of the collection of all these units is in-
deed a completely determinate one.” As a consequence, “In the symbolic sense
we . . . can say of any arbitrary multitude that a determinate number belongs
to it even before we have formed that number itself; indeed, also when we
are not in position to undertake the actual formation of it.” 
However, as Husserl’s analyses unfold, he abandons his initial view that
the symbolic formation of numbers is “coordinated in their rigorous distinc-
tiveness with the true—but to us [authentically] inaccessible—number con-
cepts ‘in themselves’” (223). This is clear from Husserl’s analyses, which show
that that to which the symbolic concept of number refers, or, more precisely,
that which the number sign and sign system that comes to express the sym-
bolic concept of number designates, is neither “the number sequence . . .
already given beyond any specifiable limit” (229) nor the “step-by-step for-
mation of the (authentic or symbolic) number concepts” (239). Thereby,
Husserl brings to its logical conclusion what he noted earlier in his investi-
gations (without developing there its full implications) about the role of ex-
ternal signs in the symbolization of multitudes. Specifically, that “in logical
meanings such signs come into consideration only in cases where the con-
cept of what is to be designated by an external sign belongs, as such, to the es-
sential content of the symbolic presentation” (194). In other words, as we
have already suggested and will demonstrate below, Husserl’s analysis of sym-
bolic numbers arrives at the conclusion that their logical content is insepara-
ble from the external signs and the sign system by which they are designated.
Consequently, the logical status of their symbolic content is now signitive,
which means that they refer neither to the concept of a determinate amount
of units nor to their symbolic idealization, that is, to the conceptually sym-
bolic system of number formation that expands numbers beyond the psy-
chological limits of their authentic presentation. Thus, as we shall see, it is
the number signs themselves that function as the “numerical” reference in
signitively symbolic number formations, because it is their sensible character
that forms the basis for a “numerical interpretation” in accord with the (con-
ventional) rules that govern their combination and transformation. And, as
we shall also see, Husserl does not understand these rules to present concepts.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
128

On the contrary, he takes these rules to present just that, rules that are “par-
allel” to the inauthentic concepts proper to the ideal concept formation and
designation of the symbolic numbers through which the authentic number
sequence (i.e., the so-called natural numbers) is expanded beyond its au-
thentic presentation. To the extent that it still makes sense to understand sig-
nitively symbolic number formations as having a “logical” reference to
anything, we will see that they refer—indirectly, via the mediation of the rules
for their combination and transformation—to the inauthentic concepts of
number formation and number designation, concepts in relation to which
these rules are established as the signitive (and thus emphatically not concep-
tual) parallels. 
It is clear, then, that for Husserl the “external signs” that compose sig-
nitively symbolic number formations are not understood as “general names,”
that is, as names that refer to the determinate, but non-intuitable collections
of arbitrary items that happen to fall under inauthentic number concepts.
Consequently, these signs achieve a “numerical” status only insofar as they
are “interpreted” by means of the rules that govern their combination and
transformation. The logical status of symbolic numbers conceived in this way
is therefore at odds with Husserl’s initial position that symbolic and authen-
tic presentations (and concepts) are logically equivalent because of the iden-
tity of their object. For just this reason, Husserl understood idealized
symbolic numbers, as surrogates for the actual presentation of multitudes of
units, to retain a logical connection with the authentic cardinal number con-
cept. In other words, as the ideal surrogate for the presentation of multitudes
of units that exceeds the finite capacity of the human mind to grasp them in-
tuitively (and, therefore, authentically), symbolic numbers in this sense re-
tain a tie with what Husserl characterizes as the authentic meaning of the
concept of cardinal number as such, namely, a multiplicity of units. 
However, the supposition that initially guided Husserl’s account of
the systematic symbolization of numbers that yields the number system was
that the foundation of this systematic is precisely the authentic presentation
of the first few natural numbers. Moreover, the intuitional foundation pro-
vided by their presentation is, at first, said to function as the basis of the
number system on two closely related yet fundamentally different levels.
Thus, on the one hand, Husserl initially understood the number system to
be “a matter of symbolic formations for those species of the concept of num-
ber that are not accessible to us in the authentic sense” (234). On the other
hand, he characterized the authentically acquired concepts of the “more and
less” (226) as what permits the determination “as to which of two [symbol-
ically formulated] numbers would be the greater, and which the smaller, di-
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
129

rectly from their mere position [as a predecessor or successor in a sequence
of number signs] in the system.” 
Therefore, according to Husserl’s statement of the matter prior to Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic’s last chapter, “The essence of the systematic number
formation consists in this: that it constructs all other number concepts by
means of some few elementary concepts and propositions (numerical for-
mulas and rules of operation)” (238). The elementary concepts involved are
the number signs (numerals) 1 through 9, “structured in conformity with the
principle of the natural number sequence” (236),30 and the correlative con-
cepts of the ‘more’ and the ‘less’. The rules of operation involved concern the
“constructing [of] new concepts and simultaneously designating them along
with their construction” (234). As such, these rules present a system that has
“a two-fold aspect” (237). Husserl characterizes this as follows:
On the one hand, it provides for each number a systematic mode of forma-
tion (as symbolic stand-in for the missing authentic number concept) utiliz-
ing certain elemental numbers, 1, 2, . . . , X, that are given. And, on the other
hand, it provides, starting from the number names 1, 2, . . . , X, a systematic
mode of formation for the number names appertaining to each one of the
numbers. A rigorous parallelism governs here between the method for the
continuation of the sequence of number concepts, and the method for the
continuation of the sequence of number signs—and this not merely in gen-
eral, but rather for each individual step, one after the other.31
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
130
————————
30. That is, the “principle” that governs the sequence proper to “the domain of num-
bers that are authentically presentable” (236), i.e., the principle of successive increase on the
basis of the collective addition of ‘one’.
31. Husserl’s letter to Stumpf (see also n. 12) makes it clear that with his discovery that
the concept of cardinal number does not form the foundation of universal arithmetic, he also
rejected the view that the latter’s sign system runs rigorously parallel to any common concept.
Thus, the view expressed here of precisely such a parallelism must reflect his view of the mat-
ter prior to that discovery. Indeed, Husserl writes to Stumpf that “There is nothing to be won-
dered at in the fact that a system of signs and operations with signs can replace a system of
concepts and operations with judgments, where the two systems run rigorously parallel
(Stumpf Letter, 159/14). But he then goes on to make it clear that this is not how he under-
stands “things to stand with respect to the system of signs in arithmetic” (160/15). He writes:
“The sign system of arithmetica universalis divides into a certain sequence of levels, compara-
ble to that of a system of concentric circles. The lowest level (the innermost circle) is occu-
pied by the signs 1, 2 = 1 + 1, 3 = 2 + 1, etc.; the next level by fractional signs; and so on. The
signs of the lowest level, and they only, are independent. . . . The rules of calculation are, then,
so formed that each ‘equation’ (in whatever way it is set up, i.e., by means of whatever domain
levels) is satisfied as an identity with reference to the signs and the domain of rules which it ac-
tually involves” (161/16).
Husserl characterizes the lowest level of signs as belonging to “the totality of whole
numbers” and appears to equate these numbers with their signs. This view of the foundational
role of signs equated with numbers for arithmetic is also reflected in his text, “On the Logic of
Signs (Semiotic),” dated 1890 by the editor and late 1890 or 1891 by the translator—see Ed-

As we have seen (§ 42 above), on Husserl’s account, the authentic number
concepts for which the systematic numbers function as symbolic stand-ins
emerge with the doing away of the “indeterminacy that is essential to the
concept [of multiplicity] in its broad sense,” whose content is indicated in
the “expression ‘one and one and one, etc’.” The natural number sequence
arises when “a definite number term is associated” with each determinate
number concept (one and one; one, one, and one; etc.). For Husserl, “The
Numbers in Arithmetic Are Not Abstracta” (or concepts), as the title of the
first subsection of Chapter XIII reads (181). For example, “5 does not sig-
nify the concept (the abstractum) five; but rather 5 is a general name (or else
calculational sign) for any arbitrary multitude as one falling under the con-
cept five” (181–82).32 As a consequence, Husserl initially maintained that
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
131
————————
mund Husserl, “Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik),” in Hua XII, 340–73; English translation:
“On the Logic of Signs (Semiotic),” trans. Dallas Willard, in Early Writings, 20–51; henceforth
cited as Semiotic with German and English page references, respectively. In that early text,
Husserl says of systems of signs in general that “In every system of signs we distinguish the basic
signs from the derived or composite signs” (368/46), and he says of the arithmetical sign sys-
tem in particular that “the arithmetical operations, insofar as they are formative of numbers,
are rule-governed methods for the production of inauthentic presentations”—with “[t]he basic
signs of number theory” being “the signs 0, 1, . . . , 9.” 
32. Husserl’s characterization of the authentic presentation of number as a “determi-
nate multiplicity,” i.e., as the amount of any arbitrarily collected multitude of objects whatso-
ever, is extremely hard to follow if one attempts to get at what he means by beginning on the
conceptual level proper to symbolic mathematics, which presupposes that numbers are in fact
“abstract concepts.” Miller illustrates this difficulty when he avers that “The determinateness
which is characteristic of numbers in contrast to mere multitudes is not explained with refer-
ence to our experience of concrete multitudes. It is held rather”—by whom, we wonder?
Clearly not by Husserl—“to arise in a kind of thinking which is directed toward abstract con-
cepts” (Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 40). Whatever obscurities are present in
Husserl’s analyses (in Philosophy of Arithmetic) of the psychological origin of the collective
combination characteristic of the authentic number concept, it is clear that “[t]he abstraction
process that yields the determinate number belonging to a given concrete multiplicity” in-
volves nothing more than “[d]isregarding the specific character of the particular contents
grasped together, [such that] one considers and retains each content only insofar as it is an
‘anything’ or ‘one’” (PA, 81–82). Rather than yielding the various species of numbers as “ab-
stract” concepts over and above the unity of the collectively combined “anythings” or “ones”
that comprise “the universal form appertaining to the multiplicity at hand: one and one, etc.”
(82), Husserl is very clear that the “similarity [of the universal forms of the species of numbers]
rests upon the equivalence of the partial presentations that make them up (the ‘ones’ or units),
as well as the elemental similarity of the psychical acts unifying those presentations.” Conse-
quently, apart from the “most universal and empty” (84)—and therefore in preciselythis sense
“abstract”—status of the units rendered determinate by the various “species” of collective com-
bination proper to numbers (e.g., one and one; one, one, and one; etc.), no other abstractum is
at issue for Husserl in his analysis of the determinateness characteristic of numbers.
This last point is especially clear from Husserl’s analysis of the question of how “the
concepts of cardinal numberand multiplicityare related to one another” (82). He maintains that
“The distinction consists only in this, that the concept of the cardinal number already pre-

III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
132
————————
supposes a differentiation of the abstract forms of multiplicity from each other, but that of
multiplicity does not” (83). It is important to note that what is at issue for Husserl in this
quote is the “generic concept” of cardinal number and not the concepts of the species of num-
bers themselves. Thus, “The former is to be taken as the generic concept that originates from
the comparison of the determinate multiplicity forms or numbers as species concepts, already
differentiated from each other.” As a consequence, as we noted in § 41 above, “There is no
cardinal number in general” (82). Moreover, as we have seen, Husserl is very clear that we come
by the derivation of the number concepts “directly, setting out from arbitrary concrete multi-
plicities; for each of these falls under one, and indeed a determinate one, of those concepts”
(81). It follows from this that because there is no cardinal number in general, the concepts of
the species of number cannot arise on the basis of its mediation. And it also follows that be-
cause each species of number does not comprise anything beyond a determinate collective
combination and the units so combined, numbers for Husserl are not concepts but rather the
“universal form appertaining to the multiplicity at hand” (82). Miller’s contention, that “the
collective combination alone” cannot account for this, “for this connection is common to all
multitudes and is in no way distinctive of [specific] multitudes” (Miller, Numbers in Pres-
ence and Absence, 92), has been rightly criticized by Willard as indicating that Miller “has
not got to what Husserl is saying about collective combinations—and the concept of num-
ber and number itself ” (Dallas Willard, “Review of J. P. Miller, Numbers in Presence and Ab-
sence,” Husserl Studies 1 [1984], 124–30, here 127). Willard goes on to say, “Husserl makes
boringly clear that there is a different structure of collective combinations of ‘anythings’ for
each number.” In connection with Willard’s observation here, however, it is curious that in
his own account of the authentic concept of number presented by Husserl in Philosophy of
Arithmetic Willard argues that the “species” at issue in this work refer to “abstract entities
that may be contained in other (relatively concrete) entities” (Willard, Logic and the Objec-
tivity of Knowledge, 64). As evidence for this, he cites Husserl’s discussion of figural moments
as producing a “genus concept in the rigorous Aristotelian signification of the term.” Yet, as
we have shown, Husserl draws this connection in his analysis of the symbolic presentation of
multitudes, which forms the basis of the “symbolic concept of multitude” (PA, 61), and thus
with respect to neither the authentic concept of multitude nor the authentic concept of num-
ber. It is the latter that is in question in the discussion of the status of the species proper to
authentic numbers.
To be fair to Miller, it has to be pointed out that he claims that Husserl’s recognition
of the categorial unity of number came later, in his Logical Investigations. Thus, in the case of
the “collective presentation of this or that set of five objects . . . [an] act . . . is intuitively given
in a certain formal articulation, and so as an instance of the number species in question. Look-
ing at this intuited individual [act of collection], we perform an ‘abstraction,’ i.e., we not only
isolate the non-independent moment of collective form in what is before us, but we appre-
hend the idea in it: the number Five as the species of the form swims into our conscious sphere
of reference. What we are now meaning is not this individual instance [of the concrete col-
lection of this or that set of five objects], not the intuited object as a whole, not the form im-
manent in it, but still inseparable from it: what we mean is rather the ideal form-species” (LI
I, 171 [180], cited in Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence, 93). Two comments are in order
here. First, contra Miller, in this passage Husserl clearly understands the original, non-ab-
stracted act of collective combination to be what is responsible for the initial determination of
the number species (in this case, five), whose ideal form is then yielded on the basis of “an ab-
straction.” And, second, Husserl’s view that “there must be a form of ‘categorial perception’ or
categorial intuition in which objects such as numbers and multitudes are given as unities”
(ibid.) is something that is totally absent from his analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic. (See
Part IV, § 168 below for a detailed comparison of the account of number in the Logical Inves-
tigations with that in Philosophy of Arithmetic.)

“The arithmetician absolutely does not operate with the number concepts
as such, but rather with the universally presented objects of those concepts”
(181). For example, in adding 5 and 5, it is not the concepts that are con-
joined, “since each remains identically what it is [i.e., the concept ‘5’]; and
since each concept, in itself, is only a single one,” which raises a “logical dif-
ficulty” of “how are we ever to conjoin the identical concepts.” According to
Husserl, this difficulty is resolved when we realize the following: “5 + 5 = 10
means the same as: a multitude—any one, whichever it may be—falling under
the concept five, and any other multitude falling under that same concept,
when united yield a multitude falling under the concept of ten” (182).
In line with this non-conceptual character of the content of the au-
thentic concept of number, Husserl characterized the concepts of the more
and the less as being based in “an elemental fact, to be described in no other
way than by reference to the phenomena” (91), namely, to the collectively
thinking of aggregates in which “adding to and taking away is present.” Thus,
the relation of the more and the less “presupposes for its realization that the
original and the augmented assemblages be present to us simultaneously,”
by which Husserl means “as one assemblage without their separate unifica-
tions being lost” (92). 
It is on the basis, then, of this account of the authentic number con-
cept and the concepts of the ‘more’ and the ‘less’ that Husserl initially—that
is, before the “shift” in the account of both symbolic numbers and symbolic
————————
The upshot of all this is that for Husserl (in Philosophy of Arithmetic) the “concept” of
authentic number derives its status from the peculiar unity of the whole of a determinate col-
lective combination of units, the unity and therefore “wholeness” of which is not present in the
abstracta (i.e., the units) proper to the latter, except insofar as they are combined in accordance
with the universal form of however many ones (one and one; one, one, and one; etc.) they
happen to be. In other words, apart from the latter and their collective combination, which
arises “directly, setting out from arbitrary concrete multiplicities,” the number species have no
other “contents.” (In answer to the question “What . . . distinguishes a case of physical [or
metaphysical] combination from a case of collective combination?” [PA, 332], Husserl writes:
“in the first case a unification is noticeable within the contents of the presentation, while this
is not so in the latter case. . . . And this is so even though a certain unity is present in the to-
tality and is perceivable with evidence.”) Thus, even if we admit into our discussion Husserl’s
account of the “ideal form-species” in the Logical Investigations, nothing is changed with re-
spect to his account in Philosophy of Arithmetic of the origination of the unity and wholeness
of authentic numbers. This holds inasmuch as by ‘ideal form-species’ Husserl clearly does not
understand free-floating Platonic forms or ‘universal concepts’ (e.g., the universal concept of
Five), but the abstractively isolated unities of that which is necessarily first given in concrete
acts, which in the Investigations as in Philosophy of Arithmetic do not arise through the medi-
ation (or application) of “abstract” concepts or forms in relation to concrete individuals (i.e.,
to individual acts of collective combination). For it is the reverse: what is initially given are the
concrete individuals and then, only on the basis of this, the abstracted forms that they (subse-
quently) are maintained to instantiate.
133
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic

calculation in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s last chapters—articulates the rules
for constructing symbolic number formations. This articulation presents
the root of these rules in an “idealization of our finite mental capacities”
(240), an idealization that manifests an “analogy” (221) with the “idealiza-
tion” at work in the symbolic presentation of the universal concept of mul-
tiplicity. Specifically, “if we start with any arbitrarily symbolic multitude
presentation, then we possess (at least ideally) the capability of expanding it
without limits by continuously adding new and ever newer members” (223).
Thus, we “can think of the members proper to the multitude as mirrored in
a constant reiteration and accordingly form the concept of the continuing
expansion of the multitude by means of the members of its mirrorings
[Spiegelungen].” Although “we cannot in fact form the required reiterations
in infinitum and arrange them in sequence . . . , we can idealizingly disre-
gard these limitations on our abilities and conceive the concepts, which are
symbolic also in this respect.” Thus, to each symbolic multitude symbolically
expanded by “such means . . . there belongs—again, in symbolic presentation—
to each level a determinate cardinal number, different for each level.” Con-
sequently, “[t]he manifold of conceivable number specifications is . . .
infinite, like the manifold of conceivable multitude levels.”
In line with this view, the coordination of determinate symbolic num-
ber formations “with the true—but to us inaccessible—[authentic] number
concepts in ‘themselves’” (223) requires something more than the “remote
symbolizations” achieved in the idealizing expansion of multitudes. What is
required is the invention of a system of signs with the following character-
istics: 1) that a few basic signs “correspond, in rigorous parallelism, to a sys-
tem of conceptual formations grounded upon certain basic concepts” (228);
2) that the “unsurpassable simplicity in the formation of natural numbers”
(230), that is, “the procedure of successive number formation through the ad-
dition, in each case, of one unit to the number already formed” (226), be pre-
served “to the extent feasible” (230); and 3) that “the number system arrived
at . . . is not . . . a mere method of symbolizing concepts that are given, but
rather one of constructing new concepts and simultaneously designating
them along with their construction” (234).
According to Husserl, ordering the sequence of symbolic numbers in
terms of levels that repeat a determinate sequence of elementary numbers is
the concept of number formation most desirable for rendering symbolically
the authentically inaccessible determinate multitudes of ones that compose
any arbitrarily given multiplicity. The “sequence must be structured in con-
formity with the principle of the natural number sequence” (236), such that
“The numbers within each level form a sequence ordered according to mag-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
134

nitude. Each number is greater by one than the previous one, but the first (of
each level) is greater by one than the last one from the previous level” (232).
Thus, “all levels link together and form a unique and endlessly continuing se-
quence of numbers which corresponds exactly to the natural, primitive num-
ber sequence.” Such systematically constructed numbers encompass, “in
concept, the entire domain of number: that is, there is no actual number to
which there would not correspond, as its symbolic correlate, a wholly de-
terminate systematic formation equivalent to it” (233).
The choice of the magnitude of the elementary sequence of numbers
for the first level, which comprises the “base number” (235) for the system,
is governed by the criterion that it “must be accessible to us without remote
systematic expedients” (236). Although number concepts that are authen-
tically presentable (e.g., the first few cardinal numbers) would meet this cri-
terion, Husserl explicitly rejects “the requirement that the elemental
numbers must still fall within the domain of numbers that are authentically
presentable.”33 And he does so on the grounds that “Such a far-reaching re-
striction would . . . be unnecessary.” With this rejection, Husserl’s analyses
begin to move beyond their initial supposition of the logical equivalence of
symbolic and authentic presentations and therewith of the identity of the
object to which both symbolic and authentic number concepts refer. This
can be seen when—after expressing the view that “we can form the ideal of
an unrestricted continuation of the simple number sequence by correspond-
ingly idealizing our mental capacity” (234) and that, further, “we can think
of the sign-formations of the number system also as marks for the parallel
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
135
————————
33. Husserl’s explicit rejection of authentically presentable numbers, and therefore of
authentic number concepts per se, as the basis of the system of symbolic numbers is curiously
overlooked by a number of commentators who no doubt miss the fact that Husserl’s analyses
eventually abandon his initial supposition of the correlation and therefore logical equivalence
(based on the identity of their content) of authentic and symbolic presentations and thus of
the correlation and logical equivalence (likewise based on the identity of their content) of the
authentic and symbolic concepts themselves. Take, e.g., Bell, who writes in connection with
“Husserl’s theory” of “the symbolic presentations of determinate numbers”: “One or more of
the earliest signs in the series must be correlated with an authentic concept of number” (Bell,
Husserl, 56). Likewise, Rudolf Bernet maintains regarding the construction of “a system of
numerical symbols and inauthentic numeral concepts” that “There is here a possible principle
of construction for designating the (intuitionally formed) numbers 1 through 9 as elementary
numbers and forming the further numbers by way of a repetition of the series of elementary
numbers.” (See Rudolf Bernet, Iso Kern, and Eduard Marbach, An Introduction to Husserlian
Phenomenology [Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1993], 26.) By contrast,
Willard correctly observes that in calculation by means of symbols “the intuition of numbers
is thus simply by-passed, as are the complicated articulations in the explicit conceptualization
of numbers as correspondents to numerals in virtue of an analogy between number series and
numeral series” (Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 127).

members of the (ideally expanded) number sequence”—Husserl warns that
“one must consider well the fact that these all are only modes of presentation
and language that are inauthentic in the highest degree and have their source
in the idealizations mentioned.” With these words Husserl indicates, re-
markably, that he no longer holds to the account and language of his earlier
analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic regarding the sign formations of the
number system, that is, the symbolization that yields the symbolic numbers
with which arithmetic operates. Husserl no longer considers such sign for-
mations to be marks for an ideally expanded number sequence putatively
running parallel to these formations, because, as he puts it, this way of pre-
senting and talking about these sign formations stems from these very “ide-
alizations” themselves. In other words, the very idealization of natural
numbers that yields symbolic numbers is what is responsible for rendering
problematic the characterization of the sign formations produced by this
expansion as having a reference to supposed ideal natural numbers, under-
stood as actual multiplicities of units that are nevertheless incapable of au-
thentic presentation due to the limits for such presentation that are imposed
by the human mind’s finitude. Thus, Husserl maintains, “to interpret” the
symbolic sign formations “in another, more authentic sense would be to dis-
tort the entire sense and purpose of the systematic formation of numbers.”
Husserl now rejects the view that “the systematic number concept would be
the mediator between the natural number and the systematic designation”
(233) because “the situation is not one in which the sequence of natural
numbers was first given to us, and we then subsequently sought for a sym-
bolization adequate to its conceptual formations.” Rather, as already men-
tioned, what is at stake in the number system so characterized is a method
of “constructing new concepts and simultaneously designating them along
with their construction” (234), a method whose foundation, according to
the analysis in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s last two chapters, cannot be char-
acterized appropriately in terms of sign formations that are presentable in the
step-by-step formation of either authentic or inauthentic number concepts,
that is, in terms of concepts that have as their content—either directly (au-
thentic) or indirectly (inauthentic)—multiplicities of units.
§ 49. Husserl on the Symbolic Presentation of the Systematic
Construction of New Number Concepts and Their Designation
Based on his analysis of the decadal number system, wherein he aims first of
all to reconstruct this system’s “method” for the construction of new num-
ber “concepts,” Husserl therefore comes to realize that the level-by-level re-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
136

iteration of the magnitude of the numbers that form the base, elementary
level is not accomplished by number concepts at all but by the system of num-
ber signs. This is because, on his view, “it proves in general feasible and
preferable to substitute certain symbolizations even for the number con-
cepts accessible to us in the form of authentic presentations—indeed, to put
it plainly, to substitute external signs” (236). As a consequence of this sub-
stitution, there prevails a “rigorous parallelism . . . between the method for
the continuation of the sequence of number concepts and the method for the
continuation of the sequence of number signs—and this not merely in gen-
eral, but rather for each individual step, one after the other” (237). Thus,
“number definitions and operation rules, which are the regular medium of
systematic processes,” are replaced “with corresponding, conventionally fixed
formulas expressing equivalencies of sign combinations” (237–38). In con-
nection with this, Husserl writes:
One will recognize that, in this way, there actually originates an independent
system of symbols that permits the derivation of sign after sign in a uniform
pattern without there ever turning up—nor could there ever, as such, turn
up—other sign formations that appear in other circumstances, accompany-
ing a conceptual process, as designations of the concepts here formed. (238)
The “evidence” for this “peculiar relationship” between concepts and signs
has its “inner ground” in the fact that “the system of designations faithfully
reflects these conceptual formulations,” such that “each number designation
will also have to be one formed, in exact correspondence, from the designa-
tions of the elements and operations in which formal rules for the replace-
ment of sign compounds by others will be used—rules that correspond to
those propositions concerning the relation of concepts.” 
Despite the correspondence between concepts and signs that results
from the method of substituting the latter for the former, Husserl maintains
that there is a fundamental difference between the two systems. In the case
of number formations that “are systematically rigorous consequences of the
elementary concepts along with their forms of combination and transfor-
mation . . . the transformations unfold on the basis of knowledge proceed-
ing with necessity from the relevant concepts,” whereas in the case of parallel
sign formations, “the transformations of signs will indeed proceed accord-
ing to certain types, but in a wholly external and mechanical manner.”
Husserl maintains, moreover:
If, now, we detach these types from their conceptual supports, and if we fix
them once and for all in the form of conventional sign equivalencies (in the
manner of the rules of a game), then it is clear a priori that we now possess
all that is necessary for the independent development of the system of signs,
137
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic

and that no result can come about that would not find its correlate upon
the side of the conceptual systematic. (238–39)
The consequence of this independent development for Husserl is that “from
the logical perspective . . . , both in the tasks of practical enumeration of a
given multitude, as well as in those of derivation through calculation of num-
ber from number, the solution can be obtained in a purely mechanical fash-
ion.” Finally, he considers this consequence to be a “perfection of the number
system” (240). 
§ 50. The Fundamental Shift in the Logic of Symbolic 
Numbers Brought about by the Independence of 
Signitively Symbolic Numbers
It is precisely in Husserl’s analysis of the perfection of the number system that
the shift in his understanding of the calculational methods in arithmetic
noted above (§ 40) comes to the fore and that, corresponding to this, the fun-
damental shift in his characterization of the logic of symbolic numbers comes
about. Husserl now realizes that the independent status of the sign system
that characterizes symbolically formed numbers means that the “referent” of
their sign formations cannot be properly understood as the logical content of
the idealized concepts of the number, a content that he had characterized as
the determinate collection of units that belongs to each inauthentically pre-
sented multitude. So, instead of referring indirectly, via symbolic concepts
whose idealized mode of formation eventually leads back to a determinate
collection of units, the “referent” of each sign formation belonging to the
conceptually independent sign system is precisely itself a sign. That is, the sig-
nitive status of the sign is exhausted in its function to “call attention” to itself
as a sense-perceptible object. This has two consequences. The first is that “the
symbolic number formations of the system are precisely not thought of as
compositions of purely abstract [i.e., conceptual] determinations” (241). The
second consequence is that “Each such sign complex supplies, in its intuitive
unity and typical form, the stable substrate for that chain of conceptual trans-
formations that make up the ‘interpretation’ of the compound sign.” More-
over, the “sensible signs” (242) proper to “each such large sign complex” (241)
involved “in praxi in all counting and calculating” (242) are understood to be
grasped by “the figural moments that impart a unified character to even very
large sign complexes” and that, as a result, “extraordinarily facilitate their com-
prehension in one’s grasp” (241).
The major implication of the first consequence is the fundamental
change in Husserl’s account of the logic of symbolic numbers. The condition
138
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein

for their newly recognized status as signitively symbolic formations is the
recognition that they do not refer, even indirectly, to arithmetical opera-
tions (enumeration and calculation) that are determined conceptually.
Husserl’s analyses had initially characterized the indirect reference to oper-
ations performed on authentic cardinal numbers as being essential to symbolic
numbers, as a consequence of the logical equivalence of their presentation
and the authentic presentation of cardinal numbers. But he now comes to re-
alize that “Already with the expansion of the number sequence in the more
primitive form first discussed, it is clear that the enumeration of a multitude
by means of successive steps along the sequence in no way requires the step-
by-step formation of the (authentic or symbolic) number concept” (239).
Once this requirement falls away, Husserl explicitly realizes that “Even the
successive subsumption of the individual multitude members under the con-
cept of unit becomes superfluous.” And this means that Husserl now un-
derstands symbolic numbers to be logically independent of the concept of
number defined as a determinate multiplicity of units, that is, of the con-
cept of cardinal number.34
The major implication of the second consequence concerns the role
that Husserl now recognizes the perceptionor intuitionof number signs to play
in the formation of symbolic numbers. Because “a number is defined through
such a systemic complex of sensible signs” (241–42), it follows that “the uni-
formity in this complex forms the means of symbolization for the sequence of
conceptual steps that, otherwise, does not hold together.”35 The “conceptual
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
139
————————
34. In his otherwise excellent study, “The Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy,” Ierna ap-
parently misses Husserl’s account here of the logical independence of symbolic number for-
mations from the proper conception of numbers, i.e., numbers conceived of as determinate
multitudes of units, when he writes (Part 1, 34): “Ultimately it appears that symbolic numbers
have a sense only because they could in the end be reduced to ‘real,’ i.e., properly conceived,
numbers. Even though the symbolic presentations can become very complex constructions of
signs upon signs, ultimately they obtain sense and validity due to the small but indispensable
field of properly conceived numbers. This is what appears to warrant the truthfulness of sym-
bolic numbers and symbolic counting as logically equivalent to proper conceptions.” 
35. Willard argues that Husserl “believed, that in most arithmetical operations we are
not thinking of or representing [Vorstellung] numbers at all—whether authentically or sym-
bolically” (Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 108). He goes on to state, “This is
because what we do to or with symbols in calculation—even within arithmetic—simply has
no essential conscious bearing upon numbers and their relations at all” (108–9). Willard bases
his argument on Husserl’s coming to recognize “that calculation in arithmetic is a mainly non-
conceptual manipulation of sensible signs” (108). While in agreement with this last statement,
our argument does not draw the same conclusion from it that Willard does, namely, that for
Husserl arithmetical calculation with “sensible symbols and their sensible relations” does not
involve—in any sense—numerical thinking or Vorstellung. Clearly, on Husserl’s view, what is
being thought of or presented in such thinking are not authentic numbers. However, it does
not follow from this that arithmetical calculation with sensible signs lacks any “numerical” 

steps” at issue here concern, of course, the “conventionally fixed formulas”
(237) for combining and transforming the sensible complexes of signs, and
not the conceptual steps that are designated by their sign equivalencies.
§ 51. The Unresolved Question of the Logical Foundation of
Signitively Symbolic Numbers
The shift in Husserl’s account of the referent proper to signs in the forma-
tions composing symbolic numbers and the corresponding shift in his ac-
count of arithmetical calculation bring to the fore the question of the extent
to which, in the remainder of Philosophy of Arithmetic, he addresses the prob-
lem of the logical foundation of conceptually independent symbolic numbers
and, corresponding to this, conceptually independent symbolic calculation.
Despite the new analysis of both, the last chapter contains the following
statement, which seems inconsistent with the new analysis:
Only the systematic combination of the concepts and their interrelationships,
which underlie the calculation, can account for the fact that the correspond -
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
140
————————
sense whatsoever. We draw this conclusion for two reasons. First, we argued (in § 46 above)
that as a consequence of the same shift (in the course of Husserl’s analyses in Philosophy of
Arithmetic) in his understanding of calculation—a shift that Willard was the first to note—
Husserl abandoned his earlier (essentially Brentanian) view of the logical equivalence of the
authentic and the symbolic presentation of numbers and therefore the authentic and the sym-
bolic number concepts. Moreover, we also argued (in §48 above) that the consequence of this
is Husserl’s non-conceptual extension of symbolic numbers, an extension that recognizes “num-
bers” that are signitively symbolic, in the sense proper to their status as functional sign equiv-
alencies of inauthentic (i.e., conceptually symbolic) number concepts. Second, we understand
Husserl’s “strictly formal” (Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 109) extension of
the concept of calculation beyond the arithmetical domain, to which Willard appeals in sup-
port of his claim about the non-numerical status of calculation with symbols, to be something
that Husserl recognized as stemming from “higher logical interests than those of arithmetica
numerosa (with which we currently [i.e., in Philosophy of Arithmetic] have to do)” (PA, 258).
Thus, rather than conclude that the shift in Husserl’s understanding of calculation in Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic results in a non-numerical understanding of the symbols operative in arith-
metical calculation, we argue that attendant to this shift is a transformed understanding of
the logical status proper to the numerical significance of “a number [when it is] defined
through such a systematic complex of sensible signs” (PA, 241–42). As we argue in § 51 below,
however, despite this documentable transformation in Husserl’s analyses of the numerical sig-
nificance proper to the “numbers . . . that can be symbolized only signitively” (PA, 242), his
analyses neither thematize nor analyze the logical significance of this transformation. Thus, we
are in agreement with Willard that Philosophy of Arithmetic “does not provide any analysis of
the logic of arithmetic in the formation of judgments through procedures that utilize symbols
without conceptualization” (Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 127). Never-
theless, our argument diverges from Willard’s insofar as it is able to provide an interpretation
of Husserl’s consistent appeals to ‘number’ in his discussions of symbolic calculation, which for
the reasons just given is something that Willard’s argument for the non-numerical status of
such calculation has to overlook if it is to remain consistent.

ing designations come together to form a coherently developed system and
that thereby we have certainty that to any derivation of the signs and sign-re-
lations from given ones, which is valid in the sense prescribed by the rules for
the signs, there must correspond a derivation of concepts and conceptual re-
lations from concepts given, valid in the sense that thoughts are. Accordingly,
for the grounding of the calculational methods in arithmetic we will also have
to go back to the number concepts and to their forms of combination. (259)
However, in light of our presentation of the new analysis, it is not clear which
“number concepts” Husserl has in mind in this passage that we have to re-
turn to in order to ground the calculational methods in arithmetic. On the
one hand, in accord with his original supposition regarding the logical equiv-
alence of the presentations proper to the authentic and the symbolic number
concepts, he says:
A number system (as, for example, our decadal system) can accordingly be re-
garded as the most perfect mirror reflection of the realm of the numbers in
themselves, that is, of the actual numbers that are in general inaccessible to us.
And this is also true with respect to their order, which—with the symbolic as
with the authentic concepts—is that of a simple sequence. Thus we may jus-
tifiably regard the indirect formations of the system as the symbolic surrogates
of the numbers in themselves. (260)
On the other hand, in keeping with his analysis of the conceptual inde-
pendence of signitive symbolic numbers, Husserl maintains that although
the systematic status of these numbers is such that they are “themselves only
symbolic surrogates for other concepts that are inaccessible to us” (261),
nevertheless, they “are regarded in arithmetic as the ultimate number con-
cepts.” As such, they are precisely not regarded as the “symbolic stand-ins for
other concepts that are inaccessible to us,” but rather as the number con-
cepts to which “all other number forms only lead back to and therefore can,
in addition, be reconstructed starting from.” In contrast, then, to the view
that symbolic numbers, being the result of idealizations that can be traced
back to authentically presented numbers, are grounded in such numbers and
therefore have their logical foundation in the concept of cardinal number
(understood as a determinate collection of units), a very different view of
the logical status of symbolic numbers can be seen to emerge when Husserl
writes: 
In truth they [i.e., systematic symbolic numbers] only function as normative
numbers—fixed standards, as it were—which all other number forms are
compared to for the purposes of an exact comparison among themselves
with respect to more or less. And thus we see that by means of the number se-
quence the ideal of a universal and exact classification of numbers is realized
in the most perfect way. But that it accomplishes this entirely corresponds
to our original intentions. The need for order and classificatory distinction
in the jumble of symbolic number forms was in fact the original impulse
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
141

that forced our logical development to expand the domain of authentic
numbers given at the outset precisely in its systematic forms.
In contrast to the view guiding his analyses in the first part of Philosophy of
Arithmetic that it is the finitude of the human mind, reflected in the de facto
weakness of its presentational capacities, that is the source of the logical ex-
pansion of authentic numbers, here Husserl’s identification of this impulse
with the need to order and classify symbolic number forms clearly represents
another view of the matter. 
Thus, when Husserl concludes—with respect to the means of mechan-
ical calculation that characterizes the universal arithmetic involved in the “cases
where a number is defined symbolically by means of a structure of numbers
that are, without exception, known” (281)—that “[t]hey represent logical
methods for evaluating symbolic number compositions . . . , that is, for deter-
mining the symbolic normative-formations corresponding to those composi-
tions as the logically qualified stand-ins for the actual number concepts”
(271–72), it is no longer clear exactly what concept of number he is referring
to as ‘actual’. Husserl does not tell us which of the two “actual number con-
cepts” that are operative in his analyses of the logical sources of universal arith-
metic he has in mind here. Is it the number concept that is “actual” in the sense
of rendering determinate the answer to the question of ‘how many’ with re-
spect to a concrete multiplicity, that is, the multiplicity proper to a multitude
whose individual members are subsumed under the concept of unit? That is,
is Husserl still referring here to the concept of cardinal number with which he
began Philosophy of Arithmetic? Or is the number concept that is “actual” the
number concept employed by the calculational technique of arithmetical
praxis, namely, the normative number concept36 of the rule-governed, signi-
tively symbolic expansion of the domain of authentic numbers? This concept
of number, as we have seen, no longer refers to multitudes whose members are
subsumed under the concept of unit,37 because, being inseparable from the ex-
ternal sign that “belongs, as such, to the essential content of the symbolic pre -
sentation” (194), it is already symbolic in its essence.
Husserl’s concluding analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic of the “so-
called ‘four species,’ the most elemental of arithmetical operations” (262)—
that is, addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, along with analyses
of the “higher operations” (276) (e.g., “multiplying a sum by a number, di-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
142
————————
36. Strictly speaking (as we have seen), signitively symbolic numbers are not number
concepts, according to Husserl, because their meaning as signs does not—as in the case of sys-
tematically symbolic numbers—accompany the concepts and conceptual operations of num-
ber formation “whose conceptual content could still be brought before the mind” (242).
37. See § 50 above.

viding a product by a sum, raising a quotient to a power, etc.” [278])—make
it clear that “it is . . . a matter of indifference whether we take as the basis of
arithmetic merely the sequence of natural numbers or the system numbers”
(264). Consequently, the question of which are the “actual” numbers that
Husserl understands to underlie the operations of arithmetic remains unclar-
ified—or perhaps better: ambiguous—at the conclusion of this work. This
is the case because, on the one hand, Husserl arrives at the view that the “sci-
entific deliberations”38 that “form the domain of universal arithmetic” (280)
and that prove the truth value of mechanical calculation are able to do so with-
out any appeal to authentically given numbers, because this truth value “is nec-
essarily independent of whether we operate with the concepts or simply with
their signs.” In other words, because “the logical validity” of mechanical cal-
culation “is guaranteed by means of the rigorous parallelism between the sys-
tematic of the numbers and the number relations, on the one hand, and that
of the number signs and the relations of number signs (equivalencies of sym-
bols), on the other” (271), Husserl comes to realize that logically valid results
can be achieved without any appeal to authentic numbers or to calculational
operations with such numbers. That is because the “small numbers” (263),
which “can be given to us as simple and non-systematic,” nevertheless lend
themselves to being easily positioned “within the system” of systematic or
symbolic numbers, such that “we can regard it in each case as already ac-
complished [i.e., that the small numbers have been given to us as simple and
non-systematic] and therefore can also take combinations of such small num-
bers to be as such already combinations of systematic numbers” (263–64).
On the other hand, however, Husserl continues to hold that “just as the in-
dividual symbolic number stands in for a definite authentic one, so also each
symbolic operation of combination stands in for a definite (although not ac-
tually executable) authentic one” (263).
Husserl’s recognition of the “authentic” inaccessibility of most numbers,
together with the fact that now, in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s last chapter, he
understands the “symbolic surrogate concepts” to be something that we “clas-
sify by taking as our basis a sequence of normal-form concepts,” gives rise to the
following question: can his overall account of symbolic numbers remain co-
herent while continuing to maintain what he maintained prior to Philosophy of
Arithmetic’s last chapters, namely, that the symbolic numbers and symbolic op-
erations proper to their combination (calculation) “stand in for” the authentic
number concepts and their combination? Once Husserl’s analyses are guided by
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
143
————————
38. It is interesting to note that the view expressed here, that the truth value of me-
chanical calculation is the result of “scientific deliberations,” is contradicted when Husserl
writes to Stumpf that “[t]he arithmetica universalis is no science” (Stumpf Letter, 161/17).

the view that the symbolically systematic numbers in arithmetic are no longer
understood properly when one maintains that, “in truth” (261), they lead back
to number concepts that are “authentic,” this question becomes unavoidable.
Yet Husserl does not raise this question, let alone attempt to answer it,
at the conclusion of Philosophy of Arithmetic.39 Rather, after noting that his
analyses of arithmetic “have all along had in mind only the cases where a num-
ber is defined symbolically by means of a structure of numbers that are, with-
out exception, known” (281), he calls attention to another “great” (282) group
of problems. This group deals with “a special branch of number theory of the
highest importance, that of algebra.” It has to do with the problems involved
in symbolic numbers “defined by equations” (281), in which “[a] number can
also be symbolically defined as an unknown constituent of such a precisely
characterized structure of numbers whose value is already known or is to be cal-
culated from an operation structure built up completely out of known num-
bers.” Just as the first group of problems, that is, those taken up in Philosophy
of Arithmetic, requires an investigation by a universal arithmetic, the second
group of problems “also evokes the need for a universal arithmetic” (282). And,
while both groups of problems concern “the indirect determination of num-
ber” (283), the second group “has to do with a number determination that is
indirect to a far higher degree.” Husserl reserves the investigation of the uni-
versal arithmetic of the latter for the second volume of his arithmetical stud-
ies, which he announced at the time of the publication of the first and, as it
turned out, only volume of these studies.40
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
144
————————
39. In both his letter to Stumpf and “On the Logic of Signs (Semiotic),” Husserl ex-
pressly states that the problem behind this question, namely, the logic of the symbolic calcula-
tion operative in arithmetic, is something that does not yet exist. In the latter text he writes: “If
one takes only the most common and simplest of algorithms, that in which one counts and cal-
culates with numbers, one will search logical works in vain for light on what really makes such
mechanical operations, with mere written characters or word signs, capable of vastly expanding
our actual knowledge concerning the number concepts—making possible for us accomplish-
ments which were inconceivable to the greatest thinkers of antiquity” (Semiotic, 372/50). What
is missing according to Husserl is the “logic of symbolic representations and judgments”
(365/43), which he contends has to set “two goals for itself: It would seek to get to the bottom
of the function of symbolic presentations and judgments in the activity of theoreticaljudgment,
and above all, to provide logical illumination for those algorithmic modes of procedure which
have on such a wide scale become the vehicles of progress in the exact sciences” (365/44). Be-
cause, on Husserl’s view, “the slightest insight into the logic of the matter” (370/48) in univer-
sal arithmetic is lacking “from the time of a Leibniz, D’Alembert and Carnot up to today,” it is
reasonable to assume that among the “many attempts” that have “made no essential progress”
in this regard he would have to include his own Philosophy of Arithmetic. 
40. In his “Author’s Notice” (Selbstanzeige) for the first (and only) volume of Philoso-
phy of Arithmetic, Husserl expressed the conviction that “[t]he higher-level symbolic methods
. . . that constitute the essence of the universal arithmetic . . . will appear [in the second volume] 

§ 52. Summar y and Conclusion
The psychological and logical investigations in Husserl’s Philosophy of Arith-
metic contain foundational analyses of arithmetic that are guided by two dis-
tinct and incompatible theses. One is the thesis that the basic concepts and
calculational operations of universal arithmetic, that is, the numbers and the
algorithms of both ordinary arithmetic and the symbolic calculus, have their
foundation in the concept of cardinal number. The other is the thesis that
both the numbers and algorithms of universal arithmetic have their founda-
tion in a system of signs that are not conceptual but rather formal-logical, in
the sense of that part of logic defined as symbolic technique. The juxtaposi-
tion of analyses guided by conflicting theses in the single text of Philosophy of
Arithmetic is explained by a radical shift in their author’s view of the logical
relation between authentic and inauthentic number “concepts.” This shift
occurred sometime between the date of the original studies from which this
text is drawn and the date of their revision on the occasion of its composition.
Husserl’s manner of presenting the analyses that exhibit this shift does not
call explicit attention to it, but rather suggests a linear development from the
view of the foundational status of the concept of cardinal number for uni-
versal arithmetic to that of the conceptual independence of the sign system
that defines arithmetic. So it is left for the reader to make explicit in Husserl’s
analyses what he himself does not.
Thus, on the one hand, Philosophy of Arithmetic contains “earlier”
analyses reflecting the view that the operations of universal arithmetic have
their foundation in a symbolic concept of number that is characterized by its
idealization of the human mind’s limited capacity to present cardinal num-
bers directly, that is, authentically. Symbolic numbers in this sense are ideal
and defined by their logical equivalence to the authentic concept of cardi-
nal number, because, according to Husserl, both number concepts have the
same content, namely, a collection of separately collected units or ones. The
logical equivalence of these concepts does not entail their identity, however,
because authentic cardinal numbers present this object authentically, in the
direct intuition of the collected units and the direct presentation of the unity
proper to their multitude, while symbolic numbers present it inauthenti-
cally, in indirect presentations mediated by signs.
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
145
————————
as one member of a whole class of arithmetics unified in virtue of the homogeneous character
of identically the same algorithm” (PA, 288). As we shall see, Husserl apparently abandoned
the conviction that the essence of universal arithmetic is algorithmic, as his logical investigations
subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic sought to provide a logical (and thus a non- or trans-
algorithmic) foundation for the logical status of symbolic calculus operative in both formal
mathematics and formal logic.

Husserl’s logical investigations of symbolic numbers in Philosophy of
Arithmetic begin with the view that they are surrogates for authentic cardinal
numbers, thus for number concepts that refer to a determinate amount of
completely arbitrary items belonging to a multiplicity. Moreover, he main-
tains that the determinate items that make up the content of the authentic
number concepts are presented as generically empty anythings or units
(ones). As the surrogates or inauthentic stand-ins for the authentic (intuitive)
presentation of the content of authentic number concepts, symbolic num-
bers have the logical status of indirect determinations of cardinal numbers.
Because, on this view, the object of symbolic number concepts and authen-
tic number concepts is the same, that is, the object for both is a determinate
multiplicity of units, Husserl’s analyses of symbolic numbers commence from
the supposition that both number concepts—the authentic and the inau-
thentic—are logically equivalent. 
However, as Husserl’s analyses of the basic symbolic operations proper
to arithmetic unfold, operations he characterizes as ‘calculational technique’,
he gradually comes to realize that both these operations and the symbolic
numbers underlying them are not direct surrogates for the authentic number
concepts and authentic conceptual operations on them. Rather, both the cal-
culational technique operative in arithmetic and its symbolically numerical
substratum function as signitive surrogates for the inauthentic conceptual sys-
tem of (systematic) number formations and the conceptual operations on these
formations. As signitive surrogates for systematically determined (inauthentic
and therefore symbolic) numbers and the systematically determined (again, in-
authentic and therefore symbolic) calculational operations upon them, signi-
tively symbolic numbers manifest a complete conceptual independence from
the authentic and inauthentic number concepts together with the concepts
involved in the calculation with each. 
Signitively symbolic numbers and the calculational technique that op-
erates with them achieve their conceptual independence from their status as
the sign equivalencies of the systematic numbers and systematic number op-
erations that form the basis for arithmetical knowledge. The establishment
by a universal arithmetic of the rigorous parallelism between the former and
the latter insures that the signitive calculative technique has a logical valid-
ity equivalent to arithmetical calculation that is conceptual.
Husserl’s analyses thematize the shift in calculative technique that oc-
curs with the invention of a sign system in the manner of the “rules of a game.”
The role of sensible number signs, which provide the stable foundation for
their “numerical” interpretation in accordance with conventionally fixed al-
gorithms, is articulated in line with these analyses. In addition, Husserl the-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
146

matizes the fact that it is the intuitive givenness of the former that permits
their numerical interpretation in terms of the two principles that govern the
expansion of the natural number sequence: addition by ones and the con-
cepts of the more and the less. Moreover, Husserl is aware that at the level of
signitively symbolic numbers, neither principle functions in accordance with
the authentic conceptual origin of addition and the more and the less; neither
functions (respectively) as a principle that relates to determinate quantities of
units or to intuitively presented items of a multiplicity. Thus, with respect to
the principle of successive number formation, what is at issue at the signi-
tively symbolic level is the sensible sequence of number signs—and not the
addition by one proper to the units of a multiplicity that comprise the con-
tent of the authentic cardinal number concepts. What is at issue at the signi-
tive level with respect to the more and the less is the designation of which of
two number signs, as a predecessor or successor in a sequence of number signs,
is the greater or the smaller—and not which multitude of units belonging to
a multiplicity is more or less.
Yet Husserl does not thematize the fact that, in his analyses of the shift
that occurs with the invention of the significatively symbolic calculational tech-
nique, the concepts to which the signs of this technique refer alreadyrelate only
indirectly to the numbers themselves. As a result, he does not thematize the
fact that the rigorous parallelism between 1) the signitively symbolic numbers
and 2) the signitively symbolic operations upon them and the “number con-
cepts” is established with respect to number concepts that present the system-
atic concepts for the formation and designation of the ideally (and therefore
inauthentically) expanded number sequence. In other words, at the operative
level of Husserl’s analyses—but not at the level of their reflective thematiza-
tion—it is the latter, conceptually symbolic numbers and conceptually sym-
bolic calculational operations, that now (in the final analyses of Philosophy of
Arithmetic) comprise the foundation for the system of arithmetic. Therefore,
the contents of the authentic concepts proper to cardinal numbers and the op-
erations upon them that (in the earlier analyses of Philosophy of Arithmetic)
were characterized as the logically equivalent contents of the symbolic num-
ber formations are no longer so characterized by Husserl.
Husserl is quite clear, then, that the contents of the authentic cardinal
number concepts have become superfluous with respect to the foundation
of the signitively symbolic number sequence and the technique of calcula-
tion with rule-governed algorithms (i.e., signitive calculation). This clarity,
however, does not extend to his final reflections and concluding analyses on
precisely which concept of number is the “actual” one underlying the signi-
tive understanding of the calculative technique operative in the universal
Authentic and Symbolic Numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic
147

arithmetic of known numbers. Thus, these analyses are ambiguous on this
point, since they oscillate between the appeal to authentic cardinal number
concepts and to signitively symbolic numbers. In other words, the precise
sense of the numbers that are “indirectly” determined by universal arith-
metic remains unclarified. In the case of the characterization of such num-
bers as authentic cardinal numbers, the content of the “concepts” of universal
arithmetic would be the precisely delimited units of multiplicities—whether
or not the amounts (Anzahlen) of these units are accessible to thinking. In
the case of the signitively symbolic characterization of such numbers, the
content of “concepts” of universal arithmetic would be sense-perceptible
signs and the algorithmic rules that determine their arithmetical value.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
148

Chapter Fourteen
Klein’s Desedimentation of the Origin of 
Algebra and Husserl’s Failure to Ground
Symbolic Calculation in Authentic Numbers 
§ 53. Implications of Klein’s Desedimentation of the Origin
of Algebra for Husserl’s Analyses of the Concept 
Proper to Number in Philosophy of Arithmetic
Our discussion of the concepts of authentic and symbolic number operative
in Husserl’s analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic has shown that he was even-
tually forced to abandon his initial thesis of their logical equivalence. Specif-
ically, we have demonstrated that rather than substantiate the view that the
symbolic presentation of number “can [act as a] surrogate, to the furthest ex-
tent, for the corresponding authentic presentation” (PA, 194) of number,
Husserl’s analyses conclude by substantiating, in effect, the opposite view.
That is, they substantiate the view that the signitively symbolic numbers at
issue in arithmetical calculation, which are presented by sensible number
signs, do not refer to the same object as authentic numbers.
Husserl’s analyses clearly show, on the one hand, that the authentic con-
cept of number refers directly to determinate amounts (i.e., the answer to the
question ‘How many?’) of a multitude of determinate objects. Moreover, the
latter have the status of generically undetermined—which is to say, physically
and “metaphysically” empty and therefore neutral—units or ones (these two
concepts being equivalent). On Husserl’s view, the authentic number con-
cepts are manifestly not “abstracta,” since each one involves the “universal
form appertaining to the multitude at hand” (82), that is, one and one; one,
one, and one, etc. All of this, on the other hand, is in the sharpest possible
contrast with the signitively symbolic number concepts, which refer to nei-
ther a determinate multitude of units or ones nor to the universal form of
their amount. Rather, signitively symbolic numbers, or, more properly, sig-

nitively symbolic number signs, indirectly determine “number” through the
calculational rules—in the manner of the “rules of the game”—for their com-
bination and transformation. 
Husserl’s concluding analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic, which dis-
cover that the “mechanism of the symbolic methodology can break completely
free of the conceptual substratum of its employment” (258), do not thematize
the implications of the fact that two different concepts of number—authen-
tic and signitively symbolic—are operative in these analyses. Because of this,
the logic of calculation with symbolic numbers, in the sense of a theory that
would account for their capacity to retain a numerical meaning despite their
lack of reference to authentic numbers, remains uninvestigated at the conclu-
sion of Philosophy of Arithmetic. Thus, beyond the assertion of the rigorous
parallelism between 1) the rules for calculating with number (and operational)
signs and 2) the inauthenticconcepts involved in the construction of symbolic
number concepts,41 Husserl’s analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic fail to shed
any light on how the mechanistic technique at issue in such calculation is able
to achieve what nobody doubts it is able to achieve: arithmetical knowledge. 
In what follows we shall defend the thesis that Klein’s desedimentation
of the origin of algebra provides an account of its historical context that ex-
plains precisely why Husserl’s attempt to establish the logical origin of the
technique of calculating with symbols (the number and operational signs
composing signitively symbolic number formations) on the foundation of
authentic numbers and their operational relations not only failed but had to
fail. We shall argue that Klein demonstrates that fundamentally at issue in
the origin of algebra is a symbolically novel understanding of the concept of
number. He shows that this new concept decisively transforms the Greek
ἀριθμός-concept, understood as the direct reference to a definite amount of
definite objects. In line with this, we shall argue that Husserl’s analysis of the
authentic concept of cardinal number corresponds to the Greek concept of
ἀριθμός and that his analysis of signitively symbolic “numbers” corresponds
to the symbolic concept of number that is first made possible by the inven-
tion of algebra. In addition, we shall argue that Klein’s desedimentation of
the origin of algebra shows that it was self-consciously understood by its in-
ventors to be an “art” and not a theory. Finally, we shall argue that this un-
derstanding effectively obscures the theoretical presuppositions that make
possible the algebraic calculation with symbols, and that this obscurity is mir-
rored in Husserl’s failure to establish the logical foundation of arithmetical
calculation with symbols. 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
150
————————
41. See §§ 47–49 above.

On Klein’s view the historical context of the origin of algebra discloses
that rather than being the realization of the ancient Greek demand (which,
as we have seen in our preview of these matters, he traces back to Plato) for a
theoretical science of logistic (λογιστική) or calculation, the modern method
of calculating with symbols develops as a praxis. This context also discloses
that the originators of the “analytical art” (ars analytice) characteristic of al-
gebra understood it either as simply replacing Greek logistic or as the latter’s
perfection. In both cases, therefore, the ontological problems inseparable
from the ancient demand for a theoretical science of logistic cease to be a fac-
tor for the modern understanding of the algebraic method. Consequently,
for the most part,42 the innovators of symbolic calculation were completely
unaware of the conceptual presuppositions of their method. Because for
Klein these presuppositions involve the transformation of the ἀριθμός-con-
cept of ‘number’, and because the effect of this transformation is a new con-
ceptuality (Begrifflichkeit) that renders the Greek and modern number
concepts and therefore their respective concepts of ‘number’ incommensu-
rable, it is our thesis that the desedimentation of this incommensurability
provides the historical background for Husserl’s failed attempt to establish
systematically the origin of the symbolic concept of number43 on the foun-
dation of the authentic concept of number.44 At the theoretical level, Husserl’s
failure signifies his inability to establish the foundation for the logic of the
technique proper to signitively symbolic number calculation, which means
that the demonstration of our thesis will perforce establish the historical con-
tinuity of Husserl’s failure to ground such a logic with the unrealized Platonic
demand for a theoretical logistic.
§ 54. Klein’s Desedimentation of the Two Salient Features of
the Foundations of Greek Mathematics
As we have also seen in our preview of these issues (§ 36), Klein’s desedi-
mentation of the origin of algebra as Vieta’s invention of an “analytical art” be-
gins with a discussion of Neoplatonic mathematics. We suggested that this
indirect starting point follows from Klein’s thesis that, in order to distinguish
Desedimentation of Algebra and Grounding of Calculation
151
————————
42. Descartes is the notable exception. See the discussion below (§ 114) of the extent
to which, according to Klein, he attempted to work out the theoretical basis of the symbolic
concept of number.
43. The historical background of the symbolic concept of number/concept of symbolic
number is the modern concept that Klein desediments in his Greek Mathematical Thought and
the Origin of Algebra.
44. The historical background of which is the ἀριθμός-concept desedimented by Klein.

Vieta’s innovation from its Greek foundations, the latter need to be reacti-
vated in concert with the reactivation of their own presuppositions. For
Klein, what is central to these presuppositions is the meaning of ἀριθμός that
is presupposed in Diophantus’s Arithmetic, as well as in all of Greek mathe-
matics. Thus, because Vieta’s innovation represents both an assimilation and
transformation of the technique elaborated in Diophantus’s Arithmetic, Klein
begins with a consideration of the latter’s Neoplatonic background. We also
saw, however, that Klein contends that this background itself is informed by
the mathematical presuppositions of Plato’s philosophy. Specifically, it is in-
formed by Plato’s understanding of arithmetic and logistic and the theoretical
ἀριθμός-concept that is presupposed in his philosophical demands for theo-
ries of each. Thus, after his initial consideration of Neoplatonic mathematics,
Klein investigates its Platonic background, including also the Pythagorean
and Eleatic background of this background. Finally, Klein concludes his ac-
count of the presuppositions proper to the background of Diophantus’s
Arithmetic with an account of Aristotle’s critique of the theoretical mode of
being that Plato’s philosophy attributes to ἀριθμός.
Klein’s desedimentation of the foundations of Greek mathematics un-
covers two features that are distinct from the mathematical foundations of
Vieta’s Ars analytice. One is the ἀριθμός-concept of ‘number’, the definite items
of which are posited at the theoretical level as indivisible ones or units acces-
sible only to thought, that is, as “intelligible” monads. Klein’s recovery of this
understanding permits him to grasp Vieta’s transformation of the concept of
number as a concept that differs radically from the Greek concept. For Vieta,
the concept of number involves a sign that directly refers to “the general char-
acter of being an amount which belongs to every possible quantity” (GMTOA,
182/174), that is, to ‘definite amount in general’, a concept that therefore “only
mediately” refers to “the things or units that may be present in any particular
quantity.” On Klein’s view, at issue here is not a higher level of “abstractness”
in Vieta’s concept in comparison with the ἀριθμός-concept, as historians of
mathematics commonly assume, but rather a novel and therefore unprece-
dented difference in the conceptuality of the number concept itself. On the
basis of Vieta’s introduction of the term symbolum to designate the “stipula-
tions governing equations” (263–64 n. 226),45 Klein characterizes the new
number concept as “symbolic in nature” (183/176). 
The other distinguishing feature of Greek mathematics that Klein un-
covers concerns the difficulties presented to it by Plato’s demand for a the-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
152
————————
45. Klein’s note on symbolum appears only in the English translation of Greek Mathe-
matical Thought and the Origin of Algebra.

oretical logistic. These difficulties are rooted in Plato’s ontological presup-
position of the indivisible mode of being belonging to monads, which also
determines the theoretical understanding of ἀριθμός in Neoplatonic math-
ematics. These difficulties are rooted in the impossibility—so long as math-
ematics remains Platonic—of providing a theoretical foundation for “the
partitioning of the units themselves, although this is in most cases unavoid-
able in the course of an exact calculation” (51/44). Klein takes Aristotle’s
critique of the Platonic χωρισμός (separation) thesis, which postulates the
indivisible mode of being of monads, to prepare the way for a “type of theo-
retic logistic which can be built on Peripatetic foundations—the ‘arith-
metical’ textbook of Diophantus” (105/113). However, as this book’s title
suggests, Diophantus’s logistic is not unambiguously logistical. And, indeed,
for Klein the relationship, and the distinction itself, between arithmetic and
logistic in both Neoplatonic and Greek mathematics generally turns out to
be quite a complex affair. 
In order to develop our thesis that Klein’s desedimentation of the ori-
gin of algebra provides the historical background for the systematic failure
of Husserl’s attempt in Philosophy of Arithmetic to establish the foundation
of symbolic arithmetic in the authentic concept of number, we shall first
consider in detail Klein’s account of the relationship between arithmetic and
logistic in Neoplatonic mathematics. We shall do so because it is precisely the
desedimentation of their unstable relationship that Klein contends points to
certain obscurities in Plato’s account of their relationship, obscurities he then
traces back to Plato’s ontological presuppositions regarding the theoretical
mode of being of ἀριθμός. Consequently, our consideration of Klein’s ac-
count of the relationship between arithmetic and logistic will set the stage
for our discussion of his reactivation of the ἀριθμός-concept in both Greek
mathematics and Greek philosophy. This reactivation, as we have already
indicated and now want to stress, is absolutely crucial for his desedimenta-
tion of the presuppositions of Diophantus’s Arithmetic and thus also of
Vieta’s transformation of the logistical technique operative therein into the
modern method of algebraic analysis.
Desedimentation of Algebra and Grounding of Calculation
153

Chapter Fieen
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic
Mathematics and in Plato
§ 55. The Opposition between Logistic and Arithmetic in
Neoplatonic Thought
For Klein “Neoplatonic mathematics is governed by a fundamental distinc-
tion which is, indeed, inherent in Greek science in general, but is here most
strongly formulated” (23/10). This distinction is between “that which is in
no way subject to change, or to becoming and passing away” and that which
is subject to change. Thus, one branch of mathematics “contemplates that
which is always such as it is and which alone is capable of being known: for
that which is known in the act of knowing, being a communicable and teach-
able possession, must be something which is once and for all fixed.” Klein
notes that “whatever pertains to the questions: How large? How many?” be-
longs to “a certain territory” within the realm of being that has this character
of being, and thus is something that can be known. Consequently, “Insofar
as the objects of mathematics fulfill the conditions set by the Greeks for ob-
jects of knowledge, they are not objects of the senses (αἰσθητά)” (23–24/10),
which “are subject to change, or to becoming and passing away” (23/10),
“but only objects of thought (νοητά).” These “mathematical νοητάfall into
two classes,” namely: “(1) the ‘continuous’ magnitudes—lines, areas, solids;
(2) the ‘discrete’ amounts—two, three, four, etc.” As a result, two parts of the
noetic branch of mathematics are distinguished, which correspond to these
two classes: geometry and arithmetic. 
The other branch of mathematics “has for its object the treatment and
manipulation of αἰσθητά insofar as they are subject to determinations of size
or counting” (24/11). Geodetics (the art of measuring land and of measur-
ing in general), logistic (as the art of calculation), and also music (harmonics),
optics, and mechanics all belong to this branch. Astronomy, on the other
hand, “occupies a special position insofar as it is assigned now to geometry,

now to arithmetic.” Klein writes, “Like all of these distinctions, the opposi-
tion of a ‘pure’ science of definite amounts and a ‘practical’ art of calculation
goes back to Plato.” However, it is his thesis that “in Plato this opposition is
by no means fixed as unambiguously, either in terminology or, more impor-
tantly, in content, as it is for the Neoplatonists”—a fact, Klein notes, that
“has frequently been overlooked.”
Moreover, he points out that the chief Neoplatonic sources46 on both
the nature of and the relationship between arithmetic and logistic refer back
to certain passages in Plato, whose “precise interpretation . . . was, in fact,
the original concern prompting the Neoplatonic commentators” (29/16).
However, because these sources present inconsistent accounts of the exact
status of logistic’s relation to the objects of sense, Klein maintains that the
lack of clarity due to these inconsistencies must point to “certain difficulties
inherent in Plato’s own conceptions.” At the same time, these Neoplatonic
sources are in agreement “that logistic teaches how to proceed in order to
solve problems relating to one or more multitudes of countable objects. It
shows how to make definite the amount of such objects, i.e., how to ‘calcu-
late.’ In calculation the result alone, which varies as the given multitudes vary,
matters” (28/15). They are likewise in agreement that “the possibility of cal-
culation is grounded in certain unchangeable characteristics of the definite
amounts ‘themselves.’” Arithmetic deals with these by studying “their proper-
ties and kinds as they are in themselves, not as they may be read off the count-
able things.” Arithmetic is therefore “pure” and “does not ‘calculate’ with
definite amounts of definite objects.” Consequently, “Calculation with def-
i nite amounts of definite objects is nothing but the ‘application’ of the states
of affairs of ‘pure’ arithmetic; logistic is nothing but ‘applied’ arithmetic,
which serves, above all, practical ends.”
Klein holds, however, that despite the agreement among the Neopla-
tonic sources regarding the pure or theoretical nature of arithmetic and the
applied or practical nature of calculation, they are divided over the exact
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
155
————————
46. Klein’s discussion draws on the following sources: Proclus (400 AD) (who cites
Geminus [first century BC?] on the difference between arithmetic and logistic), “Proclus Di-
adochus,” In primum Euclidis elementorum librum commentarii, ed. Gottfried Friedlein
(Leipzig: Teubner, 1873) (henceforth cited as ‘Proclus’); an anonymous scholium to
Charmides 165 E (which is based largely on Geminus), in Platonis dialogi secundum Thrasylli
tetralogias dispositi, ed. Karl Friedrich Hermann (Leipzig: Teubner, 1884), VI: 290 (hence-
forth cited as ‘Hermann’ with volume and page numbers); Olympiodorus’s scholia to Plato’s
Gorgias, 450 D and 451 A–C, in “Olympiodori Philosophi Scholia in Platonis Gorgiam,” ed.
Albert Jahn, Neue Jahrbücher für Philologie und Pädagogik, Suppl. 14 (Leipzig: Teubner, 1848),
104–49, here 131–33; and an anonymous scholium to the previous passage in the Gorgias, in
Hermann, VI: 301. 

locus of the distinction between the realm of what is changeable and what
is unchangeable. From these accounts it is not clear precisely what the basis
is for the distinction between an unchangeable and therefore “pure” con-
stituent and a changeable and therefore applied constituent, respectively, of
the objects with which arithmetic and logistic deal (28/16). On the one
hand, the distinction is presented as being determined solely by the noetic
and sensible nature of the objects with which, again respectively, arithmetic
and logistic are concerned, a distinction that therefore provides the basis for
their differentiation. On the other hand, this distinction is presented as
being determined by a difference in the realm of the definite amounts them-
selves with which each deals, albeit in different ways. 
Thus, in some Neoplatonic accounts (those based on Geminus) the
objects of logistic are identified “with that realm of the objects of sense in
which the calculations take place,” while those of arithmetic are identified
“with a realm of pure definite amounts of definite objects.” However, in the
other accounts (Olympiodorus’s and the scholium to the Gorgias) the dis-
tinction between the changeable and unchangeable constituents that dis-
tinguish logistic from arithmetic seems to be transferred to “the distinction
between an unchangeable, i.e., noetic, and a changeable constituent” in “the
definite amounts themselves.” For Klein, this is reflected in what these ac-
counts refer to as the “‘material’ (ὕλη) of the definite amounts [that] is clearly
not attached to the objects of sense but is identical with the ‘how many’
which each definite amount designates.” While this material changes in ac-
cord with the definite amount designated as the result of a given calcula-
tion, the classifications of definite amounts and their pure relationships
remain unchangeable on this view. This preserves the difference between
the purity of arithmetic (which investigates these classifications and rela-
tionships) and its application in logistic. Thus, while both sets of the Neo-
platonic accounts identify—according to whether it is present or absent—
change as what distinguishes logistic from arithmetic, the second group of
Neoplatonic accounts attribute this changing aspect to the definite amounts
themselves, which occurs “quite independently of the fact that the objects of
calculation might be objects of sense.” Klein elaborates this as follows:
In the definite amount “six,” for instance, the multitude “six,” with its “how
many,” its ὕλη, must be distinguished from its εἶδος, namely the “even-times-
odd” (ἀρτιοπέριττον – since six is composed of the even factor two and the
odd factor three). Arithmetic treats of the eidos, logistic of the multitude of
“hyletic” monads. (28–29/16)
On Klein’s view, however, the accounts of logistic that identify its changing
constituent with the ὕλη of ἀριθμοί leave unresolved the following question:
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
156

“What, now, is the relation of this conception of the objects of logistic to
their inclusion within the realm of αἰσθητά”? (29/16). Unresolved, then—
and not just in this account but in all the Neoplatonic accounts—is the ques-
tion of whether “the multitude which is designated by any definite amount
after all always [has] to be referred to the objects of sense.” To address these
questions, Klein’s desedimentation of the presuppositions that form the
Neoplatonic background of Diophantus’s Arithmetic next investigates the
problematic status of logistic and arithmetic in Plato, which, as we have seen,
Klein identifies as “the deeper reason for this lack of clarity” in the Neopla-
tonic accounts. 
§ 56. Logistic and Arithmetic in Plato
Klein maintains the key Platonic texts47 that define arithmetic and logistic
do not support the usual interpretation, which maintains (on the basis of
the Neoplatonic sources discussed above) that they “affirm a direct opposi-
tion of arithmetic as a theoretical discipline to logistic as the practical art of
calculation” (30/18). Moreover, he holds that the meaning of these texts’
definitions of arithmetic and logistic is “independent of the practical or the-
oretical character of the two disciplines” (35/24). Finally, although “Both are
concerned with ‘definite amounts’ and ‘definite amount’ in general, with
the ἀριθμός” (33/21), he finds it significant that ἀριθμός does not occur in
either definition. Among other things, this rules out arithmetic’s being for
Plato “first and foremost” (31/19) “‘number theory.’”
Thus, “Socrates says that if he were asked ‘with what’ (περὶ τί) arith-
metic deals, he would answer: ‘it belongs to that knowledge which deals with
the even and the odd, with reference to how much either happens to be’”
(29/17; Gorgias 451 A–B). Regarding logistic, he says that “It deals with the
same thing, namely the even and the uneven; but logistic differs {from arith-
metic} in so far as it studies the even and the odd with respect to the multi-
tude which they {the single even and odd} make both with themselves and
with each other” (451 B–C). On Klein’s view, the consistency of the accounts
of arithmetic and logistic in the relevant Platonic texts rules out the possi-
bility that their “strangely involved” definitions, in which “the word ἀριθμός
is carefully avoided,” are “‘accidental’” (GMTOA, 29/17).
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
157
————————
47. The classical definitions of arithmetic are found in Gorgias 451 A–B and 453 E
and in Theaetetus 198 A. The classical deﬁnitions of logistic are found in Gorgias 451 B–C
and in Charmindes 165 E–166 B.

Klein’s interpretation of Socrates’ definitions considers first of all “the
context, which determines the manner of posing questions and the mode of
conversation in Platonic dialogues, and which Neoplatonic systematizing
tends to obscure only too easily” (30/18). Rather than concern “two spheres
of knowledge which belong to different levels,” that is, the “practical” and the
“theoretical,” Klein maintains that, for Plato, “the opposition of arithmetic
and logistic . . . concerns a knowing which we first acquire in our intercourse
with objects of daily life and in which we can thereafter arrive at a certain ex-
pertise.” For Klein, this knowing is characterized first of all as a “purely ‘prac-
tical’ knowing, which we must acquire and use with a view to the necessities
of life” (33/21). This practical knowing, in turn, presents an “art” with two
aspects. One involves rendering determinate the exact amount of the defi-
nite multitudes of things with which we have to do, that is, the art of correct
counting. The ability to count things “presupposes a certain familiarity with
definite amounts in general, especially in the case of larger multitudes.” The
“art of definite amounts” (30/18) or arithmetic therefore involves the capac-
ity to “know and distinguish the single definite amounts,” that is, to “‘distin-
guish the one and the two and the three’” (Republic VII, 522 C). The other
aspect of this art is that of “multiplying or dividing these multitudes”
(GMTOA, 30–31/18), which by approaching “the definite amount enumer-
ated of some given things” (31/18) “with other ‘definite amounts,’” signals
that “we are not satisfied” with the initial amount in question. This is the case
“whether we wish to separate off a ‘third’ part of the respective multitude or
wish to produce a multitude which amounts to ‘four’ times the given one”
(31/19). To “impose on multitudes . . . such multiplications and divisions, or,
more generally, in all calculations . . . we must know beforehand how the dif-
ferent definite amounts are related to one another and how they are constituted
in themselves.” The “‘art of calculation’ – ‘logistic’” therefore “concerns the be-
havior of definite amounts toward one another, i.e., their mutual relations, . . .
which first enables us to relate definite amounts, i.e., to calculate with them.” 
Klein finds support for this view of arithmetic and calculation as as-
pects of a single practical knowing in the fact that “in Plato’s language ‘count-
ing’ and ‘calculating’ frequently occur together: Republic VII, 522 E:
λογίζεσθαί τε καὶ ἀριθμεῖν; 525 A: λογιστική τε καὶ αριθμητική; 522 C: ἀριθμόν
τε καὶ λογισμόν, which is here intended as a summary of the realm to which
the ability to distinguish ‘one’ and ‘two’ and ‘three’ . . . pertains” (GMTOA,
32/20–21). Moreover, “In the Laws (817 E), ‘calculations’ (λογισμοί) and
‘what concerns definite amounts’ (τὰ περὶ ἀριθμούς) prove to be expressly des-
ignated as ‘one learning matter’ (ἕν μάθημα)” (GMTOA, 32/21). For Klein,
then, “from the kind of knowing which is conveyed in ‘arithmetic’ and ‘lo-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
158

gistic’ we may infer the fact of their difference as well as that of their unity”
(33/21). On the one hand, both arithmetic and logistic are rooted in the art
of correct counting, of which Klein reports “Plato says explicitly in the
Theaetetus (198 A–B): ‘through this art, I think, one is oneself master of the
sciences of definite amounts [ἐπιστήμας τῶν ἀριθμῶν] and is able as a teacher
to pass them on to another’” (GMTOA, 31/19). Thus, their “unity ultimately
has its roots in the object of which both treat . . . ‘definite amounts of definite
objects’ and . . . ‘definite amounts’ in general” (33/21). On the other hand,
their difference has its basis in the fact that logistic, as the art of calculation,
involves “‘operating’ with definite amounts, i.e., [it is] an art teaching the pro-
cedures to be applied in multiplication, division, taking of roots, and in the
solution of verbal problems” (31/19). 
According to Klein, however, because both arithmetic and logistic
have their source in arts that represent two aspects of one learning matter,
and because the latter is rooted in counting, “it follows that ‘arithmetical’
and ‘logistical’ knowing are hard to distinguish on this primary level”
(32/20). (We shall see shortly that for Klein they are difficult to distinguish
at the theoretical level as well.) Thus, “All meaningful operations” (31/19),
that is, calculation, including “certain ‘mechanical’ rules of reckoning” ap-
plied to “definite amounts presuppose knowing about the relations which
connect the single definite amounts”—that is, they presuppose knowing the
art of correct counting. Likewise, “the simplest relation between the parts of
a multitude and the multitude itself (as their sum) is given as soon as they
are counted or added up, i.e., by a counting process which extends over all
members of all partial multitudes” (32/20). Consequently, the art of logis-
tic is inseparable from counting, just as the art of arithmetic is inseparable
from the relating of definite amounts. Klein elaborates on this state of affairs
as follows:
Addition and also subtraction are only an extension of counting. Further-
more, all the remaining relations between definite amounts, on which the
complicated operations of reckoning are based, may also, in the last analysis,
be reduced to that ordering of definite amounts which is ascertained by
counting. On the other hand, counting itself already presupposes a continual
relating and distinguishing of the counted things as well as of their definite
amounts.
Notwithstanding this close connection between arithmetic and logistic,
Klein maintains that for Plato 
the fundamental significance of counting necessitates the emphasis on and
the relative isolation of ἀριθημητική as such. For Plato, that ability proper to
man, to be able to count—an ability to which corresponds the countableness
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
159

of things in the world—is a fact fundamental beyond all special problems,
a fact which determines the systematic aspect of his teaching. (32/21)48
Now for Klein “the significance of the fact that in the definitions [of
arithmetic and logistic in the Gorgias and the Charmides] the ‘even’ and the
‘odd’ are mentioned, but not the definite amount” (33/21) is explained by the
fact that “a ‘scientific’ definition properly so-called is here applied” (35/24)
to each art and thus “to a subject which ordinarily serves only practical pur-
poses.” Hence, it is “in response to this” (33/21), that is, “the case that an at-
tempt is here being made to bring to bear an alien technique of definition on
perfectly familiar facts in order to formulate them more precisely,” that ex-
plains why, according to Klein, for Plato “the ‘odd’ and the ‘even’ are regarded
as characteristic of arithmetic and logistic.” And this means for Klein that the
matter at issue here can only be elucidated “through an analysis of ἀριθμός.”
However, before pursuing such an analysis, in which the significance of the
‘even’ and the ‘odd’—as the εἴδη of the Greek ἀριθμός-concept—is reactivated
by Klein, he first considers “Plato’s remarks which bear on the development
of ‘arithmetical’ and ‘logistical’ knowledge.” That is, he considers the distinc-
tion Plato draws between practical and theoretical counterparts of each.
According to Klein, “in the Republic and the Philebus Plato contrasts
‘practical’ arithmetic and ‘practical’ logistic with their ‘theoretical’ counter-
parts” (33/22). Once the “practical aims” (33/21) that characterize the
“purely ‘practical’ knowing” of arithmetic and logistic are “abandoned,” Klein
writes that, for Plato, “these studies acquire an altogether different standing”
(32/21–22), one in which “attention is freed to turn to certain peculiarities
of that knowing which is now raised to authentic knowing, to ἐπιστήμη”
(32/22). When the practical implications of both arithmetic and logistic are
set aside and their “presuppositions are pursued for their own sake” (34/23)
by their theoretical counterparts, what distinguishes the former from the lat-
ter “is the kind of multitude with which each deals.” Practical arithmetic and
practical logistic are both “concerned with multitudes of ‘unequal’ objects—
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
160
————————
48. See Husserl’s account of the fundamental importance of ‘collective combination’
(which, as we have seen, arises in his analyses on the basis of counting) for cognition per se in
Philosophy of Arithmetic. In this connection he writes: “Collective combination plays a highly
significant role in our mental life as a whole. Every complex phenomenon which presupposes
parts that are separately and specifically noticed, every higher mental and emotional activity, re-
quires, in order to be able to arise at all, collective combinations of partial phenomena. There
could never even be a presentation of one of the more simple relations (e.g., identity, similarity,
etc.) if a unitary interest and, simultaneously, an act of noticing did not throw the terms of the
relation into relief together and unifiedly grasp them. This psychic relation is, thus, an indis-
pensable psychological precondition of every relation and combination whatsoever” (PA, 75).

and obviously all objects of sense are such.” That is, they are concerned with
“‘units [μονάδας] which are in some way unequal, such as two armed camps,
two head of cattle and two of the smallest or two of the largest of all things’”
(32–33/22; Philebus 56 D). The theoretical counterparts of these practical
disciplines, however, are concerned “with multitudes of wholly homogeneous
units, namely precisely those which cannot occur in the realm of objects of
sense” (GMTOA, 34/22–23). These latter can be pursued only insofar as the
bond with the senses that characterizes practical arithmetic and logistic is re-
linquished, which permits there to be “‘posited a unit such that not one sin-
gle unit of those in a myriad differed from any other’” (34/22; Philebus 56 E).
Thus, in place of the concern with definite amounts of definite objects that
“‘have visible or tangible bodies’” (GMTOA, 35/23), theoretical arithmetic
and logistic treat definite amounts of definite objects that “‘admit only of
being thought’” (35/24; Republic 526 A). This quality “has its basis in the
‘purity’ of the units, of which ‘each and every one is identical and not in the
least different and has no parts within itself.’”
On Klein’s view, when the definitions of arithmetic and logistic pro-
vided in the Gorgias and the Charmides are considered in conjunction with
Plato’s remarks on the difference between their practical and theoretical char-
acteristics, it is apparent that “their meaning, although independent of the
practical or theoretical character of the two disciplines, can be understood
only from the theoretical side” (GMTOA, 35/24). It is this fact that explains
for Klein their “strangely elaborate formulation.” Theoretical logistic, then,
would raise “to an explicit knowledge that knowledge of relations among def-
inite amounts of definite objects which, albeit implicitly, precedes, and in-
deed must precede, all calculation” (34/23). However, because Plato’s remarks
calling for a theoretical logistic do not explicitly state exactly what is entailed
in the theoretical counterpart to practical logistic, Klein has to “try to imag-
ine what may have been Plato’s notion of theoretical logistic” (35/24). It is
thus his “conjecture” (44/36) that in the first place “theoretical logistic ought
to encompass the knowing about all those relations, i.e., ratios (λόγοι) among
‘pure’ units, on which the success of any calculation depends” (35–36/24). By
contrast, theoretical arithmetic “would be reserved for the knowing about
these ‘pure’ definite amounts themselves.” 
In order to corroborate his conjecture about theoretical logistic, es-
pecially in its relation and contrast with theoretical arithmetic, Klein turns
to “the later mathematical textbooks of the Neoplatonists and the Neo-
phythagoreans” (36/24–25). For “in these textbooks scientific material
going back to Platonic and pre-Platonic times was undoubtedly absorbed”
(36/25), even if “its arrangement, its nomenclature, and the general man-
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
161

ner of presentation may well have undergone great changes.” Thus, we will
now turn to Klein’s account of the role of the theory of proportions in rep-
resentative texts of Nicomachus, Theon, and Domninus.
§ 57. Tensions and Issues Surrounding the Role of the Theor y
of Proportions in Nicomachus, Theon, and Domninus
Klein’s account of the mathematical textbooks of Nicomachus (first century
AD), Theon of Smyrna (also first century AD), and Domninus (fifth century
AD) uncovers “a conspicuous relationship between the traditional theory of
relations [in their texts] and the logistic of which Plato speaks” (44/35). Not
only is “the connection between the ‘material’ of definite amounts of defi-
nite objects and the realm of αἰσθητά . . . still unanswered” in these texts
(44/35–36), but likewise unanswered is “the real point of the distinction”
(44/36) between their εἶδος and the ὕλη, which “is directly connected with
the former” distinction. That is, the distinction at issue in the difference be-
tween the εἶδος and ὕλη of ἀριθμοί directly hinges, for Klein, on the answer to
the question of the status of the connection between the ὕλη of these ἀριθμοί
and the realm of sensible things. He therefore sees the unresolved relationship
between the ὕλη of ἀριθμοί and the realm of αἰσθητάas something that “ulti-
mately refer[s] back to the old Platonic oppositions of ‘theoretical’ to ‘prac-
tical’ studies” and to “the difficulties inherent in the whole conception of
theoretical logistic” (45/36).
Klein finds that in Nicomachus49 and Theon there is “a certain tension
between the factical extension of arithmetical knowledge and the conception
of arithmetic as a science which should be confined to the study of definite
amounts taken by themselves and not in relation to one another” (39/30). In
Nicomachus, this is manifest in the fact that a large portion of his book on
arithmetic treats the part of quantity (τὸ ποσόν) conceived of “‘as having some
sort of relation to another [πρὸς ἄλλο] and capable of being thought of only in
its relations to another [πρὸς ἕτερον]’” (36/26; Nicomachus, I, 3 – Hoche, 5,
13 ff.), despite the fact that he explicitly assigns arithmetic (and therefore,
the ostensible subject of his book) to the study of the part of quantity that is
conceived of “‘by itself [καθ᾿ αὑτό], namely that which has no other relation
to another [πρὸς ἕτερον].’” Likewise, in Theon50 this tension is expressed in
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
162
————————
49. Nicomachus of Gerasa, Introductionis arithmeticae libri II, ed. Richard Hoche
(Leipzig: Teubner, 1866); henceforth cited as ‘Nicomachus’.
50. Theon of Smyrna, Expositio rerum mathematicarum ad legendum Platonem utli-
ium, ed. Eduard Hiller (Leipzig: Teubner, 1878); henceforth cited as ‘Theon’.

the “incoherence” (GMTOA, 39/31) of his presentation of the subject mat-
ter and relation between proportions in “‘arithmetical music [ἡ ἐν ἀριθμοῖς
μουσική]’”51 (38/28) and in “arithmetic as such” (38/29), an incoherence that
emerges despite the fact that unlike Nicomachus, he “is more consistent in-
sofar as he is careful to keep the realms [i.e., καθ᾿ αὑτόand πρὸς ἄλλο] of the
ποσόν strictly separate” (38/28).
According to Klein the realm of the πρὸς ἄλλο in Nicomachus’s text is,
on the one hand, determined on the basis of “the traditional ‘Pythagorean’ di-
vision of the mathematical sciences into arithmetic, geometry, music, and as-
tronomy” (36/26). As a result, for Nicomachus the study of quantity πρὸς
ἄλλο concerns music and natural science, subjects that are related to the realm
of αἰσθητά. On the other hand, its study for him also involves the investiga-
tion of 1) arithmetical ratios and 2) the theory of proportions52 and means.
While arithmetical ratios have “their most immediate application in the field
of music” (37/27), it is also important to note “that they belong to the theo-
retical foundation of all calculations.” Moreover, Nicomachus stresses that
proportions and means are useful “for natural science (by which the cosmol-
ogy of the Platonic Timaeus is meant); for music, astronomy, geometry, and
last but not least, for understanding the work of the ancients” (37/28). How-
ever, despite Nicomachus’s separation of arithmetic (as the study of quantity
καθ᾿ αὑτο) from the study of the realm of the πρὸς ἄλλο, “the study of pro-
portions and means, which belongs to the realm of the πρός τι [that which is
in relation to something], forms the conclusion of ” his “‘Introduction to
Arithmetic’ (cf. [Nicomachus,] 199, 19–120, 2 and also 64, 21 ff.)” (GMTOA,
38/28). 
Klein reports that Theon begins by making a distinction between “‘the
theory of mere definite amounts (ἡ περὶ ψίλους ἀριθμοὺς θεωρία) . . . , i.e., arith-
metic, and ‘arithmetical music’ (ἡ ἐν ἀριθμοῖς μουσική) (Theon, 17, 12 f.)”
(GMTOA, 38/28). Klein maintains that this distinction is “in theory iden-
tical” to Nicomachus’s distinction between, respectively, καθ᾿ αὑτόand πρὸς
ἄλλο. However, in his discussion of the realm of the musical part of arith-
metic, its study of ratios (λόγοι), proportions (ἀναλογίαι), and means (μεσότη -
τες) “is closely connected with the presentation of the theory of musical
intervals, but at the same time also clearly contrasted with it” (38/29). Thus,
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
163
————————
51. As we shall soon see below, this corresponds to what Nicomachus designates as the
study of πρὸς ἄλλο.
52. Knorr provides the following account of ‘ratio’ and ‘proportion’ in Greek mathe-
matics: “A ‘ratio’ (λόγος) is a comparison of homogeneous quantities (i.e., numbers or magni-
tudes) in respect of size. A ‘proportion’ (ἀναλογία) is an equality [sic] of two ratios” (Knorr, 15).
What Knorr terms ‘equality’, Klein terms ‘sameness’. 

the theory of “arithmetical music” is “divided into two parts . . . : the first is
concerned with the ‘harmony perceptible by sense and made by instruments’
(ἡ ἐν ὀργάνοις αἰσθητὴ ἁρμονία) (Theon, 46 f.), the second, which really first
provides the theoretical foundation of the first, with ‘the harmony appre-
hended by thought and made by definite amounts’ (ἡ ἐν ἀριθμοῖς νοητὴ
ἁρμονία).” Finally, “proportions treated by arithmetic as such are, in turn, dis-
tinguished from the proportions of ‘arithmetical’ harmonics, because the lat-
ter are only special cases of the former.” The former concern “the different
kinds of definite amounts taken by themselves, that is, of the even and the odd
together with their subspecies” (38/28–29), the “arithmetical” treatment (in
accord with the καθ᾿ αὑτό) of which nevertheless involves “some incidental
reference to the relations between the single definite amounts and between
their kinds” (38/29). Klein notes that Theon—“‘according to the arithmeti-
cal tradition (κατὰ τὴν ἀριθμητικὴν παράδοσιν)’ (Theon, 76, 1 ff.)”—makes
this distinction between the proportions whose harmony is apprehended
noetically and comprised of definite amounts and those that, apprehended
purely arithmetically, provide the basis, as it were, for this arithmetic harmony
without themselves presenting a ἁρμονία. 
Yet despite the distinctions Theon draws between the theory of pro-
portions treated by, respectively, “arithmetic as such,” “the harmony appre-
hended by thought and made by definite amounts,” and the “harmony
perceptible by sense and made by instruments,” Klein finds that he “‘yokes
together’ (συνέξευκται) ‘arithmetical music’ (Theon, 16 f.)” (GMTOA,
38/30)—the kind “made of definite amounts and grasped by thought”—
“and arithmetic.” Theon does this “basing himself on Plato, Republic VII, 530
D–531 C, but also ‘for the sake of the convenience of our study.’” Moreover,
“far from neglecting the theory of ‘aisthetic’ harmony . . . he himself observes
. . . ‘noetic harmony is more easily understood {starting} from sensible har-
mony’” (GMTOA, 38–39/30; Theon, 47, 5–6), even though “arithmetical
harmonics is . . . entirely eclipsed by the purely arithmetical theory of rela-
tions” (GMTOA, 40/31). 
Now for Klein, owing to “the rigor of Greek scientific methodology,
we cannot ascribe all these inconsistencies simply to the inadequacies of
Theon or Nicomachus.” Rather, he explains the inconsistencies as stemming
from the influence of two incompatible traditions. On the one hand, there
is the Pythagorean tradition whose “theory of proportions owes its first for-
mulation” to the “investigation of musical intervals,” which they follow in as-
signing this theory to musical theory. This explains for Klein the inconsistency
manifest in Nicomachus’s devoting a large part of his Introductio Arithmetica
to the realm of quantity (τὸ ποσόν), which is “capable of being thought only
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
164

in its relations to another,” that is, to the realm of πρὸς ἄλλο, despite his ini-
tial systematic separation of the study proper to this part of quantity from
the part studied by itself (καθ᾿ αὑτό). On the other hand, “there is the in-
fluence of another, classical tradition which goes back to Euclid and Aris-
toxenus,” within which “the theory of proportions, insofar as it is concerned
only with the relation between definite amounts, has . . . no separate exis-
tence,” in the sense of presenting a theory of relations that is able to demar-
cate arithmetic and therefore pure relations from all relations in harmonic
proportions. Consequently, in this tradition the theory of arithmetically
pure proportions “cannot be naturally isolated from the arithmetical theory
of proportions”—that is, from arithmetical harmonics—“whose very foun-
dation it provides,” and it is therefore not “passed on” according to any kind
of systematic distinction but “according to the arithmetical tradition.” Klein’s
point here is that the classical tradition does not address the distinction be-
tween the proportions characteristic of the arithmetical theory of propor-
tions (which, purportedly in accord with pure arithmetic, treats proportions
exclusively in terms of the relations between definite amounts) and the pro-
portions involved in the study of arithmetical music (which purportedly
treats the relations that compose the noetic harmony of definite amounts
considered by themselves). Therefore, although the tradition, and thus
Theon, maintain that both kinds of proportion are distinct from the pro-
portions that originate in the harmonies whose source is the realm of
αἰσθητά, the nature of the distinction between proportions that are rooted
in definite amounts themselves and those composed of the harmonious re-
lations among definite amounts is nowhere explained. That is, what remains
unaccounted for is the noetic distinction between proportions that are arith-
metically “pure,” because they do not have a basis in the noetically appre-
hended harmonies composed of the relations between definite amounts,
and those that are yielded solely by such definite amounts themselves, which,
as such, are held to provide the foundation for the proportions that com-
pose noetic harmony. 
According to Klein, “Domninus53 is successful in avoiding all the in-
consistencies arising from the Neoplatonic attempts at systemization [con-
sidered so far] by assigning the study of both the kinds of definite amounts
and their relations to arithmetic from the very beginning” (43/34). As a re-
sult, “we do indeed have here, as in Euclid . . . one single subject matter (cf.
the expression ‘one learning matter’ – ἓν μάθημα – in Plato, Laws 817 E),
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
165
————————
53. Domninus of Larissa, “[Introductory Manual of Arithmetic],” in Jean François
Boissonade, ed., Anecdota Graeca (Paris, 1832), IV: 413–29; henceforth cited as ‘Domninus’.

which can be ordered from two main points of view, namely according to the
distinction between καθ᾿ αὐτόand πρὸς ἄλλο.” Domninus accomplishes this
by introducing two sets of distinctions, “in conscious contrast to Nico-
machus and Theon” (41/32). One set concerns Theon’s distinction between
καθ᾿ αὑτόand πρὸς ἄλλο, while the other set concerns the distinction “‘ac-
cording to kind’ (κατ᾿ εἶδος) and ‘according to multitude’ (κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος).”
The latter distinction, which is found in Olympiodorus and the Gorgias
scholium, involves studying, on the one hand, any ἀριθμός “‘with a view to
the kind to which it belongs when taken by itself, either the even or the odd,’
the even-times-odd or the odd-times-even, etc. (Domninus, 416, 10 ff.).”
On the other hand, it involves the study of any ἀριθμός “‘with a view to the
underlying multitude of units in it’ . . . and in this way also it can be ‘studied
by itself.’” Thus, Domninus understands this multitude to be “‘that which
underlies and is, as it were, the material [ὕλη] of definite amounts.’” 
Once “the definite amounts have been studied by themselves accord-
ing to both their εἶδος and their ὔλη, ‘it is necessary to investigate their asso-
ciation with one another’ (Domninus, 416, 21 ff.)” (GMTOA, 41/33). The
latter involves making two types of distinction. One type concerns distin-
guishing according to kind (κατ᾿εἶδος) definite amounts that “are prime to
one another and definite amounts which have a common measure.” The
other type involves making distinctions according to material (ὕλη), that is,
“‘according to the multitude of units in them’ (Domninus, 417, 10–12).”
At issue here for Klein is determining either that they are “equal, that is to
say, they contain the same multitude of units,” or that they are related by
certain relations involved in counting, which according to “Domninus’ own
innovation” (GMTOA, 44/33) involve ten relations (δέκα σχέσις). More-
over, “it is possible to study definite amounts ‘by themselves and in relations
to one another at the same time’ (Domninus, 417–422).” For example, “Two
definite amounts are either prime in themselves and to one another, or com-
posite in themselves but prime to one another, etc.” (422). Finally, the “the-
ory of proportions and means represents then a more comprehensive study
of their mutual relations according to their material, a study ‘concerned with
the multitude underlying them’” (423, 11) that is “more comprehensive in-
sofar as in proportions always more than two definite amounts are related to
one another” (423–25).
Thus, by assigning to arithmetic from the start the study of both the
kinds of definite amounts and their relations, Klein maintains, Domninus
is able to avoid the systematic inconsistencies of Nicomachus and Theon. In-
deed, “Domninus’ second and related set of distinctions affords a better un-
derstanding of Olympiodorus and the scholiast of the Gorgias” (GMTOA,
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
166

43/34), both of whom “connect Platonic ‘logistic’ with the ‘material’ of def-
inite amounts.” For Klein, the same reasons54 that 
prevent Nicomachus and Theon from identifying the “pure” theory of pro-
portions with theoretical logistic lead both Olympiodorus and the Georgias
scholiast to take it for granted that logistic is to be understood only as a prac-
tical art of calculation (i.e., as a set of instructions for the computation of the
multitudes in question), yet both understand these quantities, independently
of whether they are objects of sense or “pure” units, as the “material” of def-
inite amounts. For only this material can in Domninus’ sense be subject to
those relations which make calculation possible to begin with. (43/34–35)
Klein asserts, then, that Domninus’s distinction between κατ᾿ εἶδος and κατὰ
τὸ πλῆθος “coincides, on the whole, with that of καθ᾿ αὑτόand πρὸς ἄλλο as
far as their area of application is concerned” (43/35). This is the case because
in opposition to “the traditional theory of the kinds of definite amounts,
which corresponds to the study ‘καθ᾿ αὑτόand κατ᾿ εἶδος,’ the introduction
of the theory of decadic counting as a study ‘καθ’ αὑτο and κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος’
clearly represents Domninus’ own innovation.” This innovation treats rela-
tionships between the multitudes that emerge in counting as belonging to
definite amounts themselves, and thus allows for both 1) the extension of the
systematic designation of “definite amounts in themselves” to include their
multitudes and 2) the differentiation to be made between these multitudes
and the systematic designation of definite amounts having a relation to an-
other. That is to say, Domninus considers the relations of definite amounts
involved in counting to be distinct from the relations between definite
amounts that compose proportions. The innovation responsible for this dis-
tinction, on Klein’s view, can only be understood as having its source in
Domninus’s interest in “systematizing,” as his reference to “the λογικήor
λογιστικὴθεωρία shows” (43/35). By contrast, Klein finds that “the subject
matter of the study of πρὸς ἄλλο and κατ’ εἶδος, namely the definite amounts
which are or are not prime to one another, is very negligible in comparison
with the subject matter of the study ‘πρὸς ἄλλο and κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος,’ which
contains all of the traditional theory of relations as well as that of propor-
tions and means.” Finally, notwithstanding Domninus’s attempt at system-
ization, for the most part “actually only the theory proportions is subject to
the approach πρὸς ἄλλο and at the same time to κατὰ τὸ πλῆθος.”
Logistic and Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
167
————————
54. These reasons involve the impossibility of partitioning the intelligible units that
Platonic mathematics posits as the material proper to the theoretical ἀριθμός-concept, even
though such partitioning is something that cannot be avoided in exact calculation. Thus, the
pure theory of proportions is displaced from logistic because the latter cannot be given a the-
oretical foundation so long as the units of its ὔλη are posited as indivisible (as demanded by
the Platonic thesis). See § 56 above and § 59 below.

Klein compares this last state of affairs with Olympiodorus’s and the
Gorgias scholiast’s view that “arithmetic treats of the kinds, while logistic con-
siders the material of definite amounts”; and it is here that he locates “a con-
spicuous relationship between the traditional theory of relations [represented
in the texts of the late Neoplatonists and Pythagoreans] and the logistic of
which Plato speaks.” This relationship points to the situation that “the ques-
tion concerning the connection between the ‘material of definite amounts
and the realm of the αἰσθητά. . . still remains unanswered,” as does the related
question of “what might be the real point of the distinction κατ᾿ εἶδος – κατὰ
τὸ πλῆθος.” Indeed, for Klein this distinction “ultimately refers back to the
old Platonic opposition of ‘theoretical’ to ‘practical’ studies” (44/36), a dis-
tinction that has no basis in Plato since the relevant texts, as we have seen,
speak of practical and theoretical variants of both arithmetic and logistic.
Notwithstanding Klein’s “conjecture” that Plato understood theoretical lo-
gistic as “primarily the study of the relations of definite amounts,” the fact
that “for Plato, too, logistic is originally related to the possibility of calculat-
ing” leads Klein to consider whether “in analogy to geometrical usage, it may
have contained, besides its own ‘theorems,’ ‘problems’ and ‘porisms’55 . . . in-
tended to determine special relations between definite amounts serving as
the counterparts in the realm of ‘pure’ units of the computational problems
proper to practical logistic.” This leads Klein to a consideration of theoreti-
cal logistic and the problem of fractions, a problem that, as we indicated
above, has its basis in the ontological presuppositions of Plato’s philosophy
that inform his theoretical concept of ἀριθμός. It is to these problems that we
now turn.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
168
————————
55. According to Sir Thomas Heath, “the only source of information about the nature
and contents of Porisms is Pappus” (A History of Greek Mathematics, 2 vols. [New York: Dover,
1981], I: 431). He goes on to quote Pappus’s Treasury of Analysis on the difference between a
theorem, problem, and porism: “‘For they [the ancients] said that a theorem is that which is
proposed with a view to the demonstration of the thing proposed, a problem that which is
thrown out with a view to the construction of the very thing proposed, and a porism that
which is proposed with a view to the producing of the very thing proposed’” (431). Regard-
ing the distinction between ‘constructing’ and ‘producing’, Klein reports that “in Plato’s time
a debate arose over the question whether ‘problems,’ since they deal with the ‘construction’ of
definite figures and the ‘computation’ of specific definite amounts, in short with the genesis of
mathematical structures, can indeed belong to the realm of those sciences which are turned to-
ward what always is (cf. Plato, Republic 527 A f.). To be exact, they should be called ‘porisms’”
(GMTOA, 50/231–32 n. 46).

Chapter Sixteen
eoretical Logistic and 
the Problem of Fractions
§ 58. The Ambig uous Relationship between Logistic and
Arithmetic in Neoplatonic Mathematics and in Plato
Thus far Klein’s desedimentation of the Neoplatonic background of Dio-
phantus’s Arithmetic has disclosed in the Neoplatonic texts an attempt to
maintain a systematic distinction between arithmetic, understood as the
pure theory of definite amounts in themselves, and the theory of propor-
tions, understood as the theory of the relations that definite amounts have
to one another. That is, he has disclosed their attempt to maintain a theo-
retical distinction between the treatment of ἀριθμοίκαθ᾿ αὑτόand that of
πρὸς ἄλλο. Moreover, he has shown that this attempt is beset by obscurities
and inconsistencies that are rooted in an arithmetical theory that is sedi-
mented in their text, which has its source in Plato and has been passed on ac-
cording to tradition. This theory aims to investigate the pure relations
proper to definite amounts, an investigation that is “intended to stand beside
the theory of definite amounts as such, i.e., of their different kinds” (47/39). 
Klein also contends that the Neoplatonic texts lack clarity on the pre-
cise nature of the underlying material (ὔλη) of ἀριθμοί, insofar as the chang-
ing status of this material is held to be responsible for the distinction
between 1) the treatment of definite amounts both in themselves and ac-
cording to their kind (κατ᾿ εἶδος) and 2) their treatment in relation to one
another. Their accounts vacillate between locating this changing constituent,
on the one hand, in the realm of αἰσθητά, and, on the other hand, in the pure
ὔλη of the multitude (πλῆθος) proper to the ἀριθμοίthemselves. Klein shows
that this lack of clarity about the nature of the material of ἀριθμοίis the
source of the inconsistency of the Neoplatonic attempts to determine the
precise status of λογιστική. Thus, on the one hand, they want to assign
λογιστική—in accord with their systematizing inclinations—to the pure the-

ory of proportions, while, on the other hand, as a consequence of their vac-
illation regarding whether the realm proper to the πρὸς ἄλλο is constituted
noetically or aisthetically, they sometimes opt for the latter and characterize
it as the practical application of pure arithmetic.
The question for Klein, then, is as follows:
What prevents later writers from interpreting the arithmetical theory of re-
lations, i.e., proportions, as the theoretical logistic? Or, in other words: How
did it happen that the Platonic double distinction between theoretical and
practical arithmetic, on the one hand, and theoretical and practical logistic,
on the other, was reduced to the single distinction between theoretical arith-
metic and practical logistic? (45/37)
According to Klein, “Plato’s special demand for a theoretical logistic corre-
sponds to the understanding that within the unified framework of the purely
noetic sciences56 there should also be a science addressed to the pure rela-
tions of definite amounts as such, which would correspond to the common
art of calculation and provide its foundation” (46/38). Such a science, which
is useful in “‘the search for the noble and the good’ [Republic 531 C], in-
quires into the presuppositions of common calculation and also of harmony,
and ignores the manner in which these sciences might be pursued in other
contexts.” Klein holds, however, that such a division in these subject mat-
ters is difficult to maintain, “even if this demand is taken seriously within
the sciences.” Not only, as we have seen, do the Neoplatonic mathematicians
encounter difficulties in maintaining the distinction between arithmetic and
logistic at both the practical (§ 57) and theoretical (§§ 55, 58) levels, but “A
further indication of these difficulties may be seen in the fact that Plato
(Statesman 259 E) refers to the knowledge of ‘the difference among defi-
nite amounts’ to logistic, although this might as well be said to be the busi-
ness of arithmetic (cf. 258 D, also Republic 587 D)” (GMTOA, 47/39).
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
170
————————
56. By ‘purely noetic sciences’ Klein has in mind not only Plato’s demand “for a ‘pure’
astronomy which ascends from the observed processes of the visible heavens to an under-
standing of the invisible spheres” (GMTOA, 45/37), but also his postulation, “in contrast to
the tetrad of ‘Pythagorean’ disciplines, [of] a science similarly organized but completely freed
of sense perception, a science whose ultimate object is the one invisible and inaudible ‘cosmic’
order on which our world of sense is founded” (46/38). This postulate is evident for Klein in
Plato’s criticism of “the theory of harmony of the ‘Pythagoreans,’” where he “says (Republic
531 C) in reproof that though they search for the definite amounts which are responsible for
audible consonances, they fail to attempt to determine without reference to anything audible
‘which definite amounts are consonant, which are not, and why’.” Evidence that to “this one
order corresponds the close inner relationship of all sciences based on measuring and count-
ing” Klein finds in the Theaetetus (145 A), where “Theodorous is called γεομετρικός as well as
ἀστρονομικός, λογιστικός, and μουσικός.”

§ 59. The Obstacle Presented by Fractions to Plato’s Demand
for a Theoretical Logistic 
It is Klein’s thesis, however, that fractions are what really stand in the way of
establishing a theoretical logistic. If its connection with calculation is at-
tended to, “the crucial obstacle to theoretical logistic . . . [is] the fractional-
ization of the unit of calculation.” Theoretical logistic, as we have seen (§ 56),
is “concerned with units which can be grasped only in thought, which are
identical to one another and which, above all, defy partition.” Accordingly,
Plato says that “should someone attempt to partition such a unit, . . . all ex-
pert mathematicians ‘would laugh at him and would not allow it, but when-
ever you were turning it into small change, they would multiply it, taking
care lest the one should ever appear not as one, but as many parts’ (Repub-
lic 525 E; cf. also Parmenides 143 A and Sophist 245 A).” The Neoplatonists
also stress this state of affairs. Theon, for example, articulates the “paradox
inherent in the partition of the unit” in terms of the fact that while every def-
inite amount can be divided and thus diminished into smaller definite
amounts, “‘the one, when it is divided within the realm of sense, is on the one
hand diminished as a bodyand is, once the cutting-up has taken place, divided
into parts which are smaller than it, while, on the other hand, as a definite
amount, it is augmented’” (GMTOA, 47/40; Theon, 18, 18–21). Thus, “Af -
ter partitioning, every part assumes the property of being one, i.e., there now
exit several ‘units’—the one has multiplied itself!”
For Klein, then, because every process of calculation or counting deals
with many units, if, in the process of calculation, “we are forced to partition
one of these units, then what we do is precisely to substitute something else
for the indivisible unit which is subject to partitioning, while the unit itself
is not partitioned but only further multiplied” (GMTOA, 48/40). Again, this
holds because “‘the one as one is impartible and indivisible’ (Theon, 18, 15),
‘and even if we multiply without limit it {and therefore every single unit}
yet remains—a unit’ (Theon, 19, 10 f.).” Thus, for Klein there
arises the necessity of making a strict distinction between the one object of
sense which is subject to counting and calculation and the one as such, i.e., of
keeping each “one” thing strictly separate from all “ones.” Each single thing
can be endlessly partitioned because of its bodily nature as an object of sense.
The unit which can only be grasped in thought is, on the other hand, indi-
visible simply, precisely in virtue of its purely noetic character: “So that the
unit, since it is noetic, is indivisible while the one, inasmuch as it is sensible,
can be cut without limit.” (GMTOA, 48/40–41; Theon, 20, 2–4)
Consequently, “this property of the noetic unit precludes calculation [i.e., its
division into fractional parts] with it” (GMTOA, 48/41). Thus, unlike the
eoretical Logistic and the Problem of Fractions
171

case in arithmetic where there is “‘a least simply,’”57 in logistic “‘the least [is
taken] in relation to some class 〈of objects of sense〉. For the one man be-
comes . . . the measure of the multitude as the unit is for definite amounts {in
arithmetic}’.”58 The unit of calculation therefore functions as a “‘substrate’”
and is only indivisible as such. For instance, in calculating with apples, one
apple “is that ‘least’ element which is not further reducible since all compu-
tational operations are referred to it as to their ultimate basis. The series of
whole apples one by one here furnishes that ‘homogeneous’ medium in which
counting and calculating takes place” (49/41–42). If, in the course of a cal-
culation, it becomes necessary to partition apples, 
the basis of the calculation, namely the one whole apple, still remains un-
touched. For once an apple has been divided into fractional parts, it loses its
significance as that which underlies the counting and is the fundamental el-
ement of all calculation, and is instead understood as a mere thing such as has
the property unlimited divisibility. As the fundamental element of calcula-
tion the function of one apple is precisely to represent  the unit “within the
material” (ἐν τῆ ὕλῃ). (49/42)
Therefore, fractions are parts not of pure definite amounts but of the bodily
thing that underlies counting, a thing, moreover, that because of its nature can
be divided without limit. In the realm of pure definite amounts, “the unit it-
self provides the last limit of all possible partitions: all partitioning ‘will stop
at one’ (καταλήξει εἰς ἕν) (Theon, 18, 11, 13 f.).”
According to Klein, because “in the majority of cases the necessity for
introducing fractional parts of the unit of calculation does arise in the course
of calculation, there emerges a remarkable maladjustment between the ma-
terial within which such calculations are performed and that other ‘material’
of ‘pure’ definite amounts whose noetic character is expressed precisely in the
indivisibility of the units” (GMTOA, 50/42–43). As a result, an exact calcu-
lation that requires the partitioning of the unit of calculation cannot be car-
ried out within the realm of “pure” ἀριθμοί. Within the Platonic tradition,
this state of affairs results in all computational problems being excluded from
the domain of the pure sciences. Moreover, “beyond this difficulty arises the
question—and this is the crucial question to be asked about theoretic logis-
tic—whether that which distinguishes exact calculation, namely operation
with fractional parts of the unit of calculation, can really be sufficiently
grounded in the science of the possible relations of definite amounts, i.e., in
the ‘pure’ theory of relations, alone” (50/43). 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
172
————————
57. Proclus, 40, 5 ff.
58. Ibid.

Klein’s answer is that it cannot. Specifically, while in the arithmetical
books of Euclid, “‘arithmetic’ and ‘logistic’ matter can hardly be separated,
. . . the ‘logistic’ constituent undoubtedly predominates and is here under-
stood precisely as ‘arithmetic’; it is obviously this fact which permits the later
‘arithmetical tradition’ (ἀριθμητικὴ παράδοσις) to include the theory of rela-
tions as well” (51/43–44). However, the relations in Euclid’s arithmetic con-
cern the theory of incommensurables, “which amounts to a first presentation
of the foundations for any calculation which goes beyond simple addition
and subtraction, insofar as in such operations it becomes necessary to de-
compose single definite amounts into their components (factors), to find the
greatest common measure (i.e., divisor) of several definite amounts, to express
their ratios in the ‘least’ terms, etc.” (51/44). Because calculations in this man-
ner cannot find or provide a foundation—consistent with the Platonic pre-
supposition of the noetic and hence indivisible units employed in pure
arithmetic—for the partitioning of the units themselves that are unavoidable
in an exact calculation, “the theory of relations in the ‘arithmetical’ books of
Euclid cannot be understood as the noetic analogue of practical logistic.”
Consequently, Klein maintains that calculation is relegated to the practical
arts and sciences and thereby loses the basis for its claim to be an apodeictic
discipline. Moreover, the pure theory of relations is displaced from the foun-
dational function Plato assigns to it vis-à-vis practical logistic, “and comes to
be assigned now to arithmetic as the theory of the kinds of definite amounts,
now to harmonics as the theory of musical intervals based on ratios of definite
amounts.” Finally, “the discovery of incommensurable ‘irrational’ magnitudes
causes the ‘pure’ theory of definite amount relations to appear as nothing but
a special case of the general theory of relations and proportions of the fifth
book of Euclid.” With this, the pure theory of definite amount relations “loses
all connection with the art of calculation,” and the latter (i.e., logistic) comes
to comprise “approximately the subject matter of present-day elementary
arithmetic” (52/45). Thus, logistic comes to be regarded as technique, espe-
cially as one that is “accomplished ‘mechanically’ with the aid of the fingers
and the abacus” (52/44), for rapid addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division, and it “teaches calculation with fractions and probably also extrac-
tion of (square) roots with the aid of geometry, develops systems of counting
for large definite amounts, especially with a view to astronomical computa-
tions, and, finally, solves problems presented in words” (52/45).
Now this practical characterization of logistic, which places it outside
theoretical mathematics, is a consequence of “that special conception of the
pure definite amounts and their material which governed the Platonic tradi-
tion throughout.” Thus, in order to understand the full significance of this
eoretical Logistic and the Problem of Fractions
173

conception of logistic in relation to the foundational problematics that gen-
erate it, Klein undertakes the desedimentation of the ἀριθμός-concept itself.
His goal thereby is to make more comprehensible the Platonic definitions of
arithmetic and logistic, and therewith to reactivate fully the presuppositions
that informed the horizon of Diophantus’s arithmetic, presuppositions that,
as we have seen, need to be rendered manifest if the radicality of the concep-
tual transformation in Vieta’s innovation of a symbolic mathematical disci-
pline is to be grasped as such. Once we have succeeded in presenting the
results of Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of these matters, our study
will be in a position to advance its thesis that these results present, in effect,
the historical background of the issues treated in Husserl’s analysis of the phi-
losophy of arithmetic, that is, of his—ultimately misguided—attempt to es-
tablish the origin of symbolic numbers on the basis of authentic cardinal
numbers and arithmetical operations. 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
174

Chapter Seventeen
e Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
§ 60. The Connection between Neoplatonic Mathematics 
and Plato’s Ontolog y
Klein’s desedimentation of the presuppositions of the Neoplatonic mathe-
matical background of Diophantus’s Arithmetic shows that they are in-
formed by two interrelated strata of presuppositions. Klein reactivates the
first of these, which belong to the Neoplatonic stratum proper, by first ar-
ticulating it and then tracing it to its roots in Plato’s philosophy of mathe-
matics. As we have seen, the Neoplatonic stratum is characterized by the
peculiarity that theoretical arithmetic does not deal directly with ἀριθμοί
but with their kinds (εἴδη). Likewise, logistic is characterized by the peculi-
arity that, while the nature of the material (ὔλη) proper to the ἀριθμοί with
which it deals is rendered inconsistently, a dominant view nevertheless
emerges that this material is sensible and that, therefore, logistic is not a sci-
ence (ἐπιστήμη) but an art (τέχνη). We have also seen that Klein traces the
roots of this stratum to the absence in Plato of any reference either to ἀριθμός
or to ἀριθμοίin the definitions of arithmetic and logistic. It is Klein’s thesis
that the definitions proper to each, as having to do with the εἴδη of the odd
and the even, point to the fact that “their formulation [in Plato] presup-
poses a theoretical point of view” (63/59). However, “the rigor of these def-
initions consists precisely in the fact that they articulate only one of the two
characteristics of the ἀριθμός,” that is, their kinds, while they “avoid the in-
definiteness which attends the term ‘ἀριθμός’ insofar as by itself it does not re-
veal the sort of definite objects it is a definite amount of, i.e., of what the
definite amount is meant to be a definite amount of.” Consequently, even
though these definitions presuppose a theoretical interest, they do not pre-
suppose that the ἀριθμοί themselves are theoretical, that is, that they are
ἀριθμοί of “pure” units. Thus, the definitions hold irrespective of whether
sensible or noetic material (ὔλη) is understood to underlie counting and cal-
culation and therefore arithmetic and logistic. For Klein, however, owing to

the fact that only sensible “units” “are amenable to the partitioning which ex-
actitude of calculation requires” (64/60), the Neoplatonic mathematicians
Olympiodorus and the Gorgias scholiast “are forced from the very begin-
ning to regard the ‘hylic’ monads, i.e., the monads which form the ὔλη of the
definite amounts,” as sensible.
Klein thus holds that the desedimentation of the Neoplatonic stratum
belonging to the presuppositions that form the background of Diophantus’s
Arithmetic leads back to the ontological considerations in Plato’s philosophy
regarding the theoretical mode of being of ἀριθμός. Specifically, they lead back
to Plato’s account of indivisibility of the pure monads that compose the mul-
titude in an ἀριθμός that is the object of arithmetical and logistical mathe-
matical knowledge. To bring these considerations to the fore, Klein first
desediments the concept of ἀριθμός operative in Greek mathematics and then
reactivates Plato’s account of its theoretical mode of being. 
§ 61. Counting as the Fundamental Phenomenon Determining
the Meaning of ᾿Αριθμός
Klein emphasizes that “The fundamental phenomenon which we should
never lose sight of in determining the meaning of ἀριθμός is counting, or more
exactly, the counting-off [Abzählen], of an arbitrary multitude of things”
(53/46). In counting, the differences of the things counted are disregarded
such that they “are taken as uniform when counted.” Thus, in counting apples,
their differences (size, color, shape, etc.) are overlooked, and they are taken
simply as apples; “or apples and pears are counted as fruit, or apples, pears,
and plates which are counted as ‘objects.’” In counting, the last word spoken
is “the definite amount, the ἀριθμός of the things involved.” Plato expresses
this in the Theaetetus (198 C): “‘Socr.: We will then understand counting as
nothing else than examining how large a determinate amount is in a given
case. Theatet.: Just so’.” Thus, for Klein, the Greek ἀριθμός “indicates in each
case a definite amount of definite things. It proclaims that there are precisely
so and so many of these things. It means the things insofar as they are present
in this definite amount and cannot, at least at first, be separated from the
things at all” (GMTOA, 53/46).
Because ἀριθμός is always a definite amount of definite things, it “is al-
ways and indissolubly related to that of which it is the definite amount”
(54/48). Thus, “Plato speaks of definite amounts (Republic 525 D) which
have ‘visible and tangible bodies’” (GMTOA, 53/47), an expression that Klein
claims “must be taken quite literally.” According to him, Aristotle illustrates
this when he says in connection with the equality of definite amounts, “‘It is
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
176

also quite rightly said that the definite amount of sheep and dogs is the same
if each is equal to the other, but the ‘decad’ is not the same {in these cases},
nor are the ten {sheep and dogs} the same {ten things}’ (Physics Δ 14, 224 a
2 ff.).” Klein also reports that Alexander’s commentary on the Metaphysics
holds that “‘every definite amount is a definite amount of something’”59
(GMTOA, 54/48), which is why “the ἀριθμός can be included in the cate-
gory of the πρός τι,” namely, that which is in relation to something. 
This relational character of ἀριθμός “cannot be adequately described
by speaking of ‘concrete’ or ‘specified’ as opposed to ‘abstract’ or ‘unspecified’
numbers” (55/48). That is because “even a ‘pure’ definite amount, i.e., a def-
inite amount of ‘pure’ units, is no less ‘concrete’ or ‘specified’ than a definite
amount of apples.” Consequently, Klein holds that the ἀριθμός is distin-
guished by a “twofold determinateness: it is, first of all, a definite amount of
objects determined in such and such a way, and it, secondly, indicates that
there are just so and so many of these objects.” It is for this reason that only the
general concept of ἀριθμός may be characterized as “‘the comprehensive unity
of a multitude,’” but not “the definite amounts intended by the contentof that
concept” (55/48–49). Klein uses the scholastic term actus exercitus60 to char-
acterize “the process of counting” (55/49) that yields ἀριθμοί, because in this
process “it is only the multitude of the counted things which are in view.” As a
result, “Only that can be ‘counted’ which is not one, which is before us in a cer-
tain definite amount: neither an object of sense nor one ‘pure’ unit is a defi-
nite amount of things or units.” Hence, in Greek mathematics, “‘the unit’ as
such is no ἀριθμός, which only seems strange if we presuppose the notion of
the ‘natural number sequence.’” Two things or units are therefore the small-
est ἀριθμός of things or units. The unit, being smaller than the smallest
ἀριθμός, has on account of this the “character of the ‘beginning’ or ‘source’
(ἀρχή)” that makes counting and ἀριθμοί initially possible. Klein appeals to a
wide range of Greek authorities to substantiate the non-numerical status of
the ‘one’ or ‘unit’. Typical of their view on the matter is Aristotle’s: “‘More
knowable than the definite amount is the unit; for it is prior and the source
of every definite amount’ (παντὸς ἀριθμοῦ) (Topics Ζ 4, 141 b 5 ff.)” (GMTOA,
59/53–54). On Klein’s view, it is precisely this state of affairs, that a multitude
of objects “can be grasped as one definite amount, that the many can be ‘one’”
(55/49), that “was treated explicitly as a fundamental problem within Pythag -
e Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
177
————————
59. Alexander of Aprodisias, In Aristotelis metaphysica commentaria, ed. Michael Hay-
duck, Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca, I (Berlin: Preußische Akademie der Wissenschaften,
1891), 85, 5.
60. That is, the act as exercised in contrast to the actus signatus, or the act that signifies
a concept.

orean and Platonic philosophy.” Thus, no matter how far this problem leads
beyond the consideration of ἀριθμοί, “it always remains tied in with it.”
§ 62. “Pure” ᾿Αριθμοί
Klein maintains that Plato’s treatment of arithmetic and logistic provides
what “can here serve as our guideposts” regarding how the conception of pure,
as opposed to visible or tangible, ἀριθμοίemerges on the basis of counting.
We have seen that for Klein the requirements of daily life include the “con-
tinual practice of counting and calculation [that] gradually fosters within us
that familiarity with definite amounts and their relations which Plato terms
‘arithmetic and logistic art.’” Thus, the problem of scientific arithmetic and lo-
gistic emerges when the question is posed regarding “those definite amounts
which we have at our disposal before we begin counting or calculating.” These
definite amounts “must clearly be independent of the particular things which
happen to undergo counting,” and it is this consideration that gives rise to
the question: “of what are these the definite amounts?” To answer this ques-
tion, Klein claims that our interest has to shift from the daily concern with
those objects that “are various and impermanent and yield ever-changing re-
sults” (56/49–50) when they are subject to counting and calculation. In raising
the scientific question concerned “with understanding the very possibility”
(56/50) of these activities, “with understanding the meaning of the fact that
knowing is involved and there must therefore be a correspond ing being which
possesses that permanence of condition which first makes it capable of being
‘known’” (see § 54 above), the special nature of the object of theoretical arith-
metic and logistic comes to the fore. Specifically, the “soul’s turning away from
things of daily life, the change in the direction of its sight, the ‘conversion’
(περιαγωγή) and ‘turning about’ (μεταστροφή– Republic 518 D) which is im-
plicit in this new way of posing questions” leads to another question: Must
not that which is known in theoretical arithmetic and logistic satisfy the spe-
cial conditions of exhibiting a being that possesses the permanence of the
knowable as such? 
Plato answers this question, according to Klein, affirmatively. Specif-
ically, “the object of arithmetic and logistic” is “that which alone of all things
is in the strict sense knowable.” Moreover, this object “is always already
known to a certain extent.” The dual requirement of a being that is perma-
nent and always already known in some fashion is “exactly fulfilled by the
‘pure’ units, which are ‘nonsensual,’ accessible only to the understanding, in-
distinguishable from one another, and resistant to all partition.” Hence, “the
‘scientific’ arithmetician and logistician deals with definite amounts of pure
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
178

monads.” Klein maintains that, on Plato’s view, “Everyone is able to see—if
only it is pointed out to him—that his ability to count and to calculate pre-
supposes the existence of ‘nonsensual’ units” (GMTOA, 56/51). That is,
“Only a careful consideration of the fact that it is really necessary to sup-
pose that there are definite amounts of definite objects different from the or-
dinary kind, if the possibility and the successful execution of counts and
calculations are to be understood, forces us into the further supposition that
there must indeed be a special ‘nonsensual’ material to which these definite
amounts refer” (56/50). 
Consequently, “an unlimited field of ‘pure’ units presents itself to the
view of the ‘scientific’ arithmetician and logistician. . . . The single multitudes
which may be chosen from this field are precisely those ‘pure’ definite
amounts (of units) with which he deals. This is how the traditional ‘classical’
definitions of ἀριθμός are to be understood” (56–57/51). Klein substantiates
this claim with copious references to both Aristotle and the Greek mathe-
maticians. For example, Aristotle: “‘for each definite amount is many because
it {consists of many} ones’ (Aristotle, Metaphysics I 6, 1056 b 23)” (GMTOA,
57/51). And Euclid: “‘[a definite amount is] the multitude composed of units’
(τὸ ἐκ μονάδων συγκείμενον πλῆθος) (Euclid, VII, Def. 2).” Thus, Aristotle
says, “‘Multitude is, as it were, the genus of the definite amount’ (Metaphysics,
I 6, 1057 a 2 f.).” A consequence of the latter position is that “‘the definite
amount’ and ‘one’ are opposites (Aristotle, Metaphysics I 6, 1056 b 19 f.)”
(GMTOA, 57/52). Nevertheless, Klein reports that Aristotle speaks of the
‘one’ “metaphorically as being a ‘certain, although small, multitude’ ([Met.],
1056 b 13 f.), namely the multitude ‘one.’” Likewise, Chrysippus (third cen-
tury BC) says that “‘the unit is the multitude ‘one’ (μονάς ἐστι πλῆθος ἕν).”61
Klein claims that the Greek definitions of the sequence of ἀριθμοί are founded
on the possibility of the “successive reproduction of the ‘unit’” or the ‘one,’
even though “The truth is that the unit can be spoken of as a ‘multitude’ only
improperly, ‘confusedly.’” In support of this, he quotes Domninus: “The
whole realm of definite amounts is an advance from the unit to the unlimited
by means of the excess of one unit {of each successive deﬁnite amount over the
preceding}’” (Domninus, 413, 5 ff.). 
For Klein, “the unit is . . . that permanently same and irreducible basic
element which is met with in all counting—and thus in every definite
amount” (GMTOA, 58/52). Consequently, “To determine an amount means
to count off in sequence the given single units, be they single objects of sense,
e Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
179
————————
61. Chrysippus in Iamblichi in Nicomachi arithmeticam introductionem liber ad fidem
codicis Fiorentini, ed. Ermenegildo Pistelli (Leipzig: Teubner, 1894), 11, 8–9.

single events within the soul, or single ‘pure’ units.” To be countable, these
units must be “identical” (58/53) and yet “separated and clearly ‘determined’
(διωρισμένα)” from one another. Insofar as the units are units of counting,
they possess “homogeneity” and “perfect wholeness.” As such, they possess
the “essential marks of the field of ‘pure’ units”: indivisibility and discrete-
ness. The latter is responsible for the “‘discreteness’ of definite amounts,
namely . . . the fact that the single units which are ‘parts’ of definite amounts
do not, in contrast to the sectional parts of continuous magnitudes, have a
‘common terminus’ (κοινὸν ὅρον – cf. Aristotle, Categories 4, 4 b 25).” Ac-
cording to Klein, such discrete units can “form the ‘homogeneous’ medium
of counting only if each unit, whatever its nature [i.e., sensuous, psychic, or
noetic], is viewed as an indivisible whole.” In support of this he cites Aristotle,
for whom “a definite amount is always ‘a multitude of indivisibles’ (πλῆθος
ἀδιαιρέτων) (Aristotle, Metaphysics Μ 1085 b 22).” Consequently, not only is
the one (μονάς) the source (ἀρχή) of ἀριθμός, in the sense that an ἀριθμός is al-
ways “‘a definite amount of . . . ,’” but also, insofar as knowledge of the unit is
presupposed in “the possibility of recognizing a definite amount of units as
such,” the unit also has “priority of ‘intelligibility.’” Finally, because the units
are multitudinous, “The possibility of extending the count over ever more
units is unlimited” (GMTOA, 59/54). However, because of the indivisible
character of the single units, “in the decreasing direction there is at last a bar-
rier; here ‘it is necessary to stop on reaching the indivisible’ (ἀνάγκη στῆναι
επὶ τὸ ἀδιαίρετον – Aristotle, Physics Τ 7, 207 b 8), i.e., the indivisible unit.”
Klein’s desedimentation and corresponding reactivation of the concept
of ἀριθμός does not amount to the claim that “the Greeks” possessed a uni-
vocal understanding of this concept. Such a claim, to the effect that there is
a concept of ἀριθμός that was shared by all Greeks, would, of course, be im-
possible to substantiate. Rather, Klein’s claim is that the various accounts pre-
sented by the Greek mathematicians and philosophers of the mode of being
belonging to the pure units that comprose ἀριθμοί or of the kind of priority
belonging to the unit with respect to an ἀριθμός all “stem from one and the
same original intuition, one oriented to the phenomenon of counting.”
Hence, Klein’s desedimentation of these accounts of ἀριθμός traces what they
have to say back to a phenomenon—counting—whose reactivation then
lends clarity to “all the possible differences of opinion regarding the mode of
being of the ‘pure’ definite amounts or the ‘pure’ units themselves, along with
the kind of priority of the unit over the definite amount.”
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
180

§ 63. Why Greek Theoretical Arithmetic and Logistic 
Did Not Directly Study ᾿Αριθμοί
On Klein’s view the scientific disciplines of Greek arithmetic and logistic—in
contrast “with that ‘practical’ knowledge which is satisfied with ‘knowing’ . . .
definite amounts without understanding what this ‘knowing’ implies”
(GMTOA, 59/54)—consist “in finding such arrangements and orders of the
assemblages of monads [Monadverbänden] as will completely comprehend
their variety under well-defined properties, so that their unlimited multitude
may at last be brought within bounds.” That is to say, because the “unlimit-
edness and the homogeneity of the field of monads permit us to combine units
into assemblages of monads, i.e., into definite amounts of units, in whatever
way and as often as we please,” the first task of theoretical arithmetic consists in
understanding how this delimitation takes place. Accordingly, for Klein, “in
theoretical arithmetic the definite amounts themselves are not studied directly”
(61/56). And because, as we shall see, it is the kinds (εἴδη)of definite amounts
that are responsible for this delimitation—most conspicuously, the odd and
the even62—and because, moreover, these kinds delimit definite amounts
“completely independent of whatever ‘material’ [i.e., sensible or noetic] may hap-
pen to underlie any particular case of counting” (63/59), the concern of theo-
retical logistic with this material likewise does not directly concern “the
determination of each determinate amount as a ‘determinate amount of some-
thing’” (61/56). For Klein, then, these two states of affairs explain why the
definitions of arithmetic and logistic in Plato’s Gorgias and Charmides “fail to
name the definite amount as the object of either of these sciences” (59/54). 
Klein claims that the “point of view” of the “man who knows definite
amounts” discloses that this view is oriented toward finding “within the field
of ‘pure’ units itself those properties which will permit us to collect the dif-
ferent assemblages of monads under some few aspects, so as to obtain a com-
plete synopsis of all possible multitudes” (59/54–55). Accordingly, “Greek
theoretical arithmetic does, in fact, deal first and last with different kinds of
definite amounts” (60/56). This means that “it attempts to comprehend all
e Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
181
————————
62. Klein also refers, in this context, to the concern of “Greek theoretical arithmetic”
(60/56) with “the discovery of kinds of figures and definite amounts,” such as the distinc-
tion Plato’s Theaetetus makes between ‘square’ and ‘oblong’ (60/55), “designations which
recur in all later arithmetical presentations,” or the use of “the gnomon” to show “immedi-
ately that the εἶδος for all similar numbers is in each case one and the same.” Klein elsewhere
describes a ‘gnomon’ as “a configuration of dots (or of lines) which added to a figure of dots
(or lines) produces a similar figure” (Klein, “The Concept of Number in Greek Mathemat-
ics and Philosophy,” 46–47), a figure that presents numbers with “shapes” such as triangular,
square, and pentagonal.

possible groupings of monads in general under arrangements which are de-
terminate, i.e., which possess unambiguous characteristics and which may, in
turn, be reduced to their own ultimate elements, such as the ‘same,’ and the
‘other,’ the ‘equal’ and the ‘unequal,’ the ‘limit’ and the ‘limitless’ (ταὐτόν –
ἕτερον, ἴσον – ἄνισον, πέρας – ἄπειρον, cf. Philebus 25 A–B).” Thus, theoret-
ical arithmetic is not concerned with the first aspect of the twofold deter-
minateness of ἀριθμός, with “the determination of each definite amount as
a ‘definite amount of something’” (GMTOA, 60/56) that “is given by the
pure units or the given objects.” Rather, it is concerned with the second as-
pect of this determinateness, with “the fact that it is always a definite amount
(of pure units or of things of some sort).” And it is precisely the latter that
Klein maintains “can be understood only as the consequence of the special
kind to which it belongs, i.e., by means of something which is in itself one
and thus is capable of unifying, of making wholes—of delimiting.” Thus,
“Only through membership in an εἶδος ‘derivable’ from such ‘sources’ (ἀρχαί)
does the being of a definite amount become intelligible as determinate, i.e.,
as a delimited amount, as one assemblage of just so and so many monads.” In
other words, “Precisely because the ἀριθμός as such is not one but many, its
delimitation in particular cases can be understood only by finding the εἶδος
which delimits its multitude,” that is, “by means of ἀριθμητικήas a theoretical
discipline.”
According to Klein, “the most comprehensive εἴδη, those which come
closest to the rank of an αρχήand are therefore termed ‘the very first’ (πρώτι -
στα) . . . are the odd and the even” (61/57). Within the realm of ἀριθμοί, the 
“first cut” (πρώτη τομή– Theon 21, 20; Nicomachus 13, 9) . . . in terms of
“even” and “odd” . . . affects all definite amounts in such a way that “one whole
half of the realm of definite amounts” (ὁ ἥμισυς τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ ἅπας – Plato,
Phaedo 104 A) falls under the “odd” and the other under the “even,” each of
these halves nevertheless comprising an unlimited multitude of definite
amounts.
Notwithstanding this, however, “by means of certain unambiguous charac-
teristics” the unlimited multitudes of each of these halves is “in turn gathered
‘into one’ (εἰς ἕν).” Thus, all definite amounts that are divisible into two equal
parts, that is, that when divided yield no remainder, are ‘even’. And “those
whose division yields a remainder of one indivisible unit, are ‘odd.’” Klein
holds that “This latter property of ‘being odd’ can obviously occur only in a
field of discrete and indivisible units, since it always depends on a single, ‘su-
pernumerary’ unit, indivisible by ‘nature.’” By contrast, “the property of being
divisible into two equal parts without ‘remainder’ is . . . a property common
to definite amounts and the continuous, i.e., infinitely divisible, magnitudes
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
182

which are always capable of being further bisected (cf. Plato, Laws 895 E:
‘definite amounts also can, I suppose, like other things be divided into two
parts’)” (GMTOA, 62/57). For Klein, this state of affairs has the significant
consequence that “only ‘oddness’ is characteristic of that which is countable
as such, while ‘evenness’ represents something within the realm of definite
amounts, and of everything countable, which goes, as it were, beyond it—
something ‘other,’ namely the possibility of unlimited divisibility and thus, in
a way, the ‘unlimited’ itself.” 
It is Klein’s position, then, that for Greek mathematics the odd and the
even are “determinations that concern the being of the definite amount that
belongs to the countable as such, namely they concern the being (οὐσία) of an
ἀριθμός as something according to which ‘how many’ is determined as a def-
inite amount” (63/58). Thus, “‘with every definite amount one or the other
belongs necessarily, either the odd or the even’ (Aristotle, Categories 10, 12 a
7 f.)” (GMTOA, 62–63/58). As such, the odd and the even are “‘two kinds
proper’ (δύο ἴδια εἴδη) of ἀριθμός” (62/58). However, because “the odd im-
poses a limit on unlimited divisibility in the form of an indivisible unit,” it has
a priority over the even.63 Nevertheless, “the even still appears alongside the
odd as a second essential characteristic of the discrete realm of definite
amounts.” Moreover, the “general familiarity of the distinction between odd
and even definite amounts” (63/59) attests that the εἴδη of each belong to
the being of ἀριθμοί.64
Klein stresses that the role of the distinction between the odd and the
even in limiting ἀριθμοί and thus rendering them determinate “is completely
independent of whatever ‘material’ may happen to underlie any case of counting”
(63/59). Consequently, for him the absence of any reference to ἀριθμός or
ἀριθμοίin the Gorgias’s and Charmides’ definitions of arithmetic and logistic
indicates two things: 1) “the multitude of arbitrarily chosen assemblages of
monads is accessible to ἐπιστήμη only through the determinate εἴδη which
can always be found for these assemblages” and 2) “the characteristics of all
possible kinds of definite amounts, beginning with the odd and the even, are
to be found indifferently in all countable things, be they objects of sense or ‘pure’
units.” Thus, the theoretical rigor of these definitions consists in the fact that,
e Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
183
————————
63. Klein conjectures that the “appearance of the περιττόν, the uneven, on the ‘posi-
tive’ side of the Pythagorean table of opposites marks a characteristic reversal of the ‘natural’
sense of values (cf. especially the English word ‘odd’)” (234 n. 64). This note appears only in
the English translation.
64. Klein reports in this connection that “this distinction—besides that of male and fe-
male, and right and left—provides Plato with the model for every ‘natural’ diairesis [division]
(cf. Statesman 262 A–E, Phaedrus 265 E)” (GMTOA, 63/59).

while they articulate “that all-pervasive limitedness which is rooted in an
εἶδος, so that they can cover the whole realm of what is countable,” they do
not specify whether what is counted are unequal sensible things or pure (i.e.,
noetic and therefore uniform) units. This means for Klein that 
the rigor of both definitions does not exclude them from the “common un-
derstanding,” since (1) the understanding that the ἀριθμοίwith which ἐπι-
στήμη deals are definite amounts of “pure” units is in no way presupposed and
(2) the two εἴδη of the even and the odd appeal to a thoroughly familiar dis-
tinction. (63–64/59–60)
On Klein’s view, then, arithmetic—as it is understood in the commen-
taries of Olympiodorus and the Gorgias scholiast—“deals with definite
amounts insofar as these present assemblages whose unity is rooted in the
unity of a certain εἶδος, although this fact usually remains hidden for the most
part from the practical intention of counting” (64/60). Consequently, at the
theoretical level, arithmetic “studies the respective ‘how many’ of each group
of monads that falls under a particular εἶδοςonly indirectly.” By contrast, both
practical and theoretical logistic aim “of necessity—insofar as it is concerned
with the mutual relations of definite amounts—directly at the ‘how many,’ at
the multitude of what in each case happen to be related to one another or
computed, i.e., at the ‘material’ which underlies each relation or calculation.”
Whereas Plato, as we have seen, 
leaves completely indeterminate whether this material belongs to the realm
of the sensible or the purely noetic (an indeterminacy which insures the uni-
versality of the definition), Olympiodorus and the Gorgiasscholiast are forced
from the beginning to regard the “hylic” monads, i.e., the monads which form
the ὕλη of the definite amounts . . . as sensible ‘units,’ since only these are
amenable to that partitioning which exactitude of calculation requires. 
According to Klein, both of these Neoplatonic commentators are forced, as
it were, by the problem of the indivisibility of pure monads maintained by
Platonism to “unwittingly enter an ontological realm which is no longer con-
sonant with the Platonic definition of monad.” To make this clearer, Klein
next turns his attention to “the ontological problems raised by the ἀριθμοί,”
that is, to the relation between Greek ontology and Greek mathematics. His
reason for doing so is that “any attempt to understand Greek mathematics as
a self-sufﬁcient science must fail,” because “It is impossible to disregard its
ontological difﬁculties which fundamentally determine its problems, its pres-
entation, its development, especially its beginnings,” just as it is impossible
“to understand Greek ontology without reference to its speciﬁcally ‘mathe-
matical’ orientation” (64–65/61).
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
184

Chapter Eighteen
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
§ 64. The Interdependence of Greek Mathematics 
and Greek Ontolog y
Klein argues that a major consequence of the interdependence of Greek math-
ematics and Greek ontology is that “the μάθημα-character of ‘mathematical’
states of affairs, its status as a ‘learning matter,’ serves as a model for all teachable
and learnable knowledge,” just as it is “knowledge so understood which deter-
mines the sphere of Greek ontological inquiry” (65/61). As we have seen, it is
his contention that both the mathematics and ontology of the Greeks presup-
pose that only that which “possesses that permanence of condition which first
makes it capable of being ‘known’” (56/50) can be learned and therefore taught.
We have also seen that the theoretical attempts of both the Neoplatonic math-
ematicians and Plato to articulate the precise statuses of arithmetic and logis-
tic were driven by this stance on the being of knowledge. Notwithstanding
their different accounts of the statuses of these mathematical disciplines, they
were in accord that only a theoretical study of the εἴδηproper to ἀριθμοί can sat-
isfy the ontological condition proper to the permanence of knowledge. 
Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of the suppositions determi-
nate of the Greek mathematical background of Diophantus’s Arithmetic,
however, has “so far avoided coming to terms with the ontological point of
view which from the very first determined the form taken by the Greek doc-
trine of the ἀριθμοί” (64/61). As his desedimentation of the Greek ἀριθμός-
concept has shown, this point of view has its origin in Plato’s philosophy.
So, to come to terms with this point of view, Klein undertakes the task of
desedimenting Plato’s understanding of the “mode of being” (72/71) that
“belongs to definite amounts of ‘pure’ monads,” as well as the εἴδη that de-
limit them and therefore render them determinate. On Klein’s view, “our
different [i.e., ‘modern’] orientation notwithstanding,” “nothing hinders us

from doing justice to the originality of ancient science by allowing ourselves
to be guided only by those phenomena to which the Greek texts themselves
point and which we are able to exhibit directly” (66/63). It is to his reacti-
vation of such phenomena that we now turn.
§ 65. The Pythagorean Context of Plato’s Philosophy
“There can be no doubt,” Klein says, “that Plato’s philosophy was decisively
influenced by Pythagorean science, whatever the exact connection between
Plato and the ‘Pythagoreans’ may have been” (71/69). Thus, “those defini-
tions of arithmetic and logistic which were the basis of the preceding re-
flections seem to point to a Pythagorean origin.” Not only is it the case, as
we have seen, that “these definitions in no way presupposed the existence of
‘pure’ definite amounts; . . . they [also] referred to everything countable as
such, and thus, above all, to the objects of sense in this world.” Consequently,
for Klein, “The definitions seem to have preserved the original cosmological
significance of these two sciences.” Indeed, he states that this is the case “es-
pecially since we must keep in mind that the ‘very first kinds’ (πρώτιστα εἴδη)
of definite amounts, the ‘odd’ and the ‘even,’ represented for the Py thagore-
ans the ‘limit’ and the ‘unlimited,’ i.e., the ἀρχαίof all beings, whose union,
whose ‘mixture,’ first brings the world as such into being.” Not only is “This
view, which is part of the cosmology of the Philebus and the Timeaus, . . . di-
rectly connected with the general theory of opposites of the Pythagoreans,”
but it also connected with “the symmetry of the pairs of opposites in the
Charmides” and “in the Gorgias” (71/69–70). 
Thus, it would seem that the conception in both the Charmides and
the Gorgias of the object of arithmetic and logistic is “conceived from an on-
tological point of view identical with that of the Pythagoreans” (71/70).
This semblance is dispelled, however, by the entirely different mode of being
that Plato assigns to mathematical objects in comparison with Pythagorean
science. Klein writes that the Pythagoreans 
saw the true grounds of the things in this world in their countableness, inas-
much as the condition of being a “world” is primarily determined by the pres-
ence of an “ordered arrangement” (τάξις)—and this means a well-ordered
arrangement—while any order, in turn, rests on the fact that the things or-
dered are delimited with respect to one another and so become countable.
(67/64)
Based on this, he concludes that for “the men traditionally called ‘Pythagore-
ans’” (66/63) “the arithmetical determinations of things concern their being
itself,” and that, as Aristotle reports, “‘the authentic being of all things is pre-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
186

cisely their definite amount’ (Metaphysics Α 5, 987 a 19)” (GMTOA, 67/64).
Consequently, “those affections (πάθη) which are to be found in everything
counted as such,” that is, their “properties, conditions, and ways of behaving
would be . . . identical with the elements and sources of their countableness
(Metaphysics Α 5, 985 b 23–26, 29; 986 a 6, 15–17; Α 8, 990 a 2 ff., 19)”
(GMTOA, 67/64–65). Moreover, “They evidently considered a vague ‘struc-
tural’ similarity a sufficient basis for speaking of an ‘imitation’ of definite
amounts by things (Metaphysics Α 6, 987 b11 f.; Theophratus, Metaphysics 11
a 27 f.),” a view that Aristotle criticized due to the “‘superficiality’ of their
definitions” (GMTOA, 68/65). 
Klein claims that the Pythagorean manner of definition was driven
by their search for “the being of things by reducing and assimilating them to
states of affairs ‘primarily’ exhibited in the realm of counted assemblages as
such.” This use of definition, which accounted for the being of particular
things “in terms of a certain kind of definite amount or ratio,” was also driven
by the search for a primary definite amount or ratio, because “There is always
a first and ‘smallest’ definite amount (or ratio) of a particular kind such that
a particular property belongs to it primarily.” In line with this, the first def-
inite amount or ratio “therefore represents the ‘root’ (πυθμήν) of its kind.”
Consequently, the ἀριθμός ten along with one are especially significant, the
latter because it is the “fundamental element of all counting,” the former be-
cause “the definite amounts comprised in the decad, together with their mu-
tual relations, are themselves the most important ‘roots.’” Klein writes, “This
Pythagorean method of identifying the being of things which have analo-
gous characteristics thus extends to the decad and is elaborated in the later
Neopythagorean and Neoplatonic tradition so as to become the most im-
portant tenet of ‘arithmology’ (to use a modern term coined for this pur-
pose)” (68/66). Because “the guiding thought of this tradition is always that
of the perfect arrangement (διακόσμησις) or order (τάξις) of the Whole,” the
controlling point of view throughout remains cosmological. Within this
tradition, then, “the very countableness of things, and thus the sequence of
definite amounts, which makes this τάξις possible, is understood as a definite
‘being-in-order’ of things, and thus the sequence of definite amounts is un-
derstood as the original order of the being of these things” (69/66). This order
is not understood, however, as “a linear chain whose links are all ‘of the same
kind’ but an ‘ordering’ in the sense that each definite amount precedes or
follows in the order of its being, i.e., is related as prior and posterior (πρότερον
and ὕστερον – cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics Δ 11, 1018 b 26–29).” 
Thus for Klein “the science of the Pythagoreans is an ontology of the
cosmos,” which means that their arithmetical and logistical science has as its
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
187

“true object the being of the very constituents of the world” (GMTOA,
69/66). While this conception doubtless was motivated by, among other
things, “an insight into the dependence of musical consonances on ‘logis-
tic’—the basis of its possibility is the ‘natural’ conception of the ἀριθμός as
characterized earlier” (69/66–67). That is, “Only when ‘definite amount’
means a definite amount of things, when the counted things themselves are
meant whenever a definite amount is determined, is it possible to understand
their being (precisely insofar as they are things) as ‘definite amount’” (69/67).
Aristotle reports repeatedly that the Pythagoreans “do not make definite
amounts separable {from the things} (οὐ χωριστὸν ποιοῦσι τὸν ἀριθμόν),” which
means that “they do not go so far as to suppose the existence of ‘pure’ definite
amounts of ‘pure’ units, although they were the very men who concerned
themselves with definite amounts not for a practical but for a theoretical pur-
pose, who conceived of the ἀριθμός as ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός, as scientific def-
inite amount (Metaphysics Μ 6, 1080 b 16 ff.).” Klein avers that, despite their
being wedded to “the opinion that being extends just as far as sense percep-
tion” (GMTOA, 69/67), they were nevertheless “on the way toward discov-
ering a mode of being of a higher order.” Indeed, he holds that “we may
conjecture that they saw the genesis of the world as a progressive partitioning
of the first ‘whole’ one, about whose origins they themselves, it seems, were
not able to say anything conclusive (cf. Metaphysics Μ 6, 1080 b 20 f.; Ν 3,
1091 a 15 ff.).” Nevertheless, it seems that for them the one “already contained
as fundamental constituents, as ‘elements,’ the two fundamental kinds of the
realm of definite amounts, the ‘odd and the even,’ namely ‘limit’ and ‘unlim-
ited’ (cf. Metaphysics Α 5, 986 a 17 ff. and Theon 22, 5 ff.).” Both this first one
and all subsequent ones resulting from partition, that is, the definite amounts
themselves, “they therefore regarded as having bodily extension: ‘they under-
stood the monads to have magnitude’ (τὰς μονάδας ὑπολαμβάνουσιν ἔχειν
μέγεθος – Metaphysics Μ 6, 1080 b 19 f.)” (GMTOA, 70/ 67). This “allowed
them to reduce the measurableness of things to their countableness—until the
discovery of ‘incommensurable’ magnitudes proved the impossibility of this
reduction” (70/67–68).
Klein maintains, however, that the Pythagoreans went beyond their
understanding of “the bodily monads as the specific ‘stuff’ of the real [ding -
lich] being of things (which relates them to the atomists)” (70/68), “to see in
the qualities of the kinds of definite amounts models which things ‘imitate.’”
Hence, in accord with their principle “that the being of things with analo-
gous characteristics is identical, they were able to define their being [i.e., the
being of the ‘kinds’] as being a definite amount.” Klein cites Aristotle, who re-
ports that they considered “‘definite amounts to be the source of the things
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
188

that are, both as their material and as their characteristics, as well as their
states’” (Metaph. Α 8, 990 a 18–19). This means that both the characteristics
of ἀριθμοί, namely their kinds (εἴδη), as well as the ἀριθμοί themselves, are re-
sponsible for the being of things, since, as Aristotle again reports, “‘Those
{different things} [i.e., the kinds of definite amounts and the definite amounts
themselves] would be the same with one another since the same kind of defi-
nite amounts belongs to them’” (Ν 6, 1093 a 11–12). Regarding these εἴδη,
Klein also cites the Pythagorean Philolaos, who in reference to εἴδη of the
odd and the even, writes: “‘There are many shapes belonging to each of the
two forms.’”65 Klein says that “it is clear . . . that by the μορφαί [shapes] of the
εἴδη are to be understood their subspecies, i.e., certain characteristics or qual-
ities of the kinds.” He also holds that not “since Boeckh” (GMTOA, 70/69),
who remarked about these characteristics “‘that they were developed by the
ancient arithmetician with a special industry which appears to us as petty,’”66
has the “significance of these πάθη or μορφαίor εἴδη of definite amounts . . .
been properly acknowledged” (70/68–69). That is not only because “the εἴδη
of definite amounts and of their relations, together with their correlative roots
(πυθμένες) . . . form, as we have seen, the true object of Greek arithmetic but
also the foundation of all cosmological speculation as originated by the
Pythagoreans and developed through the centuries up to Kepler” (70/ 69).
Here Klein announces, in anticipation of his analysis of the origin of algebra,
that “we shall have to examine the role given to this εἶδος concept in the math-
ematics of Vieta.”
Despite the similarity between the Pythagorean science and Plato’s phi-
losophy, Klein holds that “there exists an indissoluble tension” between the
role each assigns to mathematical objects. This tension “manifests itself right
within the Platonic opus in the opposition between the Socratic dialogue and
the ‘likely tale’ (εἰκὼς μῦθος) [in Plato’s Timaeus] representing the cosmos”
(71/70). For Plato, mathematics is the “‘bond’ (δεσμός) which ties dialectic
and cosmology together and affects both decisively.” As a bond, mathematics
holds a “‘middle position’” between the objects of dialectical inquiry (the
εἴδη) and the objects of praxis (somatic things). Thus, “by giving this ‘medi-
ating’ role to mathematics Plato assigns to mathematical objects a totally dif-
ferent mode of being than they can possibly have in Pythagorean science.” In
this connection, Klein emphasizes the fact that in discussing ἀριθμοί “Aristo-
tle never tires of stressing that Plato, in opposition to the Pythagoreans, made
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
189
————————
65. Klein’s citation refers to Diels, I3, 310, 13–14, Philolaos fragment 5.
66. Here Klein cites August Boeckh, Philolaos der Pythagoreers Lehren (Berlin: Voss,
1819), 60.

them ‘separable’ from objects of sense, so that they appear ‘alongside per-
ceptible things’ (παρὰ τὰ αἰσθητά) as a separate realm of being” (71–72/70).
As we have seen, this realm is comprised of “the field of ‘pure’ units, which
are indivisible, of the same kind, and accessible only to thought” (72/71).
Thus, for Klein, the novelty of Plato’s account of ἀριθμοί explains “his gen-
eral interest in the superiority of the purely noetic over everything ‘somatic,’
. . . the stress which he lays on the existence of the purely noetic over every-
thing ‘somatic,’” and the fact that the “emphasis with which the thesis of
‘pure’ mo nads is propounded is indicative that ἀριθμοίwere ordinarily, and
as a matter of course, understood only as definite amounts of sensible and
tangible things.” 
§ 66. Plato’s Departure from Pythagorean Science : 
The Fundamental Role of ᾿Αριθμοί of Pure Monads
Klein holds, then, that Plato’s “thought of ‘pure’ definite amounts of definite
objects separated from all body is originally so remote that it becomes the
philosopher’s task precisely to point out emphatically the fact that they are in-
dependent and detached, and to secure this fact against all doubt” (72/70–
71). As we have seen, this task is fulfilled by following the “course which leads
from our actual counting to the conception of ‘pure’ monads” (72/71), a
course that Plato gives an account of by showing that our ability to count and
to calculate is rooted in the fact that our διάνοια (the faculty and activity of
thinking) “authentically means, when it counts or calculates such things”—
that is, “a definite multitude of objects of sense”—“the existence of ‘nonsen-
sible’ monads which can be joined together to form the definite amount in
question.” Klein says that “the special mode of being which belongs to definite
amounts of ‘pure’ monads begins to be comprehensible in the light of their
foundational role” vis-à-vis that for which it provides a foundation, that is, the
ordinary definite amounts. Hence, for Klein, “The being of the foundation
takes precedence over that which is so founded, i.e., it is prior (πρότε-ρον),
because the second cannot be without the first, but the first can be without
the second.” Aristotle bears witness to this “primordial independence and
‘detachment’ which is rooted in the founding function” “when in the expli-
cation of the various meanings of prior and posterior (πρότερον – ὕστερον,
Metaphysics Δ 11) he remarks expressly, in commenting on the meaning of
these terms which has just been explicated, that ‘Plato made use of this dis-
tinction’ (ᾗ διαιρέσει ἐχρήσατο Πλάτων – 1019 a 2–4).” 
Klein maintains that the distinction in question “is connected with the
much-discussed ‘hypothesis’ (literally: sup-position) theory of Plato” (GMTOA,
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
190

73/71). Plato’s well-known division into two domains67 (Republic 510 B–D)
of “that which is accessible to the understanding,” of, namely, what “is and
can be thought (νοητόν)” characterizes the relation of what is so divided as fol-
lows. Certain objects that are perceived by the senses nevertheless refer be-
yond themselves to something that is imperceptible to the senses, something
“which is for thought” (νοητόν) because of this very imperceptibility. More-
over, because the latter is somehow linked to the objects of the senses that
refer to it, it provides the foundation for what is perceived by the senses. Thus,
Plato maintains that in such cases “the examining soul is compelled to sup-
pose, i.e., to make to underlie,” the objects of sense “the νοητόν in question.”
Such objects of sense function as “an image of something ‘other,’” “which un-
derlies them as a foundation and images itself in them” (GMTOA, 73/72).
Consequently, Plato holds that “‘Here the soul must of necessity begin its
search {for objects of thought} from suppositions’ ([Republic] 510 B).” Thus,
“In such cases we do examine these things by means of the senses; yet we do
not mean these things but rather that which comprises their ‘foundation’ and
which they image” (GMTOA, 73/72). In the case of the geometers, what
their souls mean are not the “characteristic qualities” exhibited by the figures
they draw, but what is “imaged in” them, “e.g., the rectangle which is, in its pu-
rity, accessible only to thinking.” In that of logisticians, even though they
“have before their eyes the ‘odd’ and the ‘even’ as the form [Gestalt] of what-
ever objects their deliberations move over,” it is nevertheless the case that such
“deliberations, being pursued in thought, do not aim at these visible things
but at the ‘pure’ definite amounts or their εἴδη that are imaged by them and
taken as their basis by thinking.” 
While this suppositional procedure characterizes “above all” that of
geometers and logisticians, “the efficacy of διάνοια” that is “directly dis-
played” in their conduct “is by no means confined to these alone” (73/73).
Klein claims that for Plato διάνοια “obviously has an essential, perhaps the
essential, part in all human activity and self-orientation.” He maintains this
because Plato’s procedure by hypothesis “is not a specifically ‘scientific’
method but is that original attitude of human deliberation prior to all sci-
ence which is revealed directly in speech as it exhibits and judges things”
(73–74/73). Klein takes Socrates’ characterization of it in the Phaedo, in its
contrast to the physiological study of nature, as the “‘second-best sailing’
(δεύτερος πλοῦς),” “which consists of ‘taking refuge in reasonable speech’
(Phaedo 99 E),” to signal “nothing else than a return to the ordinary attitude
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
191
————————
67. Namely, one in which the soul makes its inquiries using hypotheses and the other
in which it inquires by means of the εἴδη themselves.

of the διάνοια.” Hence, he says, “it is for this reason that Plato can characterize
the method of ‘hypothesis’ as ‘simple and artless and perhaps naive’ (Phaedo
100 D).” 
On Klein’s view, then, reasonable speech guided by the διάνοια always
supposes “something ‘other’ to underlie the objects we perceive, namely νοητά;
these, albeit appearing in the mirror of our senses, are the true objects of our
study, though we may not even be aware of making such ‘suppositions’”
(GMTOA, 73/74). By rendering these suppositions perspicuous, that is,
“transparent and thereby learnable,” the “‘devices’” of the διάνοια make “com-
pletely explicit what the διάνοια has in effect been accomplishing prior to any
science.” The process of making the latter explicit is the work of “a privileged
mode of deliberation in which this ‘supposing’ is raised to the rank of a con-
scious procedure; this is the origin of every science and every skill (cf. Phile-
bus 16 C)” (GMTOA, 74/73). This means “one can grasp the authentic
content of the former ordinary accomplishment of the διάνοια only through
this privileged mode of deliberation.” According to Klein, the “authentic sense
of the διάνοια” (74/74) is grasped in precisely “those τέχναι which are most
highly developed, surveying and above all, counting and calculating (cf. Eu-
thyphro 7 B–C), that ‘common thing of which all arts as well as all thinking
processes and all sciences make use’ (Republic 522 C) and without which any
τέχνη would lose its character as τέχνη (Philebus 55 E; cf. Republic 602 D)”
(GMTOA, 74/74). Not only is this why Plato assigns διάνοια to the exem-
plary realms of geometry and logistic, but it is also why the arguments of the
Republic “establish the leading role played in education by mathematical sub-
jects, especially counting and calculation” (74/74).
§ 67. Διάνοια as the Soul’s Initial Mode of Access to Νοητά
What is at issue for Klein in Plato’s account of διάνοια, therefore, is the soul’s
initial mode of access to the νοητά. Despite their non-sensible mode of being,
the νοητάnevertheless remain tied—so long as they are apprehended by the
διάνοια—to αἴσθησις (sense perception). They remain so tied because of their
suppositional character as the foundation of sensible objects. This means that
for Plato “the διάνοια itself is not able to appreciate the full range of signifi-
cance of its accomplishment” (79/79), because, as we shall see, “its own νοητά,
which it ‘supposes’ to underlie αἰσθητά, appear altogether lucid and without
further need of foundation.” Thus, “this quarry of the διάνοια, as it is brought
in especially by the mathematicians, must first be handed over to the dialec-
ticians for proper use (Euthydemus 290 C; Republic 531 C–534 E).” That is
because the διάνοια “at first always attains to noetic structures of oppositional
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
192

quality” (GMTOA, 78/78), which means that the mode of being of the de-
limited field of pure units that underlies the sensible objects it counts and
that makes possible its calculations cannot be grasped except by means of its
opposite, “namely from the unlimited many” (77/77). Hence, according to
Klein, “the διάνοια discovers the ‘one’ not by itself alone but among many ones,”
and it thereby “relates the one to the other ones, an activity which, in effect,
is nothing but—counting.” 
Klein reactivates Plato’s account of the emergence of διάνοια from
sense perception on the basis of the argument in the Republic (523–525) re-
garding the “objects of perception which of necessity leave the perceiving
soul unclear about their nature and which thus of necessity call up deliber-
ation to aid the soul in discovering it” (GMTOA, 75/74). Thus, in contrast
to 1) “objects of perception which directly satisfy the perceiving soul be-
cause they are in themselves sufficiently clear, so that there is no necessity
to appeal to any authority beyond perception—there is no necessity to de-
liberate in any way on such perceptions,” “the very structure” of 2) some per-
ceived objects, is such as to necessitate that the soul “go beyond ‘bare’
perception and ‘call up’ and ‘awaken’ ‘reckoning and thought’ (λογισμόν τε
καὶ νόησιν – [Republic] 524 B)” (GMTOA, 75/75). On the one hand, with
respect to the former type of object, for instance, when “I look at the fingers
on my hand, I perceive each of them directly as a finger. Plain perception is
the end of the matter: Within this perception there is nothing ‘problemat-
ical’—it is complete in itself, it does not leave behind a feeling of a lack of
clarity such as might move me to deliberate and to investigate what there
authentically is to the finger, what a finger might be ([Republic] 523 D)”
(GMTOA, 75/74–75). On the other hand:
The situation changes completely when I perceive the characteristics of each
of my fingers in turn, such as its largeness or thickness or softness. Now I per-
ceive in any one finger at one and the same time alsoan opposite: its smallness,
its thinness, and its hardness. I therefore perceive opposites in the same per-
ception, and in the same object of perception. Here something which clearly
does not belong together is in an obscure way “mixed,” as deliberation imme-
diately informs me. (75/75)
It is at this point that “reckoning and thought” are called up, becoming “active
spontaneously, as it were, in direct succession to perception.” They inform the
soul that here it is a question of “something twofold, namely on the one hand
softness and on the other hardness, and similarly largeness on the one hand and
smallness on the other (cf. Theatetus 186 B)” (GMTOA, 76/75). Reckoning
and thought therefore permit the soul “to recognize both together as ‘two,’ as
this one thing—softness or largeness—and that other one thing—hardness or
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
193

smallness—no longer ‘mixed’ with one another, but as distinct: ‘Each is one,
but both are two, and the two are separated by thought . . . not fused together
but distinct’ (ἕν ἑκάτερον, ἀμφότερα δε δύο, τά γε δύο κεχωρισμένα νοήσει . . . οὐ
συγκεχυμένα ἀλλὰ διωρισμένα – [Republic] 524 B–C).”
The διάνοια is able to effect this separation of the “‘mixture’ which as-
saults the senses” (GMTOA, 76/76) “by way of comparison (cf. Theatetus 186
B)” (GMTOA, 76/75). Thus, the same finger is small or large in comparison
with its left or right neighbor. Simmias is large, “not insofar as he is Simmias,
but insofar as he can be compared with Socrates.” Moreover, “The same Sim-
mias is, on the other hand, small—again, not insofar as he is Simmias, but in-
sofar as he can be compared with Phaedo” (76–77/75–76). Consequently,
“The largeness and the smallness of an object, can . . . be recognized by thought
as something twofold only when the object is recognized at one time as ‘being-
larger-than . . .’ and another as ‘being-smaller-than . . .’” (76/76). Therefore,
for Klein, “Only by relating the one condition to the other is the διάνοια en-
abled to suppose two distinct structures” “to underlie each obscure αἰσθητόν.”68
Its objects, “the first kind of νοητά, are therefore attained as a result of the fact
that that which is accessible to the senses is, by reason of its ‘relational charac-
ter’ (‘Bezüglichkeit’ – Natorp), recognized as a manifold.” Consequently, ac-
cording to Klein, 
the recognition of the many as many, and thus also of the other as other,
means precisely that the single constituents of the many are distinguished
from one another and at the same time, in all their distinctiveness, related to
one another. The διάνοια continually surveys and compares the many aspects
which αἴσθησις offers it.
This means that the “διάνοια is never directed toward a single being as such;
rather, its view always so encompasses a series of beings that the members of
this series are carefully distinguished from, and thus simultaneously related
to, each other.” 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
194
————————
68. The relating of one condition to another is properly the work of logistic. In the
case at hand, the comparison of one finger to the two on either side of it with respect to their
size involves two ratios. Specifically, one and the same finger is small when compared at one
time to its left neighbor. This is one ratio, i.e., being-smaller-than. At another time, one and
the same finger is large when compared to its right neighbor. This is another ratio, i.e., being-
larger-than. As we have seen, according to Klein the διάνοια resolves the obstacle of one and the
same finger’s being both big and small by discerning that the being both big and small of the
“one” finger is not itself one but two. That is to say, ‘big’ and ‘small’ are each one but together
two. And discerning this requires that the ratios in the being-larger-than and being-smaller-
than are recognized as such by logistic, that is, recognized as comparisons between two things
with respect to their magnitude.

§ 68. The Limits Inherent in the Dianoetic Mode 
of Access to Νοητά
It is thus Klein’s claim that in Plato “the διάνοια is based essentially on ‘ac-
count-giving and counting’ (λογίζεσθαι τε καὶ ἀριθμεῖν), namely on the abil-
ity to recognize many as so many, to see many as many, i.e., to distinguish the
constituents of the many and at the same time to relate them to one another”
(76–77/76–77). If it should happen, in the clarification of the opposition in
the finger or any other object, that “the perception of an ‘incompatibility’
(ἐναντίωμα) in the sense that the same object appears as one and also as the op-
posite of one [i.e., ‘many’], ‘so that nothing appears any more as one than as
the opposite’ ([Republic] 524 E; cf. Theaetetus 186 B), then here too the
διάνοια would have to intervene to remove the ‘obstacle’ and to allow the ex-
amining soul to reach ‘clarity’ (σαφήνεια) concerning the ‘one’” (GMTOA,
77/77). Therefore, Plato’s account of the obscurity involved in the perception
of the finger “leads directly to the question concerning ‘definite amounts’ and
the ‘one.’” To be sure, the opposition—between the softness and hardness of
the same finger, or Simmias’s largeness and smallness—is “easily resolved. For
the finger [or Simmias] is called ‘one’ and ‘many’ in totally different respects”
(77 n. 1/236 n. 85). “Nevertheless in this elementary and easily penetrable
form . . . the contradiction [i.e., of the one and the many] is palpable enough
to spur the διάνοια on to activity—which is here the sole point.” Moreover, be-
cause perception in these instances is responsible for our seeing “‘the same
things at the same time as one and as unlimited in multitude’ ([Republic] 525
A)” (GMTOA, 77/77), and since this holds not just for one object but “also
generally for ‘every definite amount’ of objects (ξύμπας ἀριθμός), because any
‘definite amount’ represents precisely a limited multitude of unit objects,”
then the διάνοια is “compelled . . . to separate the unit as such, ‘the one itself’
(αὐτὸ τὸ ἕν), from its opposite, namely the unlimited many.” 
Thus, as we indicated above, for Klein the διάνοια—because of the op-
positional character of its clarifying activity—“is unable to come face to face
with the one as it is in itself. For the διάνοια always deals with a multitude of
ones; it cannot grasp the one except through the totality of ones, just as it
cannot grasp one element of language, i.e., a single sound rendered by a let-
ter, without the remaining sounds (Philebus 18 C), nor a single tone with-
out the other tones” (GMTOA, 78/78). The discovery by the διάνοια of the
“one” not by itself but in relation to other ones, “an activity which is, in ef-
fect, nothing but—counting,” is, according to Klein, “a proceeding of a per-
fectly ordinary kind. In all the daily routines of life we are dependent on just
such interventions.” Moreover, the soul, led by the διάνοια, 
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
195

turns its attention to this, its very own way, “arousing thinking within herself”
(κινοῦσα ἐν ἑαυτῇ τὴν ἔννοιαν) and discovers, within a field of unlimitedly
many and homogeneous “pure” units, the “pure” definite amounts of these
units; it raises its own relating activity to full explicitness by examining the re-
lations of these definite amounts to one another, thus incidentally laying a
foundation for the possibility of making calculations; it causes the εἴδηof these
relations of definite amounts, as well as of the definite amounts themselves, to
“underlie” the objects of sense as “suppositions,” “positing the odd and the
even” ([Republic] 510 C) as the first of these—yet in spite of all this, it is un-
able to come to face with the one as it is in itself. (GMTOA, 78/77–78)
As we have indicated, this inability is rooted in the oppositional character of
the noetic structures that the διάνοιαrecognizes, a character that has its source
in the fact that the διάνοια, despite its being directed toward νοητά, “always re-
mains related to that αἴσθησις which first ‘called upon it’ to clarify an obscure
state of affairs” (78/78). Thus, “The διάνοια effects its clarification by recog-
nizing the opposition which underlies the obscurity of the αἰσθητόν as an op-
position,” a recognition that is “the proper function of the διάνοια (cf. Theae-
tetus 186 B).” And again, as we have already seen, the consequence of this is
that “it at first always attains to noetic structures of oppositional character.”
Klein finds these illustrated in the Theaetetus in terms of “‘being’ and ‘non-
being,’ of ‘likeness’ and ‘unlikeness,’ of the ‘same’ and the ‘other,’ and further-
more of the ‘one’ and the ‘definite amount’ which deals with these {i.e., with
objects of sense}’ (Theaetetus 185 C–D).” Moving in the realm of opposition,
the διάνοια “in conducting its ‘comparisons’ (ἀναλογίσματα – Theaetetus 186
C) . . . discovers as the true ‘foundation’ of this domain the realm of the ‘pure’
relations of definite amounts, i.e., the ratios (λόγοι) and proportions (ἀναλογίαι)
of the ‘pure’ definite amounts, because every possible comparison is ultimately
founded on these (cf. Timaeus36 E–37 A)” (GMTOA, 78/78–79). However,
since “the work of the διάνοια is everywhere ‘hypothetical’ in character” (78/
79), it nevertheless remains dependent on sense perception, both in the case
of its discovery of the foundation proper to the domain of oppositions in ra-
tios and proportions and in the case of “the general theory of proportions.”
Thus, even though “it can ‘replace’ the ‘more and less’ (τὸ μὰλλον καὶ τὸ ἧττον)
which always attaches to the realm of αἰσθητάby the exact relations of definite
amounts, thereby accomplishing the most important step toward gaining that
true ἐπιστήμη which no longer has any use for αἴσθησις and whose object is
the realm of those other νοητάthat ascend to something ‘unsupposed’
(ἀνυπόθετον – Republic 510 B, 511 B),” it cannot, as we have mentioned, ap-
preciate the full significance of this accomplishment. And it cannot do so be-
cause the νοητάit supposes do not appear to it to need—due to their seeming
clarity—any further foundation. Consequently, Klein maintains that, for
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
196

Plato, “Only dialectic can open up the realm of true being, can give the ground
for the powers of the διάνοια and can reveal Being and the One and the Good
as they are—beyond all time and all opposition—in themselves and in truth”
(GMTOA, 79/79).
According to Klein, then, in Plato’s thought the soul’s dianoetic access
to νοητάis limited, because the comparison necessary for their discovery
yields a structure that is fundamentally oppositional. The pure being of these
structures supposed by the soul’s διάνοια to underlie the activities of counting
and making calculations (as well as of all the oppositions that it discovers in
the realm of sense) and, as such, something that is available only to thought,
is limited due to its inseparability from its opposite. Thus, the διάνοια cannot
think the one apart from the many, the more from the less, the odd from the
even, etc. On Klein’s view, overcoming this limitation, that is, overcoming
the oppositional character of the νοητά supposed by διάνοια, is for Plato the
work of dialectic, the proper method of which is “‘division’ (διαίρεσις)”
(93/97). Klein holds that the key to this method is to be found in “that ever-
same aporia” (84/86) manifested by the mode of being of ἀριθμός, its pecu-
liar “one over many” structure. Plato directs “attention to varying aspects” of
this aporia, and in the process “indicates the mode of being of the νοητόν as
such” (88/91). Because of the intrinsic “‘weakness of speech’ (τὸ τῶν λόγων
ἀσθενές) (Seventh Letter 342 E)” (GMTOA, 91 n. 2/238 n. 103), however,
this mode of being cannot be grasped “‘with complete clarity’ (Sophist 254
C)” (GMTOA, 90/94). That is to say, when it comes to the problem of being,
“the λόγος fails!” (91/94), and it fails precisely because “the problem of ‘being’
has an internal connection with the aporiaof ‘non-being’” (84/86), and there-
with, with its opposite. Klein will show that the λόγος cannot fully account
for this aporia because it is inseparably tied to the διάνοια, a tie that brings with
it the fundamental involvement with the counting of that which has being. 
Plato’s Ontological Conception of ᾿Αριθμοί
197

Chapter Nineteen
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of
᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
§ 69. The Inability of Mathematical Thought to Account for
the Mode of Being of Its Object
Klein’s interpretation of Plato’s dialectical method is guided by the question he
has shown was raised, but not answered, by Greek mathematical thought. It
is guided therefore by the question of the mode of being proper to the math-
ematical objects that such thought, in its theoretical guise, cannot help but
encounter, a question that it also cannot help but be unable to answer—“for
all time” (83/85)—so long as it remains strictly mathematical. The question
here, which concerns both the mode of being proper to the “pure” ἀριθμοίas
well as to their εἴδη, is what guides Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of
Plato’s thought of “[t]he Platonic theory of the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί[eidetic defi-
nite amounts]” (88/91), a theory that “is known to us . . . only from the Aris-
totelian polemic against it (cf., above all, Metaphysics M 6–8).” Klein writes: 
Only the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίmake something at all like “definite amount” pos-
sible in this our world. They provide the foundation for all counting and reck-
oning, first in virtue of their particular nature which is responsible for the
differences of genus and species in things so that they may be comprehended
under a definite amount, and, beyond this, by being responsible for the un-
limited variety of things, which comes about through a “distorted” imitation
of ontological methexis [participation].69 (GMTOA, 89/92–93) 
Thus, Klein’s desedimentation of what Aristotle referred to as Plato’s “so-called
unwritten teachings (τὰ λεγόμενα ἄγραφα δόγματα)”70 reactivates the role of
the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίthat Aristotle attributes to Plato, and it does so not only
in terms of their function of making possible the γένη involved in the dialec-
tical method of “dividing according to genera” but also in terms of their role
————————
69. See n. 78 below.
70. Aristotle, Metaphysics A 6.

in providing a solution to what Klein terms “the ontological methexis [partic-
ipation] problem” (81/82).71Klein’s account of this problem represents a major
discovery, insofar as he identifies, in Plato’s discussion (in certain dialogs) of
the relationship between εἴδη, an account of their “ontological” participation
that is more fundamental—indeed, literally more radical—than the usual ac-
count of the participation of non-eidetic things in an εἶδος. The key to the so-
lution of the problem of participation in its ontological dimension lies for
Klein in the realization that “the understanding of the special κοινόν [com-
mon thing] character of the definite amount is of crucial importance for the
solution of the fundamental Platonic problem proper to the ‘community of the
kinds’ (κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν),” a problem whose solution also provides the foun-
dations for the mode of being of ἀριθμοί, their kinds, and, finally, for “not only
the inner articulation of the realm of ideas but every possible articulation,
every possible division and conjunction—in short, all counting” (88–89/92).
§ 70. The Curious Kind of Κοινωνία Manifest in ᾿Αριθμοί
Klein’s reactivation of the unwritten Platonic theory of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίis of
necessity guided by Aristotle’s reports about it, which provide the basis for
Klein’s desedimentation of the “veiled way” (81/82) in which various dialogs,
but especially the Sophist, are engaged “with the curious kind of κοινωνία
[community] which shows itself in definite amounts.” According to Klein,
the κοινωνία at issue in ἀριθμοίconcerns the following: that “every definite
amount of things belongs to these things only in respect to their community, while
each single thing taken by itself is one” (80/81). The kind of community here
is distinguished from that of “a property which belongs to several things in
common,” because, in this case, the property must also be attributed to each
single one of them, so that a κοινόν [common thing] is something ‘which be-
longs to both {in this case to hearing – ἀκοήand sight – ὄψις} in common, as
well as to either in its own right’ ([Hippias Major 300 A–302 B] – cf. Theaete-
tus 185 A)” (GMTOA, 79/79–80). 
Klein locates in Plato’s dialog Hippias Major a discussion of both of
these kinds of κοινόν. Regarding the property kind of common thing, Hip-
pias “refers to the fact (300 E–301 A) that when something is said of him,
Hippias, and of Socrates as holding for both, for instance, that ‘we are both’
(ἀμφότεροί ἐσμεν) just, healthy, wounded, golden, silver, etc., then it is ‘en-
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
199
————————
71. Klein writes to his friend Gerhard Krüger in 1932, “I believe—however hyper-
bolic this may sound—that I have ‘solved’ the μέθεξις problem, I mean in Plato’s sense” (“Se-
lected Letters from Jacob Klein to Gerhard Krüger, 1929–1933,” 321).

tirely necessary’ (μεγάλη ἀνάγκη) that each of these properties should also be-
long to each one” (79/80). By contrast, Socrates points out with respect to
the first kind of κοινόν that “‘Each of us is one, but that very thing which
each of us is, both of us are not; for we are not one but two’ (301 D)” (80/81).
Consequently, “Socrates and Hippias are both together two, yet each of them
is not two, but only one; and conversely, what each of them is, namely one,
that both together they are not” (80/80–81). Moreover, “It follows directly
from this that both together make an ‘even’ definite amount, while each of
them taken separately is ‘odd’ (cf. Phaedo 103 ff.)” (GMTOA, 80/81). In ad-
dition to “‘each’ (ἐκάτερον) and ‘both’ (ἀμφότερον), certain ‘irrational’ mag-
nitudes which when added make one ‘rational’ magnitude ‘and numerous
other such things’ (καί ἄλλα μυρία τοιαῦτα) fall under the domain of κοινά
which Socrates has in mind.” Klein concludes, “We can easily see that this
domain can be defined only within the mathematical realm and that definite
amounts, above all, have this curious κοινόν character.”
§ 71. The Κοινωνία Exemplified by ᾿Αριθμοί as the Key 
to Solving the Problem of Μέθεξις
On Klein’s view, then, “There are two different kinds of κοινόν, of which one
is represented by the ‘beautiful’ (καλόν), the ‘just’ (δίκαιον), etc., while the other
can be shown to exist within the realm of quantity.” The latter kind of κοινόν
“is signaled by Plato with the formulaic phrase: ‘each {is} one but both {are}
two’ (Hippias Major 300 ff.; Republic 524 B; Theaetetus 146 E, 185 A, B, 203
D ff. . . . cf. also Republic 476 A, 479 C, 583 E and Phaedo 96 E–97 A; 101 B,
C; furthermore Parmenides 143 C, D and Sophist 243 D, E; 250 A–D)”
(GMTOA, 81/81–82). Klein holds that “Plato himself relates this state of af-
fairs to the problem of μέθεξις,” to the problem of “how it is possible that one
idea in its unity and wholeness is ‘distributed’ over many things which ‘partake’
in it” (79/80). Klein identifies two dimensions to this problem: 1) the “dia-
noetic methexis problem” (80/80), which is exemplified in the distribution
of the unity of ἀριθμός over Socrates and Hippias in the example above, and
2) the “ontological methexis problem” (81/82), which concerns “the relation
of an idea of a higher order to the ideas under it, of a ‘genus’ to its ‘species’”
(80/80). Indeed, he holds that “as the elementary form of the problem of the
one and the many is to the dianoetic methexis problem, so is the latter to the
ontological problem of the ‘community’ of ideas.” And, as we have indicated,
the second kind of κοινόνthat Klein identifies, the kind exemplified by ἀριθμοί,
“is of crucial importance for the solution of the fundamental Platonic prob-
lem of the ‘community of the kinds’ (κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν)” (81/82). 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
200

Klein holds that the Sophist “brings this problem [i.e., the community
of the kinds] to the fore,” and thereby places “under examination . . . nothing
but the special constitution of the κοινόν of which the Hippias Major speaks”
(85/87). Guided by Aristotle’s reports about Plato’s theory of ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί, Klein desediments “[t]he notion of an ‘arithmetic’ structure of the
realm of ideas” (87/89), which “permits a solution of the ontological methexis
problem.” On the basis of this solution, an account is yielded of the mode of
being proper to ἀριθμοί and their kinds that, given the fact that “the aporia of
‘being’ is here [in the Sophist] left unresolved” (85/88), is still nevertheless
able to point out that “the διάνοια . . . at the end of its ‘dialectical’ activity,
[must] come to see that the ‘conjunction’ of opposites is in truth the ‘co-exis-
tence’ of elements other in kind” (92/96).
§ 72. The Κοινωνία Exemplified by ᾿Αριθμοί Contains the Clue
to the “Mixing ” of Being and Non-being in the Image
Klein argues that the Sophist deals with the fundamental fact that “the diffi-
culty of the problem of ‘being’ has an internal connection with the aporia of
‘non-being’” (84/86). Thus, the question about being “is in itself twofold,” in-
sofar as “At bottom we are dealing with one difficulty: ‘being and non-being
have equal parts in this quandary’ ([Sophist] 250 E).” Moreover, for Klein,
the quandary in question concerns the “mode of being of the ‘image’”
(GMTOA, 81/83), which “can only ‘be’ if ‘non-being’ and ‘being’ can ‘mix’
with one another” (84/86). Hence, “The main task of the Sophist is that of ex-
hibiting the foundations of the ‘possibility of being’ of a sophist as identical
with the ultimate foundation of every possible articulation of being itself”
(81/82). This possibility is rooted in “The fact that everything which is can
be ‘duplicated’ by an image (cf. Timaeus 52 C), an image which is, in some
enigmatic way, precisely not that which it presents [darstellt], so that it is at
once this being and ‘another,’ is ultimately founded on the ‘mirror-like qual-
ity’ of being itself.” Consequently, Klein writes that “This primal character of
being is . . . the effect of the ‘twofold as such,’ the ‘indeterminate dyad’
(ἀόριστος δυάς).” To anticipate the conclusion Klein draws concerning the
role of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίin the clarification of being—so far, that is, as this is
possible given the limits of the λόγος—this twofold structure of being is ex-
emplified by “the first ‘eidetic definite amount,’” which is “the eidetic ‘two’:
it presents the γένος of ‘being’ as such” (90/93).
On Klein’s view, the sophist presents, “[w]ithin human existence”
(81/82–83), the “perfect ‘imaginal’ embodiment” (81/83) of the ἀόριστος
δυάς (indeterminate dyad). Thus, “Whether or not the sophist’s being is a pos-
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
201

sible one must then, in the final analysis, be considered to depend on showing
that the ἀόριστος δυάς is the ἀρχήof all duality and thus of all multiplicity.”
This means that to understand the sophist, “the primal phenomenon of ‘im-
ageability’ . . . must occupy the center of inquiry.” This phenomenon initially
manifests itself in the sophist’s “claim ‘to know everything’ (πάντα ἐπίστασθαι)”
(81–82/83), which must be taken seriously if the enigma of the sophist and
therefore the image is to be unraveled, “even if such a claim can only be made
playfully—as Theaetetus says [to the Stranger]: ‘You are jesting somehow’
(Παιδιὰν λέγεις τινά– [Sophist] 234 A)” (82/83). Indeed, 
to do justice to this claim, we must understand it as the highest form of
“play,” namely as “imitative play” (234 B; cf. 231 A), for the whole activity
of the sophist is to be understood as an “imitation of reasonable speech”
(μίμησις . . . περί τοὺς λόγους), made “through the ears” (234 C), analogous
to the activity of the painter (cf. Protagoras 312 C) who can, with the aid of
color, produce “images and namesakes of being” (μιμήματα καὶ ὁμώνυμα τῶν
ὄντων) for the eyes, and who can thus simulate a whole world (234 B; cf.
Statesman 277 C and also 288 C).
The question must be asked whether the sophist’s “imitation is a ‘true’ or
only an ‘apparent’ one, i.e., whether it corresponds to the relations of simi-
larity in geometry where the “proportions” of the originals are always pre-
served, or to those of the ‘theory of perspective’ (ὀπτική) or ‘scene painting’
(σκηνογραφία) where they are distorted according to the laws of perspec-
tive” (82/83–84). Thus, here, “within the realm of μίμησις, of ‘image mak-
ing’ (εἰδωλοποιική), the opposition of being (εἶναι) and seeming (δοκεῖν –
[Sophist] 236 A–C)” emerges, and the question of whether the sophist’s im-
itation has to do with one or the other kind of μίμησις “is endlessly hard to
decide because it begins by taking two things for granted: a ‘yes’ and a ‘no,’
a ‘being’ (ὄν) and a ‘non-being’ (μὴ ὄν)” (GMTOA, 82/84). The difficulty
here is rooted in the equivalence of this question with the question “about
the ‘imageability’ of being as such,” which means that “this is the ultimate
question to which that concerning the possibility of the sophist’s being
leads.” Hence, Klein claims that when the sophist asks about “the enigmatic
being quality of the ‘image’ (εἴδωλον) which spans ([Sophist] 239 D–240 A)
‘likeness’ (εἰκών) and ‘mere appearance’ (φάντασμα), [he] mirrors himself
within himself, as it were, in an unlimited image.” Indeed, “That he demands
an answer such as comes from ‘reasonable speech’ (ἐκ τῶν λόγων) marks him,
to crown it all, as the highest ‘imitator’—for is not this just the demand of
the ‘philosopher,’ of Socrates, who once entered on the ‘second-best sailing’
(δεύτερος πλοῦς) by taking refuge in the λόγοι (Phaedo 99 D–E; cf. Statesman
285 E–286 A) and who now plays the silent listener?” (GMTOA, 82–
83/84).
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
202

According to Klein, “the ability to determine the being quality of an
‘image’ depends on the solution of the problem concerning the ‘non-,’ for in
the image as such ‘being’ and ‘non-being’ are inextricably intertwined
([Sophist] 240 A–C)” (GMTOA, 83/84). Moreover, “characteristically the
presentation of the ‘first and greatest quandary’ (μεγίστη καὶ πρώτη ἀπορία –
[Sophist] 238 A 2; D 1), which concerns non-being, already indicates the close
connection between ‘speaking’ (λέγειν) or ‘thinking’ (διανοεῖσθια) the μὴ ὄν
[non-being] on the one hand and the possibility of counting, i.e., the existence
of ἀριθμοί(238 A–239 B) on the other” (GMTOA, 83/84–85). For Klein this
is apparent in the following exchange between the Stranger and Theaetetus:
“‘Then we posit every definite amount whatsoever as belonging to being?’”
(83/85), to which Theatetus replies: “‘At least if there is anything to be posited
as being at all.’” So Klein claims that, for Plato, “what is ‘countable’ is always un-
derstood as ‘being,’ and ‘being’ is always understood as ‘countable.’” What is
is always spoken about “either in the ‘singular’ or in the ‘plural’ (leaving apart
the ‘dual’): even one thing is only ‘one’ among many things.” Moreover, 
the direct connection between . . . “thinking” (διανοεῖσθαι) and “accounting for
and counting” (λογίζεσθαι καὶ ἀριθμεῖν) becomes especially visible when we
turn toward non-being or, going further, make “non-being” itself the object of
study, for even when we speak of the μὴ ὄνand μὴ ὄντα, of non-being and non-
beings, we articulate even that which defies all articulation, namely—nothing!
Klein holds that this is the reason why the “Eleatic Stranger—‘as ever, so also
now’ (καὶ γὰρ πάλαι καὶ τὰ νῦν)—declares himself no match for ‘non-being.’”
Klein therefore finds it of the utmost significance that the Stranger “pretends
to expect of his interlocutor, the young Theaetetus, ‘straight speaking about
non-being,’” as the latter, not only because of his youth but also because he is
a mathematician, is “incompetent . . . for all time to deal with the problem of
the μὴ ὄν within his own realm.” Nevertheless, Klein avers that because
Theaetetus is a mathematician he “yet holds in his hand, as it were, the keys
to its solution.” For “In truth, neither of the two by themselves (‘forget about
you and me’ – [Sophist] 239 C) but only both together (‘at the same time from
the mathematical side and from universal reasonings’ – Aristotle, Metaphysics
M 8, 1084 b 24 f.) can approach a solution” (GMTOA, 83/85–86). 
§ 73. Partial Clarification of the Aporia of Being and 
Non-being Holds the Key to the “Arithmetical” 
Structure of the Νοητόν’s Mode of Being
As we have indicated, the key to the approach to a solution to the problem of
non-being is rooted for Klein in the attention Plato pays to the “ever-same apo-
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
203

ria” (84/86) that is inseparable from the κοινόν manifested by ἀριθμοί. When
this aporia is formulated by both the Stranger (i.e., the philosopher, who ap-
proaches it from the side of “universal reasoning”) and Theaetetus (i.e., the
mathematician, who approaches it from the “mathematical” side), a partial clar-
ification of the image’s mode of being is grasped. And, with this, the ἀριθμός
structure of the γένη (kinds) that allows being and non-being to mix is indi-
cated, as is the ἀριθμόςstructure of the εἴδηproper to the odd and the even that
underlie “each single definite amount of pure units” (89/92), that is, that un-
derlie each noetic ἀριθμός. In other words, Klein maintains that the partial clar-
iﬁcation of the aporia of non-being holds the key to the notion that an “arith-
metical” structure (i.e., the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί) belongs to the mode of being of the
νοητόν as such, including the mode of being of both the εἴδη and the unity of
the pure monads in ἀριθμοί, each of which eludes the mathematician’s theo-
retical thinking. The mode of being of the εἴδη of ἀριθμοίeludes such thinking
because it can get beyond neither the aporia of its supposition that the unitary
qualities of oddness and evenness are distributed among an unlimited multitude
of ἀριθμοί nor the aporia of its supposition that the one is always a one among
many. Both of these presuppositions thus prevent mathematical thinking—
“for all time”—from coming face to face with the mode of being proper to
either the εἴδη of ἀριθμοίor the “one itself” presupposed by its thinking.
If an image—which, as we have seen, is enigmatically not what it pre -
sents—is to “be” at all, then ‘being’ and ‘non-being’ must somehow “mix.”
Klein argues that this “holds just as much for the being of ‘seeming,’ of mere
‘appearance,’ of ‘lie,’ of the ‘false,’ and of ‘error’” (84/86). The problem of
non-being is therefore inseparable from that of being, in the sense that 
in asking about “non-being” at all, we are already directed by the question
“about being” (περὶ οὐσίας – [Sophist] 251 C–D; “about that first and great-
est founder” – περὶ τοῦ μεγίστου τε καὶ ἀρχηγοῦ πρώτου – 243 D; cf. also the
traditional subtitle of the dialogue: “About Being” – Περὶ τοῦ ὄντος), just
as we must of necessity come upon the “philosopher” in our search after the
“sophist” (cf. 231 A–B; 253 C).
The converse also holds, because of the internal connection previously men-
tioned between being and the aporia of non-being. This is the reason why
Klein maintains that for Plato there is only “one difficulty,” one question,
“which is in itself twofold.” Indeed, he holds that Plato avers that “This is what
the ‘ancients’ as well as the ‘moderns’ have failed to recognize.” In missing this,
they “are unable even so much as to see a difficulty which arises in all their so-
lutions of the problem of being.” Of “those who allow the ‘whole’ to be more
than only one, that is, those who reduce everything to two basic constituents,
as for instance the ‘warm’ and the ‘cold,’” it must be asked: “‘But what then are
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
204

you addressing in both when you say that both and also each is?’ ([Sophist] 243
D–E)” (84/86–87). If “this ‘being’ [is] ‘a third thing besides those two,’” then
“there would be—in contradiction to the thesis—three basic constituents”
(84/87). Moreover, “neither can ‘being’ coincide with one of both, for then
only this one could be said to be, and consequently there would ‘be’ only this
one.” Finally, “if they are only ‘together’ then they ‘are’ precisely only together,”
which is how the stranger puts it in a question posed to Theaetetus: “‘But do
you then want to call both together being?’” Klein stresses, however, that “in
the present case this would mean: the ‘warm’ and the ‘cold’ would no longer
be by themselves separately, but there would be clearly only one, something
‘tepid,’ or more generally, a ‘middle thing.’” 
What is at issue here in Plato’s question regarding the difficulty of those
who allow the whole to be more than one, on Klein’s view, is the “special con-
stitution of the κοινόν” (85/87) identified in the Hippias Major. However, at
this, “the lowest level of ontological deliberation,” the state of affairs “That
‘both together’ (ἄμφω) are indeed ‘one’ and yet remain ‘two’ (cf. Parmenides
143 C–D)” cannot be exhibited, “because the two ‘substrates,’ the ‘warm’ and
the ‘cold’ themselves can be mixed.” Nevertheless, when the discussion in ques-
tion shifts such that the problem of the κοινόν comes to concern “the relation
of ‘rest’ (στάσις) and ‘change’ (κίνησις)” as the two aspects of a whole, the state
of affairs identified in the Hippias Major is indeed exhibited. For “It turns out
([Sophist] 249 D) that ‘change’ as well as ‘rest’ must ‘both together’ (συναμφό -
τερα) be assigned to ‘being.’” Thus, even though “κίνησις and στάσις are ‘most
opposite to one another’ (ἐναντιώτατα ἀλλήλοις – 250 A 8 f.) and therefore
completely uncombinable; yet both and each of them ‘is’: ‘Stranger: And do
you say that bothand eachof thesealike are? Theaetetus: Yes, indeed I do.’” Just
as in the case of the problems unrecognized by the ancients when they allow
the whole to be twofold and therefore more than one, for instance, in the ex-
ample above of the hot and the cold, in the case at hand “only this much can
be ascertained (250 B 2–D 4): to say ‘change’ and ‘rest’ ‘both and each’ (ἀμφό -
τερα καὶ ἑκάτερον) ‘are’ cannot mean that ‘being’ coincides with one of them.”
Moreover, “it is just as impossible, if they are ‘both {together said} to be’ (εἶναι
ἀμφότερα), to posit their ‘being’ as a ‘third’ thing beside them’ (250 B 7) or
‘outside both of them’ (250 D 2), ‘taking both together and then disregarding
them to look at the community of their being’” (GMTOA, 86/ 88). This is im-
possible, for if ‘being’ is understood to “be ‘according to its own nature’ (κατὰ
τὴν αὑτοῦ φύσιν) and therefore neither rest nor change,” then ‘being’ “would be
precisely not change and rest ‘together’ (συναμφότερον),” and this “appears to
be the ‘most impossible of all things’ (πάντων ἀδυνατώτατον)—for what is not
at rest is surely changing, and what is not changing rests!”
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
205

§ 74. The Κοινωνία among ῎Ον, Κίνησις, and Στάσις Composes
the Relationship of Being and Non-being
For Klein, then, the Sophistdoes not resolve the aporiaof being but rather for-
mulates it in a way that allows “the problem concerning ‘both together—each
of both—neither of the two’ to come to the fore.” He maintains that it is this
formulation that permits the realization that “The strange κοινωνίαamong ὄν,
κίνησις, and στάσις is none other than that between ‘being’ and ‘non-being’”
(85/88). To show this, Klein first traces the course of the conversation in the
Sophistas it is initially broadened beyond the topic of the relationship between
change and rest to include the problem of the one and the many. The formu-
lation of the latter problem in connection with the question of the “κοινωνία
τῶν εἰδῶν (or τῶν γενῶν)” proves to be crucial for his account of the “Platonic
theory of the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί” (88/91) as the solution to the ontological
methexis problem. Primarily on the basis of Aristotle’s reports in the Meta-
physics about the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίin Plato’s unwritten teachings, Klein shows
not only that they are intended to make intelligible the inner articulation of
the community of εἴδηand γένη, but also—as has already been suggested—all
articulation, including every possible division and conjunction, that is, count-
ing. Finally, Klein shows that the Sophist’s investigation of the incompatibility
of κίνησις and στάσις “permits the διάνοια to understand the ‘duplicity’ of
‘being,’ namely, that it means not only ever self-identical ‘rest,’ but also con-
jointly ‘change,’ and that in this manner alone, the ‘imaging’ [Ab-bildung]
of being in re-cognition [Erkennen], that is, in knowing [γιγνώσκειν] and being
known [γιγνώσκεσθαι] – 248 B ff.), and, beyond this, all image making (cf.
Cratylus 439 E–340 A)” (GMTOA, 91–92/95–96) is possible.
For Klein, then, “the relation of στάσις to κίνησις forms the nucleus of
all the subsequent discussion [in the Sophist]” (85/88). The “universal exten-
sion of the original problem of the ‘two’ aspects, i.e., of the meaning of ‘at one
and the same time’ (ἅμα) or of ‘both’ (ἄμφω, cf. Phaedo 96 E–97 A)” (86/88)
leads to the question of “how the ‘many’ are conjoined to form the ‘unity’ of
any being.” At issue in this question “is that ‘gift of the gods to human beings’
(Philebus 16 C), namely the ‘astounding’ (ibid., 14 C) assertion that each
thing is ‘one and many’ (ἕν καὶ πολλά) ‘at once’ (ἅμα)” (85–86/88). Initially
raised “in the most universal terms, namely in reference to any being,” it is
next “transformed into the narrower ontological methexis problem, into the
question of the κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν (or τῶν γενῶν)” (86/88). Three possibil-
ities, “and no more” (86/89), emerge regarding this κοινωνία, only one of
which is realizable. These possibilities are: “(1) There is no κοινωνία at all.
(2) All the εἴδη are mutually related. (3) There is partial κοινωνία, in the sense
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
206

that some εἴδη can ‘mix’ with each other but others not.” The first two pos-
sibilities “are not in fact realizable,” which means that “the third alone, of
necessity, remains (most explicitly: [Sophist] 252 E; cf. also 256 C).” Klein
holds then that “the very formulation of this possibility indicates the ἀριθμός
structure of the γένη; for what is it but the division of the whole realm of εἴδη
into single groups or assemblages such that each εἶδος, which presents a
unique eidetic ‘unit’ (ἐνάς), i.e., a μονάς (Philebus 15 A–B), can be ‘thrown
together’ with the other ideas of the same assemblage, but not with the ideas
of other assemblages?” 
§ 75. The Contrast between ᾿Αριθμοὶ Μαθηματικοί and
᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
Klein concludes from this that “The εἴδη . . . form assemblages of monads,
i.e., ἀριθμοίof a peculiar kind.” Unlike the mathematical assemblages of mon-
ads, which are, “as we have seen, completely similar and can therefore all be
‘thrown together’ (Aristotle, Metaphysics M 7, 1081 a 5 f.: ‘capable of being
thrown together and indifferent’ – συμβληταὶ καὶ ἀδιάφοροι),” “the assem-
blages of εἴδη, the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, cannot enter into [just] any ‘community’
with one another.” This is the case for Klein because “Their ‘monads’ are all
of a different kind and can be brought ‘together’ only ‘partially,’ namely only
insofar as they happen to belong to one and the same assemblage, whereas
insofar as they are ‘entirely bounded off’ from one another (πάντῃ διωρισμέναι
– Sophist 253 D 9) they are ‘incapable of being thrown together,’ incompa-
rable (ἀσύμβλητοι).” Consequently, “The monads which constitute an ‘ei-
detic definite amount,’ i.e., an assemblage of ideas, are nothing but the
conjunction of εἴδη which belong together” (GMTOA, 87/89–90). Moreover,
They belong together because they belong to one and the same εἶδος of a
higher order, namely to a “genus,” a γένος (as, for instance, “human being,”
“horse,” “dog,” etc., partake in “animal”) without “partioning” it among the (fi-
nitely) many εἴδη and without losing their indivisible unity only if the γένος it-
self exhibits the mode of being of an ἀριθμός. Only the ἀριθμός structure
with its special κοινόν character is able to guarantee the essential traits of the
community of εἴδη demanded by dialectic; the indivisibility of the single
“monads” which form the ἀριθμός assemblage, the limitedness of this as-
semblage of monads as expressed in the joining of many monads into one as-
semblage, i.e., into one idea, and the untouchable integrity of this higher idea
as well. (87/90)72
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
207
————————
72. Klein writes in his 1932 letter to Krüger (ibid.): “There is in Plato a kind of ‘formula,’
which runs: ἀμφοτέρα δύο, ἑκάτερον δὲ ἕν (e.g., Republic 524b, Theaet. 185b). That is: determi-
nate numbers—and only these—have the peculiarity that they apply to several things together,
but to no individual thing of this group, of this ἀριθμός—and vice versa. If we have five apples, 

Klein therefore concludes that for Plato “What the single εἴδη have ‘in com-
mon’ is theirs only in their community and is not something which is to be
found ‘beside’ and ‘outside’ (παράand ἐκτός) them (cf. also Philebus 18 C–
D).” 
Thus, unlike the unity and determinacy of the noetic ἀριθμοί that the
διάνοια supposes to underlie its praxis of counting, which have their basis in
the delimitation of the field of unlimitedly many monads as a consequence
of the special kinds to which each definite amount belongs (see § 57 above),
“the unity and determinacy of the ἀριθμός assemblage is here rooted in the
content of the idea (ἰδέα).” On Klein’s view, the content of the idea is some-
thing that “the λόγος reaches in its characteristic activity of uncovering foun-
dations ‘analytically.’”73 This means that a “special kind of definite amount
[e.g., ‘odd’ or ‘even’] with a particular quality [e.g., ‘oddness’ or ‘evenness’] is not
needed in this realm, as it was among the dianoetic definite amounts . . . , to
provide a foundation for this unity.” Each whole in question is determined
by the ἰδέα whose content provides the unity of the parts comprising the ei-
detic ἀριθμός assemblage, and therefore—in contrast with the delimitation
provided by the kinds proper to mathematical ἀριθμοί—is what is responsi-
ble for the delimitation of the unity of an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός. Moreover, “each
eidetic definite amount is, by virtue of its eidetic character, unique in kind,
just as each of its ‘monads’ has not only unity, but also uniqueness.” These
unitary but unique monads stand in “contrast to the unlimitedly many ho-
mogeneous monads of the mathematical region of definite amounts, which
can be assembled arbitrarily into specific definite amounts as often as one
likes,” which means that “it is impossible that the kinds of definite amounts
corresponding to those of the dianoetic realm” should exist in the realm of
eidetic definite amounts.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
208
————————
‘five’ only applies for them all together, but not for each of these apples. Conversely, each indi-
vidual apple is certainly ‘one,’ but all together they are not ‘one,’ but rather ‘five.’ This is elabo-
rated at length in Hippias Major (300a–302b) and there too linked intimately with the μέθεξις
problem. What, then, does this state of affairs mean for the great problem of the κοινωνία of εἴδη,
which alone is the real problem of μέθεξις? Well, simply this: if, e.g., ‘dog,’ ‘horse,’ ‘stag,’ ‘lion,’ etc.
(a finiteamount of such εἴδη) relate to the γένοςin the same manner as the monads of an ἀριθμός
to this ἀριθμός as their integrated totality, then the γένος does not ‘divide’ itself into the εἴδη,
just as ‘five’ does not divide itself into the five monads! Thus: the ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός is the onto-
logical possibility of the ἰδέα as a whole that stands in many relations in kind to other εἴδη and
yet is indivisible. The ἀριθμὸςεἰδητικόςis nothing other than the Platonic solution of the μέθεξις
question. Hence the obstinacy and intensity of Aristotle’s attack! Of course, such a solution is
possible only on the basis of the ‘natural’ concept of ἀριθμός, as you well know . . .”
73. See § 102, where Klein’s articulation of the “analytic” method in ancient mathe-
matics is discussed, and esp. n. 134, where this method is discussed in connection with the
dialectical method manifest in Plato’s dialogs. 

Klein makes use of Aristotle’s report that “there are three kinds of
ἀριθμοί” (88/91) to clarify the similarities and differences between sensible,
mathematical, and eidetic definite amounts in Plato. ᾿Αριθμὸς αἰσθητός (a
sensible definite amount) and ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός (a mathematical definite
amount) are alike, in “that they occur in multitudes and are of the same kind
(Aristotle, Metaphysics B 6, 1002 b 15 f.: ‘{Mathematical objects} differ not
at all in being many and of the same kind’).” They are different, of course, in
that the former is not everlasting and unchanging, while the latter is precisely
both. ᾿Αριθμὸς εἰδητικός (an eidetic definite amount) and ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός
are alike in that they are both everlasting and unchanging, but unlike in that
“each εἶδος” that belongs to the multitude unified by an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός “is,
by contrast [with each monad that belongs to the multitude unified by an
ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός], irreproducible and truly one (Metaphysics A 6, 987 b 15
ff.: ‘Mathematical objects differ from objects of sense in being everlasting and
unchanged, from εἴδη, on the other hand, in being many and alike, while an
εἶδος is each by itself one only’).” This clarification allows Klein to articulate
the three kinds of definite amounts as follows. Sensible or “aisthetic definite
amounts present nothing other than precisely the sensibly perceivable74 things
themselves present to αἴσθησις in this definite amount.” By contrast, “mathe-
matical definite amounts form an independent domain of objects which the
διάνοια reaches by seeing the exemplary fulfillment of its own activity in ‘reck-
oning 〈i.e., account-giving〉 and counting’ (λογίζεσθαι καὶ ἀριθμεῖν).” And the
“eidetic definite amount indicates the mode of being of the νοητόν as such—it
defines the εἶδος ontologically as a being which has multiple relations to other
εἴδη in accordance with their particular nature and which is nevertheless alto-
gether indivisible.”
§ 76. The Foundational Function of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
Besides Aristotle’s polemic against what Klein terms “the Platonic theory of
the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί,” Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of the pecu-
liar ἀριθμός structure of their κοινωνία takes its clue from the various reports
about Plato’s “lecture On the Good (‘Περὶ τ᾿ ἀγαθοῦ’).” Both the latter and re-
peated references in Aristotle (Klein cites Metaphysics Λ 8, 1073 a 20, Μ 8,
1084 a 12 ff., 25 ff., and Physics Γ 6, 206 b 32–33 at GMTOA, 88/92) indi-
cate that Plato “limited the realm of eidetic definite amounts to ten” (88/91).
However, Klein thinks it “is questionable whether Plato sketched out more
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
209
————————
74. The phrase sinnlich wahrnehmbaren (sensuously perceivable) is not translated in
the English translation.

than the general framework of the theory.” Nevertheless, Klein’s desedimen-
tation of the Greek ἀριθμός concept, together with his reactivation of the
basic problematic of Greek theoretical arithmetic as dealing not with ἀριθμοί
but with their delimitation by their εἴδη (see § 57 above), permits him to re-
activate in turn 1) the “separate, independent and ‘absolute’ being” (89/93)
of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί“in relation not only to αἰσθητάbut also to the ‘pure’ math-
ematical definite amounts,” 2) the grounding of the “‘sequence’ of monadic
definite amounts” in the “original order of eidetic definite amounts,” and, fi-
nally, 3) the ground of the ordering from “higher” to “lower” of the γένη
themselves that comprise the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί.
Regarding (1), Klein holds that “the eidetic definite amounts might, in
their foundational function, be most easily compared to the Pythagorean
‘roots’ (πυθμένες) of the mathematical realm of definite amounts” (88/92;
see § 62 above). That is because “the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίare intended to make in-
telligible not only the inner articulation of the realm of ideas but every pos-
sible articulation, every possible division and conjunction—in short, all
counting” (88–89/92). On his view, Aristotle’s polemic against Plato’s the-
ory “exhibits the many contradictions which must arise from the transfer of
the universal character of the countable as such to the distinct nature of each
εἴδη” (88/92). However, “it is precisely the unmathematical employment of the
ἀριθμός-structure which is essential” for Plato on Klein’s view. With regard to
the εἴδη of ἀριθμοί, theoretical arithmetic and logistic are unable to provide
“the true grounds for the existence of such εἴδη of definite amounts and of
each single definite amount of pure units”75 (89/92). This is the case, because
“While the arithmetician and the logistician ‘suppose’ certain εἴδη to ‘under-
lie’ the unlimitedly many monads of his domain in order to have ‘hypothet-
ical’ grounds on which they may be comprehended into single monadic
assemblages,” only the dialectician is able actually to give these grounds by
pointing out how “the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίmake something of the nature of def-
inite amounts possible in this our world.” Thus, on Klein’s view, there can “be
arbitrarily many definite amounts, such as hexads or decads, in the realm of
‘pure’ units as well as in the realm of sensibles,” “[o]nly because there are εἴδη
which belong together, whose community in each case forms a ‘kinship’ which
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
210
————————
75. Stanley Rosen’s critique of Klein’s interpretation of the μέγιστα γένη in the Sophist
“on the basis of Aristotle’s contention that these forms are eidetic numbers” (Stanley Rosen,
Plato’s Sophist [New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1983], 48–57, here 48) overlooks
Klein’s reactivation of this aspect of the mode of being proper to mathematical ἀριθμοί, an as-
pect, as we have seen, that Klein maintains Greek theoretical arithmetic attempts to address
with its hypothetical method. Because the presentation of this aspect, or, more precisely, of
this problem, forms the indispensable context for Klein’s account of the function of ἀριθμοὶ 

Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
211
————————
εἰδητικοίto provide the foundation for mathematical ἀριθμοί, as well as for his account of them
as a solution to the ontological methexis problem, Rosen’s claim that Klein’s “attempt to un-
derstand Platonic dialectic by means of an arithmetical paradigm” (49) “is unsuccessful on in-
ternal technical grounds” needs to be reevaluated.
Rosen argues that Klein adopts the paradigm “of the combination of numbers” (50) in
order to resolve “the problem of the combination of the elements of intelligible structure,” e.g.,
the problem of how the “Formal elements like man and horse must be able to combine with an
element like animal, without dissolving the integrity of each element in the combination.” He
goes on to articulate this paradigm as follows: “Thus, for example, the numbers two and three
(italics designate ‘the numbers themselves’) combine into the number five with no sacrifice of
their independent identities, but with the addition of new properties (such as odd and even)
which they may lack independently.” In Klein’s discussion of mathematical ἀριθμοί, however,
no such paradigm can be found. Specifically, as we have seen, for him the Greek theoretical
arithmetic that formed the context for Plato’s philosophy is concerned with the problem of ac-
counting for the delimitation of the unlimited field of noetic monads by investigating the εἴδη
of ἀριθμοί. Moreover, for Klein, as we shall see below (§ 88), prior to Aristotle these εἴδη were
not understood as the “properties” of ἀριθμοί, but, on the contrary, as their “kinds.” As such,
they were supposed to account for the delimitation of each ἀριθμός as a determinate amount of
monads, e.g., two, three, etc. Hence, one errs in calling them “properties” of ἀριθμοί, since, strictly
speaking, the specific ἀριθμοίwere supposed to come into being only as a consequence of the
delimiting characteristics accomplished by their εἴδη. As we have also seen, the reasons for the
unsatisfactoriness of this mathematical supposition are, according to Klein, alluded to in Plato’s
dialogs, and amount to the claim that the method of hypothesis—as employed by theoretical
arithmetic—cannot account for the “one and many” mode of being of both the εἴδη and the
monads appealed to (see § 69 above) in its investigation of the even and the odd “with reference
to how much either happens to be” (see § 56 above). 
When Rosen’s appeal to the numbers themselves putatively at issue in Klein’s arith-
metical paradigm is considered with respect to Klein’s understanding of theoretical arithmetic
presented above, it is necessary to challenge the appositeness of his critique. Rosen’s claim, that
what is at issue here is the ability of “any arithmetical number” (52) to “combine with any other
arithmetical number to form a community in which none of the participants loses its identity
(something that is not true for empirical or practical numbers),” does not get at what Klein re-
activates as the distinctive feature of the κοινωνία in the one and many structure of ἀριθμοί.
Namely, that the peculiar unity of an ἀριθμός, as an assemblage of just so many units (e.g., ‘two’
or ‘three’), is something that only applies to the aggregate of units as a whole. That is to say, e.g.,
that the ἀριθμός of “two” chickens or the ἀριθμός of “two” monads—contra Rosen, it makes no
difference on Klein’s account of this aspect of the problematic whether the units are aisthetic
or noetic—involves a one and many structure, the unity of which, e.g., the ‘two’, manifestly does
not belong to the individual units; thus, in the example at hand, it does not belong to the chick-
ens and monads. Hence, for Klein, the combination of the ἀριθμοί‘two’ and ‘three’ involves the
addition of counted units, and not, as Rosen would have it, the combination of “the numbers
themselves” such that “their independent identities” are preserved in the number five itself. For
Klein, Rosen’s notion of ‘numbers in themselves’ would be out of place in the consideration of
the theoretical arithmetic that formed the context of Plato’s dialogs.
Thus, when Rosen maintains that, “As Klein observes, the units of eidetic numbers, as
distinguished from those of theoretical numbers like eight and ten, cannot form such a com-
munity” (52), it is evident that he is conflating two issues that must be kept distinct in order to
achieve access to Klein’s view of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί. Rosen thinks that because the units of ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί“are not free to combine with one another indiscriminately,” they cannot “form a com-
munity in which none of the participants loses its identity.” However, for Klein the indiscrim-
inate combination of the units that make up a mathematical ἀριθμός is distinct from the issue 

must, due to the ‘arithmetical’ tie of its ‘members’ as an eidetic ‘definite
amount,’76 be designated as the six or the ten.” Moreover, only because of this
“unmathematical” ἀριθμός structure “can definite amounts exhibit such def-
inite, unifying kinds . . . as the ‘even-times-even’ or the ‘triangular.’”77
§ 77. The Order of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί Provides the Foundation
for Both the Sequence of Mathematical ᾿Αριθμοίand the 
Relation of Family Descent between Higher and Lower Γένη
Beyond providing the foundation for both the many sensible and pure ἀριθμοί
and the εἴδη that delimit them, the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, “in virtue of their distinc-
tive nature,” are “responsible for the differences of genus and species in things that
makes them graspable in a definite ‘amount’” (89/92–93). In addition, it is
“through a ‘distorted’ imitation of ontological methexis (. . . cf. Philebus 16 C–
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
212
————————
of whether it is possible for the units in an ἀριθμὸς εἰδηικός to combine without losing their
identity. On the one hand, there is the ἀριθμός structure of the “one and many” community that
allows the discrete items that comprise the many to maintain their integrity, in the sense that,
notwithstanding their unity as parts of the whole ἀριθμός, the whole proper to this ἀριθμός is
something that manifestly does not characterize each of its parts taken singly. On the other
hand, there is the difference between the homogeneity of the many monads that comprise a
pure ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός and the heterogeneity of those that characterize an ἀριθμὸς εἰδηικός.
As we have seen from our discussion of Klein’s account of the ἀριθμός structure, the first issue
is distinct from the second, because both the many mathematical and the many eidetic mon-
ads are capable of “commingling” “without loss of identity ensuing for the constituent” ele-
ments. The second issue, which addresses the difference in the character of the communities
brought about by the commingling made possible by the ἀριθμός structure of each, that is, the
issue of the combinability of monads belonging to different ἀριθμοίthat characterizes mathe-
matical but not ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, is thus a difference that shows up for Klein within a com-
mon context. For, contrary to Rosen’s claim, both mathematical and eidetic ἀριθμοί“form a
community in which none of the participants loses its identity.” 
Rosen’s judgment, then, that the question of whether “the version of a doctrine of eidetic
numbers attributed to him [Plato] by Klein” (53) is “a genuine solution to the ontological
methexis problem,” is a question that “can be answered in the negative without any hesitation,”
must be rejected. The failure of the critique of Klein upon which it is based to keep distinct the
issues detailed above, has as one consequence keeping open the possibility that Klein’s version
of a Platonic doctrine of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίmay indeed be successful “on internal technical
grounds.” Because of the shortcoming in his critique, Rosen’s claim that the authenticity of the
thesis Klein attributes to Plato cannot be established, on the grounds that a “careful scrutiny of
the passages cited by Klein from the dialogs shows no explicit statement at all” of it, is also in
need of reassessment. For Rosen’s failure to grasp the basics of Klein’s thesis rules out his being
able to recognize whether or not parts of Plato’s dialogs do indeed present, as Klein maintains,
evidence—albeit “in a veiled way”—of an engagement with the strange kind of κοινωνία that
shows itself in ἀριθμοί.
76. The German als eidetische “Anzahl” (as an eidetic “definite amount”) is not trans-
lated in the English translation.
77. See n. 62 above.

E; Timaeus 43)” (89/93)78 that they are responsible “for the unlimited variety
of things.” It is this “foundational function” (89/93) that “guarantees” the sep-
arate, independent, and absolute being of the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίin relation to
both sensible and pure mathematical ἀριθμοί. For Klein, then, “[w]hat the
Pythagoreans undertook with respect to the world of sense in which they be-
lieved that all beings were comprised . . . Plato now undertakes to do with re-
spect to the world opened up by the λόγος, the world of νοητάwhich has true
being.” This means that for Plato “the ‘definite amount’-being of the νοητά sig-
nifies their ordered being, their τάξις.” This τάξις, however, cannot be explained
or otherwise accounted for by theoretical arithmetic or logistic, because for
these sciences the mode of being of νοητάis hypothesized as “a completely ho-
mogeneous field” formed by mathematical monads (see § 59 above). The se-
quence of monadic ἀριθμοί, which by its very nature as a sequence is inseparable
from the difference that composes each ἀριθμός qua its sequential ordering,
transcends the hypothesized homogeneity of the monad field, and therefore
cannot be accounted for by theoretical mathematics. But it can be “grounded
in the original order of the eidetic definite amounts.” Thus, Klein maintains
that “Every eidetic definite amount is either superior or inferior in this order
with respect to its ‘neighbor.’” Indeed, because of this eidetic ordering, “a sub-
sumption of all these definite amounts under one idea common to all, namely
‘definite amount in general,’ is quite impossible.” This is because the order at
issue here is determined precisely by the differenceof each ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός from
its “neighbors,” which ipso factorules out a quality in common that is necessary
for them to fall under a common idea. Klein quotes Aristotle in this context:
“‘In respect to things in which there is a prior and a posterior, what is in these
cannot be something apart from them’ (Aristotle, Metaphysics Β 3, 999 a 6 f.)”
(GMTOA, 89 n. 1/237 n. 100).
Klein’s account of the function of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί to ground the se-
quence of monadic ἀριθμοί shows that their grounding function extends to an
ordering of the γένη yielded by the partial κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν. What is or-
dered in this case are the relations among the incomparable assemblages of
εἴδη whose unity and determinacy is rooted in the content proper to the εἶδος
or ἰδέα of a higher order that unites them. Thus, he writes that “the relation
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
213
————————
78. Klein, at this point, does not elaborate precisely what is at issue in the “‘distorted’
imitation of ontological methexis,” but instead refers to his text’s initial and final discussions
of the relationship between dianoetic and ontological methexis. The earlier discussion articu-
lates the relationship between dianoetic and ontological methexis in terms of a “proportion”
(see § 71 above), while the latter (see § 72 above) articulates the difference between the preser-
vation of the proportions of the originals in the relations of similarity in geometry and the
distortion of such proportions according to the laws of perspective. Regarding this final dis-
cussion, see § 83 below.

of ‘family descent’ between the higher and lower ideas corresponds to the ‘ge-
netic’ order of the eidetic definite amounts” (89–90/93). That the genetic order
of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί“is genuinely Platonic can be seen, if not ‘with complete
clarity’ yet clearly enough, from the Sophist” (90/93). Manifest for Klein in
that dialogue’s discussion of the “‘greatest genera’ (μέγιστα γένη – 254 C),”
which occurs in the context of the goal “to grasp ‘being’ as well as ‘non-being’
in a manner suited to the present mode of examination” (90/94), is the be-
ginning of this order. The ordered mode of being of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί re-
sponsible for the sequence of monadic ἀριθμοίis also shown to be, in turn,
responsible for ordering—from higher to lower—the γένη proper to the dis-
tinct assemblages characteristic of the κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν in terms of their
“familial descent.” Klein shows how the Sophist’s discussion of the partial
κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν points to “the eidetic ‘two’” (90/93) as “the ‘first’ eidetic
definite amount” in the genetic order of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί. As the ‘first’ ἀριθ -
μὸς εἰδητικός, its γένος is the most “original and comprehensive,” because the
“‘higher’ the γένος. . . the less articulated the eidetic definite amount.” As such,
it “presents the γένος of being as such, which encompasses the two εἴδη ‘rest’
and ‘change.’” 
§ 78. The Inability of the Λόγος to “Count” the Μέγισ τα Γένη
Points to Its Limits and Simultaneously Presents the First
᾿Αριθμὸς Εἰδητικός
Klein shows all of this by bringing into relief how the Sophist’sinvestigation of
the possibility of a partial κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν (or τῶν γενῶν) with respect to the
μέγισταγένηpoints to the failure of the “dianoetic-dialogic method” to “count”
the γένη involved in the kinds of community that emerge from its investiga-
tion. After disclosing this failure, he is able to reactivate the “eidetic two,”
“which consists of στάσις and κίνησις,” as the “paradigm” (92/96) for “‘an arith-
metic community’ among eidetic monads which are not capable of ‘being
mixed’ although they ‘belong together.’”
Klein begins by showing how in its attempt to count the γένη of
στάσις, κίνησις, and ὄν, “the λόγος cannot conclude the count with ‘two’ be-
cause it says that στάσις and κίνησις ‘are’ not only together but also ‘singly’”
(91/95). Because the mixing of στάσις and κίνησις has been ruled out and in-
deed stressed (see § 71 above), “both ‘are,’ and from this follows the ‘triad’
of στάσις, κίνησις, and ὄν ([Sophist 254] D 12)” (91/94). However, Klein
points out that earlier in the dialog “it has already been shown that the ὄν is
not to be understood as a ‘third thing beside’ or ‘outside these’ (τρίτον παρὰ
ταῦτα or ἐκτὸς τούτων), since this would lead to the ‘most impossible thing
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
214

of all’ (250 B–D),” namely, ὄν according to its nature excluding both στάσις
and κίνησις. From this, Klein concludes that “In respect to ὄν, κίνησις and
στάσις, the λόγος fails!”—“because it must count ‘three’ when in truth there
are only ‘two,’ namely στάσις and κίνησις, which are ‘each one’ and ‘both
two’! (ἑκάτερον ἕν and ἀμφότερα δύο)” (91/94–95). Thus, unlike “the case of
‘two mathematical monads,’” which the λόγος counts “each . . . by itself as
only one and precisely not as ‘two,’” such that the διάνοια understands their
arithmetical κοινωνία, expressed by the ἀριθμός ‘two’, to pertain only to “both
together” (i.e., the λόγος does not regard each of the monads encompassed
by the ἀριθμός ‘two’ to be, when taken singly, ‘two’), it is otherwise in the case
of the “two” γένη of στάσις and κίνησις: for here the διάνοια understands their
“arithmetical” κοινωνία, expressed by the γένος ὄν, to pertain to both together
as well as to each of them singly. That is, the λόγος regards each of the γένη en-
compassed by ὄν—στάσις and κίνησις—to have ὄν, as well as both together
to have it. Consequently, when the λόγος attempts to give an account of
‘being’ (ὄν), it “counts” the ὄν of στάσις and κίνησις, “both together,” as “one”
γένος, and takes στάσις singly as another “one,” and, likewise, κίνησις is taken
singly as still another “one”; that is, it counts “three” γένη where there are
only “two.”79 Because this ‘two’, however, emphatically does not emerge from
counting and therefore does not present a mathematical ἀριθμός, Klein takes
its emergence to present an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός: specifically, to present the ei-
detic ‘two’, which—as we have noted—for him presents the “γένος of ‘being’
as such” (90/93).
§ 79. Θάτερον as the “ Twofold in General” Allows for the 
Articulation of Being and Non-being
Klein thus concludes that, for Plato, “[ὄ]ν, κίνησις, and στάσις, in spite of their
‘arithmetical’ κοινωνία, cannot be ‘counted’ at all” (91/95), and that it is “this
that defines the ‘failure’ of the λόγος.” Regarding the κοινωνία of the “three”
γένη presupposed by the “dianoetic understanding,” it is able to get “clear only
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
215
————————
79. Klein writes that “This state of affairs is obscured for us by the ‘symbolic’ concept
of number . . . , but it poses a nearly insurmountable difficulty for Eleatic, Pythagorean, and
Platonic philosophy” (GMTOA, 91 n. 1/238 n. 102). This is because, as we saw in Chapter
12 above and shall see again below, the “symbolic” concept of number directly designates a
concept and therefore only indirectly designates a determinate amount of items. Thus, the
problem here is nearly unintelligible when it is approached from the conceptual level of the
symbolic numbers that we take for granted. The problem of how to understand the “unity” of
the items designated by their “definite amount” (i.e., ἀριθμός) (be it mathematical or eidetic)
can only appear obscure on the basis of an understanding of ‘number’ that rules out, from the
start, direct reference to such items that are inseparable from the Greek concept of ἀριθμός. 

about this much, that each” of them, “insofar as it is ‘itself’ precisely what it is,
and is grasped in its ‘self-sameness,’ is an ‘other’ than the ‘two’ others: ‘Then
each of them is other than the two, but the same with itself’ (254 D 14 f.).”
This consideration leads, according to Klein, to “the introduction of yet a fur-
ther ‘pair’ [of γένη]: ‘self-sameness’ and ‘otherness’ (ταὐτόν and θάτερον),” which
both “compounds” this “crucial quandary of the διάνοια” and brings with it
“the solution which must suffice within the dianoetic realm.” It compounds it
insofar as this pair of γένη range through and therefore pervade “all the γένη.”
That this is the case is established when it is seen that “the possibility of ‘oth-
erness’ is dependent on the ‘self-sameness’ of the participants in the relation of
‘otherness.’” This means that the kind of κοινωνία they exhibit is unlike the
kind exhibited by the κίνησις and στάσις pair, which does not pervade all
γένη—for, most obviously, they do not pervade each other. According to
Klein, “the κοινωνίαbetween ταὐτόν and θάτερον. . . permits the διάνοιαto un-
derstand the ‘duplicity’ of ‘being,’” which is manifest in its meaning both
στάσις and κίνησις, because in order to be understood at all the significance of
each has to be grasped, in their self-sameness, as other than the other. In addi-
tion, their κοινωνία also permits the διάνοια to understand “that by this means
alone” (92/96) (i.e., the duplicity of being), “the ‘imaging’ of beings in re-cog-
nition, that is, in knowing [γιγνώσκειν] and being known [γιγνώσκεσθαι], and
all image making, is possible.” Finally, just as it is the opposition encountered
in the sensible realm that presents the obstacle that first awakens διάνοια, so,
too, “at the end of its ‘dialectic’ activity,” it is the duplicity of being that allows
it to “come to see that the ‘conjunction’ of oppositesis in truth the ‘co-existence’
of elements other in kind” (92/96). Thus, for Klein, the duplicity of being
emerges as “the ontological foundation and justification of the method of ‘di-
vision’ (διαίρεσις)” (93/97), by which, in “a continual duplication of the εἴδη—
that the λόγος grasps in the ‘division’ of the γένη—it makes the ‘genetic’ order
of the eidetic definite amounts possible” (94/98). 
Klein claims that, on closer inspection, the κοινωνία between ταὐτόν
and θάτερον “is nothing but another expression for the internal ‘twofold-
ness’ of θάτερον itself ” (91/95), because, for Plato, “‘the ‘other’ is always in
relation to an ‘other’ (255 D 1; cf. D 6 f.).” Hence, θάτερον, by pervading all
“γένη whatsoever” (255 E 3 f.), “accordingly is both a connecting bond
(δεσμός) and the cause of their division (αἴτιον τῆς διαιρέσεως – 253 C 3),”
and, as such, presents “the ‘ultimate source’ of all articulation whatsoever.”
This means that “‘Otherness’ makes possible an ‘arithmetic community’
among eidetic monads which are not capable of ‘being mixed’ although they
‘belong together’” (92/96). Klein claims further that the eidetic ‘two’, as “the
paradigm for such a κοινωνία” and as containing στάσις and κίνησις, can be
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
216

articulated only when “‘being’ itself ” is understood to be “accompanied of
necessity by a ‘not’; just as στάσις is not κίνησις, so κίνησις is not στάσις.” It
follows that “since precisely only ‘both together’ amount to ‘being,’” κίνησις
is that which, in confrontation with στάσις, is the ‘other’ without which even
στάσις itself cannot be”—and vice versa. According to Klein, the significance
of this for Plato is that “Otherness turns out to be the ontological meaning
of ‘non-being,’ which can never be separated from ‘being.’” Just as θάτερον,
“analogously to the vowels among the letters (253 A 4–6)” (91/95) and,
therefore, by its “very ‘nature’ (φύσις)” “‘being broken up into parts’” (93/97),
pervades all the γένη, so too “the shadow of ‘non-being’ necessarily attends
all the ‘being’ of that which is” (92/97). ‘Non-being’, therefore, “is only ‘being
other,’ ‘not something the contrary of, but only other than, being’ (οὐκ ἐναντίον
τι . . . τοῦ ὄντος ἀλλ᾿ ἕτερον μόνον – 257 B; cf. 258 B).” 
§ 80. Recognizing “the Other” as the “Indeterminate Dyad”
By allowing for the articulation of being and non-being, Klein maintains that,
for Plato, θάτερονis “akin to the discerning ἐπιστήμη” (93/97), and that it is so
“certainly not accidentally,” since it makes possible “everywhere” (92/97) “an
‘opposition’ of one being to an other being,” and thus “‘a confrontation of being
with being’ (ὄντος πρὸς ὂ ἀντίθεσις – 257 E 6)” (92–93/97). For Klein, then,
the κοινωνία of ταὐτόνand θάτερον allows the duplicity of being, as both στάσις
and κίνησις, to be grasped and, in addition, makes possible “the ‘imaging’ of be-
ings in ‘re-cognition,’ that is, in knowing and being known, and, beyond this,
allimage making” (92/96). Likewise, on Klein’s view, θάτερον, as the source of
this duplicity, “is the reason for the possibility of a ‘mistake’ or ‘interchange’ of
the ‘one’ and the ‘other’ or of ‘being’ and ‘non-being,’ a possibility on which all
‘contradiction’ (cf. 232 B), all ‘illusion,’ all ‘error,’ and every ‘lie’ depend (260
B–264 B, also 266 D–E)” (93/97). Klein says of the peculiar status of θάτερον,
that “It is always, as it were, only a ‘part’ (μόριον) of itself, namely an ‘other of
another’ (ἕτερον ἑτέρου)—a ‘counter-part’” (93/98). As a result, he maintains
that “as the ἀρχή of all doubleness it [i.e., θάτερον] must be recognized as the
‘twofold in general,’ and in the context of Plato’s search for foundations, what
has been referred to as the ἀόριστος δυάς.”80 As the source of the duplicity of
both being and non-being, the δυάς is ἀόριστος because “it does not present
‘two’ beings of some particular kind such as are mutually delimited and uni-
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
217
————————
80. Among the many references Klein provides to Aristotle’s mention of the ἀόριστος
δυάς (in connection with the question of whether the εἴδη are ἀριθμοί), the following is typical:
“For the indeterminate dyad makes things double (ἡ γὰρ ἀόριστος δυὰς δυοποιὸς ἦν)” (Aristo-
tle, Metaph. M 8, 1083 b 35–36).

vocally determined.81 Rather, in endowing the being [Sein] of each being
[Seienden] with ‘imageability,’ it ‘doubles’ everything, and so first allows each
to become a ‘being’ at all—it is ‘two-making’ (δυοποιός– Aristotle, Metaphysics
Μ 8, 1083 b 35 f.; Μ 7, 1082 a 15)” (93–94/98).
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
218
————————
81. David Lachterman maintains that Klein’s account of the relationship between
Being and the Other, “while deeply provocative, leaves a number of questions unsettled”
(David Lachterman, Rev. of Klein, Jacob, Plato’s Trilogy: Theaetetus, The Sophist, and The
Statesman, in Nous 13 [1979)], 106–12, here 111). Lachterman holds that “Klein’s thesis that
Being is the first in the series of eidetic numbers,” when combined with his consideration that
“if the Other is taken to be the Indeterminate Dyad, then it is one of the two principles of the
forms and the eidetic numbers,” renders it “unclear how a principle can participate in one of
the items ontologically subordinate to it, or under its command” (112). This lack of clarity ap-
pears to be the case for Lachterman because, on the one hand, Being and the Indeterminate
Dyad are among the μέγιστα γένη and therefore must “participate in, or mingle with” (111) one
another. On the other hand, “The Other, into which not-being is analyzed” (110) must, as a
result of its connection with not-being, be subordinate to Being. Hence his question: how can
Being participate in something that is ontologically inferior to it? The unstated basis of this
lack of clarity seems to be the idea that the participation relationship between Being and the
Indeterminate Dyad cannot be symmetrical, because the latter, as a result of its connection to
non- or not-being, has a lower ontological status than the former.
If the issue Lachterman raises is unpacked in terms of our consideration of Klein’s ac-
count of the different modes of being belonging to the duplicities that characterize Being re-
spectively as the eidetic two and the ἀόριστος δυάς, his concern would appear to be the
following: how can the duplicity of Being, which consists of στάσις and κίνησις, participate in
a “principle” that it not only is not, non- or not-being, but that is also its opposite, the unlim-
itedness of the twofold in general? If, however, the referent for what Lachterman articulates
as “the two principles of the forms and eidetic numbers” (my emphasis) is considered as its
proper identity for Klein, i.e., as the strange kind of arithmetical κοινωνία that is responsible
for the unity of eidetic elements different in kind, then Klein’s thesis about the relationship be-
tween Being as the eidetic two and the Other is indeed able to settle the question posed by
Lachterman. This is the case, on the one hand, because according to this thesis the kind of
κοινωνία characteristic of Being is different from that of the Other: even though each are what
Lachterman refers to as “principles,” for Klein such principles are neither homogeneous nor
symmetrical, but, on the contrary, indexes for two different kinds of κοινωνία. Specifically, the
unity of elements different in kind characteristic of Being, as the eidetic ἀριθμός ‘two’, encom-
passes precisely what is many but not unlimited, while the unity of elements different in kind
characteristic of the ἀόριστος δυάς encompasses precisely what is unlimited. That is, rest and
motion do not pervade all γένη (most obviously, they do not pervade each other) and, there-
fore, all beings, while the Other pervades all γένη and, therefore, all beings. On the other hand,
what, as their ἀρχή, is responsible for each different kind of κοινωνία is something that is be-
yond the opposition of Being and non-being, namely, the One Itself. As the Whole responsi-
ble for delimiting Being as something that, notwithstanding its duplicity, is itself one, and also
for generating non- or not-being as something that, despite its negativity, is not the contrary of
Being but “only other than Being,” i.e., unlimited in multitude, the necessity belonging to the
priority of the One Itself is beyond Being and non-being alike. It is beyond Being, because it
is that which is referred to but unaccountable for by its duplicity. It is beyond non-being, be-
cause it is the source—albeit one that is distorted by what it generates—of ταὐτόν, which, as
we have seen, is “nothing but another expression for the internal ‘twofoldedness’ of θάτερον it-
self.”

§ 81. The “One Itself ” as the Source of the Generation of
᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
Klein holds that, beyond the generation of beings, the ἀόριστος δυάς also
makes possible the “‘genetic’ order of the eidetic definite amounts” (94/98).
It does so “by a continual ‘duplication’ of the εἴδη,” although, more precisely,
“only the even eidetic definite amounts can be generated in this way . . . ,
while the corresponding odd eidetic definite amounts” do not arise from du-
plication but “through a ‘delimitation’ on the part of the ἕν” (94 n. 1/239 n.
110). Thus, in contrast to mathematical ἀριθμοί, all of which—namely, both
the odd and even—are generated by the successive reproduction of the unit,
that is, of the one that is a one among many ones (see § 59 above), “even”
ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίare generated by duplication and the “odd” by delimitation.
Moreover, Klein maintains that the λόγος can only grasp εἴδη in διαίρεσις
“because at the ‘head’ of the τάξις of eidetic definite amounts, at once com-
pleting and instituting them, is the One Itself in its ‘absolute’ priority”
(94/98). He writes:
Since it is beyond all articulation, beyond the “two,” and thus “beyond being
itself ” (ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας – Republic 509 B), it is not, like the mathemati-
cal unit, a one among many ones, but rather the original, perfect, all-com-
prehensive Whole (cf. Sophist 244 D–245 D; also Parmenides 137 C, 142
D). As the “Whole” it is that which needs no “other” at all, that which is al-
together “complete.” In this sense it is “the perfect itself,” namely, the model
of every possible “relative” wholeness which is “delimited” in respect to an
“other”: it is the “Idea of the Good” (ἰδέα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ). 
The absolute priority of the “One Itself” initially comes into relief with
the consideration that neither of the “two” sources responsible for the de-
limitation of one being by another—namely, ταὐτόν and θάτερον—can account
for the unity of the delimited beings except in terms of their opposition to one
another. On the one hand, θάτερον cannot do so for the obvious reason that,
as the twofold in general, it is not responsible for unity but duality. On the
other hand, ταὐτόν cannot do so either, because, as we have seen, its κοινωνία
with θάτερον makes it simply another expression of the “twofoldness” of
θάτερον. This means that the unity, the wholeness, or, in other words, the self-
sameness itself of that which arises in its opposition to another is something
that cannot be accounted for in terms of that which is responsible for this
opposition. That there is such self-sameness “itself,” that is to say, a unity or
wholeness that is beyond all opposition and thus beyond all duplicity, is
something that the very articulation of duplicity (i.e., division) makes man-
ifest when each of what is divided is said precisely to be “one”—and thus not
said to be what “both together” are, namely “two.” However, so long as the
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
219

unity of what is articulated in division is grasped in terms of the mathemati-
cal one, namely, as a one that can arise only in relation—and therefore in op-
position—to the other ones that comprise the many of which it is one, the
“one itself ” appealed to by such articulation will remain presupposed and
therefore unaccounted for. Hence, Klein’s reactivation of the necessity recog-
nized by Plato, that the absolute priority of the “One Itself” as a “Whole”
possessing a perfection and completeness that precludes its self-sameness from
having any relation to what is other than itself. As such, its unity is beyond
both the eidetic ‘two’ of ὄν and the ‘twofold in general’ of the ἀόριστος δυάς.
It is precisely the status of the “One Itself” as beyond all articulation that al-
lows it to serve as the model for the relative wholeness of both sensible beings
and the γένη or εἴδη whose self-sameness and therefore unity arises in the de-
limitation composed of their contrast to an other.
That the “One Itself” is at the head of the order of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί,
“at once completing and instituting them,” follows from its status as both 1)
the model for the self-sameness proper to the unity of everything that is ar-
ticulated—in the case at hand, the γένη or εἴδη that comprise each ἀριθμὸς
εἰδητικός—and 2) the “Whole” that, needing no “other” at all, is “the perfect
itself,” with a unity beyond all articulation. In the first case, the “One Itself”
is responsible for instituting the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, because as the absolute pri-
ority of its unity, as a unity beyond all opposition, it makes possible the rela-
tive wholeness proper to each of the γένη or εἴδη that compose them. In the
second case, it is responsible for completing the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, insofar as the
“incomparable” character of its unity, as a unity that needs no “other,” makes
possible the uniqueness of the κοινωνία of each ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός as either su-
perior or inferior in relation to its “neighbor.” More precisely, the incompa-
rable character of the unity of the “One Itself ” confers limits upon the
ἀόριστος δυάς and thereby generates both the “even” and the “odd” ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί. On the one hand, it generates the former by initially rendering de-
terminate the “twofoldness in general” of the ἀόριστος δυάς, the result of
which is the eidetic ‘two’, and thereafter rendering determinate each succes-
sive “even” ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός generated by the original “duplication” of the ei-
detic ‘two’. On the other hand, it generates the latter (i.e., the “odd” ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί) through the ἕν by making ἀριθ μοὶ εἰδητικοίthat are indivisible.82
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
220
————————
82. The quotes around the terms ‘odd’, ‘even’, and ‘duplication’ are intended to indicate
that, in the context of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, each of the monads that comprises them are “incompa-
rable” and that they are therefore, in this important respect, disanalogous with mathematical
ἀριθμοί. For, as we have seen, in contrast to the monads that comprise each noetic mathemati-
cal ἀριθμός, which can be combined indiscriminately with the monads of other such ἀριθμοί, the
monads that comprise ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίcannot be so combined. In the case of the generation of 

§ 82. Γένη as ᾿Αριθμοὶ ΕἰδητικοίProvide the Foundation 
of an Eidetic Logistic
On Klein’s view “‘arithmetic’ has priority over ‘logistic’” (93 n. 1/238 n. 106)
in Plato’s thought. As a consequence, Klein maintains that “however great a
role the latter may, especially in the theory of proportions, play for Plato,” the
“doctrine of the γένη as eidetic definite amounts must, finally, also furnish
the foundation of an eidetic logistic” (94/98). The priority of arithmetic over
logistic in the mathematical realm comes about due to the fundamentality
of that with which arithmetic deals, the ordering of ἀριθμοίascertained by
counting, over that with which logistic deals, calculating the relations be-
tween ἀριθμοί. For, as we have seen (§ 53), Klein holds that despite the close
and, indeed, inseparable relationship between arithmetic and logistic for
Plato, addition, subtraction, and all the other logistical relations between def-
inite amounts are, in the final analysis, reducible to those obtained by count-
ing. It is this state of affairs that leads to the “relative isolation” of arithmetic
as such, as the significance of the ability to count, namely, the countable order
of the things in the world to which counting corresponds, is the fundamen-
tal fact that, according to Klein, determines the systematic aspect of Plato’s
teaching. Hence, Klein also holds that in the eidetic realm, the logistically es-
tablished ἀναλογία by means of which certain things can only be understood
has its ultimate ground in the basic compositions and kinds that characterize
the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίthemselves. He writes that, “For instance, sound-mind-
edness (σωφροσύνη) and justice (δικαιοσύνη) in Book IV of the Republic (cf.
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
221
————————
“even” and “odd” ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, then, both the delimitation through the ἕν of the “monads”
in the former and their duplication through the ἀόριστος δυάςin the latter cannot be understood
in strict analogy with, respectively, the divisibility into two equal ἀριθμοί, or the opposite of this
effected by the supernumerary ἕν, which are characteristics proper to assemblages of mathe-
matical monads. Of course, achieving clarity regarding exactly how the generation of ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοίis to be understood is something that the most basic premise of Klein’s reactivation of
Plato’s thought on this matter rules out, and it does so on the grounds of its claim that for Plato
the εἴδη or γένη that the διάνοιαhas to presuppose in order to investigate the distinction between
being and non-being cannot be counted. Thus, only this much appears to be clear: that non-
being, as the image of being, can be what it is not only if what it is not, namely being, is granted
a priority over its “duplication” through its image. That this priority cannot be established,
however, as long as the investigation of problem of ‘being’ remains at the level of its duplicity,
that the solution to its establishment must be found beyond being and therefore beyond the
source of this duplicity in the eidetic ‘two’, and that it is therefore in the direction of the “One
Itself,” as the ἰδέα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, to which Plato points as the source of this priority, all of this ap-
pears to be—if not clear, then, at least, clear enough. Nevertheless, as we will see below (§ 83),
establishing the priority of the “original” over the “image” in this way “is brought . . . at the price
of the transgression of the limits which are set for the λόγος” (GMTOA, 98/99), with the result
that the is becomes, from the “point of view” of “the ordinary mode of predication,” “no longer
understandable.”

I 337 A–C!; Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, E 6, 7), or the τάξις of elemental
materials in the Timaeus,” which “can be only understood by means of ἀνα -
λογία, proportion,” are nevertheless just like “the relation of ontological to
the dianoetic methexis problem,” only resolvable with their reduction “to the
‘community’ relations in the realm of εἴδη.” That is, Klein argues that while
“the relation of the ontological to the dianoetic methexis problem” (see § 68
above), “as well as the original-image relation in general” (94/98–99), is (like
those just mentioned in the Republic and Timaeus) “first of all graspable pre-
cisely in ‘logistical’ considerations” (94/99), this relation is nevertheless some-
thing that “we can glimpse in its original form” only with the reduction of the
logistical relations to the relations of εἴδη that compose the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί.
In other words, the non-mathematical, eidetic proportions through which
certain relations are initially only graspable, are, in their original form, pre-
cisely the community relations of εἴδη with which the “conception of ἀριθμὸς
εἰδητικός” is concerned.
Klein’s discussion of the relationship of the ontological to the dianoetic
methexis problem elaborates the fundamental dependency of the propor-
tional or logistical relations in eidetic logistic on the relations that compose
the κοινωνία (community) of the εἴδη. On his view, the “imagistic character of
the whole methexis relation,” namely, of the relation of ontological to dia-
noetic methexis, is “usually overlooked in the discussion of the methexis ques-
tion.” This relation is overlooked, he says, “insofar as this discussion is
concerned with the dianoetic realm, i.e., the relation of an εἶδος to a series of
αἰσθητά.” Earlier, Klein had articulated the relationship between dianoetic and
ontological methexis in terms of the following proportion: “as the elemen-
tary form of the problem of the ‘one and many’ [i.e., precisely ‘the relation of
an εἶδος to a series of αἰσθητά’ just mentioned] . . . is to the dianoetic methexis
problem, so is the latter to the ontological problem of the ‘community of ideas’”
(see § 68 above). Thus, when the discussion of the methexis question is limited
to the elementary form of the problem of the one and the many, the methexis
of many αἰσθητά in one εἶδος, what is missed is the problem proper to the re-
lationship of this methexis to the methexis of the relations of community
within the realm of the εἴδη. As we just saw, Klein characterizes this relation-
ship “as the original-image relation in general” and avers that it is “first of all
graspable precisely from ‘logistical’ considerations.” However, he also main-
tains that “Only the reduction of this relationship [i.e., the relationship of
dianoetic to ontological methexis as the original-image relation in general] to
the community relations in the realm of the εἴδη allows us to glimpse the
methexis question in its original form,” a reduction that presents “the concep-
tion of the ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός” “precisely as one of the possible solutions to this
question.”
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
222

§ 83. Plato’s Postulate of the Separation of All Noetic 
Formations Renders Incomprehensible 
the Ordinar y Mode of Predication
In addition to providing the foundation for the differences between the
genus and species of things, which allows them to be counted, Klein also at-
tributes (see § 74 above) to the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίthe responsibility for bring-
ing about their unlimited variety, through what he refers to as “a ‘distorted’
imitation of ontological methexis” (89/93) that occurs in the dianoetic
realm. The methexis question in the dianoetic realm concerns the mimetic
and therefore imagistic relation of the many to the one, a relation that is re-
sponsible for the unlimited variety of things. According to Klein, this
methexis in Plato’s thought is itself an image—albeit a “distorted” one—of
the methexis in the ontological realm, which concerns the eidetic relation of
the one and the many.83 As “one of the possible solutions” to the ontologi-
cal methexis question, “the ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός indicates in itself the possibility
of an immediate unification of the many” (95/99). Because the non-math-
ematical nature of such an ἀριθμός prevents the λόγος from giving a com-
pletely clear account of Plato’s “final answer to the problem of the ‘one and
the many,’” Klein holds that “this solution is brought, as we have seen, at the
price of the transgression of the limits which are set for the λόγος, for, from
this point of view, the ordinary mode of predication, such as: ‘the horse is an
animal,’ ‘the dog is an animal,’ etc., is no longer understandable.” When it is
said that ‘the dog is an animal’ and ‘the horse is an animal’, the γένος ‘animal’
is united with the εἴδη ‘dog’ and ‘horse’ in the following manner: both to-
gether as well as each by itself are inseparable from being an animal; animal
is common to dogs and horses and each dog and horse is an animal. This
manifestly does not hold, according to Klein, in the case of the “arithmeti-
cal” unity belonging to the structure of an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός, because the γένη
united by the γένος responsible for their κοινωνία are not this γένος. While
it makes sense to say that a dog is an animal and a horse is (likewise) an an-
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
223
————————
83. As a “distorted” image of ontological methexis, the dianoetic proportions do not
accurately duplicate the proportions of the original to which they are related imagistically (see
§ 72). In the case at hand, the original is composed of the communal relations of the εἴδη that
make up an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός. Of course, what is at issue in the reference to proportions here
are not equivalent numerical ratios (see n. 52 above) but, as it were, the adjustment of the pro-
portions in the image to reflect accurately how the original appears according to its aesthetic
perspective, an adjustment that paradoxically results in the image seeming to be more like the
original itself than would be the case if the proper mathematical proportions of the original
were duplicated in the image. This paradoxical state of affairs, moreover, is—as will be seen
directly below—precisely what is reflected when the eidetic solution to the one and the many
problem is compared with its natural solution and shown to fall short of the perfectly com-
prehensible logical sense that is inseparable from the natural one.

imal, it does not make sense to say that στάσις is ὄν and κίνησις is (likewise)
ὄν. Moreover, the incomparable nature of the monads that comprise an
ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός means that, “Above all, the ‘natural’ meaning intended
when a multitude of things is called an ἀριθμός is lost.” That is, what is lost
is the sense that the many things that compose an ἀριθμός are countable and
therefore exactly delimitable.
Thus on Klein’s view, when the doctrine of γένη as ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίis
employed to provide the foundation of an eidetic logistic, the natural mean-
ing of that which is at first comprehensible only in terms of the proportions
established by logistical considerations is no longer comprehensible. In the
case at hand, the reduction of the eidetic proportion (ἀναλογία)—which is
characteristic of the dianoetic methexis’s distorted imitation of ontological
methexis—to its foundation in the community relations belonging to the mul-
titude of γένη or εἴδη in an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός presents what Klein calls atten-
tion to as “difficulties.” They include not only those pertaining to the
intelligibility of these relations to the ordinary mode of predication noted
above, but also those that pertain to the questions connected with the mode
of being of an image. The problem of discerning something as not being what
it presents itself to be, that is, of recognizing something as an image, remains
unresolved by the doctrine of γένη as ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί. That is because this
doctrine establishes the ontological conditions that have to prevail for an
image to be at all, namely, the “mixing” in some sense of being and non-being.
What remains unresolved in this account, however, are the conditions that
make it possible to grasp an image as an image in the first place. In other
words, establishing the possibility of the mode of being of an image is not
tantamount to establishing how it is that the initial distinction between
image and original is made at all. To establish this, the priority of the origi-
nal over its image must be secured in a manner that rules out the very du-
plicity that makes possible the recognition of the original as original. In the
visible realm, the comparison by the διάνοια of the perception of visible things
with their images is sufficient to—seemingly—accomplish this. This holds
insofar as perception appears able to grasp the one visible thing that is the
source of the image as something that is beyond all opposition and therefore
beyond the duplicity of that which is grasped in relation to something else.
Of course, as soon as this “one” thing is perceived in relation to other things,
this semblance is exposed as such and its priority called into question. Re -
establishing the priority of the one, of the original, over all relations and thus
over the duplicity that makes relations possible, is, as we have seen, the task
Plato attributes to dialectic according to Klein. We have also seen, however,
that dialectic’s own proper method, διαίρεσις, leads not only to “the postu-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
224

late of the ‘separation’ (χωρισμός) of all noetic formations, and in particular
the χωρισμός of ἀριθμοὶ μοναδικοί, the definite amounts of ‘pure’ monads,” but
also to the χωρισμός of the absolute priority of the One Itself. For Klein, only
Aristotle’s critique of the postulate of χωρισμός “exposes the root of” the dif-
ficulties presented by the ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός solution to the problem of the one
and the many, when this solution is considered from the perspective of the
natural meaning of things. It is Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of
this critique that we now take up.
Klein’s Reactivation of Plato’s eory of ᾿Αριθμοὶ Εἰδητικοί
225

Chapter Twenty
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos
esis and the Possibility of a 
eoretical Logistic
§ 84. Point of Departure and Over view of Aristotle’s Critique
According to Klein, “the obvious point of departure for the Aristotelian crit-
icism of the Platonic school is the ontological standing attributed by them to
the mathematical realm, in particular, to the definite amounts of pure units”
(95/100). As we have seen, this standing is based in the “exemplary μάθημα
character of mathematical objects, their undeniably pure noetic quality, their
‘indifference’ with regard to sensuously perceivable things,” all of which the
Platonic chorismos thesis takes “to indicate directly the possibility of the ex-
istence of noetic structures which are independent and ‘detached,’ i.e., sepa-
rated from, all that is somatic.” On Klein’s view, however, Aristotle’s critique
questions neither “mathematical science itself” nor the fact that “mathemat-
ical inquiry has a special field of objects, as, for example, arithmetic has the
field of pure monads (cf. Posterior Analytics A 10, 76 b 4 f.).” Rather, he con-
tends that Aristotle is “concerned with proving the Platonic conception of
the mode of being of mathematical objects false, ‘so that our controversy will
be not about their being but its mode’ ( . . . Metaphysics Μ 1, 1076 a 36 f.).”
Klein articulates two interrelated aspects of Aristotle’s critique. On
the one hand, it contains an argument against the Platonic view of the mode
of being proper to ἀριθμός as independent of the objects of which it is the
ἀριθμός, as having a generic unity, and as being something that is a κοινόν,
something that is a whole above and alongside of the parts—namely, the
definite amounts of units—of which it is the whole. On the other hand, it
determines the mode of being of mathematical objects, especially of pure
ἀριθμοί, by abstraction (ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως) from the objects of sense. From this
it follows that the former objects are separable but not detached from the lat-

ter, that the unity of ἀριθμός derives from the unity possessed by each ob-
ject insofar as it is the measure of the count in question, and that the de-
marcation of one ἀριθμός from another is comprehended only with respect
to objects that are actually counted. Klein maintains that Aristotle’s critique
eliminates the ontological obstacles—posed by the Platonic notion of the
monad’s indivisibility—that stand in the way of the realization of a theoret-
ical logistic and thus prepares the way for its realization in the arithmetical
textbook of Diophantus. 
§ 85. Aristotle’s Problematic : Harmonizing the Ontological
Dependence of ᾿Αριθμοίwith Their Pure Noetic Quality
For Klein the point of departure for Aristotle’s criticism emerges “in the
course of an analysis of what is meant in ordinary speech” (GMTOA,
95/101). Klein cites Aristotle at length: 
The fact that it becomes possible to call something a “whole” by indicating
the “parts” of which the whole “consists,” and that, therefore, “for declarative
speech” (τῷλόγῳ) the parts precede the whole does not mean that in re-
spect to their “being” (τῇ ουσίᾳ) these parts can lay claim to priority over
the being of the whole. (cf. Metaphysics Μ 2, 1077 b 1 ff. and Δ 11, 1018 b
34 ff.) (95–96/101) 
Thus, “to call an object that appears before us, for example, a human being,
a ‘white’ human being, presupposes the partial assertion ‘white,’ and yet no
other being is meant than precisely this white human being (cf. on this Meta-
physics Ζ 4, 1029 b 13 ff.)” (96/101). For Aristotle, then, it is clear that the
“‘white’ meant has no existence ‘outside’ of this human being and ‘separate’
from him.” As a consequence, in its being it is “bound to the given ‘whole,’
namely to ‘this white human being,’” and, as such, “It cannot exist if this
human being of which it is predicated does not exist.” This is to say, “Its
being is therefore dependent on the being of the human.” On Klein’s view,
for Aristotle it is “[e]xactly in this same way” that “the assertion ‘three trees’
presupposes the assertion ‘three’”—in other words, “what the assertion
‘three’ means has no existence ‘outside’ of the trees of which there are said to
be three.” And this is because the “definite amount of trees, i.e., ‘three,’ has
no proper, no independent ‘nature’ (φύσις, cf. Metaphysics Μ 6, 1080 a 15;
7, 1082 a 16; 8, 1083 b 22, and elsewhere).” Hence, both the “being ‘so many’
of the trees” and “their being, for instance, ‘green,’ is dependent on their
being trees.” 
Klein traces Aristotle’s understanding of the ontological status of
ἀριθμός to its “‘natural’ meaning,” in which “the assertion that certain things
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos esis
227

are present ‘in a certain definite amount’ means only that such a thing is pres-
ent in just this definite multitude: ‘To be present in a definite amount is to be
some definite amount of a 〈given〉object’ ( . . . Physics Δ12, 221 b 14 f.).” This
significance of ἀριθμός, combined with its dependence, rules out for Aristotle
the sufficiency of determining its mode of being “as independent, and sepa-
rate or ‘absolute,’” even in the case of the pure units that must be presupposed
“in order to understand the prior knowledge of definite amounts which is re-
vealed in our daily calculating and counting” (96/102). On Klein’s view, this
holds because Plato’s determination of the mode of being of pure ἀριθμοί on
the basis of the “attempt to ‘account’ for . . . the possibility of counting and
calculating” misses for Aristotle precisely the “dependence and bondage” that
is “indicative of the being of a definite amount.” The Aristotelian problem-
atic, then, is “precisely to bring this being character of all possible definite
amounts, and thus also of the ‘pure,’ ‘mathematical’ definite amount, into har-
mony with the purely noetic quality of the latter.”
§ 86. Aristotle on the Abstractive Mode of Being of 
Mathematical Objects
Aristotle attempts to accomplish this with his “so-called ‘theory of abstrac-
tion’” (98/104), which Klein maintains “is, after all, not so much a ‘psycho-
logical’ explication of certain cognitive processes as an attempt—fraught with
heavy consequences for all later science—to give an adequate ontological de-
termination of noetic objects like the μαθηματικά.” According to Klein, math-
ematical objects for Aristotle “have their being ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως 〈by abstraction〉,
that is, . . . they are ‘lifted off,’ ‘drawn off’ (‘abstracted’) from sensuously per-
ceivable things” (98/104). Such objects, “which in respect to their being are
not ‘detached,’” are studied by science “as if they were detached or separated
from sensuously perceivable things.” Thus, one “‘thinks the mathematical ob-
jects which are not separate as separate whenever one thinks them.’ ( . . . On
the Soul Γ 7, 431 b 15 f.).” Klein traces the reason for this back to Aristotle’s
answer to the question of how we are able “to extract all the single parts
(μέρη), the single ‘constituents’ of a thing which we get hold of in the λόγος
one after another, e.g., ‘this’ ‘round’ ‘white’ ‘column,’ from the concrete
[dinglichen] context into which they are fitted in accordance with the possi-
bility of their being and to examine each of them separately” (GMTOA, 96–
97/102). Klein characterizes Aristotle’s answer as follows:
in each case we disregard certain attributes of the thing in question, ignoring
the nexus of being which links them all to one another. This “disregarding of
. . .” is able to produce a new mode of seeing which permits something to
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
228

come into view in αἰσθητάwhich, for all their variety and transitoriness, suf-
fers no change but remains always in the same condition, thus fulfilling the
demand that it can be an object of some science, of an ἐπιστήμη. (97/102)
Thus, “‘Each thing may be viewed best in this way—if one posits that which
is not separate 〈i.e., which has no separate existence〉as separate, just as the
arithmetician and the geometer do.’ ( . . . [Metaph. Μ] 1078 a 21 ff.)” (97–
98/103). 
On Klein’s view the “‘lifting off’” (98/104) characteristic of abstrac-
tion “is only a different expression for precisely that aforementioned ‘disre-
garding’ of all the other content of things.” For “In this ‘disregarding of . . .’
the sensuously perceivable things wither away, as it were, and become mere
‘pieces’ [Stücken] or mere ‘bodies.’” They are “Thus deprived of their aisthetic
character and, to a great extent, robbed of their individual differences.” The
possibility of “an apodeictic discipline” is based on this “‘disregarding of ’
every particular content,” which allows both the ἀριθμός aspect and geomet-
rical dimensions of αἰσθητάto be, “as it were, read off ” (97/103) them,
“‘though not insofar as these are sensuously perceivable bodies, but insofar as
they are just such {namely so extensive or so many}’ ( . . . Metaphysics Μ 3,
1077 b 20 ff.).” These aspects and dimensions of αἰσθητά“are no longer sub-
ject to the senses, though they do not achieve any independent being, i.e., a
being alongside of the αἰσθητά.” Even though, however, “their being remains
dependent on the being of sensuously perceivable things,” “insofar as the
mathematical aspects become visible in their ‘purity,’ detached from all other
content, they may be isolated within the ‘whole’ and may be, without detri-
ment to their dependence, ‘lifted off,’ as it were, from the ‘whole.’” Abstract-
ing them in this way poses no danger “For their more exact investigation,”
because “‘if someone, positing things as separated from that which {other-
wise} goes with them, examines them for that about them by which they are
such {namely ‘separable’}, there will be no more falsification because of this
than when someone draws something on the ground (for the purpose of
demonstrating geometric theorems) and says that it has the length of a foot
when it has not; for the falsity is not in the premises {as such}.’ ( . . . Meta-
physics Μ 3, 1078 a 21 ff.)” (98/103).
According to Klein, when the things that serve as the basis of ab-
stractive disregarding “are no longer regarded even as ‘bodies’ but only as
‘pieces,’ these things have been transformed into ‘neutral’ monads” (98/105).
He quotes Aristotle to this effect: “‘The mathematician makes those things
which arise from abstraction his study, for he views them after having drawn
off all that is sensible . . . , and he leaves only the 〈object of the question〉‘how
many?’ and ‘continuous magnitude’ ( . . . Metaphysics Κ 3, 1061 a 28 ff.)”
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos esis
229

(98/104–5). Hence, in the case of pure ἀριθμοί, it is precisely “this ‘neutral-
ity’ of things which have withered away into mere countable ‘pieces’”
(98/105) that “constitutes the ‘purity’ of the[ir] ‘arithmetic’ monads.”
Therefore, contrary to the Platonic chorismos thesis, it is “[n]ot original ‘de-
tachment’ but subsequent ‘indifference’” (99/105) that “characterizes the
mode of being of pure definite amounts (Metaphysics Μ 2, 1077 a 15–18).”
As the way in which “mathematical formations”—here ἀριθμοί—“first be-
come objects of science . . . this mode [of being] of their content, the ‘what’
of all these formations, is given in advance” (98/103–4). Klein maintains
that the task, for Aristotle, of determining “how this ‘being’ itself is to be
understood” (98/104) is “no longer the task of mathematics but of ‘first phi-
losophy’ (πρώτη φιλοσοφία) alone (cf. Metaphysics Κ 4, 1061 b 25–27).” Sci-
ence, then, “simply has to ‘accept’ (λαμβάνειν) the ‘being’ of the various
original formations, namely of the ‘one,’ the ‘line,’ the ‘plane,’ etc., and to ‘de-
rive’ from it the ‘being’ of the rest, i.e., to display the noncontradictory con-
nection of all the pregiven contents of arithmetic and geometry (cf. Posterior
Analytics Α 10, 76 a 31–36).” 
§ 87. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of 
the Non-generic Unity of ᾿Αριθμός
For Klein, Aristotle’s “attack on the chorismos thesis” (99/105) takes aim pri-
marily at Plato’s account of “generic identity” as “the ultimate foundation of
all possible unity.” The Platonic “problem of the ‘unity of an ἀριθμός-as-
semblage—how the ‘many’ can be understood as ‘one’ at all,” which is solved
according to the “Platonic doctrine of the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί”—is in truth for
Aristotle, on Klein’s view, neither solved in this way nor able to account for
the unity in question. Aristotle therefore rejects the Platonic claim “that the
unity of definite amounts ultimately has its roots in the indivisible qualita-
tive wholeness of a γένος.” In the first place, “if generic identity entails unity,
then ‘unity’ is attributed to formations which, strictly speaking, cannot be
‘one’ at all” (99/106), especially “in speaking of a ‘definite amount,’” since in
so doing “we mean precisely more than ‘one thing.’” Klein quotes Aristotle
at length on this important point: 
Some things are one by {immediate mutual} contact {of the parts}, others by
mingling, yet others by the disposition {of the parts}; none of this can pos-
sibly occur in the monads of which the dyad and the triad {consist}, but just
as two men are not one thing over and above both of them {being each by
himself one}, so is it necessary also with {pure} monads ( . . . [Metaph.] Μ 7,
1082 a 20 ff.). 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
230

In the second place, “‘. . . by reason of what the definite amounts are one, or
the soul and body, or generally, the εἶδος, no one tells us at all . . .’ (. . . cf.
Metaphysics Λ 10, 1075 b 34 ff.; cf. also Κ 2, 1060 b 10–12)” (99/105–6).
Klein’s reactivation of Aristotle’s critique maintains that for Aristotle
it “is precisely the supposition of the ‘detachment’ of the pure monads” that
“seduces us to this view,” namely, that of the generic “unity” of ἀριθμοί
(99/106). For once the supposition is made that “these monads, whose
noetic character manifests itself in their ‘absolute’ indivisibility . . . , in their
unlimited multiplicity . . . , and in their complete similarity . . . ,” are de-
tached and therefore independent of sensuously perceivable things, the basis
is removed for such monads “to offer any sort of ‘natural’ articulation (such
as is found in the ever-different and ever-divisible sensuously perceivable
things) which might serve as the original source of delimitation and unifi-
cation productive of singular assemblages, i.e., of precisely limited amounts”
(99–100/106). Thus, “the possibility of collecting two monads in oneἀριθμός-
combination cannot but be understood as the effect of an original and there-
fore independent εἶδος, be it the ‘even’84 (ἄρτιον), be it the eidetic ‘two’”
(99/106). However, because “in truth [for Aristotle] the pure monads are
nothing other than the sensuously perceivable things reduced to mere count-
able ‘pieces,’ ‘they do not differ {from αἰσθητά} because they are indivisible
{while αἰσθητά are divisible}, for points {which, although they are also purely
noetic formations, can nevertheless be immediately ‘represented’ by sensu-
ously perceivable signs} are also indivisible, and yet there is nothing other
aside from their ‘being two’ {i.e., no ‘one’ thing different from themselves}
which might be termed their ‘twoness.’ ( . . . Metaphysics Μ 8, 1082 a 24–26;
cf. also Μ 9, 1085 a 23–31)” (100/106–7). For Aristotle, then, a “definite
amount is precisely not one thing but a ‘heap’ (σωρός) of things or monads
(cf. Metaphysics Η 3, 1044 a 4; Μ 8, 1084 b 21 f.)” (100/107). This means
that, unlike for Plato, the “being of a definite amount is not a κοινόν, to be
taken as a ‘whole’ above and alongside, as it were, the parts of the ‘heap’ (cf.
Metaphysics Η 6, 1045 a 8–10).” Rather, an ἀριθμός is precisely these parts
and nothing more. “‘For a definite amount is {only} that which has been
counted or can be counted.’ ( . . . Physics Δ 14, 223 a 24 f.; cf. Γ 5, 204 b 8.).”
Klein holds that Aristotle recognizes, as does Plato, a “preknowledge
of all possible definite amounts” that makes “available indifferent forma-
tions, each of which holds the place of ‘a definite amount by which we count’
(ἀριθμὸς ᾧ ἀριθμοῦμεν – Physics Δ 14, 223 a 24 f.; cf. Γ 5, 204 b 8). Moreover,
this availability, on Klein’s view, should be called—following Plato—“a
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos esis
231
————————
84. The English translation renders ἄρτιον as ‘odd’, which is clearly a misprint.

‘stored possession’ [κτῆσις] and not a ‘possession in use’ [ἕξις] (Theaetetus,
197 B ff.; cf. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics A 1).” However, while Plato takes
all of this to indicate a field of “pure” monads and hence ἀριθμοίthat are
originally “detached” from sensuously perceivable things, Aristotle, on
Klein’s view, maintains that each of these ἀριθμοί, as a “stored possession,” is
precisely such as to “not coincide with what is counted” and thus something
that “must not be spoken of as one thing.” The “availability” of “all possible
definite amounts” in this “inexplicit preknowledge” (100–1/107) does not
point, then, to each of them “being one” (101/107), as it does for Plato.
That is to say, it does not point to their being “a κοινόν, to be taken as a
‘whole’ above and alongside” the multitude of counted or countable objects
that compose (for Aristotle) an ἀριθμός properly so-called. Rather, this “avail-
ability” for Aristotle, according to Klein, “first comes to be known in the ex-
ecution of counting, and so it is also rooted in the experience of counting
multitudes and of culling from them those indifferent formations ἐξ ἀφαιρέ -
σεως.” Indeed, “we see that here too we are dealing with ‘heaps,’ namely with
heaps of ‘pure’ monads, which may be understood as ‘separable’ but not as
originally ‘detached’” (100/107). So ἀριθμοίof pure monads are one “only as
much as is anything whatever which extends ‘over the whole’ (καθόλου, cf.
Posterior Analytics B 19),” which means that they “are as little ‘one thing’ as
any definite amount of sensuously perceivable things (cf. also Metaphysics
Μ 4, 1079 a 34–36)” (101/107).
§ 88. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of the Unity of
᾿Αριθμός as Common Measure
Having criticized the Platonic chorismos thesis, as well as the view of ἀριθμός
as a κοινόν that follows from it, what remains is “the question by what those
definite amounts which are ‘heaps’ are demarcated from one another, how
it is possible to call one definite amount just that, namely one” (101/107–
8). Klein maintains that, for Aristotle, “this question should be posed only
concerning that which is actually counted” (101/108). That is because “the
‘unity’ of a definite amount is not of a generic sort,” which, as we have seen,
is how the Platonic chorismos thesis understands it. Rather, 
When we consider that all counting presupposes the homogeneity of that
which is counted insofar as it is counted . . . , we see not only that every def-
inite amount consists of many units, i.e., is many “ones” (ἕνα . . . ), but also
that it is kept together by a common measure, namely by the unit in question
that has become the basis of the count, and, therefore, the means by which
“many ones” “as many” initially become—as such—possible. “For each def-
inite amount is ‘many’ because each is [made up of ] ‘ones’ and because each
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
232

is measured by {its own}‘one.’” (πολλὰ γὰρ ἕκαστος ὁ ἀριθμὸς ὅτι ἕνα καὶ ὅτι
μετρητὸς ἐνὶ ἕκαστος – Metaphysics I 6, 1056 b 23 f.; cf. Physics Δ 12, 220 b
20–22.)
Thus, “We comprehend a definite amount as one because we do our count-
ing over one and the same thing, because our eyes remain fixed on one and the
same thing.” It is therefore 
In this sense [that] the “one” (or the one thing subjected to counting) makes
counting and thus the “definite amount” as such possible: In this sense it takes
precedence over the definite amount and may be called its ἀρχή( . . . cf. Meta-
physics Δ 6, 1016 b 17–20; 15, 1021 a 12 f.; Ν I, 1088 a 6–8). The priority
of the one over the definite amount does not follow from a relationship of su-
periority of genus over species, but rather from the character of the one as
“measure.” 
And it is precisely this state of affairs, namely, that “the ‘unity’ of a definite
amount” is something that “has its roots in the unity which each counted
thing has as the ‘measure’ of the count in question,” which rules out this
unity being of “a generic sort.”
This measure and root of the being one proper to things is also some-
thing that “in reverse marks their possibility as countable, and it follows from
this and only this that ‘to be one is to be indivisible.’ ( . . . Metaphysics I 1, 1052
b 16; cf. I 3, 1054 a 23; furthermore, Physics Γ 7, 207 b 6 f.)” (101–2/108). In-
divisibility, then, “belongs to things only insofar as they supply the measure
of a possible count” (102/108). “‘Whatever is not subject to division is called
one in respect of that by reason of which it is not divisible.’ ( . . . [Metaph.] Δ 6,
1016 b 4–6.)” (102/108–9). The “unity of a definite amount of things” is
therefore “only the unity of its ‘measure,’ namely of the very thing which is sub-
jected to counting and in that capacity indivisible” (102/109). Consequently,
“the definite amount can be determined in general as ‘a multitude measured
by the one.’ ( . . . [Metaph.] I 6, 1057 a 3 f.)” (102/109). And it is precisely this
that provides the basis, according to Klein, for both Aristotle’s rejection of the
Platonic view of the “one” as a “κοινόν [common thing] ([Metaph.] I 1, 1053
a 14)” and Aristotle’s own view of it as “a measure (μέτρον – 1053 b 4 f.; 1052
b 18 ff.; Λ 7, 1072 a 33; Ν 1, 1087 b 33 ff.).”
§ 89. Aristotle’s Ontological Determination of the 
Indivisibility and Exactness of “Pure” ᾿Αριθμοί
Klein’s reactivation of Aristotle’s determination of the mode of being of
ἀριθμοί concludes with a consideration of how “by confining counting and
calculating to ‘pure’ monads, we turn the being one and being indivisible of
things as such into the object of study.” Klein traces the genesis of the ob-
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos esis
233

jects of this study to Aristotle’s claim that “we habitually reduce every count
to a neutral expression. We do not say: one apple, two apples, three apples,
but rather: one, two, three . . . (cf. Μ 7, 1082 b 35).” When we do this, “we
are already seeing the things in question in their ‘reduced’ structure, i.e., as
indifferent, simply countable material.” And because “raising this procedure
to the rank of a science” is what yields the “being one and being indivisible”
of “the mathematical μονάς,” for Aristotle the status of the latter is “nothing
other than the character of being a measure as such, which has been ‘lifted
off ’ things.” Indeed, “This is why the arithmetician understands the μονάς
as that which is ‘totally indivisible’ (πάντῃ ἀδιαίρετον – I 1, 1053 a 1 f.; Δ 6
1016 b 25), and therewith also as something that is given as a ‘completely
exact’ (ἀκριβέστατον – 1053 a 1) measure.” Moreover, “the universal ‘ap-
plicability’ of the ‘pure’ definite amounts is grounded in this indivisibility
and exactness.” Thus, “for example, the human being as human being is one
and indivisible, the {arithmetician} has, however, already posited the {ab-
solutely} indivisible one {namely the μονάς, and indeed, has posited it as ‘de-
tached’}, and then sees what might belong to the human being insofar as he
is ‘indivisible’ i.e., what makes him subject to being counted or reckoned
with as a ‘unit’. ( . . . Μ 3, 1078 a 23–25.)” (102–3/109–10). Finally, what
Aristotle says here about the applicability of the μονάς to the human being
“may be said of any arbitrarily countable being whatsoever” (103/110),
which is the reason why its applicability is “universal.”
§ 90. The Influence of Aristotle’s View of Μαθηματικάon
Theoretical Arithmetic
Klein maintains that “Aristotle’s ontological view of μαθηματικά, especially
of the ‘pure’ definite amounts, soon comes to influence the development of
mathematical science itself.” In contrast to the prominent role played by the
concept of the εἶδος within “the Pythagorean and Platonic framework” of
theoretical arithmetic, subsequent to Aristotle it “will now have a consider-
ably smaller significance.” Not only will εἴδη of ἀριθμοί “no longer be under-
stood as structures which give unity and unambiguous articulation to the
realm of definite amounts,” but, “if they are to have a place at all, the singu-
lar definite amounts must henceforth be considered as εἴδη, and indeed be
considered such in the ‘derivative’ sense (cf. Metaphysics Ζ 4, 1030 a 18–27).”
In other words, Klein here is maintaining that one consequence of Aristo-
tle’s account of the “abstract” mode of being of definite amounts is that any
εἴδη attributed to them must also assume this mode of being, which is “de-
rivative” in the precise sense of its non-independence from the sensible things
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
234

that function as its abstractive basis. Moreover, “The ‘even,’ the ‘odd,’ the
‘even-times-odd,’ etc., . . . are now no more than the ‘peculiar characteristics’
(ἴδια πάθη) of definite amounts ( . . . Physics Β 2, 194 a 3–5),” which means
that they are no longer understood as the εἴδη of ἀριθμοί. As such, these char-
acteristics “present merely a quality (ποιότης) of definite amounts, for in-
stance, the character of being a ‘composite’ definite amount” (GMTOA,
103/110). Finally, the “being (οὐσία) of a definite amount is the multitude
of units as such, for instance ‘six’—where οὐσία is again to be understood in
the ‘derivative’ sense.” Thus, in pointed contrast to the Platonic account of
the “being” of ἀριθμοί which posits a mode of being proper to the noetic
character of each ἀριθμός (e.g., the hexad) as something that has its source in
“εἴδη which belong together, whose community in each case forms a ‘kinship’
which must, due to the ‘arithmetical’ tie of its ‘members’ as an eidetic ‘defi-
nite amount,’ be designated as the six” (89/92), Aristotle, according to Klein,
determines it as follows. The “‘what’ of each definite amount insofar as it is
a definite amount is precisely the ‘how many’ it indicates; thus ‘six’ units are
not in themselves ‘two times three’ units or ‘three times two’ units, for this
indicates only their ‘composite quality,’ but ‘once six’: ‘For the being of each
definite amount is what it is once, for instance that of six is not what it is
twice or thrice but what it is once; for six is once six’ ( . . . Metaphysics Δ 14,
1020 b 7 f.; also b 3–7)” (103/110–11).85
Klein reports that this “transformation of the ontological foundation”
(103/111) of definite amounts is “directly mirrored” in “the ‘arithmetical’
books of Euclid (VII, VIII, IX).” Hence, the “‘pure’ units of which the def-
inite amounts to be studied are composed are here understood precisely only
as ‘units of measurement’” (103–4/111). Moreover, the “same approach is
indicated by Definitions 8, 9, 11, 12, 14 of the seventh book (namely of
even-times-even, even-times-odd, odd-times-odd, prime and composite def-
inite amounts . . . ), which define the nature of each definite amount with re-
spect to the measuring character of its factors” (104/111). Klein finds this
last fact especially significant, for it presents “the very approach which Nico-
machus and Domninus, at least, make every effort to avoid,” since, like all
Neoplatonists, their concern with these classifications is “to provide a (more
or less unambiguous) classification of all definite amounts,” and not merely
to “determine certain of their properties.”
Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Chorismos esis
235
————————
85. In his 1939 talk, “The Concept of Number in Greek Mathematics and Philoso-
phy,” Klein suggests that “it seems as if Aristotle didn’t see the real problem of numbers,” be-
cause he denied “that there is any unity in a number of things.” Klein concludes this lecture
with the observation, “This problem still awaits a solution” (52).

§ 91. Aristotle’s Ontological Conception of ᾿ΑριθμοίMakes
Possible Theoretical Logistic
However, Klein draws “another consequence” (105/112) “[f ]rom Aristo-
tle’s ontological conception” of ἀριθμοί “insofar as it affects the problem of
theoretical logistic,” which, he maintains, is “far more central in our context.”
Specifically, Klein holds that Aristotle’s criticism of the Platonic view of the
monad as “an independent and, as such, simply indivisible object,” which
shows that “this ‘indivisibility’ does not accrue to the μονάς as a self-subsist-
ing ἕν, but by virtue of the measuring character of any such unit, be it of an
aisthetic or a noetic nature,” removes the difficulty that stands in the way of
realizing on Platonic grounds a theoretical logistic. That is, it removes the
obstacle of the indivisibility of the unit of calculation that prevented logis-
tic, “as the theory of those mutual relations of definite amounts that provide
the basis of all calculation,” from being able to account for calculation with
fractions. In other words, Klein maintains “that only Aristotle’s conception
of μαθηματικά makes possible that ‘theoretical logistic’ which suffered from
the dilemma of being at the same time postulated by the chorismos thesis and
yet precluded from realization by that very thesis” (105/112–13). 
For Klein, then, “Only when the Aristotelian critique has taken effect
can a whole series of ‘applied’ sciences, such as were cultivated in the Alexan-
drian school, be justified as ‘sciences’” (105/112). In support, Klein cites the
Metrics of Heron of Alexandria, which “starts out from the following obser-
vation: ‘In order, then, not to have to name feet or ells or their parts in each
measurement, we will exhibit our numerical results as {reduced to indiffer-
ent} monads, for it is open to anyone to substitute for them whatever measure
he wishes.’” Commenting on the implications of this, Klein holds that “Noth-
ing now stands in the way of changing the unit of measurement in the course
of the calculation and of transforming all the fractional parts of the original
unit into ‘whole’ definite amounts consisting of the new units of measure.”
Consequently, what was impossible for Platonically conceived theoretical lo-
gistic now becomes possible, since “even fractions can now be treated ‘scien-
tifically.’” On Klein’s view, the “‘arithmetical’ textbook of Diophantus” (105/
113) provides “a significant document which is able to give us a concrete no-
tion of the type of theoretical logistic which can be built on Peripatetic foun-
dations.” Klein’s reactivation of the peculiar nature of Diophantus’s arithmetic
as a theoretical logistic is the subject of the next chapter. 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
236

Chapter Twenty-one
Klein’s Interpretation of 
Diophantus’s Arithmetic
§ 92. Access to Diophantus’s Work Requires Reinterpreting It
outside the Context of Mathematics’ Self-interpretation 
since Vieta, Stevin, and Descartes
On Klein’s view the “self-conception” (122/117) of modern algebra is insep-
arable from Vieta’s foundational appropriation and transformation of the lo-
gistical technique employed by Diophantus in his Arithmetic.86 As a result,
Klein concludes that “this new self-definition of the mathematical enterprise
rests essentially upon a certain reinterpretation of ancient mathematics (as of
the whole of science)” (122–23/117). Achieving the goal of clarifying this
reinterpretation, in Klein’s words, “means nothing less than to gain renewed
access to Greek numerical doctrine” (123/117), and it is for this reason that
Klein’s historical reflection has focused on the Neoplatonic mathematical hori-
zon of Diophantus’s work along with its Platonic and Aristotelian contexts.
From the vantage of our foregoing exposition of Klein’s investigation of these
horizons, we are in a position to confirm both the “zigzag” movement87 of his
method and its effective reactivation of “the most general conceptual presup-
positions of Greek arithmetic and logistic” (122/117). That is to say, Klein’s
desedimentation of the Greek ἀριθμός-concept, Plato’s articulation of the in-
volved distinction between arithmetic and logistic in general and their prac-
tical and theoretical modes in particular, and the different modes of being that
Plato and Aristotle attribute to the εἴδη of ἀριθμοίcan now be confirmed.
Klein maintains that his “approach” to the significance of “the work of
Diophantus,” which interprets it “in the light of” the “most general presup-
positions of Greek arithmetic and logistic,” “cannot but bring us in conflict
————————
86. See Part I, § 23 above.
87. See Part II, § 38 above.

with the standard presentation of Diophantus’ Arithmetic as a rudimentary
stage of modern algebra and hence of our symbolic mathematics in general.”
This conflict arises because that standard presentation is “intimately con-
nected with the self-conception of modern mathematics since Vieta, Stevin,
and Descartes.” The problem with the standard view, then, is that it does not
recognize “[t]he necessity of abstaining as far as possible from the use of mod-
ern concepts in the interpretation of ancient texts” (123/118). Klein observes,
and indeed stresses, that an important consequence of the failure to recognize
this necessity is that the generality of the Greek mathematical method is mis-
taken for the generality of its object. When this occurs, the use of “[l]etters for
indicating magnitudes” (128/124) by Diophantus (and before him, by Aris-
totle, Euclid, Archytas, and others) is understood from the vantage of “our
own conceptuality [or conceptual framework],” which, as a matter of course,
identifies “the object represented with the means of its representation” (126/
122)—and so misunderstands such letters as symbolic designations. For
Klein, however, “such a letter is never a ‘symbol’ in the sense that that which
is signified by the symbol is in itself a ‘general’ object” (128/124). On the
contrary, the symbolic understanding of letters presupposes precisely “the
conceptual transformation which permits the ancient ἀριθμός to appear as
‘numeral’ (‘Zahl’)—as opposed to a ‘definite amount of definite objects’ (‘An-
zahl’)—and concomitantly, as ‘general magnitude.’” Klein’s clarification of the
modern reinterpretation of Diophantus is therefore tantamount to an at-
tempt to trace the transformation of number into the modern symbolic des-
ignation from a perspective whose point of departure is the conceptuality of
Greek mathematics. 
Klein is well aware that “the feasibility of an interpretation not based
on modern presuppositions must always be limited” (123/118). He notes
that “even if we succeed in ridding ourselves completely of present-day sci-
entific terminology, it remains immensely difficult to leave that medium of
ordinary conceptuality which corresponds to our mode of thinking, a mode
essentially established in the last four centuries.” He nevertheless holds that
“the ancient mode of thinking is not totally ‘strange’ or closed to us,” since
“the relation of our concepts to those of the ancients is oddly ‘ruptured’—
our approach to an understanding of the world is rooted in the achievements
of Greek science, but it has broken loose from the presuppositions which de-
termined the Greek development.” To clarify “our own conceptual presup-
positions,” then, Klein says that “we must always keep in mind the difference
in the circumstances surrounding our own science and that of the Greeks.” 
Klein locates the difference in circumstances that concern the contrast
between the “‘natural’ basis” (123/119) of Greek science, in which “science
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
238

stands in original and immediate opposition to a nonscientific attitude”
(123/118), and the replacement of this natural basis “by a science already in
existence” (124/119), which characterizes the “‘new’ science” (124/119). For
Klein, “Greek ἐπιστήμη” (123/118) involved, “for the first time,” the recog-
nition that “the life of ‘cognition’ and ‘knowledge’” is “an ultimate human
possibility, one which enables men to disregard all the ends they might oth-
erwise pursue, to devote themselves to contemplation in complete freedom
and leisure, and to find their happiness in this very activity.” Thus, not only
is this science “contrasted with the affairs of the day,” but, “In attempting to
raise itself above this nonscientific attitude, science preserves intact these given
foundations” (123/118–19). The situation with “[o]ur science” (124/119),
“whose foundations were laid in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,” is
completely different, insofar as its “edifice” is “erected in deliberate opposition
to the concepts and methods” of the former science, even though “the funda-
mental claim to validity of this science is recognized.” That is to say, for the
“new” science, “Scientia herself appears as an inalienable human good,” even
if, as in the case of “the learned science of the schools,” it has “become de-
based and distorted.” Thus, although scholastic science’s “principles are de-
nied,” its “methods rejected,” and its “knowledge mocked,” science’s “place
within human life as a whole is placed beyond all doubt” by the “founders of
the ‘new’ science.” 
These considerations lead Klein to conclude that it is “both possible
and necessary to learn to see Greek science from the point of view of . . . its
‘natural’ basis” (123/119). Instead of approaching this science through “the
conceptual formulation” (124/119) of a science whose “new insights” are “de-
rived from the traditional concepts,” Klein approaches it in terms of “the
whole complex of those ‘natural’ cognitions which are implied in a prescien-
tific activity moving within the realm of opinion and supported by a pre-
conceptual understanding of the world” (123–24/119). Doing so not only
enables him—as we have seen—to reactivate the most general conceptual
presuppositions of Greek arithmetic and logistic, but it will also enable him
to see that the new science of “men like Galileo, Steven, Kepler, and Des -
cartes” (124/119), while no doubt “carried by an original impulse which is
quite foreign to the learned science of the schools,” nevertheless “shares with
scholastic science the most general presuppositions of that ‘scientific attitude’
which was developed by Greek science in opposition to a ‘natural’ existence”
(124/119–20). Furthermore, seeing Greek science from this angle will enable
Klein to realize that even though this new science “returns to the sources of
Greek science, which had been neglected by scholastic science” (124/120), it
nevertheless “interprets both the presuppositions and the sources from a basis
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
239

which is utterly foreign to ancient science.” This last point cannot be overem-
phasized, because its realization not only is not self-evident, but it is also dis-
cernible only by a cognitive regard that has appropriated something of the
conceptuality belonging to the original horizon that informs Greek ἐπιστή -
μη, an appropriation that therefore places it in a position to see both the dis-
continuity and the continuity between the conceptualities of ancient Greek
and modern science. In other words, to grasp modern science as a “reinter-
pretation of the ancient body of doctrine, which brings with it a characteristic
transformation of all ancient concepts,” and to see also that this reinterpre-
tation “lies at the foundations not only of all concept formation in our science,
but also of our ordinary conceptuality, which is derived from the former,” the
radically different circumstances surrounding these two conceptualities must
be established and then investigated.
Our articulation of Klein’s desedimentation of the most general pre-
suppositions belonging to Greek arithmetic and logistic has considered in
detail Klein’s first step in establishing these different circumstances, which
now places us in a position to consider the next step, involving the establish-
ment of the radical discontinuity between modern and Greek mathematics.
Klein carries out this next step by, first, interpreting the logistical technique
operative in Diophantus’s Arithmetic from the perspective of Greek mathe-
matical doctrine. Only on the basis of such an interpretation is it then possi-
ble, secondly, to establish the fact that Vieta’s interpretation of this technique
involves a complete transformation of “the structure of the objects with which
mathematics deals” (129/125), a transformation that has its basis in “[a] new
kind of generalization, which may be termed ‘symbolic abstraction.’” It is pos-
sible to recognize that Vieta’s reinterpretation of Diophantus occurs within
a conceptual framework completely unknown to the latter only when the
basis for comparing the conceptualities operative for each has been estab-
lished, that is, when the conceptuality that informs Diophantus’s work is ap-
proached from the horizon of ancient rather than modern mathematical
science. Moreover, only on the basis of the contrast that emerges from this
comparison is it possible to see that “the nature of the modification which the
mathematical science of the sixteenth and seventeenth century brings about
in the conceptions of ancient mathematics is exemplary for the total design
of human knowledge in later times” (126/121).
With this last statement, Klein has in mind “the intimate connection be-
tween the mode of ‘generalization’ of the ‘new’ science and its character as an
‘art’” (126/122), the “most characteristic expression” of which “is to be found
in the symbolic formalism and calculational techniques of modern mathe-
matics.” He notes that the understanding of mathematics as an art “is heralded
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
240

at the end of the Middle Ages by an increasing interest in the practical, i.e.,
applied mathematical disciplines” (128/124), and that the latter, in the guise
of “logistic and mensuration (arithmetica et geometria practica)” (129/125),
now takes precedence over “‘theoretical’ arithmetic and geometry (arithmetica
et geometria speculativa) such as especially Boethius, using Neopythagorean or
Neoplatonic sources, passes on to the Middle Ages” (128–29/125). These
practical disciplines “are consistently understood as ‘artes’” (129/125), and “to
learn them means to master the corresponding ‘rules of the art.’” The goal of
the arts, then, is “‘[a]rtful procedure,’ the ‘practica’ or ‘praxis’ of calculating and
measuring.” The confluence of two events is responsible for the connection be-
tween the art character of these practical disciplines and the symbolic for-
malism and calculational techniques of modern mathematics. First, these
disciplines “succeed in gaining recognition as part of the ‘official’ science” on
the basis of “precisely their character as ‘arts,’” which is “thought to lend them
their true theoretical dignity.” Second, the structure of mathematical objects
is transformed by the symbolic abstraction operative in the mathematical
thought of Vieta, Stevin, and Descartes, such that, in place of the determinate
objects intended by premodern mathematics, modern mathematics intends
the “possibility of making” (127/123) them “determinate,” and does so pre-
cisely on the basis of letters that symbolize the value of numbers, letters that
are operated on in accordance with the rules of calculation. 
Because, on Klein’s view, “this whole process” (129/125) “is mainly ini-
tiated by the reintroduction and assimilation of the Arithmetic of Diophan-
tus,” and because, as we have seen, interpreting the meaning of this work—
“backwards,” as it were—from the conceptual level of modern mathematics
makes it impossible to describe the precise nature of the conceptual trans-
formation of ancient arithmetic and logistic presupposed by this level, Klein
endeavors, “first of all” (20/6), to “see the work of Diophantus from the point
of view of its own presuppositions.”
§ 93. Diophantus’s Arithmetic as Theoretical Logistic
Klein writes that the standard interpretation of Diophantus’s ᾿Αριθμητικάis
based on the latter’s use “of a series of abbreviations for unknowns and their
powers which enter into the calculation itself” (130/126) of “the solution of
those computational problems which are known today as determinate and
indeterminate equations of the first and second degree” (129/126). Dio-
phantus’s manner of presenting these calculations lends it the quality of a
“new abstract ‘logistic’” (132/128), one that, in contrast to the “old ‘concrete’
study” of ἀριθμοί, is such that he “could come to be called—always with cer-
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
241

tain reservations—the ‘inventor’ or ‘father’ of our present-day algebra” (130/
126). On Klein’s view, however, “the opposition of ‘abstract’ and ‘concrete’ is
insufficient for characterizing a work of this kind” (135/129); and the un-
derstanding of “all the signs which Diophantus uses” (150/146) as anything
more than “merely word abbreviations” is only possible on the basis of “ex-
ternally transposing” (131/127) “the content of Greek mathematics” “into
another mode of presentation,” rather than “by comprehending it in the one
way which seemed comprehensible to the Greeks.” 
The inquiry into precisely how Diophantus himself understood the
“being” (135/130) of the ἀριθμοί—which, “without further ado,” are “sim-
ply . . . called ‘abstract’” by the proponents of the standard interpretation of
Diophantus—is crucial for Klein’s purpose of “making explicit the particular
character of Greek conceptuality, whose peculiar transformation in the six-
teenth and seventeenth centuries is equivalent to the ‘introduction of a com-
pletely new means of expression for mathematical thinking’” (131–32/128).
Thus, while “It is, to be sure, characteristic of Diophantus that he calculates
with ἀριθμοίwhich are nothing but amounts of pure monads” (135/129–30),
the key question for Klein is whether their being is understood “as inde-
pendent and therefore incapable of division, or as the result of reduction to
‘neutral’ items which merely indicate the character of the ‘measure,’ and thus
easily admit further partition” (135/130). 
Klein’s answer to this question is that “which of these two possibilities
is here realized cannot be in doubt.” This is clear to him because “The Arith-
metic of Diophantus is . . . a theoretical work . . . that does not scruple to in-
troduce fractional parts of the unit of calculation into the inquiry”
(138–39/133), which is something that “is possible only if the ontological un-
derstanding of the μονάς is Peripatetic in character” (139/133). At the same
time, however, “this handling of fractional parts of the unit clearly does not
diminish the ‘theoretical’ character of the whole work, although this ought
to be the case in light of Neoplatonic conceptions” (138/132).88 Thus, when
“we consider the essential content of the Diophantine work as it appears in
the formulations of the problems themselves, the thought that this is a dis-
cipline to which the Platonic definition of logistic . . . is immediately appli-
cable can hardly be avoided” (139/133). Klein’s analysis of the signs that
comprise Diophantus’s nomenclature will show that they have as their con-
cern “the ‘kind,’ the εἶδος of definite amounts” (147/143), although “we are,
to be sure, no longer dealing with the original Pythagorean-Platonic εἶδος
which is responsible for the characteristics of a ‘kind’ because it gives unity
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
242
————————
88. See §§ 54 and 59 above.

to, and thereby makes possible, the being of definite amounts.”89 Notwith-
standing this difference, Klein will show that 
in Diophantus too the εἶδος of a definite amount means—as in the Neopla-
tonic mathematicians—the characteristic of its kind which it shares with
other definite amounts, or by which it is, in turn, separated from them so
that a classification of definite amounts can be obtained, except that this
characterizing εἶδος is here understood rather in the Peripatetic-Euclidean
manner, as a mere property of the various definite amounts. 
Yet Diophantus’s signification of and solution to calculational problems
“in terms of εἴδη themselves” (149/144) does not mean, according to Klein,
“that the εἴδη as such are definite amounts.” Thus, although “Diophantus’ cal-
culation with the sign of the magnitude sought, where this sign is introduced
into the very process of solution as it develops step by step” (144/139), is
clearly similar to the calculation with signs characteristic of modern algebra,
“the object meant is in each case a definite amount of monads” (149/145).
Hence, for Klein, the answer is negative to “the important question whether
Diophantine logistic may not contain within itself the possibility of a sym-
bolic calculating technique” (144/139). Indeed, Klein stresses that unless this
is recognized, the “true problem” (150/147) “in a historical study” of the ori-
gin of modern symbolic algebra will remain unrecognized. He therefore char-
acterizes this problem as follows:
How was it possible at all that in the face of a conceptually self-sufficient and
complete calculating procedure, such as the Diophantine Arithmetic is par ex-
cellence, the idea of a symbolic algebra was conceived? Or, more exactly: What
transformation did a concept like that of ἀριθμός have to undergo in order that
a “symbolic” calculating technique might grow out of the Diophantine tradition?
Klein begins to desediment the non-symbolic character of Diophan-
tus’s theoretical logistic by addressing the question of what we know about its
originality, given that “the formin which this material is presented” (130/126–
27) by Diophantus “cannot be documented before him” (130/127). The con-
tent of Diophantus’s theoretical logistic, however, can be so documented, and
the fact that “The material assimilated in Diophantine problems is to be found
already” (130/126) in earlier works provides “reason for the claim that he must
have been related to his predecessors somewhat as Euclid was to the authors
of the Elements . . . , whose works were completely eclipsed by the Euclidean
compilation” (130/127). The relation to earlier Greek sources, however, does
not prevent Klein from holding that “it can hardly be denied” (131/127)
“[t]hat the science of Diophantus exhibits certain non-Greek traits.” Notwith-
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
243
————————
89. See § 64 above.

standing these traits, Klein writes, “whatever the case for the more remote pre-
history may be—the conceptuality of a work which developed, as this one
did, on Hellenistic soil must first of all be understood on the basis of Greekpre-
suppositions.” Moreover, regarding “the origin of modern algebra and its for-
mal language” (151/147), the fact that the “Arithmeticof Diophantus may, to
be sure, itself refer back to a pre- and non-Greek, perhaps even a ‘symbolic,’
technique of counting” changes nothing regarding the fundamental role of
both this work and Greek science in this origin. This is the case, for Klein, be-
cause “it was precisely the direct assimilation of Diophantus’ work and of its
concepts which was crucial” for this origin. 
Turning now to Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of these con-
cepts, his analysis of Diophantus’s text establishes four interrelated and in-
terdependent points that rule out its standard interpretation as a work whose
conceptuality, although rudimentary, is commensurate and therefore con-
tinuous with the conceptuality of modern algebra and symbolic mathematics
in general.90 The first is that the “numbers” operative in Diophantus’s logis-
tic concern monads. The second is that the precise nature of this concern
with monads is the reference to there always being so and so many—that is,
a definite amount—of them. The third is that all the signs that Diophantus
uses, including his sign for an indeterminate multitude of monads, ‘ς’, are
word abbreviations for concepts that are only provisionally indeterminate,
for they are indeterminate only from the standpoint of the determinate so-
lution. The fourth and final point is that Diophantus’s use of the εἶδος con-
cept is completely instrumental, which means that its significance is likewise
instrumental and therefore not ontological.
§ 94. The Referent and the Operative Mode of Being of 
Diophantus’s Concept of ᾿Αριθμός
That the ἀριθμοί operative in Diophantus concern monads Klein establishes
on the basis of both Diophantus’s explicit statement to this effect and the
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
244
————————
90. Klein refers to the following as representatives of the standard interpretation:
Thomas L. Heath, Diophantus of Alexandria: A Study in the History of Greek Algebra (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2d ed., 1910); Hermann Hankel, Zur Geschichte der
Mathematik im Altertum und Mittelalter (Leipzig: Teubner, 1874); Freidrich Hultsch, “Dio-
phantos,” in A. Pauly and G. Wissowa (eds.), Real-Encyclopädie der klassischen Altertumswis-
senschaft (Stuttgart: Metzler, 1894–1980); Otto Neugebauer, “Studien zur Geschichte der
antiken Algebra I,” Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik,
Abteilung B, II (1936), 1–27; G. H. F. Nesselman, Algebra der Griechen (Berlin: Reimer,
1842); Paul Tannery, La géométrie grecque (Paris: Gautiers-Villars, 1887); and H. G. Zeuthen,
Die Lehre von den Kegelschnitten im Altertum (Copenhagen: Höst & Sohn, 1886).

meaning of the letter he uses to designate ἀριθμοί that are presupposed as
known. Klein reports that in “‘Definition I’ (2, 14 f.)” (136/130) of his Arith-
metic,91 Diophantus states that “‘all definite amounts consist of a certain mul-
titude of monads’. . . .” In addition, Klein observes that “in accordance with
‘Definition II’ (6, 6–8),” “the definite amounts which are presupposed as
‘known’ (the determinates – οἱ ὡρισμένοι – 6, 6 f.) in the calculation” are des-
ignated by a “letter which gives the definite amount of monads,” a letter that
“usually has . . . the sign for μονάς () as a prefix; for instance: δ(four
units).”92 Klein concludes from this that “the use of the sign itself was the re-
sult of the meaning of the word ἀριθμός in common speech, namely: a definite
amount of definite objects—in the extreme case this might be a definite
amount of units of measurement, or of ‘pure’ or ‘neutral’ monads” (136/131).
Klein also finds it significant for establishing the referent proper to
the ἀριθμός concept operative in Diophantus that its linguistic usage “also oc-
curs throughout the Metrics of Heron” (137/131) and in “the second book
of Pappus . . . where the system of calculation and the nomenclature of Apol-
 lonius are described.” Klein notes that this linguistic usage “is, incidentally,
the basis both of Apollonius’ system of nomenclature and of Archimedes’ ex-
position in a lost work addressed to Zeuxippos as well as in the Psammites.”
Specifically, both of these works “depend on the introduction of units of a
higher order; they are called by Archimedes ‘definite amounts 〈formed〉anal-
ogously to those based on monads’ (ἀριθμοὶ ἀπὸ μονάδος ἀνάλογον . . . ), by
Apollonius simply ‘analogous definite amounts’ or ‘analogues’ (ἀνάλογοι
[ἀριθμοί] or τὰ ἀνάλογα . . . ).” This linguistic usage allows “unusually large
definite amounts of simple monads to be pronounced, written down, or
made objects of calculation without much difficulty,” and in this manner
represents “nothing but the consistent development of the Greek mode of
thought and speech” (137/132). In the case at hand, what is developed is
the “ordinary system of counting” (137/131), where “the myriad, the unit-
ten-thousand (μυριάς), forms a new and higher unit, and so, actually, does the
chiliad, the unit-thousand (χιλιάς), if the numerical adjectives thousand, two
thousand, three thousand (χίλιοι, δισχίλιοι, τρισχίλιοι) and their written form
are taken into account.” Hence, Klein’s point is that Diophantus’s sign ‘’,
like the myriad, chiliad, etc., has a determinate referent: the units whose
amount composes the ἀριθμός in question.
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
245
————————
91. Diophantus, Arithmetica (᾿Αριθμητικά), in Diophantus (Greek and Latin), ed. Paul
Tannery (Leipzig: Teubner, 1893–1895).
92. According to Heath, the “use of the letters of the alphabet as numerals was orig-
inal with the Greeks” (A History of Greek Mathematics, 32). Thus, α = our numeral 1, β = our
numeral 2, γ = our numeral 3, δ = our numeral 4, etc.

Regarding the mode of being of ἀριθμός in Diophantus, Klein holds
that “In the Diophantine text calculation with fractional parts of the unit of
calculation, i.e., the division of this unit, is simply admitted without com-
ment” (137/132), which attests that an Aristotelian understanding of the
ontological status of the μονάς is operative therein. That is, it attests to the
fact that “we are dealing with ‘neutral’ monads obtained ‘by abstraction’ (ἐξ
ἀφαιρέσεως)” (139/133).93 In this respect, Diophantus’s Arithmetic is there-
fore “altogether irreconcilable with that of the Neoplatonists” (137/132).94
Yet the unit’s partitioning does not detract from the “‘theoretical’ character
of the whole work” (138/132), as it does in Neoplatonism. Moreover, be-
cause it poses and solves all its problems “in terms of ‘pure’ monads,” together
with the “strictly ‘methodical,’ i.e., transferable to other cases of the same
type,” nature of each solution (ἀπόδειξις), it is consistent with the Platonic
definition of theoretical logistic as the part of mathematics that concerns
“all those relations, i.e., ratios (λόγοι) among ‘pure’ units, on which the suc-
cess of any calculation depends” (35–36/24).”95
According to Klein, “by a fraction Diophantus means nothing but a
definite amount of fractional parts of the unit of calculation, or a single such
fractional part.96 The ‘magnitude’ of such a fractional part corresponds to
‘how many’ (i.e., what multitude of ) partitions the μονάς undergoes”
(142/137). Therefore, “In its character as a measure, the μονάς itself is not af-
fected by any partition.” This can be seen, on the one hand, where Dio-
phantus in “‘Def. V’ (8, 11 f.)” (143/138) maintains that “When a fractional
part of a unit is multiplied as many times as the homonymous definite
amount indicates, the whole original unit is reconstituted.” Likewise, it can
be seen, “On the other hand, where the fractional parts of an original unit
may be transformed into a new unit by changing the measure . . . , which is
precisely what is done by Diophantus in problems I, 23, 24, 25; III, 14; VI,
2 and 16.” Thus, as we saw in § 56 above in the Peripatetic account of ab-
straction, “What is divided is only a bodily, or perhaps a geometric, i.e., lin-
ear, measuring ‘item,’ which is in itself divisible” (143/137–38). For Klein,
then, “Diophantus’ use of ‘fractions’ should by no means lead us to conclude
that on the level of Diophantine logistic the concept of ἀριθμός compre-
hends the whole of what we call the ‘realm of rational number’” (142/136).
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
246
————————
93. See § 87 above.
94. See § 56 above.
95. See § 53 above.
96. The phrase ‘the unit of calculation, or a single such fractional part’ renders “der
Recheneinheit bzw. einen einzelnen solchen Bruchteil,” which was not included in the Eng-
lish translation.

Fractions, let alone “negative definite amounts,” are not ἀριθμοίfor Dio-
phantus—the former, because they are parts of the unit (μονάς), which is not
a definite amount; the latter, because they are “impossible.” Regarding the
latter, Klein notes that whenever an equation “leads to a ‘negative’ or ‘irra-
tional’ solution,” Diophantus “in each case” introduces “a ‘restrictive condi-
tion’ (προσδιορισμός).” Such equations are therefore “‘impossible’ (ἀδύνατος)
or ‘not enunciable’ (οὐ ῥητή– i.e., ir-rational), just as it is ‘absurd’ (ἄτοπον)
to state such solutions, particularly to state an ‘ir-rational definite amount’
(ἀριθμὸς οὐ ῥητός . . . )—an irrational ἀριθμός is precisely not an ἀριθμός at all”
(143–44/138).
§ 95. The Ultimate Determinacy of Diophantus’s Concept of
Unknown and Indeterminate ᾿Αριθμοί
Having established that Diophantus’s concept of definite amount follows
“directly from that aspect of the ἀριθμός which implies that it is a ‘definite
amount of something’ (ἀριθμός τινος . . . )” (144/139), Klein next establishes
that “the other aspect of the ἀριθμός, namely that the objects meant by it are
precisely so and so many, is also preserved in Diophantus, as indeed in the
whole of Greek mathematics.” He does this by showing that the significance
of “the use of the sign for the unknown in the Diophantine text itself ”
(145/140) is ultimately determinate in a sense that decisively rules out what
has been its misinterpretation, since Vieta, as a sign for the possible deter-
minacy of its referent, which is to say, as a symbol whose meaning is insepa-
rable from a symbolic calculating technique. The sign in question, ‘ς’,97
represents the “special Diophantine sense of an unknown definite amount,”
in which “the ἀριθμός is defined as ‘having in itself an indeterminate multi-
tude of monads’ . . . (6, 4 f.).” However, and this is what decisively settles the
issue on Klein’s view, “The multitude of monads which the unknown defi-
nite amount contains is . . . indeterminate only ‘for us’ (πρὸς ἠμᾶς).” This is
because, for Diophantus, “The whole point of each problem lies precisely in
this—that a completely determinate amount of monads completes the solution
of each problem.” 
For Klein, then, in Diophantus the “‘indeterminate’ solution forms
only a stage preliminary to the final one” (140/134), which, as final, “is
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
247
————————
97. Klein follows “Heath’s typography in using the final sigma to represent this sign”
(GMTOA, 145/140); see Heath, Diophantus of Alexandria, 37. Klein also maintains that, “as
Heath has convincingly shown” (GMTOA, 150/146), this sign “represents nothing but a lig-
ature for αρ (= ἀριθμός).”

throughout concerned only with finding wholly determinate definite amounts
(and under certain circumstances also wholly determinate fractional parts of
the unit of calculation) such as have to each other a certain particular relation
given by the problem.” Thus, even though “Diophantus does know problems
and solutions of a ‘general’ kind (in his terms: ‘in the indeterminate 〈solu-
tion〉’ . . . ), namely those which leave their object ‘indeterminate’” (139/134),
Klein maintains that “it becomes apparent that such problems and solutions
have a merely auxiliary character” (140/134). Specifically, the “unknown”
(145/140) is “to be understood as an ‘indeterminate multitude’ (πλῆθος ἀόρι -
στον) only from the point of view of the completed solution, namely as ‘pro-
visionally indeterminate,’ and as an amount which is about to be exactly
determined in its multitude.” Moreover, this connection to the determinate
that belongs to the “indeterminacy” of Diophantus’s problems and solutions
“in the indeterminate solution,” as well as to his “indeterminate multitude,”
is also shared by his “concept of the ἀριθμοὶ ἀόριστοι (indeterminate definite
amounts).” That is because only in connection with geometrical “figures ‘sim-
ilar’ to one another (i.e., given only in shape and not determinate size)” (145/
140) does this concept become “transparent” (141/136), figures that, once
their problematic proportions are correctly determined and “taken together
with the further conditions of the problem” (141/136), permit a “univocal
solution” to the problem to follow “immediately.” 
Among other things, the peculiar “indeterminacy” at issue in Dio-
phantus’s solutions and concepts means that “When the unknown or its sign
is introduced into the process of solution, it is precisely not indeterminacy
in the sense of ‘possible’ determinacy which is meant” (145/140), the latter
being precisely what, as we shall see, is meant by the signs used in a symbolic
calculating technique.98 Rather, what is meant is always a provisional inde-
terminacy, the provisionality of which is established by the exactly deter-
mined multitude that comprises for Diophantus the complete solution to
the problem. For Klein, then, there is “no sharp boundary between ‘the de-
terminate’ (οἱ ὡρισμένοι – 6, 6 f.) and the ‘indeterminate’ definite amounts
(ἀόριστοι)” (146/142) in Diophantus. Moreover, when “definite amounts
are marked off by brief names indicating their kind” (146/141), and when
each of these names, in turn, is “rendered by a ‘sign’ (σημεῖον),” such that each
kind may be formulated in terms of its “root” relation to “‘an indeterminate
multitude of monads’ . . . and its sign, ς,” “it is by no means their original char-
acter to be merely powers of an unknown or ‘indeterminate’ definite
amount.” 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
248
————————
98. See §§ 94 and 103 below.

Klein establishes the latter by “attending to the way in which these terms
are introduced by Diophantus himself” (145/140). The “quadratic and cubic
definite amounts and furthermore those definite amounts which result from
‘squaring’ the quadratic, from multiplying a quadratic with a corresponding
cubic (i.e., one which has the same root as the quadratic), and finally from the
‘quadrature’ of a cubic definite amount” (145/140–41) are listed by Dio-
phantus “as falling under (ἐν τούτοις– 2, 17)” (145/140) “the series of definite
amounts going to infinity.” The names of these definite amounts, “δύναμις,
κύβος, δυναμοδύναμις, δυναμόκυβος, κυβόκυβος, i.e., square, cube, square-times-
square, square-times-cube, cube-times-cube” (146/141), indicate “their kind,”
and are called by Diophantus “the elementary constituents of ‘arithmetical’
science (4, 12–14).” Furthermore, he says that “the texture of most ‘arith-
metical’ problems is knit (4, 7–10)” “by interweaving these and their roots in
various ways” (145/141). In the solutions that follow Diophantus’s signifying
each of the aforementioned kinds of definite amounts, respectively, as “Δγ, Κγ,
ΔγΔ, ΔΚγ, ΚγΚ” (146/141), Klein stresses that “no unknown or indetermi-
nate definite amount is so much as mentioned.” When “the expression ἀριθμός
in the sense of an ‘indeterminate amount of monads’ (πλῆθος μονάδων ἀόρι -
στον) and its sign, ς, as well as the sign for the immutable μονάς” are finally in-
troduced, such that “within the course of each solution the definite amounts
rendered by Δγ, Κγ, ΔγΔ, ΔΚγ, and ΚγΚ have as their root (cf. 2, 19 f. . . . ) pre-
cisely the ς for each case, it is by no means their original character to be merely
the powers of an unknown or ‘indeterminate’ definite amount. For even as
powers of the ς they represent only transformations of a determinateamount of
monads.” Thus, Klein maintains that “it is not permissible simply to call the
expressions δύναμις, κύβος, δυναμοδύναμις, δυναμόκυβος, κυβόκυβος ‘powers of
the unknown.’”
Klein contends that “Exactly the same thing holds true also for the
fractional parts homonymous with these, namely the ‘fraction named after
a ‘definite amount,’ ‘square,’ ‘cube,’ etc. . . . 〈i.e., the reciprocals of the terms
named earlier〉( . . . 6, 9–21).” That is, these are not “powers of the un-
known”; rather, each is a fractional part of the unit that, when multiplied
by its homonymous definite amount, “yields one” (146/142). Moreover, this
“is exclusively based on the fact that this holds for the multiplication of any
definite amount with its homonymous fractional part.” Indeed, “That the
multiplication of several fractional parts of the unit again yields fractional
parts which are homonymous with the product of the definite amounts
homonymous with the original fractional parts (‘Def. VII’) is something
that likewise holds true of all definite amounts, and, therefore also those spe-
cial multitudes of monads which occur within the course of the solution
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
249

and which are, therefore, at that point still ‘indefinite’” (146–47/142), es-
tablishes the following for Klein: At issue in all of Diophantus’s “rules for
multiplication” (147/142) are precisely not rules in the modern sense,
namely, “rules by which certain relations among newly introduced magni-
tudes, and thus the magnitudes themselves, are originally determined.” On
the contrary, “they are . . . the rules of calculation already in use within the
ordinary realm of definite amounts, which are here, in deference to the un-
familiar notation, merely explicitly confirmed.” Thus, Diophantus suggests
that “these rules can be inferred from the nomenclature itself: ‘They will be
clear to you because they are pretty well expressed in the name itself ’ ( . . . 6,
24 f.), for the relevant expressions show directly the multiplicative compo-
nents of the definite amounts which are meant” (147/142–43). 
§ 96. The Merely Instrumental, and Therefore Non-ontological
and Non-symbolic, Status of the Εἶδος-Concept in 
Diophantus’s Calculations
The nomenclature at issue here concerns, of course, “the ‘kind,’ the εἶδος, of
definite amounts” (147/143), with which Diophantus calculates by means of
designative signs. Thus, “all definite amounts which can be rendered with the
aid of the signs ς, Δγ, Κγ . . . ςχ, Δγχ . . . represent, in respect to their multi-
plicative composition, one εἶδος each, while all definite amounts which are
written with the aid of the sign likewise form an εἶδος by themselves (cf. e.g.,
114, I f.: ‘the rest of the classes . . . of the unknowns and units’ – τὰ λοιπὰ . . .
εἴδη τῶν ς καὶ τῶν ).” Characteristic of this, Diophantus thus holds “the sign
χ” (148/143)—“which denotes reciprocals (6, 20 f.)” (146/141)—“to be a
sign ‘distinguishing the class’ (διαστέλλουσα τὸ εἶδος – 6, 21) in that it allows
the εἶδος in question (e.g., Κγχ) to be distinguished from the homonymous
εἶδος (Κγ).” Moreover, “with reference to the classes enumerated, the division
of one definite amount by another of another class is mentioned: ‘the parti-
tionings of the aforementioned classes’ ( . . . 14, 2); and practice in the addi-
tive, subtractive, and multiplicative combination of definite amounts of the
same or different classes is recommended (14, 3–10)” (148/143–44). Dio-
phantus’s concern with the εἴδη of ἀριθμοί is also apparent in “the general rule
(14, 11–23) for the treatment of equations of the first order (and of pure
quadratic and pure cubic equations, etc.)” (148/144), which “has precisely
this object—to order and combine the definite amounts according to their
class membership until finally both sides (μέρη, i.e., parts) of the equation are
reduced to definite amounts of one class, that is, ‘until one class becomes equal
to one class’ ( . . . 14, 14).” Finally, Diophantus speaks of his problems “ex-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
250

plicitly as ‘having their material for the most part concentrated in the εἴδη as
such’ ( . . . 14, 25–27).” Klein thus considers it to be “of the greatest signifi-
cance that here and throughout the εἴδη themselves are directly mentioned, and
not the definite amounts, each of which belongs to a certain εἶδος” (147/144).
This means that Diophantus’s “presentation and solution of the problems
takes place essentially in terms of the εἴδη themselves,” εἴδη that, as “a ‘charac-
teristic of the kind’ of each determinate definite amount,” are manifestly not
themselves definite amounts. In this connection, Klein writes:
Here, in the realm of mathematics, we thus find mirrored, albeit in a disjointed
fashion which is no longer appropriate to the original phenomenon, the rela-
tion between εἶδοςand single object—in the language of the schools, between
“secondary” (δευτέρα) and “primary substance” (πρώτη οὐσία). On its home
ground, that is, within Greek conceptuality, this relation is taken as a “matter
of course”; in Aristotelian ontology it is forcefully brought to the fore: As the
single object is just that which we name in its εἶδος, and is therefore accessible
to “scientific” treatment through it alone, so the definite amounts which the
Diophantine problems are supposed to yield are available to the “scientific”
grasp only in their “eidetic” properties; and this is precisely because in each
εἶδοςa completely determinate amount of monads is always meant. (149/145)
According to Klein, then, both Diophantus’s explicit statements and
his calculative practice make it necessary to “distinguish strictly between pro-
cedure and the object; while the procedure is applied to the εἴδη which are as
such independent of each ‘multitude of monads’ (πλῆθος μονάδων) and in
this sense ‘general’ (καθόλου), the object meant is in each case a determinate
amount of monads” (149/144–45). Thus, for Klein, notwithstanding the
vast difference between “Diophantine Arithmetic and the Neoplatonic ‘arith-
metical’ science” (149/145), a difference rooted, as we have seen, in the for-
mer, but not the latter, permitting the calculation with fractions, they are
“altogether compatible” insofar as each “deals with the multitude of monads
essentially only in the medium of the εἴδη.” However, this compatibility
should not be allowed to obscure what fundamentally distinguishes Dio-
phantus’s εἴδη from those of the Neoplatonists: according to Klein, it is “their
purely instrumental significance.” Thus, unlike the Neoplatonic εἴδη, which,
as we have seen, are inseparable from the ontological positing of both their in-
divisibility and their somatic independence, Diophantus’s placing of “[a]ll
definite amounts, which in this sense99 have one and the same εἶδος” (147/
143), into “one and the same ‘class,’” “has therefore no ontological signifi-
cance” (148/143). Its significance is rather taxonomical, “exactly as, for in-
stance, all hundreds belong to one and the same τάξις, although it may be that
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
251
————————
99. That is, in the Aristotelian sense of the εἶδος as merely the non-independent prop-
erty of ἀριθμοί.

the same definite amount is included in some other respect in another class.”
Hence, according to Klein, “Within the calculating procedure itself the εἴδη
are used as special units of calculation exactly in the same sense in which units
of a higher order occur in Archimedes and Apollonius100 and in which the
myriad is used in other places (cf. in Diophantus himself, 332 f.: 1 second-de-
gree myriad, and 8-thousand 7-hundred 4-ty and 7 first-degree myriads and
4-thousand 5-hundred and 60 monads [187,474,560 in our notation]— β´
My α καὶ α´ ͵ηψμζκαί ͵δφξ= δευτέρων μυριάδων ακαὶ πρώτων ͵ηψμζκαὶ
μονάδων ͵δφξ)” (149/145). That is to say, they are used as “units of calcula-
tion” that, “in every single case” (150/146) “mean a definite amount of units.”
And Diophantus’s signs are also used in this way. Thus, “the sign for the or-
dinary unit, , is introduced as a complete parallel for the sign ς [the un-
known amount of units]: ‘and its 〈i.e., the definite amount’s〉sign is ς. There
is also another sign, the invariant sign of determinants, the monad . . . ( . . .
6, 5–8).”
Klein thus shows that, notwithstanding “the facility with which Dio-
phantus carries out the multiplications of expressions which are composed
of definite amounts of different ‘kinds,’ the matter-of-course fashion in
which he handles such expressions in general . . . , and, finally, the purely in-
strumental use he makes of the εἶδος concept” (151/147), Diophantus’s
Arithmetic cannot be accurately characterized as a symbolic logistic. Yet
Klein nevertheless acknowledges that “an inner tension between the ‘mate-
rial’ treated and the character of the concepts forced on it” is evident in this
Arithmetic. As a consequence, he holds that there is “some justice” (150/151)
for Léon Rodet’s division of ‘algebra’ into “two types,” “namely ‘l’algèbre des
abbréviations et des données numèriques’ and ‘l’algèbre symbolique,’”101
maintaining that “It is to the first type, that of the algebra of abbreviations
and numerically given constituents, that the Diophantine ‘Arithmetic’ un-
questionably belongs.” 
Before turning to his account of Vieta’s realization of the “fundamen-
tal transformation of the conceptual foundations” (152/148) of Diophan-
tus’s—and, of course, with this, of ancient Greek—arithmetic and logistic,
Klein briefly sketches the lineage of his “direct assimilation” (151/147) by
the tradition leading up to and through Vieta, Stevin, and Descartes. First,
Rafael Bombelli, “under the influence of the impression made by a reading of
the Diophantine manuscript” (151/148), “changes the ‘technical’ character
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
252
————————
100. See § 91 above.
101. Léon Rodet, Sur les notations numériques algébriques antérieurement au XVI siècle
(Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1881), 69.

of his manuscript” (152/148), L’algebra, opera di Rafael Bombelli da Bologna,
“which was probably already written by 1550.”102 Moreover, the “third book
of his Algebra, which appeared in a new version in 1572, now contains also
(in modified, partly ‘generalized’ form) the majority of the problems in the
first five books of Diophantus. Here the original verbal ‘cloaking’ of the prob-
lems, which had been the practice in previous ‘algebraic’ works, is abandoned
in favor of a ‘pure’ form taken over from none other than Diophantus.” Sec-
ond, “In 1575 there appears the first Latin translation of Diophantus by Xy-
lander.”103 Third, “in 1577 the algebraic work of Guillaume Gosselin”104
appears, “which includes a treatment of the equations of Diophantus.” Fi-
nally, fourth, “Diophantus is put into modern ‘symbolic’ form in 1585 by
Stevin and in 1591 by Vieta.” Klein notes that even though “Stevin, who de-
pends directly on Bombelli for his terminology and symbolism, already
makes the new ‘number’ concept as such which is the basis of the ‘symbolic’
procedure completely explicit” (152/148–49), it is “Vieta who, by means of
the introduction of a general mathematical symbolism” (152/149), trans-
forms Diophantine logistic into a symbolic logistic and thus should be cred-
ited with inventing modern algebra. We now turn to Klein’s desedimentation
and reactivation of this epochal event.
Klein’s Interpretation of Diophantus’s Arithmetic
253
————————
102. Rafael Bombelli, L’algebra parte maggiore dell’aritmetica divisa in tre libri
(Bologna: Giovanni Rossi, 1572).
103. Diophantus, Res arithmeticae = Diophanti Alexandrini Rerum Arithmeticarum
libri sex, quorum primi duo adiecta habent Scholia, Maximi (ut coniectura est) Planudis.
Item Liber de Numeris Polygonis seu Multangulis. Opus incomparabile, verae Arithmeticae
Logisticae perfectionem continens, paucis adhuc visum. A Guil. Xylandro Augustano in-
credibili labore Latinè redditum, et Commentariis explanatum, inque lucem editum, ad Il-
lustriss. Principem Ludovicum Vuirtembergensem (Basel: Episcopius & Nicolai, 1575).
104. Guillaume Gosselin, De arte magna seu de occulta parte numerorum quae et Al-
gebra et Almucabala vulgo dicitur (Paris: Gilles Beys, 1577).

Chapter Twenty-two
Klein’s Account of Vieta’s Reinterpretation
of the Diophantine Procedure and 
the Consequent Establishment of Algebra 
as the General Analytical Art 
§ 97. The Significance of Vieta’s Generalization 
of the Εἶδος-Concept and Its Transformation 
into the Symbolic Concept of Species
What is at stake for Klein in Vieta’s “analytical art” is the birth of both “the
modern concept of ‘number,’ as it underlies symbolic calculi” (183/176), and
the expanded—in contrast to ancient Greek science—scope of the general-
ity of mathematical science itself. Klein writes that the former “heralds a gen-
eral conceptual transformation which extends over the whole of modern
science” (183/175), while the latter lends the “treatment” (πραγματεία;
187/179) at issue in the ancient Greek mathematical idea of a “‘general treat-
ment’ [καθόλου πραγματεία]” “a completely new sense” “within the system of
‘science.’” The generality of this new sense will concern both the method and
the object of science in what will come to be known as ‘universal mathemat-
ics’ (mathesis universalis). This transformation of the basic concept and scope
initially of mathematics and then of “the system of knowledge in general” (193/
184) “concerns first and foremost the concept of ἀριθμός itself” (183/175).
As a result of “its transfer into a new conceptual dimension” (194/185),
namely, into that in which both “the concept of ‘number’” and “that which
it means” (183/176) are “symbolic in nature,” a transfer that “becomes visible”
(194/185) “for the first time in Vieta’s ‘general analytic,’” there follows “a
thoroughgoing modification of the means and aims of science.” Klein main-
tains that what this modification involves is “best characterized by a phrase
. . . in which Vieta expresses the ultimate problem, the problem proper, of his

‘analytical art’: ‘Analytical art appropriates to itself by right the proud prob-
lem of problems, which is: TO LEAVE NO PROBLEM UNSOLVED’.”
§ 98. The Sedimentation of the Ancient Practical Distinction
between ‘Saying ’ and ‘ Thinking ’ in the Symbolic Notation 
Inseparable from Vieta’s Concept of Number 
Central to Klein’s view of these matters is that the usual explanation of the de-
velopment of the modern symbolic concept of number “by a reference to its
ever increasing ‘abstractness’” (183/175) is a “facile and easily misunderstood
manner of speaking” (184/175–76), one that “leaves its true complicated
structure completely in the dark” (184/176). That is because it belongs to
the symbolic number’s specific character to be indirectly related to the things
or units that the ἀριθμός concept is directly related to, thereby rendering it in-
accessible to the traditional Aristotelian measure of abstractness, which is cal-
ibrated in terms of a concept’s degree of remoteness from or proximity to
sensuously perceived things.105 Klein elaborates the reason for this inaccessi-
bility on the basis of the peculiar nature of the “abstractness” proper to the
symbolic number concept, which he describes in terms of the direct refer-
ence of the letter sign employed in Vieta’s logistice speciosa to “the general char-
acter of being an amount that belongs to every possible definite amount”
(182/174). That is to say, Vieta’s letter sign “immediately means the general
character of being an amount that belongs to every possible definite amount—
i.e., ‘amount overall’—and only mediately the things or units that may be pres-
ent in any particular definite amount.” According to Klein, one important
consequence of this is that “the ‘being’ of the species [or εἶδος]” (182/175) to
which the letters of Vieta’s notation refer, “i.e., the ‘being’ of the objects of the
‘general analytic,’ is to be understood neither as independent in the Py -
thagorean and Platonic sense nor as obtained ‘by abstraction’ (ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως),
i.e., as ‘reduced’ in the Aristotelian sense, but as symbolic” (182–83/175) in
the precise sense of “formations whose merely possible objectivity is understood
as an actual objectivity” (183/175).106
Thus, for Klein, “As soon as the ‘amount in general’ is conceived and
presented in the medium of the species as an objective formation in itself, that
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
255
————————
105. See § 103 below.
106. The novelty of Klein’s desedimentation of the peculiar “abstractness” at issue here,
as well as the inherent difficulty of the issues it involves, is exemplified by the following, which
is written by the distinguished historian of modern mathematics and science, Michael S. Ma-
honey—in his “The Beginnings of Algebraic Thought in the Seventeenth Century,” in Stephen
Gaukroger, ed., Descartes: Philosophy, Mathematics and Physics (Brighton: Harvester, 1980), 

is, symbolically, the modern concept of ‘number’ is born.”107 When Klein com-
pares this concept of species with “the Pythagorean and Platonic concept of
the εἶδος of an ἀριθμός, which as such first makes the unified being of each def-
inite amount, as an amount of something, possible” (183/175), he maintains
that “we may say that the ontological independence of the εἶδος, having taken
a detour through the instrumental use made of it by Diophantus . . . here fi-
nally arrives at its symbolic realization.” Furthermore, Klein maintains that
this comparison reveals that “sedimented” (185/177) in the notation that is
inseparable from the symbolic realization of the εἶδος is the “distinction be-
tween ‘dicere’ (saying) and ‘cogitare’ (thinking), which antiquity knows well
enough in practice but never as a principle.” Klein suggests108 that this dis-
tinction is grounded in the “close relation of διάνοια and λόγος” (74 n. 1/235
n. 81) that is manifested in the “original comportment of human delibera-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
256
————————
141–55—in connection with the status of Vieta as “the founder of the theory of equations,
one of the greatest achievements of the seventeenth century, if not the greatest of all” (144):
“Greek mathematics was intuitional and strongly dependent on physical ontology,” such that
“the concept of number as the thing counted, that is, as a collection of counted units, derived
from this basically physical ontology of Greek mathematics” (143); and, “In this respect, the al-
gebraic mode of thought can be characterized as an abstract mode of thought, in contrast to an
intuitive one” (142). Apart from Mahoney’s interpretation of the “abstractness” at issue here in
precisely the terms that Klein derides as “facile,” it is interesting to note that later in his article
Mahoney cites Klein’s book in support (!) of his (Mahoney’s) claim that “Descartes also frees
the concept of number from its classical intuitive foundations” (146). 
107. As we mentioned above (§ 92) and shall elaborate in detail below (§ 103), Klein’s
desedimentation of Vieta credits his reinterpretation of the Diophantine εἶδος concept with
the transformation of the “concept of number,” specifically with the realization of something
that within the compass of the structure and self-understanding proper to ancient Greek
mathematics was an impossibility: arrogating a numerical interpretation to the εἶδος of num-
ber (number as Anzahl), i.e., the concepts related to number. The numerosity at issue in this
reinterpretation of the Diophantine εἶδος concept, which involves (as we just noted above
and shall discuss further below) the notion of ‘number in general’, and thus what Klein refers
to here as the birth of “modern concept of number,” is (as we shall see in § 103 below) a state
of affairs Klein keeps distinct from the separate but related issue of the transformation of the
“number concept.” Involved in this latter state of affairs is the gradual identification by “the
everyday understanding” (186/178) of “definite amounts of definite objects” with “ordinary
numbers” in the precise sense of the coincidence of “these amounts with the ‘numeral’ sign as
such.” As we shall see in our discussion of Klein’s desedimentation and reactivation of “the
new ‘number’ concept’” (204/195) in Stevin (see §§ 107–110 below), it is precisely the iden-
tification of the ‘number concept’ with the ‘number sign’ or numerals used in calculation that
“once and for all fixes the ordinary understanding of the nature of number, for which being
able ‘to count’ is tantamount to knowing how to handle ‘ciphers’” (205/197), and thus makes
possible the extension of the “number concept” to include zero, one, fractions, along with the
“numbers” traditionally designated as “‘absurd’ or ‘surd’ or ‘irrational’ (i.e., un-speakable)”
(204/195).
108. This suggestion becomes apparent when the references (in n. 135 [p. 185] in
the German and n. 264 [p. 278] in the English) to earlier parts of Origin of Algebra are con-
sidered in connection with his present discussion of this distinction.

tion” (74/73), which, as we have seen,109 he maintains “is revealed immedi-
ately in speech as it exhibits and judges things,” “prior to all science.” On Klein’s
view, the close relation at issue here also points to their distinction, albeit one
that is not recognized as such in Greek theory but only in their practice. He
enlists as evidence for this not only Apollonius’s and Archimedes’ attempts
to show that even large definite amounts can be expressed in language,110 but
also various accounts in Plato’s dialogs. In the Sophist, this involves διάνοια
and λόγος, which are the “‘same’ [ταὐτόν]” (74 n. 1/235 n. 81),111 save for the
former being “‘voiceless’”; in the Theaetetus, their relationship is characterized
by the status of λόγος as either a likeness (εἴδωλον; 74 n. 1/236 n. 81) of
διάνοια or its making it “‘apparent . . . through the voice’” (74 n. 1/236–37 n.
81). In the case of saying large definite amounts, it is the obvious importance
for both Apollonius and Archimedes of saying—and not just writing—what
is thoughtthat indicates for Klein a practical recognition of the distinction be-
tween διάνοια and λόγος. That is, their very endeavor to show that even very
large definite amounts can be spoken points to their tacit awareness that say-
ing such definite amounts, which readily enough can be thought, is something
of an issue. In the case of the Platonic distinctions, the practical distinction
between διάνοια and λόγος is attested both by the Stranger’s and Theaetetus’s
lack of an investigation of the former’s statement regarding the exception to
their being the same and the unproblematic way in which the λόγος is main-
tained to make “apparent” διάνοια and be its “likeness.” In each case, the im-
plicit distinction is manifestly not subject to an investigation aimed at
providing an “account of the reason why” (λογισμὸς αἰτίας), which is to say, a
theoretical investigation and therewith recognition of the distinction—hence
the practical significance of this distinction for Klein.
Klein’s claim that the practical distinction between ‘saying’ and ‘think-
ing’ is sedimented in the innovation of the symbolic notation that both de-
fines and makes possible modern mathematics should not be taken, however,
as amounting to the claim that with its sedimentation this distinction is now
known as a principle by mathematics. On the contrary, his point is that this
very distinction is no longer encountered even at the level of practice by the
modern science that this notation makes possible. Harbored within this dis-
tinction is the defining ontological problematic for Greek science,112 how to
conceive of the relation between its concepts (i.e., εἴδη) and the objects (i.e.,
sensuously perceived things or intelligible units) to which they refer. That is
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
257
————————
109. See § 63 above.
110. See § 91 above.
111. See Sophist 263 E.
112. See Part II, § 28 above.

because the signs belonging to the art113 of symbolic calculation are not di-
rectly related to the things or units to which the concepts of Greek science are
directly related, being instead directly related to concepts, to the species of these
things and units, and only (as we shall see) indirectly related to the things
and units that these species originally are the species of in Greek science.114
Moreover, these signs refer to concepts in such a way that the conceptuality of
the concepts to which they refer becomes inseparable from the significative status
of the signs themselves: sign and concept, as we shall also see, are therefore no
longer distinct.115 The consequence of all this for Klein is that the Greek prac-
tice of saying, or attempting to say, what it is that is thought in the concepts of
science becomes superfluous for the art of calculating with signs, that is, for
symbolic calculus. Hence, the practical distinction between thinking and say-
ing what it is that the concepts of science refer to is lost when signs—or, more
precisely, symbols—become inseparable from science’s concepts. This is force-
fully exhibited in the words of Diophantus’s first editor, Bachet de Méziriac,
written in 1621, which Klein quotes: “‘Who, in fact, when he hears the num-
ber 6 does not at once think of six units? Why then is it necessary to say ‘six
units’ when it suffices to say ‘six’?’” (185/177). On Klein’s view, the sedimen-
tation of the distinction here 
holds both for the formal language of algebra and for the representation of
the definite amounts of definite objects themselves in this sphere: The “def-
inite amounts” [i.e., the “definite amounts of definite objects themselves” just
referred to] are now conceived as “ordinary numbers,” and for the everyday
understanding, which in effect determines the actual formation of concepts,
these definite amounts coincide with the “numeral” sign as such, especially in
the course of specific calculational operations. (185–86/177–78)
§ 99. The Decisive Difference between Vieta’s Conception of
a “General” Mathematical Discipline and the Ancient Idea 
of a Καθόλου Πραγματεία
Because Vieta’s “species serve as the objects” (187/179) of his “‘general’ ana-
lytic,” and because, moreover, they do so “in their numerical character,” Klein
maintains that “Vieta’s conception of a ‘general’ mathematical discipline and
the ancient idea of a καθόλου πραγματεία, a ‘general treatment,’” are decisively
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
258
————————
113. Which is, of course, a practice, albeit one with a distinctively modern character,
the very character of which, in contrast to ancient Greek practice, is precisely what is involved
in Klein’s suggestion that the latter’s practical distinction between διάνοια and λόγος is sed-
imented in the former’s symbolic notation. 
114. See § 103 below. 
115. Ibid.

different. The latter idea concerns “the general theory of proportionsof Eudoxus
as transmitted in the fifth book of Euclid” (162/158), with the generality of
its theory being rooted in the fact that its demonstrations “are identical neither
with arithmetical nor with geometric nor with astronomical theorems”
(163/159). To the theory itself here “belong, above all, the theorems of the
theory of ratios and proportions.” Klein holds that “already for Aristotle the
Eudoxian theory of proportions, together with the ‘common notions’ (κοιναὶ
ἔννοιαι), formed the classical example of a discipline that proceeds ‘generally’
without being bound to a specific sphere of objects: ‘Among the mathematical
〈sciences〉. . . geometry and astronomy deal with a nature of a certain kind,
while the general science is common and about all things’ ( . . . Metaphysics E 1,
1026a 25–27)” (162/158). Likewise in this connection, Klein cites the Poste-
rior Analytics: “‘Just as it used to be proved separately that a proposition can
be alternated {cf. Euclid V, Def. 12 and Prop. 16} insofar as it is a proportion
of definite amounts and lines and solids {the last with reference to astronomy,
cf. the previous quotation and Metaphysics M 2, 1077 1–4; 12}, so it now can
be shown for all in one demonstration; but because all of these—definite
amounts, lengths, time, solids—did not have any one name and differed from
one another in species they were taken separately, but now{using the model of
Eudoxus} it is proved generally; for it belongs to them 〈to be alternable〉not
insofar as they are lines or definite amounts, but insofar as they are in general
supposed to have this property.’ ( . . . A 5, 74 a 17–25)” (163/159).
Klein also enlists testimony from Proclus regarding “‘one science’ (μία
ἐπιστήμη) which gathers all mathematical knowledge into one,” a science
whose “‘common theorems’ (τὰ κοινὰ θεωρήματα)” can, “it is true, be stud-
ied ‘in definite amounts and magnitudes and motions’ (ἐν ἀριθμοῖς καὶ ἐν
μεγέθεσι καὶ ἐν κινήσεσι), but which are identical neither with arithmetical
nor with geometric nor with astronomical theorems.”116 Proclus character-
izes this science as involving theorems “‘about proportions, their composi-
tions and divisions, their conversions and alternations, furthermore about all
ratios, such as their multiples, their superparticulars,117 their superpartients118
and their opposites, and the theorems established generally and in common
for the equal and unequal simply’ ( . . . Proclus, in Euclid., 7, 22–27)”
(163/159–60). Klein notes that by the last mentioned theorems, “Proclus
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
259
————————
116. Proclus, In primum Euclidis elementorum librum commentarii, ed. Gottfried
Friedlein (Leipzig: Teubner, 1873), 7 ff.; 18 ff.
117. A ratio in which the antecedent contains the consequent once with one aliquot
(contained an exact amount of times in something else) part over.
118. A ratio in which the antecedent contains the consequent once with any amount
of aliquot parts over.

means theorems which are not tied to ‘figures or definite amounts or mo-
tions (of heavenly bodies)’ (ἐν σχήμασιν ἢ ἀριθμοῖς ἢ κινήσεσιν) but in which
‘a certain common nature’ (φύσις τις κοινή) is grasped as such, ‘itself by itself’
(αὐτὸ καθ᾿ αὑτό)” (163/160). 
Klein locates “the crucial difference” between the “generality” at issue
in the ancient “general theory” and in Vieta’s “general analytic” “precisely” in
the “‘numerical’ character of the species,”119 which, “while preserving the po-
sition of this πραγματεία within the system of science, lends it a completely
new sense.” The new sense concerns the shift in the very conceptuality proper
to the “generality” of mathematical science that occurs when the meaning of
the species of the numbers conceived as “definite amounts of definite ob-
jects,” species whose status (as εἴδη) is non-numerical for Diophantus as well
as for all ancient science, assumes with Vieta a numerical character. As we
have seen,120 for the ancients the εἴδη of ἀριθμοί are responsible for their de-
limitation as so and so many, without themselves being so determined—that
is, without the εἴδη being numerical in this precise sense. For Vieta, the species
are not conceived as numerical in the sense of a definite amount of definite
objects, which is the salient characteristic of the ancient ἀριθμός, but they
are nevertheless taken to be numerical in the transformed sense of “the gen-
eral character of being an amount that belongs to every possible definite
amount.”121 With this shift, not just the method of mathematics (as is the
case with the ancients) but also its object is now general, which is a state of
affairs that, according to Klein, contrasts sharply with ancient science, where
“the existence of a ‘general object’ is by no means a simple consequence of a
‘general theory’” (166/161).
Klein appeals to both the Aristotelian and the Platonic traditions, as
well as to Diophantus’s peculiar blending of them, for evidence in support
of this last statement. Aristotle himself leaves little room for doubt, as the fol-
lowing quote cited by Klein shows. “‘The general propositions in mathe-
matics {namely the ‘axioms’, i.e., the ‘common notions’}, but also all theorems
of the Eudoxian theory of proportions, are not about separate structures,
which exist outside of and alongside the {geometric} magnitudes and definite
amounts, but are precisely about these; not, however, insofar as they are such
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
260
————————
119. Klein’s claim here, that it is precisely Vieta’s numerical interpretation of the species
that is crucial for the transformation of the object of mathematics into a general object, seems
not to have been appreciated by the few commentators who have addressed this issue. See
below (nn. 146, 149, and 153), where we discuss in detail the various ways in which Klein’s
claim has been either overlooked or distorted.
120. See § 60 above.
121. See § 103 below.

as to have a definite amount or to be divisible {into discrete units}.’ ( . . . Meta-
physics Μ 3, 1077 b 17–20)” (166/161–62). Hence, “There cannot be a spe-
cific mathematical object which is ‘neither a {definite} amount {of monads}
nor {indivisible, geometric} points, nor an {arbitrarily divisible geometric}
magnitude, nor a {determinate period} of time’ ( . . . Metaphysics Μ 2, 1077
a 12)” (166/162). Moreover, that this is “not some special Aristotelian
dogma but rather a generally granted premise of Aristotelian argumentation”
is made evident for Klein when Aristotle writes (following the previous
quote): “‘and if this is {granted to be} impossible . . .’ (εἰ δὲ τοῦτο ἀδύνατον . . .
– 1077 a 12 f.).” Klein likewise finds in Proclus support from the Platonic
tradition for his claim that in ancient science it does not follow from the
generality of mathematical theory that its object is general. Klein writes that
this tradition makes itself “heard one last time” in Proclus, who “never assigns
a special mathematical object to the ‘general treatment’ (καθόλου πραγ μα -
τεία)” of mathematics.122 Finally, in Diophantus there is “[t]his same funda-
mental conception of the objects of mathematics,” “insofar as in his problems
and solutions he admits . . . only definite amounts of monads” (166–67/162).
§ 100. The Occlusion of the Ancient Connection between the
Theme of General Mathematics and the Foundational 
Concerns of the “Supreme” Science That Results from the
Modern Understanding of Vieta’s “Analytical Art” 
as Mathesis Universalis
The position of the ancient idea of a general treatment that is preserved
within the system of science by the numerical character of Vieta’s species con-
cerns its relationship to what Klein, within the context of ancient science,
calls “the theme of the ‘supreme’ discipline” (187/179). For the ancients, this
discipline is “characterized Platonically as ‘dialectic’ or in Aristotelian terms
as ‘first philosophy.’” For the early moderns, it is understood “as the general
‘doctrina quantitatis,’ the ‘universa Mathesis’ in Descartes’ sense” (192/183).
The completely new sense of this treatment that follows from the numerical
character of its object, however, does not concern for Klein simply the con-
trast between this object’s indeterminateness or generality and the determi-
nateness or non-generality of the object of ancient science. Rather, it concerns
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
261
————————
122. Klein considers the possibility that “This may, to be sure, be seen as an attempt
to understand the possibility of any ‘ratio,’ ‘proportion,’ and ‘harmony’ on the basis of a ‘com-
mon property’ (κοινόν) of a primordial kind.” He notes, however, that “as soon as this attempt
is realized,” as in Plato’s theory of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, “the realm of the properly ‘mathematical’
has been far superseded.”

the very sense of the “generality” of the general treatment in each science’s
methodical relation to its objects. In the case of the ancient πραγμα τεία, a dis-
tinction in this regard is drawn between the mathematician’s and the philoso-
pher’s use and cognition of the general propositions that compose the axioms
and general theory of proportions in the καθόλου πραγματεία. However, in
the general treatment of the mathesis universalis of modern science, under
which heading Vieta’s analysis comes to be understood, the distinction be-
tween the philosopher’s and the mathematician’s use and cognition of its gen-
eral object is not made. It is not made, according to Klein, because the
“universal science of Vieta . . . in his own eyes, as in those of his contempo-
raries” (192/184), is “the complete realization of the ancient καθόλου
πραγματεία, of the ‘general theory of proportion,’” the latter being under-
stood, however, in accord with the mathematical use and cognition of its objects.
Hence, Klein concludes, the ancient relating of the καθόλου πραγματεία to a
still higher philosophical discipline or science is occluded by the modern un-
derstanding of Vieta’s symbolic discipline’s relation to the mathematical sci-
ence of the ancients. As we shall see, this occlusion is highly significant for
Klein, because it means, among other things, that “From now on the funda-
mental ontological science of the ancients is replaced by a symbolic discipline
whose ontological presuppositions are left unclarified” (193–94/184). This
occlusion is embedded in the very Latin term that came to be associated with
Proclus’s reference to the supreme science to which, as we have seen above, the
ancients connected the καθόλου πραγματεία of mathematics: mathesis uni-
versalis. It is so embedded, as we have already suggested and shall discuss in
more detail below, because the referent of Proclus’s words was understood by
the moderns to be mathematical, albeit mathematical in the sense of the in-
herently numerical characteristic of Vieta’s art of analysis, and therefore not
to be philosophical in the sense of the ancient ontological preoccupation
with the problematic relation of general or universal concepts to the sensible
and intelligible beings of which they are the concepts. 
Klein substantiates his portrayal of the close connection in ancient sci-
ence between the axioms and propositions belonging to the general theory of
proportions and the “supreme” discipline with a discussion of how, for Aris-
totle, “they form not only the stock of examples of the manner in which ‘first
philosophy’ {πρώτη φιλοσοφία} treats the theme peculiar to it . . . , but they
also belong directly to this very theme itself ” (187/179). This is clear for
Klein from the way in which Aristotle 
poses, and answers affirmatively, the question whether the examination of
“being” and the examination of mathematical axioms are to be referred to
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
262

one single science, namely πρώτη φιλοσοφία as such: “We must say whether
the concern with the so-called axioms of mathematics {cf. Posterior Analyt-
ics A 10, 76 b 14 f.} and with ‘being’ belongs to one or to different sciences.
It is clear that the examination of these things belongs to one [science], which is
that of the philosopher too,” and also: “these too are the study of him who
comes to know ‘being’ as ‘being.’” ( . . . Metaphysics L 3, 1005 a 19–22; . . .
ibid. a 28 f.). (GMTOA, 187–88/179–80)
Klein thus maintains that for Aristotle not only does first philosophy
examine and study both general propositions and being, but also the cog-
nition of being as being is something that concerns the very study of the gen-
eral propositions themselves. Regarding the distinction between the ways
in which the mathematician and the philosopher deal with the subject mat-
ter of first philosophy, Klein writes:
Whereas the mathematician makes use of “general” propositions with refer-
ence to those objects which happen to be before him, the “philosopher” treats
them as primary, that is to say, not as they can be derived from lines or angles
or definite amounts but as they are common to all that is countable or mea -
surable in their generically determined being-character as “quantitative.” (187/
180)
Klein supports his account of this distinction by quoting Aristotle, who
writes: “‘Since even the mathematician uses the common notions in a special
way it should belong to first philosophy to investigate their origins.’ ( . . .
Metaphysics K 4, 1061 b 17 ff.).” The same passage in Aristotle also provides
an illustration of a “‘common notion applicable to all that is quantitative’
(κοινὸν ἐπὶ πάντων τῶν ποσῶν),” namely, “the axiom: ‘If equals are subtracted
from equals the remainders are the equal’. . . .”
Klein observes that Proclus also connects the study of these common
notions to knowledge of being as being and likewise distinguishes between
a mathematical inquiry into such notions and an inquiry “far superior in
rank” (188/181). Klein writes in this connection:
Similarly Proclus, referring to the Aristotelian doctrine and stressing the gen-
eral theory of proportion, asks who would be the man that would, in contrast
to a “geometer” and an “arithmetician,” demonstrate, for instance, the propo-
sition “that alternation [of the middle members] again produces proportion”
. . . using either geometric magnitudes or definite amounts (in Euclid. 9, 2–8),
i.e., what man might study alternation and the like in “general” and “in itself”;
“Who then comes to know alternation, be it in magnitudes, be it in definite
amounts, in his own behalf . . . ?” ( . . . 9, 8 f.) His answer is that this manner
of inquiry belongs to an independent science which is far superior in rank to
geometry and arithmetic: “the knowledge of these things belongs to a science
prior by far” ( . . . 9, 14 ff.; cf. 8, 24–26); and the “ascent from more partial to
more universal understandings” . . . is that by which “we climb up to the very
science of ‘being’ as ‘being’” ( . . . cf. Republic 534 E). (188/180–81)
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
263

Klein reports, “In the sixteenth and seventeenth century these words of Pro-
clus acquired tremendous significance, since, as they came to be widely
known, first through Grynaeus’ edition of the Euclid commentary (1533),
and then chiefly through Barocius’ translation (1560), they were normally
understood as a reference to the Mathesis universalis” (188/181). Thus,
when Proclus “mentions ‘common theorems which are both general and
have arisen from one science which comprehends all mathematical knowledge
together in one’” (Proclus, in Euclid., 7, 18–19), he is understood to be “re-
ferring precisely to this ‘superior’ science.” Barocius’s marginal notes make
this clear, according to Klein, where in reference to Proclus’s subsequent pas-
sage, which says of this science that “‘It reveals in the reasoning proper to it
the truth about the gods and the vision of things that are.’ ( . . . 20, 5 f.),” Baro-
cius writes “Divina Scientia.” Klein notes here, however, that “Proclus him-
self is, to be sure, of the opinion that this μία καὶ ὅλη μαθηματική(one and
whole mathematics – p. 44, 2 f.) only ἐφάπτεται τῆς τῶν πρώτων θεωρίας
(touches on the study of first things – p. 19, 24)” (188 n. 139/278–79 n.
268). This is because “‘Dialectic,’ as θριγχός (copingstone) of all the sciences
(cf. Plato, Republic 534 E), is said to hold an even higher rank; the highest
rank, finally, belongs to ὁ νοῦς αὐτός (intellect itself – pp. 42–44; cf. p. 9,
19–23)” (188 n. 139/279 n. 268). Thus, Proclus too, on Klein’s view, both
connects and yet maintains a distinction between the universality of the
general theory of proportion and all mathematical axioms and the “supreme”
science.
It is Descartes who, by inquiring (in the Regulae) into what the ancients
might have understood by the name mathesis (189/182) when they referred
to arithmetic and geometry, “‘but also astronomy, music, optics, mechanics,
and many other sciences’” as the “parts of mathematics,” used the term “‘Uni-
versal Mathematics’” (190/183) to characterize this mathesis. Descartes iden-
tified its referent as the “‘general discipline’” that not only “is none other than
the ‘true science’” but also “‘is nothing else than that which is called by the
barbaric name of algebra.’” Klein maintains that it was precisely this latter in-
terpretation on Descartes’s part that paved the way for the common under-
standing, already mentioned, of the universal character of Vieta’s analysis as the
mathesis universalis in Descartes’s sense. By retracing Descartes’s “reflections
which lead him to recognize in Pappus and Diophantus the traces of a ‘true sci-
ence’” (189/181), reflections in which he “is still reminded of Proclus’ think-
ing in the Euclid commentary,” Klein shows that and how the ancient
distinction between the universal mathematical science and the discipline still
more superior—dialectic or first philosophy—that is still retained in Proclus
comes to be occluded in Descartes’s reflection.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
264

Thus, after asking what exactly it is that the various parts of mathe-
matics are parts of, Descartes “continues, clearly attacking Proclus or Baro-
cius: ‘Here it is certainly not sufficient to look at the origin of the word’”
(189/182). He reasons that “‘since the name ‘Mathesis’ means no more than
〈scientific〉discipline, these [i.e., the aforementioned parts of mathematics
following arithmetic and geometry] might indeed, with as good a right as
geometry itself, be called mathematical.’” Yet Descartes rejects identifying
the object of mathesis with objects studied by these various parts. He does
so on the grounds that “attentive observation finally makes it apparent that
precisely all those things, and those only, in which ‘order’ and ‘measure’
(ordo et mensura) can be observed, deliver the object of mathesis, and that
it is, however, emphatically of no importance whether one deals with num-
bers, figures, heavenly bodies, tones, etc.” (189/182). Klein cites (190/182–
83) in its entirety the passage in Descartes where this is established: 
And thence it became clear that there ought to be some general science which
would explain everything that could be investigated in respect to order and
measure when these are not ascribed to any special material, and that this same
science was named—using a word not newly appropriated but old and of ac-
cepted usage—Universal Mathematics, since in it was contained everything on
account of which other sciences are called parts of mathematics.
Klein therefore maintains that by understanding the meaning of the
mathesis, the discipline or science of the ancients, in terms of a general sci-
ence so articulated and named mathesis universalis, Descartes accomplishes
two portentous things in, as it were, a single stroke. First, the ancient sci-
ence (dialectic and first philosophy) recognized by both the Platonic and
Aristotelian traditions to be connected with and yet supreme or superior to
the mathematical science whose “general treatment” deals with common no-
tions or axioms and the general theory of proportion is collapsed into the
modern, algebraic understanding of the latter. That this is Descartes’s un-
derstanding is most apparent in Rule IV of the Regulae, where, in reference
to the mathesis universalis, he says explicitly, “I am persuaded that this is more
powerful than all other knowledge passed on to us by human agency, inasmuch
as it is the source of all others” (193 n. 149/283 n. 279). Second, with this, the
“Mathesis universalis” (193/184), now understood “as algebra, is first and
last an ‘art of finding’ (ars inveniendi) and thus, above all, a ‘practical’ art.”
This means, among other things, that “Even if Descartes in no way con-
sciously continues Vieta’s work, yet the ‘general algebra’ he has in mind is
precisely that ‘new’ and ‘pure’ algebra which Vieta first established as the ‘gen-
eral analytic art’” (191–92/183). Thus, Francis van Schooten, “in his notes
to Vieta’s Isagoge,” characterizes it “as the general ‘doctrina quantitatis,’ the
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
265

‘universa Mathesis’ in Descartes’ sense: ‘Everything which comes within the
scope of ‘mathesis’ always enjoys the name of quantity and is precisely that
which becomes apparent only through equations and proportions. Thus, also
Vieta’s Analysis must come under this name as being of the greatest possible
universality’” (192/183–84).
For Klein, then, the “universal science of Vieta, which is in his own
eyes, as in those of his contemporaries, the complete realization of the an-
cient καθόλου πραγματεία, has . . . inherently numerical characteristics: its ob-
ject is, its generality notwithstanding, ‘arithmetically’ determined” (192/
184). Because of this, however, Klein maintains that despite the difference
between the object of Vieta’s science and that of the ancient discipline, it has
something in common with the great attempt in antiquity to conceive, nu-
merically, the objects of the “supreme” science. Thus, on the one hand, Klein
contrasts in the sharpest possible terms the  meaning of “generality” in ancient
and modern mathematics. In the modern understanding, generality is taken
to extend to the “object” of mathematics, which, as we have seen, is some-
thing he stresses would be impossible in the ancient understanding. On the
other hand, he claims that Vieta’s arrogation of “arithmetical” qualities to this
object has something in common with Plato’s “attempt to grasp the ‘supreme’
science ‘arithmologically,’” because by ascribing numerical qualities to sci-
ence’s supreme concepts, both Plato and Vieta “broke through the limits set
for the λόγος” (192–93/184). Plato, as we have seen, accomplished this with
his unwritten theory of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικόι, which exhibit an “arithmological”
structure that, paradoxically, cannot be counted.123 Vieta, as we have sug-
gested and shall see in greater detail below, likewise realizes this with an
“‘arithmetical’ interpretation of ‘general magnitudes.’” This interpretation
“leads to a special—an ‘algebraic’—mode of cognition or, more exactly, to
the conception and project of a symbolic mathematics” (193/184) whose
“frame of reference” and “internal completeness” not only are not established
by Vieta—and are therefore “yet to come”—but also are “still lacking even
in Descartes’ Mathesis universalis.”124
Despite the characteristic of transcending, as it were, the limits set for
the λόγος common to both Plato’s theory of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικός and Vieta’s an-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
266
————————
123. See § 72 above.
124. Given Klein’s overall argument in GMTOA that “the fundamental ontological
science of the ancients is replaced by a symbolic discipline whose ontological presuppositions
are left unclarified” (193/184), it is questionable whether he thought that in the science that
this discipline “slowly broadens into,” i.e., mathematical physics, such clarification to this day
has been forthcoming. For it would seem that the very structure of this science’s knowledge,
a structure that “is henceforth governed by the symbolic ‘number’ concept” (194/185), pre-

alytical art, it is nevertheless important to note that they differ in how they
realize this characteristic. As we have seen,125 in Plato it is realized on the
basis of an “arithmological” account of something that, properly speaking,
cannot be counted and therefore cannot be unambiguously spoken about
from the “point of view of ordinary predication” (95/99), namely, the con-
ditions that, in the guise of the greatest kinds, are responsible for being and
non-being. In Vieta it occurs because something that is not, strictly speaking,
numerical—that is to say, something that is not a definite amount of definite
things, namely, the species of the numbers that are numerical in this strict
sense—is nevertheless interpreted “arithmetically,” as something that mani-
fests this twofold determinacy, albeit “in general.”126 To gain a better under-
standing of Klein’s position on the nature, limits, and significance of Vieta’s
transformation of the ancient concept of species in this manner, we now
turn to Klein’s detailed account and desedimentation of Vieta’s critical ap-
propriation of ancient logistic.
§101. Vieta’s Ambiguous Relation to Ancient Greek Mathematics
According to Klein, “It is important to be clear about the fact that modern
mathematics is guided from the outset by cosmological-astronomical inter-
ests. This is true not only of Vieta, but of Kepler, Descartes, Barrow, New-
ton, etc. In this respect the ‘new’ science repeats the course of ancient
science” (155/152). Indeed, Klein maintains that “All the mathematical in-
vestigations of Vieta are closely connected with his cosmological and astronom-
ical work” (153/151). The way in which this course was repeated by these
thinkers, however, “betrays, from the outset, a different conception of the
world, a different understanding of the world’s being, than that which be-
longed to the ancients” (155/152). On Klein’s view, the founders of modern
science “were not, for the most part, themselves aware of their own concep-
tual presuppositions,”127 a consequence of which was “a tension within the
science that they founded.” We have seen that for Klein this situation has its
root in the symbolic discipline Vieta founded, with its unclarified ontolog-
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
267
————————
cludes in principle the clarification of its “frame of reference” and “internal completeness” in
a manner that would not transcend “the limits set for the λόγος.”
125. See § 80 above. 
126. See § 106 below. 
127. Mahoney writes in this connection, referring to Pierre de Fermat and Descartes,
that they “treated old problems by means of a new symbolic algebra, without themselves being
clear on the extent to which the new means had changed not only the techniques of solution
but also the very manner of posing problems” (Mahoney, “Beginnings of Algebraic Thought,”
141).

ical presuppositions, replacing the supreme ontological science of the an-
cients. Klein points out that the “legacy” of the foundational orientation of
the latter “gradually came into conflict with the new ontological under-
standing borne by the modern mode of cognition,” a conflict that “led in the
nineteenth century to a new ‘formalized’ foundation of infinitesimal analy-
sis and that today has its effect in the struggle over the principles of mathe-
matical physics.” Indeed, he holds that this conflict “[i]n germ is already
present in Vieta.”
Klein speculates that “References by Peletier128 and Petrus Ramus,129
as well as Xylander’s translation, must certainly have introduced Vieta to
Diophantus’ Arithmetic, which he undoubtedly came to know also in the
original” (154/151). From Vieta’s “study of the Diophantine work eventu-
ally grew his symbolic algebra, whose fundamental characteristic he sketched
out programmatically in his work In artem analyticen Isagoge (Introduction
to the Analytical Art), which appeared in 1591.” Unlike many of his con-
temporaries, however, “Vieta’s comprehensive humanistic education does
not lead him into open and explicit opposition to the traditional science”
(155/152), although “he resembles them in turning, by preference, toward
the neglected or unknown sources of ancient literary tradition.” Neverthe-
less, “He wishes to be in every respect the loyal preserver, rediscoverer and
continuator of our ancient teachers.” As a result, in his “mathematical writ-
ings he is always concerned not only with borrowing his terms directly from
ancient terminology (or at least, when he must invent new terms, to match
it as closely as possible) but also with interpreting all ‘innovations,’ once they
have been introduced, as a mere development of the tradition. All ‘innova-
tion’ is for him, as for so many of his contemporaries, ‘renovation’” (156–
57/153).130 Klein quotes Vieta’s “Letter Prefatory to the Isagoge” (157/153)
at length to illustrate this peculiar self-understanding, which, because it
“wishes in every respect to be the loyal preserver, rediscoverer and continu-
ator of our ancient teachers,” is “not, for the most part,” itself “aware” of its
“own conceptual presuppositions”:
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
268
————————
128. Jacques Pelletier (also spelled Peletier) du Mans (1517–1582) was a humanist,
poet, and mathematician of the French Renaissance.
129. Petrus Ramus, Scholarum mathematicarum, libri unus et triginta (Basel: Epis-
copius & Nicolai, 1569).
130. See Mahoney, who writes that Descartes “on the one hand holds his algebraic
universal mathematics to be a reconstruction of those general methods that underlay Greek
mathematics and that the Greeks meanly withheld from later generations, and . . . on the other
hand praises himself for having created a mathematical method that the Greeks had never pos-
sessed” (Mahoney, “Beginnings of Algebraic Thought,” 141).

Those things which are new are wont in the beginning to be set forth rudely
and formlessly and must then be polished and perfected in succeeding cen-
turies. Behold, the art which I present is new, but in truth so old, so spoiled
and defiled by the barbarians, that I considered it necessary, in order to in-
troduce an entirely new form to it, to think out and publish a new vocabu-
lary, having gotten ridden of all its pseudo-technical terms, lest it should
retain its filth and continue to stink in the old way.
Vieta thus “claims to have been the first to have discovered” (158/154),
“[b]eyond the mystery that surrounds it and recalls the dark art of the al-
chemists,” “the ‘previously buried genuine gold’ (aurum fossile et probum) of
the ancient mathematicians” contained in this Ars magna (great art), “which
they guarded jealously, and whose possession allows Vieta to solve not only,
as people did before him, ‘this and that problem’ singly, but precisely to man-
age problems of this kind in any desired amount—‘by tenths and twenties’
(decadas et eicadas).”
Despite Vieta’s self-understanding as the “faithful preserver and inter-
preter of the traditional doctrine” (165/161), Klein substantiates his view
that there is a “crucial difference with respect to the ancient καθόλου
πραγματεία” and Vieta’s analytical art by reactivating 1) Vieta’s understanding
of the ancient geometrical analysis and Diophantus’s arithmetical procedure
“as completely parallel procedures,” 2) Vieta’s “use of the εἶδος-concept in Dio-
phantus,” and 3) the influence on Vieta of “Proclus’ position on the general
theory of proportion” (165–66/161). On the basis of the reactivation of
these three aspects of Vieta’s “point of view” (165/161), Klein desediments
“the fundamental reinterpretation which the ancient mode of conceptuality
experiences in modern mathematics and which reaches its most characteris-
tic expression in the transformed understanding of ‘ἀριθμός’” (166/161)—a
reinterpretation that “appears in the conception which Vieta has” (165/ 161)
of the “object” of mathematics’ καθόλου πραγματεία.
§102. Vieta’s Comparison of Ancient Geometrical Analysis 
with the Diophantine Procedure 
According to Klein, “The point of departure for Vieta’s ‘renovation’” (161/
157) of the ancient Ars magna is located in his bringing together aspects of
Pappus’s geometrical employment of the concepts of analysis and synthetic
ἀπόδειξις with Diophantus’s arithmetical procedure of calculating with un-
known definite amounts in his Arithmetic. Vieta’s Isagoge draws on both of
these sources in its opening chapter, where he reports, beginning with Pap-
pus, that “There is in mathematics . . . a special procedure for discovery, ‘a cer-
tain way of investigating the truth’ (veritatis inquirendae via quaedam)
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
269

which, so it is claimed, was first discovered by Plato”131 (159/154). Although
Vieta proceeds to provide definitions of this procedure that he attributes to
Theon of Alexandria, Klein remarks that they “also occur in Pappus in a
modified and clarified form, namely at the beginning of his seventh book”
(159/155), the “Latin edition” (158 n. 86/259 n. 214) of which “appeared
in 1588–1589.” Klein speculates, moreover, that “Vieta had, without doubt,
access to Pappus manuscripts before that time.” Given the importance of
Vieta’s appropriation and conjoining of this procedure with that of Dio-
phantus’s for his ars analytica (analytical art), Klein reconstructs both Vieta’s
account of it and that of what is doubtless his source.
Vieta’s account reports that 
Theon of Alexandria gave this procedure the name of “analysis” and defined
it precisely, namely as a process beginning with “the assumption of what is
sought as though it were granted, and by means of the consequences [pro-
ceeding to] a truth [which in fact was already granted]” . . . , just “as in con-
verse” (ut contra) he defined “synthesis” as a process beginning with “the
assumption of what is granted and by means of the consequences [proceed-
ing to] the conclusion and comprehension of what is sought. . . .” (159/154–
55)
And Pappus says:
Analysis, then, is the way from what is sought, taken as admitted by means of
a [previous] synthesis . . . but in synthesis, going in reverse, we suppose as ad-
mitted what was the last result of the analysis, and, arranging in their natural
order as consequences what were formerly the antecedents, and connecting
them with one another, we arrive at the completion of the construction of what
was sought; and this we call synthesis.132 (159 n. 90/260 n. 218)
Klein identifies an additional context for the ancient method of analysis and
synthesis “[i]n a scholium to Euclid,” where he notes that “it is shown with
reference to the first five theorems of the thirteenth book how the ‘synthe-
sis’ results in each case from the preceding ‘analysis’ by means of conversion
(analysis and synthesis both proceeding ‘without drawing the figure’ – ἄνευ
καταγραφῆς133)” (159–60/155). Specifically, “‘Analysis, then, is the taking of
what is sought as admitted and 〈going through〉the consequences from this
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
270
————————
131. Klein maintains that “[t]he assertion that Plato was the discoverer of the ‘ana-
lytic’ method . . . loses its strangeness when understood in the original context of teaching and
learning characteristic of Platonic philosophy” (159 n. 90/260 n. 218). See n. 134 below for
an elaboration of this issue.
132. Pappus, Mathematicae collectiones, ed. Friedrich Hultsch, 3 vols. (Berlin: Weid-
mann, 1876–1878), II: 634, 11 ff.
133. Euclid, Opera omnia (Greek and Latin), ed. Johan L. Heiberg and Heinrich
Menge (Leipzig: Teubner, 1883–1916), 366, 4 and 368, 16; henceforth cited as ‘Heiberg-
Menge’.

to something admitted to be true, while synthesis is the taking of something
admitted and 〈going through〉the consequences from this to something ad-
mitted to be true.’ ( . . . Heiberg-Menge, IV, 364 f.)” (159 n. 89/259 n.
217).134
In addition to mentioning “the aforesaid procedure [discussed in the
scholium to Euclid quoted above] with reference to the so-called Treasury of
Analysis (ἀναλυόμενος τόπος)” (160/155), Pappus “emphatically stresses the
relationship of conversion” and, moreover, “distinguishes two kinds, two
γένη, of analysis: ‘the one is for searching for the truth 〈i.e., zetetic, from ζητέω,
to search〉, which is called theoretical, and the other is for supplying what is
required 〈i.e., poristic from πορίζω, ‘to supply’〉, which is called problematical
( . . . Hultsch, II, p. 634, 24–26).” The distinction concerns “the application
to be made of the ‘analysis’—whether it is to be applied to the discovery of
the proof of a ‘theorem’ or the solution (i.e., construction) of a ‘problem.’” Cor-
responding to the conversion of each type of analysis for Pappus is a differ-
ent type of synthesis. In the case of theoretical analysis, the synthesis
“represents a direct ἀπόδειξις,” while in the case of the problematical, “it con-
sists first of a geometric construction (κατασκευή), or sometimes a porism
(πορισμός, i.e., the production or finding of something already implicit in
the figure; Hultsch, II, p. 650, 16 ff.), upon which the ἀπόδειξις then fol-
lows” (160/155–56). Klein notes, however, that 
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
271
————————
134. Klein sees “the concepts of the ζητούμενον (the sought) and the ὁμολογούμενον(the
admitted)” to be at work in the “Socratic question-and-answer game of the Platonic dialogues”
(159 n. 90/260 n. 218); e.g. in the “Meno 79 D, where they are probably employed with a view
to the general ‘geometrical’ background of the dialogue.” Klein holds that while “the purity of
this mathematical synthetic procedure [i.e., the procedure in Proclus and the scholium to Eu-
clid] is not to be found in dialectic” (160 n. 90/260 n. 218), “the ‘analytical’ power of Socratic
conversation” is nevertheless rooted in “the truly Socratic way of ‘recollection’ (ἀνάμνησις) which
is the very subject of the Meno” (160 n. 90/261 n. 218). It is rooted in the way “the word which
designates the unknown or the thing sought (ζητούμενον) is thus always used as if the thing des-
ignated were something already known and admitted (ὁμολογούμενον)” (160 n. 90/260 n. 218).
The “course of this way to the truth,” however, is prepared by the conversational impurity of
Plato’s dialogs, which rather than begin, like the mathematical synthetic procedure, “with def-
initions, axioms and postulates,” instead begin “with ‘opinions’ (δόξαι) which presuppose what
is ‘sought’ as ‘known.’” Thus, by means of what Socrates calls to Theaetetus’s attention in the
Theaetetus, that “‘for a long time now we have been infected by impure conversation’ (196 Ε
. . . ; cf. also Meno, 75 C–D),” the sought is presupposed as known “in order to arrive, by means
of the refutation of these opinions as ‘false opinions’ (ψευδεῖς δόξαι), at the ‘true’ or ‘right opin-
ion’ (ἀληθὴς or ὀρθὴ) which is sleeping in the soul and which must, once it is found, be fixed by
means of an exact ‘account of the reason why’ (λογισμὸς αἰτίας) in order to become ‘knowledge’
(ἐπιστήμη; cf. Meno, 98 A).” Indeed, when Theaetetus asks Socrates, “‘But in what manner will
you converse if you refrain from these 〈i.e., words designating things sought〉( . . . Theaetetus, 196
E–197 A) (160 n. 90/261 n. 218), Socrates replies: “‘In no manner, at least while I am who I am’.” 

in elucidating the difference between “theoretical” and “problematical”
analysis, Pappus at both times calls the synthesis simply an “ἀπόδειξις”: “And
in reverse, the proof is the converse of the analysis.” (636, 5 f.: καὶ ἡ ἀπόδειξις
ἀντίστροφος τῇ ἀναλύσει, also 636, 12 f.: καὶ πάλιν ἡ ἀπόδειξις ἀντίστροφος τῇ
ἀναλύσει.). (160/156)
As we shall see,135 the use of the term ἀπόδειξις to refer simply to the syn-
thesis, without differentiating between its direct and indirect modes, modes
that are differentiated by their “theoretical” or “problematical” objects, is
something that Vieta will take over when he transforms the Diophantine
arithmetical procedure based, in part, on his comparison of it with Pappus’s
presentation of geometrical analysis.
Klein reports that Diophantus also called ἀπόδειξις “the conversion of
each solution, namely the ‘test proof’ which is intended to show that the def-
inite amounts found do, indeed, fulfill the conditions, that they ‘do the prob-
lem’” (160/156). Thus, “the words ‘and the proof is clear’ (καὶ ἡ ἀπόδει-ξις
φανερά) form the conclusion of a whole series of his problems” (160–
61/156). It is important to stress, however, that the ἀπόδειξις in Diophantus
does not deal with geometrical theorems and problems, as is the case of the
“character of the analysis [and synthesis] intended by Pappus” (161/157), but
rather, as we have seen, with “determinateamounts of monads” (166–67/162).
Moreover, Klein maintains that “the comparison which can be drawn between
the role of ‘analysis’ in geometry on the one hand and in the Diophantine
Arithmetic on the other” (165/161) reveals that “the relationship between
(‘problematical’) analysis and synthesis which is traditional in geometry un-
dergoes a significant change in the Arithmetic of Diophantus” (167/162). Sig-
nificantly for Klein, Vieta was aware of both 1) the different objects in the
“purely geometric” (161/157) application of Pappus’s procedure for discovery
and the arithmetical application of Diophantus’s “art” (177/170), and 2) the
different role of the analytic procedure employed by each in the discovery of
these objects. Furthermore, Klein finds that the point of view characterizing
Vieta’s analytical art was explicitly informed by a “comparison [of Diophantus’s
analysis] with geometric analysis” (167/163). This comparison “considers to-
gether” (161/157) the “states of affairs” at issue in both types of analysis in a
manner that understands them as “completely parallel procedures” (167/163).
This understanding, Klein maintains, “causes Vieta to go beyond Diophantus”
in his formulation of the possibilities for the use of the Diophantine procedure
of “calculation ‘ending in the indeterminate’ (the solution ἐν τῷ ἀορίστῳ).” 
The comparison of geometrical and Diophantine analysis reveals that
each deals, albeit in different ways, with what is sought “as with something al-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
272
————————
135. See § 103 below.

ready given or ‘granted’ (concessum)” (161/156). For Diophantus, this is
because “The construction of an equation means nothing but to put the con-
ditions of a problem into a form which enables us to ignore whether the
magnitudes occurring in the problem are ‘known’ or ‘unknown.’” As such,
the “indeterminate” magnitudes in question are dealt with “as with some-
thing already given or granted.” For geometrical analysis, this is the case be-
cause in such analysis the “given” relations between “given” magnitudes are
“understood only as a ‘possible givenness’” (168/164). Thus, this “‘possible
givenness’ appears in geometrical analysis in the fact that the construction
which is regarded as already effected (the ‘quaestitum tanquam concessum’)
does not need to use the ‘given’ magnitudes as unequivocally determinate
but only as having the character of being ‘given.’”
In Diophantine analysis the “test proof” (ἀπόδειξις) confirms that the
“consequences (consequentia) to be drawn from an equation” (161/156),
which “finally lead, by means of computation, to the finding of the deﬁnite
amount sought,” yield the “‘true’ definite amount which is only then, at the
end, ‘granted as true’ (verum concessum).” In geometrical synthesis, the ἀπό -
δειξις of a theorem or the construction of a figure takes place only when, re-
spectively, “the state of affairs in question [in the theorem] has actually been
‘derived’ solely from the ‘given’ relations between the ‘given’ magnitudes”
(168/164), or when the figure in question “has actually been drawn using the
magnitudes ‘given’ with just these determinate dimensions.” Because in both
geometrical and Diophantine analysis the object sought is treated in a manner
that is not unequivocally determinate, their analytical treatments—precisely
in this regard—are general. Thus, it sometimes happens that the ἀπόδειξις,
which “in accordance with the fundamental Greek conception of the objects
of mathematics” is “obliged to ‘realize’ this general procedure in an unequiv-
ocally determinate object,” yields either “an ‘impossible’ definite amount”
(161/156) from “the final computation” or a geometrical solution “‘agreed to
be impossible.’” In both cases, “the problem itself is taken to have been badly
posed, that is, impossible.” When this occurs, the problem is understood to
be “in need of a 〈condition of possibility〉(διορισμός), or in Pappus’ words
(636, 15 f.), an ‘additional specification for when, and how and in how many
ways the problem will be possible’ (προδιαστολὴ τοῦ πότε καὶ πῶς καὶ ποσαχῶς
δυνατὸν ἔσται {καὶ} τὸ πρόβλημα); Diophantus calls this condition a προσ -
διορισμός” (161/156–57), a “further condition.”
Continuing the comparison between Diophantus’s analytical procedure
and geometrical analysis reveals that because Diophantus’s problems and so-
lutions only admit determinate definite amounts, “the last step of the [Dio-
phantine] analysis, namely the final computation which furnishes the definite
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
273

amount sought, is at the same time also the first step of the synthesis—the final
computation actually corresponds to the geometric ‘construction’” (167/162–
63). This state of affairs thus contrasts with the “solution of geometric prob-
lems” (167/162), that is, with the finding of the magnitudes sought, in which
“the required construction forms the first part of the synthesis.” Subsequent to
the required construction, “the ἀπόδειξιςwhich follows has to use the relations
between the ‘given’ magnitudes, relations which are themselves ‘given’ from
the beginning, together with those brought to light by the construction, to
prove that this construction satisfies the conditions of the problem.” The con-
trast that comes to light here is that the generality of Diophantus’s arithmeti-
cal procedure both furnishes the object sought, that is, the “unknown,” and
establishes via the ἀπόδειξις that this object solves the problem “analytically,”
while the generality of the geometrical procedure furnishes the object and es-
tablishes the ἀπόδειξις “synthetically.” Diophantus’s procedure is able to fur-
nish its object analyticallybecause unlike geometrical analysis, which is unable
actually to furnish the givenness of its object, Diophantine analysis can do pre-
cisely this, for it is guided from the start by the “presupposition” (167/163)
that this object is a determinate amount of monads. Thus, “The conversion of
the process of solution in Diophantus . . . corresponds only to the second part
of the ‘problematical’ synthesis in geometry” (167/163), that is, to the ἀπόδειξις
that follows the construction of the figure in question. According to Klein,
this means “that the relationship between (‘problematical’) analysis and syn-
thesis which is traditional in geometry undergoes a significant change in the
Arithmetic of Diophantus” (167/162). It does so because the object sought in
the Diophantine procedure, that is, the unknown amount of monads, is de-
termined analytically. This means that even though the general analytical pro-
cedure for furnishing this object starts out as indeterminate, in the precise
sense that the equations employed by this procedure disregard the distinction
between known and unknown magnitudes, the solution to these equations is
nevertheless both analytic and determinate. In other words, because of Dio-
phantus’s presupposition that the “condition of possibility” for the solutions
to his equations must always be “numerically determinate” (167/163), Dio-
phantus’s general procedure—in contrast to the general procedure in geome-
try—is able to solve them analytically.
§103. Vieta’s Transformation of the Diophantine Procedure
Klein finds that Vieta’s transformation of the Diophantine procedure begins
with his understanding of “the ‘analytical’ manner of finding solutions in Dio-
phantus and geometric (‘problematical’) analysis . . . as completely parallel
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
274

procedures.” One important consequence of this understanding is “that a
sharper line must be drawn between the transformations of equations and the
computation of the definite amounts sought than what Diophantus generally
does draw.” That is, the analytic assumption (in the Diophantine procedure)
of what is sought (the unknown) as if it were granted, and the equally ana-
lytic conversion of this assumption in the computation of the definite amount
sought are treated by Vieta as if they corresponded, respectively, to the dis-
tinct operations of analysis and synthesis in geometrical analysis. In the syn-
thesis belonging to the “problematical” analysis in geometry, the ἀπόδειξις
follows the construction of the figure, with the construction itself proceeding
according to the conversion of the analysis that treated the object sought—
which is now the constructed figure—exclusively as though it were already
granted. Hence, the ἀπόδειξις in the geometrical procedure of finding solu-
tions (of a problem) composes the second part of the synthesis that functions
as the conversion of the analysis. Because in Diophantus’s arithmetical find-
ing of solutions the first step of the synthesis is also the last step of the analy-
sis, both the calculation with the species of the unknown definite amounts
and the computation (the ἀπόδειξις) of the “true,” and thus actually granted
definite amounts, belong to the analysis. By understanding these two differ-
ent “analytical” procedures to be parallel, Vieta takes “the calculation ending
‘in the indeterminate’ (the solution ἐν τῷ ἀορίστῳ. . . ), which Diophantus him-
self uses only as an auxiliary procedure . . . ,” to be “the true analogue to geomet-
ric (‘problematical’) analysis.” That is, Diophantus understands calculation
in the indeterminate mode to be only one part of the analysis belonging to his
arithmetical procedure, a part, moreover, he understood to be inseparable
from its other analytical part, the computation of the “true” definite amounts.
Vieta, however, using the (problematical) geometrical criterion for differen-
tiating analysis from synthesis, namely, the connection to the unknown (what
is sought) that is characteristic of analysis and the computation with known
magnitudes that is characteristic of synthesis, interprets Diophantus’s proce-
dure of ending calculations in the indeterminate as an independent analytic
procedure, one that is therefore not necessarily connected with the compu-
tation of the “true” definite amounts. With this, there emerges the kernel of
the distinction between 1) “an indeterminate solution,” which “permits any
amount of ‘determinate’ solutions on the basis of arbitrary numerical assump-
tions” to be realized, and 2) a solution based on the actual computation of the
definite amount sought, which solves “this and that” problem singly. How-
ever, “For Diophantus there is only a limited possibility for the employment
of this procedure, because it still remains connected with his determinate nu-
merical presuppositions.” It is therefore precisely Vieta’s comparison of this
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
275

procedure with geometrical analysis and its capital result of separating the
indeterminate from the determinate in Diophantus’s arithmetical procedures
that cause Vieta “to go beyond” him.
The question that confronts Vieta, then, is how the “possible given-
ness” that characterizes the magnitudes in geometrical problematical analy-
sis, whose possibility is rooted in their having the character of being given,
can “be transferred to ‘arithmetical’ analysis” (168/164). According to Klein,
it is “[o]bviously in this way—that the definite amounts [Anzahlen] ‘given’ in
a problem are also regarded only in their character of being given, and not as
just these determinate definite amounts.” This means that “to assimilate the
arithmetical to the geometrical analysis completely, the ‘given’ definite
amounts must be allowed a certain indeterminateness which should [ac-
cording to the Greek conception of mathematics], in fact, be limited only by
‘the condition of possibility’ (διορισμός) of the problem.” Klein maintains
that “Here the Diophantine model presents itself” (168/165) to Vieta, since
“just as Diophantus represents the unknown definite amount—although it
is ‘in itself’ likewise ‘determinate’ . . . —by its εἶδος, its ‘species,’ which leaves the
question of ‘how many?’ provisionally indeterminate, so every definite amount
can be expressed by its ‘species’” (168–69/165). Indeed, Vieta realizes that “As
soon as the εἴδη of the unknown and its powers appear in Diophantus . . . as
new units of calculation—the authentic computation, however, being ef-
fected in terms of determinate definite amounts—the ‘calculation’ exclusively
utilizing the ‘species’ of definite amounts ought now to be entirely transferred
into the domain of the ‘indeterminate.’” 
Klein maintains that “This crucial last step is also taken by Vieta”
(169/165), and that it is done so “in the consciousness of merely confirm-
ing a practice long in use by the ancients (and found especially in Diophan-
tus), although not sufficiently clarified by them.” Moreover, it is precisely
“[i]n the course of taking this last step” that Vieta will be “forced to rein-
terpret the tradition at essential points.” Vieta will thus view Diophantus’s
Arithmetic “exclusively as an ‘artful’ procedure” (177/170), by which he un-
derstands a logistice speciosa (169/165), that is, a logistic that calculates solely
in species and therefore “has but a small interest in the determinate results
of solutions” (178/171). Klein writes that “With this interpretation of Dio-
phantine Arithmetic . . . Vieta prescribed to historical research the approach
which governs it to this day” (178/171), an approach that is evident above
all “in the matter-of-course acceptance within the modern consciousness of
the revolution in the ancient mode of forming concepts and of interpreting
the world, which first took tangible shape when Vieta founded his ‘general
analytic.’”
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
276

Klein observes that although Vieta’s “‘logistice speciosa’ is originally
very closely connected with the Diophantine procedure” (169/165), the lat-
ter forming “the ‘arithmetical’ analogue to geometric analysis,” Vieta also un-
derstands it “as the most comprehensive possible ‘analytic’ art, indifferently
applicable to definite amounts and to geometric magnitudes.” Indeed, it is
as a consequence of this that in Vieta “the εἶδος concept, the concept of
‘species,’ undergoes a universalizing extension despite its tie to the realm of def-
inite amounts of ” (169/166). Vieta thus “devotes the ‘logistice speciosa’ to the
service of ‘pure’ algebra” (169/165), whose “general procedure” allows “the
species, or as Vieta also says, the ‘forms of things’ (formae rerum . . . ), to be
seen simply as representing ‘general’ magnitudes” (169/166). Vieta’s “exten-
sion of the Diophantine εἶδος concept” leads him to concentrate “his reflec-
tion on the procedures” (170/166) of analysis that involve “‘seeking {the truth}”
or that are “‘productive {of the proposed theorem}’” procedures that he, bor-
rowing from Pappus’s text, terms respectively “zetetic (ζητητικόν {sc.
τἀληθοῦς})” and “poristic (ποριστικόν),” thus significantly, on Klein’s view, by-
passing Pappus’s “expressions ‘theoretical’ (θεωρητικόν) and ‘problematical’
(προβληματικόν).” While for Pappus, as we have seen, the difference between
the latter two types of analysis was rooted “in the kind of object presented in
a ‘theorem’ and in a ‘problem,’” Vieta “is interested less in the ‘truths’ them-
selves than in the finding of ‘correct finding.’” The basis, then, of Vieta’s “gen-
eral definition of the ‘analytical art’”—whose name, by the way, he formulates
“on the basis of Pappus’ exposition” (161/157) of analysis—“as the ‘theory for
finding {what is sought} in mathematics {in general}” (170/166), is rooted for
Klein in the fact that Vieta “no longer differentiates between ‘theorems’ and
‘problems,’ or, more exactly,” in the fact that “he sees all theorems as problems.” 
§ 104. The Auxiliar y Status of Vieta’s Employment of 
the “General Analytic”
Klein writes, “Vieta explicitly notes that properly speaking these alone,
‘zetetic’ and ‘poristic,’ are intended in Theon’s definition of analysis.” Vieta de-
fines ‘zetetic’ “as the procedure ‘through which the equation or the propor-
tion is found which is to be constructed with the aid of the given magnitudes
with a view to the magnitude sought,’” and ‘poristic’ “as the procedure
‘through which by means of the equation or proportion the truth of the the-
orem {!} set up {in them} is investigated’” (170/167).136 However, to these
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
277
————————
136. Klein reports that Vieta elucidates the meaning of his definition of the poristic
procedure as the way that “is to be taken when a problem is given which does not fit immedi-

two types of analysis, which belong to the analytical art, “Vieta adds still a
third” (170/166), which he defines “as the procedure ‘through which the
magnitude sought is itself produced out of the equation or proportion set up
{in canonical form}’” (170/167).137 Depending on whether the magnitude to
which it leads is arithmetical or geometrical, this third type of analysis is
called, respectively, “rhetic (ῤητική) with respect to the definite amounts to
which it leads and which can be expressed by the ordinary numeral names of
our language” (172/167) and “exegetic (ἐξηγητική) in respect to the geomet-
ric magnitudes which it makes directly available to sight.” 
This third and final stage “in the solution of an equation, which, as we
have seen . . . is actually already a part of the synthesis,” is “nevertheless un-
derstood by Vieta as an analytical procedure” (172–73/167). Indeed, accord-
ing to Klein, “‘Synthesis’ in Vieta generally takes second place to ‘analysis,’
although in geometric problems he frequently makes use of it and recognizes
its traditional priority” (172 n. 105/268 n. 235). Hence, Vieta “says expressly
that the results of the analysis have to brought ‘under the order of the art’ (in
artis ordinationem) according to the ‘laws’ (leges) κατὰ παντός, καθ᾿ αὑτό, καθό -
λου πρῶτον (i.e., in school language: predicated ‘of every instance of its sub-
ject,’ ‘essentially,’ ‘commensurately with the universal’).” Klein reports that
for Vieta the “‘law of every instance’” is something that “‘essentially’ demands
that every ‘rule of the art’ (artis decretum) be ‘of the same genus and a mem-
ber of the same body as it were’. . . .” Thus, “such results ‘as are demonstrated
and firmly established by zetetic’ . . . must be subjected to ‘synthesis,’ ‘which
is commonly considered the logically tighter way of demonstration’ . . . ; this
means that ‘the tracks of analysis are thus repeated’. . . .” Vieta, however, “sig-
nificantly adds, ‘this is itself also analytical’ (quod et ipsum analyticum est),”
as well as “‘not troublesome, on account of the species calculation intro-
duced’ . . . by him.”138
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
278
————————
ately into the systematic context, i.e., which occurs by chance or incidentally” (171 n. 104/265
n. 233). In Vieta’s words: “‘But if something unfamiliar is discovered, or some chance finding,
the truth of which must be weighed and investigated, is proposed for proof, then the way of
poristic must first be tried’” (171 n. 104/266 n. 233).
137. For Vieta’s understanding of this, see § 106 below.
138. Klein says here that “the equivocality of the corresponding Latin term ‘resolutio’
should be noted” (172 n. 105/268 n. 235) in connection with Vieta’s “preference for ‘analy-
sis.’” Specifically, it “means (1) ‘reverse solution’ in Pappus’ sense (ἀνάπαλιν λύσις – Hultsch, II,
634, 18), (2) ‘resolution’ into the fundamental elements . . . , and, finally, (3) simply ‘solution’”
(172–73 n. 105/268 n. 235). Descartes, Klein also notes here, likewise considers “analysis” to
be “far more essential than ‘synthesis’” (173 n. 105/268–69 n. 235), since the latter “‘does not
teach the manner in which the thing was found (quia modum quo res fuit inventa non docet)
(Secundae responsiones, Ad.-Tann., VII, p. 156),” while the former “‘is the true and best way of
teaching’ (quae vera et optima via est ad docendum) (ibid.).”

Klein reports that Vieta considers “rhetic” and “exegetic” to be “the
most important part of the ‘analytic’” art (175/168), since—unlike the other
two parts, “zetic” and “poristic,” which “consist essentially of ‘examples’ (ex-
empla)”—each of these “comprises a series of ‘rules’ (praecepta).” Because
of “[t]his organization of the ‘analytic’” (175/168), Klein maintains that the
“‘general analytic’ is understood [by Vieta] as nothing more than the indis-
pensable auxiliary means to the solution of geometric and numerical prob-
lems.” Thus, in the final stage of analysis, “the ‘analyst’ must become either
a ‘geometer’ or a ‘logistician,’ i.e., a calculator, in the ordinary sense” (173/
167), depending on whether the problem is geometrical, which would re-
quire exegetic analysis for its solution, or logistical, in which case rhetic
analysis would be required. 
Klein holds that, for Vieta, the analyst, “[a]s geometer,” “does his work
according to the ‘solution’ of an ‘other, though similar’ problem, insofar as
he, to be sure, in the construction ‘synthetically’ ‘repeats,’ in reverse order, the
other ‘given’ magnitudes, namely those traversed though the ‘pure’ algebraic
analysis (resolutio).” Moreover, “In doing this he may thus ‘hide’ his preced-
ing purely algebraic ‘analytic’ work, pretending to solve the problem in a di-
rectly ‘synthetic’ manner, and only later—for the assistance of the calculator,
as it were—handling it analytically by reading the equation off from the syn-
thetic construction.” Indeed, Klein quotes Vieta precisely to this effect.
“‘Thus the skillful geometer, though an expert analyst, dissimulates this and
presents and explicates his problem as a synthetic one, as if he thought 〈only〉
about how to accomplish the work; thereafter, to help the logistician, he con-
structs and demonstrates the theorem in terms of the proportion or equa-
tion recognizable 〈in the problem〉’ (Isagoge, Chap. VII)” (173 n. 108/269 n.
237). And further: “The ‘geometrical solution’ (effectio Geometrica) is thus
effected in such a way that ‘it does not derive and justify the synthesis from
the equation but the equation from the synthetic construction—while the
very synthesis speaks for itself’ ( . . . Chapter VII)” (173/168).
The analyst as logistician “finds numerical solutions—be it exactly, be
it by approximation procedures—which may be either simple equations (res-
olutio potestatum purarum – analysis of pure powers, i.e., simple equations
whose unknown has the same exponent everywhere), or composite equa-
tions, or any others desired (resolutio potestatum adfectarum – solution of
conjoined powers, i.e., impure equations whose unknown has different expo-
nents for different occurrences)” (174/168). And “in every case” (174/168),
in a remark that Klein will show is directed at Diophantus, the analyst as lo-
gistician “needs not to forget to make clear, by means of a specimen, the art-
ful device employed” (175/168). 
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
279

On Klein’s view, by maintaining that “‘rhetic and exegetic . . . must be
considered to be most powerfully pertinent to the establishment of the art,’”
namely, the general analytic of “pure” algebra, Vieta therefore conceives of
the latter as “first of all a ‘technique,’ to use a modern expression—it does not
aim at opening up a domain of true states of affairs, progressively attaining an
overview of its scope, nor at the solution of a determinate amount of prob-
lems; rather it intends to be an instrument for the solution of problems in gen-
eral” (175/169). Klein has shown this on the basis of his reactivation of Vieta’s
logistice speciosa, which, as we have seen above, establishes that Vieta under-
stands it, despite its arithmetical genealogy and hence arithmetical analog in
Diophantus, to have a scope wider than merely numerical analysis insofar as
it treats “magnitude” (magnitudo) in the most general sense, that is, in a sense
that is “indifferently applicable to definite amounts and geometrical magni-
tudes.” Klein’s reactivation has also shown that notwithstanding precisely this
“generality” of Vieta’s art, Vieta nevertheless considers that aspect of it whose
analysis is concerned with the solution of either numerical or geometrical
problems—that is, rhetic and exegetic—to be its most important part. Klein’s
account of this understanding, then, provides the basis for his claim that the
general analytic has an auxiliary status for Vieta. Nevertheless, because “‘Its
‘material’ is not a single problem or a series of single problems but, as Vieta
himself says . . . , the problem of being able to solve problems in general (prob-
lema problematum),” Klein maintains that it presents the art of finding or the
ﬁnding of the finding” (175/169). Thus, Klein holds that the “‘general ana-
lytic’ is an ‘organon,’ an instrument in the realm of mathematical finding in
the same sense as the Aristotelian ‘logical’ works, above all, the (Prior and
Posterior) ‘Analytics’ are an Organon in the realm of all possible knowledge
whatever.” 
The “double function” (176/169) of Vieta’s logistice speciosa, its being
understood by him “on the one hand as the procedure of general ‘pure’ al-
gebra and on the other hand as the procedure analogous to geometric analy-
sis and directly related to the Diophantine Arithmetic” (176/170), has,
according to Klein, its basis in Vieta’s understanding of the whole analytical
art as being “in the service of his cosmological and astronomical investiga-
tions” (176/169). As a consequence, Vieta is “concerned mainly with the
numerical exploitation of solutions and therefore with ‘rhetic’ and ‘exegetic’”
analysis, which is one of the two reasons that for him “the ‘general’ algebra
has the role of a merely auxiliary procedure” (176/170). The other reason for
this auxiliary status is connected with “Vieta’s assumption that Diophantus
solved his ‘arithmetical’ problems with the aid of ‘zetetic’ as understood by
Vieta himself, but that he considered it better to ‘hide’ this.” Klein quotes
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
280

Vieta at length on this matter, no doubt in order both to substantiate and to
highlight this reason’s peculiarity:
Zetetic was employed most subtly of all by Diophantus in those books
which were written on the subject of arithmetic. But he exhibited it as though
it were founded only on definite amounts and not also on species—although he
himself used them—so that his subtlety and skill might be more admired, since
things that appear very abstruse to one who calculates in definite amounts
[i.e., practices logistice numerosa] appear very familiar and immediately ob-
vious to one who calculates in species [i.e., practices logistice speciosa].
On Klein’s view, then, “Vieta obviously sees the traces of the true Diophan-
tine art, namely of ‘pure’ analytic conceived as a ‘general’ mathematical aux-
iliary technique” (178/170), in “not only the instrumental use of the εἶδος
concept in Diophantus but also in the ‘indeterminate’ [ἐν τῷ ἀορίστῳ] so-
lutions which the latter used as an auxiliary procedure” (177/170). Because
of this, that is, because Vieta understands his innovation of a general pure al-
gebra as in truth a renovation of what he see traces of in Diophantus, “the rev-
olution in the ancient mode of forming concepts and of interpreting the
world which first took shape when Vieta founded his ‘general analytic’”
(178/171) is something that “comes to expression” in its “matter-of-course
acceptance within modern consciousness.” 
§ 105. The Influence of the General Theor y of Proportions 
on Vieta’s “Pure,” “General” Algebra
Having considered in detail Klein’s reactivation of Vieta’s comparison of geo-
metrical analysis and Diophantine analysis, Klein’s reactivation of the influ-
ence on Vieta of Proclus’s position on the general theory of proportion needs
to be considered. According to Klein, “Vieta’s conception of a ‘pure,’ ‘general’
algebra which will be equally applicable to geometric magnitudes and defi-
nite amounts is met half-way by the general theory of proportionsof Eudoxus as
transmitted in the fifth book of Euclid” (162/158) and in Proclus’s comments
on this book. In connection with his talk about “theorems which are not tied
to ‘figures or definite amounts or heavenly bodies’ . . . but in which ‘a certain
common nature’ . . . is grasped as such, ‘itself by itself,’”139 Proclus “also men-
tions the procedure of ‘analysis’ and ‘synthesis’ common to all mathematical
disciplines: ‘the road from things better known to things sought and the re-
versal [of the process, so as to go] from the latter to the former, which they
call analysis and synthesis’ ( . . . 8, 5–8)” (163/160). Klein observes that “With
this tradition in mind Vieta maintains . . . that every ‘equation’ (aequalitas) is
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
281
————————
139. See § 99 above.

a ‘solution of a proportion (resolutio proportionis), and correspondingly, every
proportion is the ‘construction of an equation’ (constitutio aequalitatis).” In-
deed, Vieta “always speaks of ‘equations’ and ‘proportions’ together,” such that
“‘pure algebra is for him not only a ‘general theory of equations,’ but at the
same time a ‘general theory of proportions’” (163–64/160). As a consequence,
Vieta forms “his ‘stipulations for equations and proportions’ (Symbola ae-
qualitatum et proportionum – Chap. II), which are to serve as the general and
firm foundations (firmamenta) ‘by means of which the equations and pro-
portions are obtained as conclusions’ (quibus aequalitates et proportiones con-
cluduntur – Chap. I)” (164–65/160), by amalgamating aspects of Euclid’s
Elements pertaining to “common notions” and “generalized” definitions and
theorems. However, notwithstanding the fact that “[h]ere Vieta does indeed
prove himself the faithful preserver and interpreter of the traditional doctrine”
(165/161), the fundamentally different nature of hisunderstanding of the ob-
jectproper to the ancient “general treatment” that guides his analysis points to
conceptual presuppositions that, as has been suggested repeatedly above and
now will be explored in detail, can only be understood on the basis of his fun-
damental reinterpretation of the ancient mode of conceptuality whose most
characteristic expression is the transformed understanding of ἀριθμός.
§106. Klein’s Desedimentation of the Conceptual 
Presuppositions Belonging to Vieta’s Interpretation 
of Diophantine Logistic
Klein’s desedimentation of the conceptual presuppositions that make Vieta’s
interpretation of Diophantine logistic possible focuses on the following ques-
tions: “What does Vieta understand by the species which form the object of
the ‘general analytic’ and in which way does he understand them?” (178/171).
Klein’s answer to the first question, as we have seen, concerns “the universal
extension which the Diophantine εἶδος concept undergoes at Vieta’s hands,
an extension through which the species become the objects of a ‘generalized’
mathematical discipline that is identifiable neither with geometry nor with
arithmetic” (179/172). Regarding the second question, Klein maintains that
Vieta understands the species to retain a “direct connection with the ‘logis-
tice numerosa,’ i.e., with ‘calculation,’” and, with this, a direct connection to
“a homogeneous field of monads presupposed by its original meaning.” As a
consequence, the way in which Vieta understands the species of his general
analytic “is dependent upon ‘definite amounts of definite objects’140 and their
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
282
————————
140. Because on Klein’s view the ancient ἀριθμοίare precisely Anzahlen, i.e., definite
amounts of definite objects, in essence his point here is that the way in which Vieta understood 

relations.” They are dependent in the sense that Vieta’s “fundamental rules”
(180/172) for calculating with species, what he calls “‘the canonical rules of
species calculation’ (logistices speciosae canonica praecepta),” “correspond to
the rules for addition, subtraction, and multiplication used for instruction
in ordinary calculation.” Even though the calculations governed by these rules
operate on the species of unknown and known magnitudes, Klein stresses
that Vieta’s fundamental law for such calculations, the “‘law of homogeneity’”
(180/173), concerns “the fundamental fact that every ‘calculation’ [with
species] finally depends on ‘counting off’ the appropriate basic units, which
presupposes a field of homogeneous monads” (181/173–74). 
Klein supports this last claim by reactivating an equation in Vieta’s gen-
eral analytic. Because the latter involves the representation of every species
“by a letter (the vowels being assigned to the unknown, the consonant to the
known magnitudes . . . ), to which are joined the designation of the degree or
genus, beginning with the second degree” (180/172–73), Klein’s reactiva-
tion first considers Vieta’s organization and presentation of the genera proper
to known and unknown magnitudes. The genera of unknown magnitudes
are organized by Vieta as “‘a venerable series or scale of magnitudes ascend-
ing or descending from genus to genus by their own power in 〈continuous〉
proportion’ ( . . . Chapter I, end)” (179/172). Klein reports that for Vieta the
genera of the unknown magnitudes “are therefore called ‘magnitudines
scalares’ (scalar or ladder magnitudes)” (179 n. 120/274 n. 249), and: 
Their ‘rungs’ or ‘degrees’ (gradus) are: 
Latus seu Radix 
(Side or Root, i.e., [in modern notation] x)
Quadratum 
(Square, i.e., x2)
Cubus
(Cube, i.e., x3)
Quadrato-quadratum
(Squared-square, i.e., x4)
Quadrato-cubus
(Squared-cube, i.e., x5)
Cubo-cubus
(Cubed-cube, i.e., x6)
Quadrato-quadrato-cubus
(Squared-squared-cube, i.e., x7)
Quadrato-cubo-cubus
(Squared-cubed-cube, i.e., x8)
Cubo-cubo-cubus
(Cubed-cubed-cube, i.e., x9).
The continuous proportion (in modern notation) is arranged thus by Vieta:
“x : x2 = x2 : x3 = x3 : x4 . . .” 
The genera of the known magnitudes (the ‘magnitudines comparatae’) are
ordered correspondingly:
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
283
————————
the concept of species in his logistice speciosa was still dependent on the ancient ἀριθμοί. This
is reflected in the English translation, which renders Anzahlen here as arithmoi.

Longitudo latitudove
(Length or breadth)
Planum
(Plane)
Solidum
(Solid)
Plano-planum
(Plane-plane)
Plano-solidum
(Plane-solid). (180 n. 120/274 n. 249)
One of Vieta’s equations (180/173) thus looks as follows:
A cubus – B solido 3,
read:
A cubed minus 3 times B
——————————
solid divided by C times E
C in E quadratum
squared 
(in modern notation: x3 – 3b ).141
cy2
Klein maintains that while Vieta was not the first to use a notation that em-
ployed letters for both known and unknown magnitudes, “The term ‘sym-
bolum,’ used for letter signs as well as for connective signs, originated with
Vieta himself ” (183 n. 128/276 n. 257). As for the meaning of the term it-
self, Klein relates that “By a ‘symbolum’ Vieta doubtless understands a ‘con-
tractual stipulation,’ which corresponds to the judicial concept of the Greek
σύμβολον” (165 n. 98/264 n. 226). In addition to being governed by the
“canonical rules of species calculation,” Klein stresses that Vieta’s “‘first and
eternal law of equations and proportions’ (prima et perpetua lex aequalitatum
seu proportionum)” (181/173), the “‘law of homogeneity’ (lex homogeneo-
rum), . . . according to which only magnitudes of ‘like genus’ can be com-
pared (i.e., can appear in the same equation) with one another,142 must be
kept in mind throughout” (180–81/173). Thus, “According to it, only such
magnitudes can be related by way of addition or subtraction as belong to
the same or the corresponding ‘rung,’ although this does not hold for mul-
tiplication and division” (181/173). On Klein’s view, Vieta’s “law of homo-
geneity” is not connected with the ancient Greek definition of a ratio as
something that “can only exist between ‘homogeneous’ magnitudes,” since
it “certainly is not unusual for ancient mathematicians to ‘compare,’ for in-
stance, a ratio of lengths with a ratio of planes, and to bring both into one
‘proportion.’” Rather, as mentioned above, Vieta’s law is “concerned with the
fundamental fact” that the known and unknown “magnitudes” united in
the equations of his logistice speciosa “represent, each and every one, ‘definite
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
284
————————
141. The ‘3b’ corrects the ‘3b’ printed in the English translation.
142. According to Klein, this law “says, in modern terminology, that all numbers of
an equation must have the same dimension” (181/173).

amounts of monads’” (181/174).143 In fact, “Vieta himself says ‘in the case of
numbers the homogeneous elements of equations are units’” (181 n. 126/
276 n. 255). Since unlike “Diophantine ‘logistic,’” where “this demand is
fulfilled as a matter of course, because it already operates within such a field
of ‘pure’ monads,” Klein points out that “For the ‘logistice speciosa’ this fun-
damental presupposition needs to be especially stressed.” According to him,
this is why “Vieta, in contrast to the ‘ancient analysts’ (veteres Analystae), ex-
pounds the ‘lex homogeneorum’ as the foundation of the ‘analytical art’”
(181–82/174). 
Klein thus maintains that “the concept of species is for Vieta, its uni-
versality notwithstanding, irrevocably dependent on the concept of ‘ἀριθ μός.’
The character of ‘ἀριθμός’ as a ‘definite amount of . . .’ is preserved in it [i.e.,
Vieta’s concept of species] in a peculiarly transformed way” (182/174). Klein
therefore desediments the way in which this “numerical” character of ἀριθμός
is, as it were, “preserved” in Vieta’s concept of species. He does this by desed-
imenting the non-Aristotelian “abstractness” proper to the “symbolic” num-
ber concept operative in Vieta’s concept of species144 as follows:
While every ἀριθμός means immediately the things or the units themselves
whose “definite amount” it exhibits exactly, Vieta’s letter signs [first of all
mean precisely this concept of an amount as a determination insolubly re-
lated to things or units, and thus it]145 immediately mean the general char-
acter of being an amount that belongs to every possible definite amount—i.e.,
“amount overall”—and only mediately the things or units that may be pres-
ent in any particular definite amount. (182/174)146
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
285
————————
143. See n. 153 below.
144. See § 94 above.
145. The clause in brackets renders the German original, “meint zunächst einmal das
Buchstaben-Zeichen bei Vieta eben diesen Begriff der Anzahl als einer auf Dinge bzw. Ein-
heiten unablöslich bezogenen Bestimmung,” which is not translated in the English translation.
146. Caton’s gloss on this passage is instructive, as it exemplifies what was noted above
(see n. 110) regarding the difficulties Klein’s commentators have in following his desedimen-
tation of Vieta’s “numerical” interpretation of the species. After quoting the English translation
of this passage, into which he inserts, after the word “ἀριθμός,” the following in brackets: “[num-
ber sign],” he writes: “Klein means to say, I take it, that the letter sign signifies an indeterminate
number of other signs (numbers), which in turn signify things or beings (units, monads). But
the main thing is to understand correctly in what way the letter signifies the number signs, for
therein lies the secret of the letter as a sign of an indeterminate magnitude (i.e., a wholly new,
un-Greek number conception), and hence as a true variable or symbol” (Caton, 223).
There are three problems with Caton’s view of the matters expressed here. First, Klein
nowhere associates or otherwise connects ‘number sign’ with ἀριθμός. Indeed, his account of
the non-theoretical—which is to say, practical—distinction between ‘saying’ and ‘thinking’
(see § 94 above) rules out precisely the separation of the ‘expressive’ (i.e., saying) and the ‘con-
ceptual’ (i.e., thinking) that is implicit in Caton’s apparent equation of ἀριθμός, or the ἀριθμός
concept, with ‘number sign’. Second, Klein nowhere suggests that Vieta’s letter sign signifies
other signs (indeed, signs that arenumbers!), and that this—namely, the letter signifying num-

Klein maintains that “the language of the schools permits this state of af-
fairs to be expressed as follows: the letter sign designates the intentional ob-
ject of a ‘second intention’ (intentio secunda), namely a concept which itself
directly means another concept and not a being.”147 However, with respect to
the peculiar abstractness of Vieta’s concept of species, what “initially brings
about the decisive turn” is that “now this general character of being an
amount or, what is the same thing, this ‘general amount’ in its indetermi-
nateness, that is, its merely possible determinateness, is accorded a certain in-
dependence which permits it to be the bearer of ‘calculational’ operations.”
This occurs when Vieta’s letter signs, together with the genera of the un-
known and known magnitudes—for instance, ‘A cubus’, ‘B solido’—are in-
terconnected “according to unambiguously manifest rules,” rules that assign
“the homogeneous field that is supposed to comprise the basis of the con-
struction of any equation.” When these letter signs themselves become the
focal point of calculational operations, Klein holds that “The ‘rung’ designa-
tion, which taken independently corresponds to the Diophantine εἶδος, thus
transforms the object of the intentio secunda, namely the ‘general amount’ meant
by the letter sign, into the object of an intentio prima, of a ‘first intention,’
namely into a ‘being’ which is accessible in a direct apprehension and whose
counterpart in the realm of ordinary calculation is, for instance, ‘two monads,’
‘three monads,’ etc.” (182/174–75).148 What is involved here for Klein, when
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
286
————————
ber signs—has anything to do with the signification of an indeterminate magnitude. Klein’s
passage, restored to its entirely, makes this clear, since it explicitly states that what Vieta’s let-
ter sign means is the “concept of an amount [Anzahl],” a concept that is said to be, moreover,
“insolubly related to things or units” and therefore manifestly not to other signs. Third, as we
shall see below, Vieta’s letter as a sign—in the novel sense of a symbol—of an indeterminate
magnitude does not signify anything apart from itself. This (the identification of “the object
represented with the means of its representation”) is the “secret” of Vieta’s letter sign, and it
means that the concept of an indeterminate magnitude, in the guise of Vieta’s species, col-
lapses into his letter sign, such that what is meant by both is, in precisely this sense, “symbolic in
nature” (183/176).
147. It is important to note here that Klein nowhere suggests in this passage, or else-
where, what Caton maintains he does, namely, that this “analysis” (225) is to be found “in the
self-conscious thought of Vieta.” Rather, Klein’s analysis (in the language of the schools) of
the transformation of the ancient concept of species and therewith ‘number’ that occurs in
the modern interpretation initiated by Vieta occurs within the context of Klein’s own analy-
sis, i.e., his desedimentation of Vieta’s thought.
148. With the exception of Caton, all of the discussions (with which I am familiar) of
Klein’s account of the origin of symbolic cognition completely elide the “decisive turn” in con-
nection with this origin that Klein attributes to the “direct apprehension,” as the object of a
“first intention,” of Vieta’s letter sign. Thus, in the following gloss, Caton is very much to the
point: “The letter sign takes on ‘independence’ in the sense that it becomes a computational
element thanks to ‘precise rules’ for its manipulation. It thus becomes an object of the first in-
tention, namely, as a visible sign, with which computations may be performed” (Caton, 223–
24). (See also § 45 above.)

the letter sign itself is literally perceived as something that exists independently
of that which it functions to designate as a sign, which is to say, when as conse-
quence of this it functions as a symbol, is precisely the interpretation of what,
for Diophantus and the ancient tradition is the “merely possible objectivity”
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
287
————————
John O’Neill, in an extensive discussion of the origins of modern algebra that relies
heavily on Klein, has this to say about the role of signs in Vieta: “The logistic of species by
contrast [to the logistic of numbers] operates on species defined as the ‘forms of things,’ in
symbols such as letters. The objects of study become symbols that can refer to any quantity or
magnitude, geometric or arithmetic”; see Worlds without Content: Against Formalism (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1991), 112. O’Neill thus understands Vieta’s letters, and perhaps letters per
se—without more ado—already to have the status of symbols: “They [the objects of Vieta’s lo-
gistic] are symbols, types of letter or marks” (109). The issue for Klein, however, is precisely
how Vieta’s letters, in contrast to the letters used by ancient Greek mathematics, e.g., the let-
ters used by Diophantus, acquire the status of symbols. Klein’s pointed expression of how this
occurs, in terms of the conceptuality of “first” and “second” intentions, is nowhere mentioned
by O’Neill. No doubt the reason for this is that O’Neill thinks that his reference to the species,
as being “taken [by Vieta] to be the forms of things like letters,” already explains the origin of
Vieta’s symbols. 
Joseph Gonda’s discussion of Klein’s account is much closer to the mark, insofar as he
characterizes “the decisive and culminating step” as occurring, “according to Klein, when the
letter sign is treated as independent.” However, he inexplicitly unpacks this to mean that “the
letter sign, because of its indirect reference to, say, things or units, is accorded the status of a
first intention, but—and this is critical—all the while remaining identified with the general
character of a number, i.e., a second intention.” See Joseph Gonda, “On Jacob Klein’s Greek
Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra,” Interpretation 22/1 (1994), 111–28, here
119. Here we have Vieta’s letter sign becoming a “first intention” (NB: Klein refers to its be-
coming the object of a first intention) because of its indirect reference to “things or units,” i.e.,
to objects of “first intentions.” Klein, however, does not mention anything about Vieta’s let-
ter sign referring indirectly to things or units—this is something he attributes to the concept
‘number in general’; rather, he explicitly states that the letter sign becomes the object of a first
intention, and that it does so on the basis of the “independence” accorded to it “which permits
it to be the bearer of ‘calculational operations.’” Which is to say, with Caton, that it “becomes
an object of the first intention, namely, as a visible sign.”
Carl Page’s discussion of Klein’s account—or, perhaps more precisely, his Klein-in-
spired account—of the “reconstitution of the mathematical as symbolic” also makes no men-
tion of the role of letter signs in this reconstitution; see his “Symbolic Mathematics and the
Intellect Militant: On Modern Philosophy’s Revolutionary Spirit,” Journal of the History of
Ideas 57 (1996), 233–53, here 242. This is perhaps a consequence of the question he poses,
which is “what do the symbols of modern mathematics signify?”—a question that is radically
different from the one that Klein seeks to answer by means of his desedimentation of Vieta’s
original constitution of a mathematical symbolism. As we have seen, the latter concerns “how
the calculation with letter signs comes to have a symbolical significance.” Page’s question thus
seems to presuppose that a symbol’s mode of being is already sufficiently transparent so as to
permit what is questionable about symbolic mathematics to shift from the problem of the
original constitution of the letter signs that it employs as symbols to the question of the ref-
erent or referents of these symbols themselves. Thus, when Page considers Klein’s “[s]ymbol-
generating abstraction,” he does so in terms of “what is common in the notions that render
determinate, first-order objects accessible” (243), that is, the “generic” notions apprehended
in “a reflective, second-order intentionality” being “reconceived in a first-order mode,” and 

(183/175) of the εἶδος or species, as an “actual objectivity.” In the under-
standing that guides this interpretation, “the ‘general amount’ is both con-
ceived and represented symbolically in the medium of species as an objective
formation in itself,” and therefore “is itself—as is what is meant by it—sym-
bolic in nature” (183/176). This means that the letter signs (together with
the designations of their genera) designating indeterminate (conceptual)
objects, namely, the species of both unknown and known magnitudes, ac-
quire their “numerical” significance on the basis of Vieta’s “stipulations.”
Notwithstanding their indeterminate conceptual and thus objective status,
however, these signs—as well as the concept of the indeterminate objects
they designate—are nevertheless perceived as determinate objects qua their
being unambiguously manifest as readily perceivable letters. Klein writes in
connection with this that “the possibility of being able to see a ‘number’ in
the isolated letter signs ‘A’ or ‘B’ is, however, obviously possible only through
the syntactical rules which Vieta gives, in the fourth chapter of the Isagoge,
in contrast to the operating rules of the ‘logistice numerosa’” (183–84/176).
In Klein’s judgment, the symbolic nature of Vieta’s concept of species is most
readily apparent “in the species of the first degree, where the designation of
the ‘rung’ is not appended to the letter sign and thus, so to speak, collapses
into it” (183/176).149 Thus, instead of designating the rung as latus seu radix
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
288
————————
thus “turned into general objects that enter the same field of mathematical operations inhab-
ited by the original objects.” Page’s only mention of “letters” assumes that their status is already
symbolic, without raising or otherwise addressing the issue of how they have acquired such a
status: “When letters appear in simple algebraic equations . . . they represent relations between
sets of possible numbers.” How, exactly, the generic notions apprehended by “second-order
intentionality” are “reconceived in a first-order mode” is something that Page does not ad-
dress. Klein, as we have seen, not only addresses it, but also, in his account of the sedimenta-
tion (in the symbolic notation that makes modern mathematics possible) of the practical
ancient Greek distinction between ‘saying’ and ‘thinking’ (see § 94 above), he provides his an-
swer to the question that Page also raises (247)—though without referring to Klein’s attempt
to answer it (see § 100 above): “How is it that mathematics which used to guard the vestibule
to philosophy has now, in the guise of a mathesis universalis, usurped its inner sanctum?”
149. Klein’s analysis here of the origin of the “meaning” of mathematical symbols, an
analysis that we have shown occurs within the context of his desedimentation of the “matter-
of-course acceptance within modern consciousness” (178/171—see also § 104 above) of the
symbolic procedure made possible by such symbols, will remain inaccessible to anyone whose
conceptual horizon is determined (and, therefore, limited) by such an acceptance of their
“meaning.” This is exemplified in the following account, where Mahoney writes: “what should
be understood as the ‘algebraic mode of thought’? It has three main characteristics: first, this
mode of thought is characterized by the use of an operative symbolism, that is, a symbolism
that not only abbreviates words but represents the workings of the combinatory operations,
or, in other words, a symbolism with which one operates” (Mahoney, “Beginnings of Alge-
braic Thought,” 142). Not only does he make no attempt here to define or otherwise account
for what an ‘operative symbolism’ is, but the very fact that it is explained in the manner of a 

(side or root), which, as we have seen, for Vieta represents the first “rung” or
“degree” of the genera of unknown magnitude, as A latus or A radix, Vieta’s
notation simply designates it as ‘A’. 
These considerations lead Klein to conclude that Vieta’s syntactical
rules “therefore represent the first modern axiom system; their systematic
connection is what initially ‘defines’ the object to which they refer” (184/
176). Because, however, “these rules are directly read off the ‘calculation’
with determinate amounts of monads,” Klein maintains “This means that,
ultimately, it is only possible for the transformed mode of the species to re-
tain an amount or quantitative character [Anzahl Charakter] and therewith
to become a ‘number,’ namely to become an object of ‘calculational’ opera-
tions, because the ancient ‘determinate amounts of monads’ are themselves also
interpreted as ‘numbers,’ which means that they are conceived from the point
of view of their symbolic representation.”150 Two factors are therefore in-
volved in the concept of species in Vieta’s sense being able to retain the gen-
eral character of number in the Greek sense: 1) the reinterpretation of the
Greek ἀριθμός as ‘number’, that is, as a sign whose numerical status is char-
acterized not by its reference to a definite amount of things (or monads) but
by its representation of the general character of being just this one number
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
289
————————
logical tautology (i.e., “an operative symbolism” = “a symbolism with which one operates”)
raises the suspicion that the author does not really see anything problematic in what a sym-
bolism is because what it is is for him apparently self-evident. 
150. In his 1932 talk, “The World of Physics and the ‘Natural’ World,” Klein charac-
terizes this conception of the ancient ἀριθμοίfrom the standpoint of their symbolic represen-
tation as precisely that which allows Vieta to take the step “from the numerical coefficient
(the term ‘coefficient’ stems from Vieta himself) to the literal coefficient” (WP, 25). The step
from “2x to ax” becomes possible “because the concept of ‘two’ no longer refers, as it did for
Diophantus, directly to an object, viz., to two pure monads.” Rather, it “already has a ‘more gen-
eral’ character,” insofar as “‘Two’ no longer means in Vieta ‘two definite things,’ but the gen-
eral concept of twoness in general.” With this, the numerical sign ‘2’, “no longer means or
intends a determinate number of things, but the general number-character of this one num-
ber.” Klein stresses that it is precisely Vieta’s understanding of the sign ‘2’ as already meaning
the general character of a single number and not a definite amount of things (or monads),
which permits the introduction of the “symbol ‘a’” as something that “represents the general
numerical character of each and every number.” The “sign ‘a’” therefore “represents ‘more’ than
the sign ‘2.’” Nevertheless, Klein maintains that “The symbolic relation between the sign and
what it designates is . . . the same in both cases.” That is, what is the same is that in each case
the sign not only designates a “general concept,” but also that the sign and what it “designates”
literally coalesce in the letter sign: ‘two’ becomes indistinguishable from ‘2’, ‘number in gen-
eral’ (i.e., any possible quantity) becomes indistinguishable from ‘a’. Hence, Klein writes: “the
replacement of ‘2’ by ‘a’ is in fact only ‘logically required’ here.” To return to what Klein em-
phasizes is “the decisive thing,” just as Vieta identifies his species symbols with Diophantus’s
signs for the unknown, he (Vieta) likewise identifies the symbol ‘2’ “with the sign employed
by Diophantus” for ‘two’. And this means that “The concept of twoness is at the same time un-
derstood as referring to two entities.”

(e.g., the sign ‘2’ would represent ‘twoness’); and 2) the interpretation of the
determinate amounts of monads (ἀριθμοί)—which underlie the operating
rules of the logistice numerosa (i.e., the rules from which the syntactical rules
of the logistice speciosa are derived)—as being “at the same time” numbers
in the symbolic sense.151 In addition to making possible the numeric status
of the symbolic notation that involves the species of unknown and known
quantities in the formal language of algebra, the reinterpretation of the
Greek ἀριθμός as a number therefore allows for “the representation of the
definite amounts of definite objects themselves in this sphere [i.e., the for-
mal language of algebra]” (185/177). Klein stresses that “This reinterpreta-
tion has to this day remained the foundation of our understanding of ancient
‘arithmetic’ and ‘logistic.’” 
It is upon the basis of his desedimentation of Vieta’s concept of species,
then, that Klein advances the thesis that the “numerically” indeterminate sta-
tus proper to this concept152 prepares the way for numbers, as “‘definite
amounts’” (186/177–78), to be “conceived as ‘ordinary numbers’” (186/178).
This conception, moreover, means “for the everyday understanding, which in
effect determines the actual formation of concepts,” that “these definite
amounts coincide with the ‘numeral’ sign as such, especially in the course of
specific calculational operations” (185–86/177–78).153 Klein also maintains
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
290
————————
151. How exactly the general concept of ‘twoness’ (in the example at hand) and the
reference to two (again, in the example at hand) entities is to be understood as belonging “at
the same time” to number is something that, according to Klein, modern set theory first tries
to clarify. He writes: “Modern set theory first tries to separate these two constituents, to clar-
ify what ‘at the same time’ means” (WP, 25). 
152. In other words, Vieta’s concept of species is “numerically” indeterminate when the
measure for numerical determinacy is ἀριθμοί, namely, “numbers” that are “definite amounts
of definite objects,” which is to say with Klein: Anzahlen.
153. O’Neill argues that “Klein’s thesis concerning the effect of the symbolic nature of
the logistic of species on the concept of number is this: that the dependency of the logistic of
species on the prior logistic of number for an understanding of the arithmetical operations it
employs comes to transform the concept of number itself” (O’Neill, Worlds without Content,
116). Moreover, he argues that the consequence of this transformation is that the traditional
account of numbers “disappears and a symbolic understanding appears, that allows for the ex-
tension of the number-concept to include the ‘algebraic’ numbers, the absurds and imaginar-
ies” and he judges that “Klein’s arguments for this position are weak.” Before addressing what
O’Neill presents as Klein’s weak arguments, it should be pointed out that his statement of
Klein’s thesis misrepresents it. It is not the reliance of the logistic of species on the logistic of
number that Klein singles out as decisive for the transformation of the traditional concept of
number. Rather, it is because the numbers (Anzahlen) in the latter are conceived from the per-
spective of their symbolic representation, as “objects” capable of being represented in the for-
mal language first invented by Vieta, that Klein maintains that the symbolic sphere constituted
by this formal language can, as Klein writes, “retain a numerical [in the sense of definite
amounts of definite objects] character,” albeit one that is now general. O’Neill overlooks this
point entirely, namely, that for Klein the transformation of the ancient ἀριθμός into the mod-

Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
291
————————
ern symbolic number is emphatically not something that involves “an extension of the number-
concept” (my emphasis). By understanding the transformation in just these terms, O’Neill
misses the sense of Klein’s account of the sedimentation that is coincident with the origin of
the modern symbolic number. The reason “the traditional account of number according to
which numbers refer to multitudes of units disappears” (O’Neill, Worlds without Content,
116) is therefore because the “number” in this account is understood to “coincide with the
‘numeral’ sign.” And this means, for Klein, that “ordinary numbers,” as it were, become sym-
bolic, and therewith among “numbers” (i.e., symbolic numbers) fractions, irrationals, nega-
tives, etc., can now be included. However, Klein does not attribute, here or elsewhere, this
reinterpretation to Vieta (see directly below), but rather claims, in effect, that one of the con-
ditions that made it possible was Vieta’s symbolic concept of the species. Investigating the ac-
tual reinterpretation or “gradual change in the understanding of number” (184 n. 130/277 n.
259—see directly below), which he here attributes to “the everyday understanding,” is some-
thing according to Klein “whose ultimate roots lie too deep for discussion in this study.”
Turning now to O’Neill’s account of Klein’s arguments, he holds that “They are
premised on a particular interpretation of Vieta’s law of homogeneity which cannot be sus-
tained” (O’Neill, Worlds without Content, 116). As we have seen above, Klein’s interpretation
of this law concerns what he claims is the “irrevocable” dependency of Vieta’s concept of
species, its universality notwithstanding, on the concept of ἀριθμός. This law for Klein, then,
concerns a radically different issue than that of the transformation of the concept of number
to which O’Neill attributes it. This is apparent, because what is at issue in Klein’s interpreta-
tion of the law of homogeneity is not the transformation of the concept of number but the
transformation of the concept of species. For Klein, what is involved here is the shift from the
species’ non-numerical status in ancient Greek mathematics to its “numerical” status in mod-
ern mathematics, a shift that occurs with its connection to “‘the arithmetical’ interpretation of
‘general magnitudes’” (193/184; see § 95 above) in Vieta’s logistice speciosa and in the symbolic
cognition belonging to the mathesis universalis made possible by his analytical art. 
As for the problem O’Neill finds in Klein’s interpretation of Vieta’s law of homogene-
ity, he claims that Klein’s thesis is that it “is introduced to ensure that one is comparing multi-
tudes of like units, to indicate ‘the particular homogeneous field underlying each equation
which is constructed’” (O’Neill, Worlds without Content, 117). The problem with this, ac-
cording to O’Neill (117–18), “is that the law of homogeneity is not relevant to the problem of
comparing like units. The only connection between the law of homogeneity and homogeneous
units is verbal. Changes in the unit are a consequence only of the use of fractions, but the law
of homogeneity has nothing to say on fractions. The question it deals with is the genus of num-
bers, the relations between linear, plane, solid numbers and the like. And these in the arith-
metical domain refer to arrangements of the units, not the units at all. Klein’s account is based
on the odd assumption that the different genera of number are made up of different units.”
Three brief points will suffice here to establish that O’Neill’s objections are untenable.
First, Klein does not maintain, as O’Neill claims he does, that the law of homogeneity indi-
cates the “particular homogeneous field” underlying the construction of equations. Rather, he
maintains that what indicates this field are the “unambiguously manifest rules” (GMTOA,
182/174) for calculational operations. He maintains this because Vieta’s law of homogeneity
is not one rule for calculation among others, but rather, the “fundamental presupposition”
(181/174) of all the rules for calculation in his logistice speciosa. Second, when considered in
relation to the homogeneous units or monads that compose the basic field to which all of the
calculations with species ultimately refer for Vieta (because the analytical art governing such
calculations remains an auxiliary procedure—see § 101 above), what Klein holds is stipulated
by the “law of homogeneity” is not, as O’Neill maintains, that only homogeneous units of
numbers can be compared, on the putative assumption that “the different genera of number
are made up of different units.” On the contrary, Klein holds that unlike the case in Diophantus’s 

that this reinterpretation of the traditional ἀριθμός concept “was supported
by the ‘Arabic’ positional system of ciphers, which had been spreading in the
West since the twelfth century and whose ‘sign’ character is much more pro-
nounced than that of the Greek or Roman notation” (184 n. 130/277 n. 259).
However, he maintains that “it would be a mistake to attempt to understand
the origin of the language of symbolic formalism as the final consequence of
the introduction of the Arabic sign language.” Rather, it is the case that “[t]he
acceptance of this sign language in the West itself presupposes a gradual change
in the understanding of number as a definite amount of definite objects,” a change,
moreover, “whose ultimate roots lie too deep for discussion in this study.”
What Klein does discuss is how “after Vieta and under his immediate influence
(as in indeed already before him) the ‘numeri algebraici (or ‘algebrici,’ or ‘cos-
sici’) are posited along with the ‘numeri simplices’ (or ‘vulgares’)” (184/176).
This is to say, Klein discusses the change in the concept of number that occurs
as a result of Vieta’s invention of symbolic calculi but notthe “gradual change”
in the understanding of numberitself that was one of the factors involved in the
change of its concept. Before Vieta, evidence for the change in its concept can
be seen in, “above all, Chuquet” (184 n. 130/277 n. 260), “who says . . . by ‘nom -
bres’ we are now to understand not only one, and all the fractions (‘tout nom-
bre rout’ – ‘every broken number’), but also those magnitudes marked by a
‘denomination’ (namely an integral component).” After Vieta, “The new ‘num -
ber’ concept which already controlled, although not explicitly, the algebraic ex-
positions and investigations of Stifel,154 Cardano,155 Tartaglia,156 etc., can now
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
292
————————
calculation with the species of number, where it is known in advance of the solution of any
equation that the genus of the units involved in the solution will be homogeneous monads, in
the case of the solution of Vieta’s equations this has to be stressed, because the very indeter-
minacy of their solutions does not render it at all apparent that the ultimate referent of the
species involved in each solution is, as Vieta believes, number in the traditional sense of ἀριθμός.
Third, and finally, the notion of “the different genera of number” introduced by O’Neill into
this whole discussion is problematic. The genera in Vieta’s logistice speciosa concern the gen-
era of unknown and known magnitudes (see this section, above), not different genera of num-
ber. In other words, the genus of number, understood as a field of homogeneous units, is
something that remains constant so long as the traditional sense of number as ἀριθμός is in ef-
fect. What does change, and this is what is reflected in Vieta’s ordering of the genera of un-
known and known magnitudes, is the determinate amount of such units. And this state of
affairs is precisely what is reflected when Klein reports that “Vieta himself says . . . ‘In the case
of numbers the homogeneous elements of equations are units’” (181 n. 126/276 n. 255).
154. Michael Stifel, Arithmetica Integra (Nuremberg: Johannes Petreius, 1544).
155. Gerolamo Cardano, Artis Magnae, Sive de Regulis Algebraicis Liber Unusi (Nurem-
berg: Johannes Petreius, 1545); see The Great Art, or The Rules of Algebra, trans. T. Richard
Witmer (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1968).
156. Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia, Quesiti et invenzioni diverse (Venice: Venturino
Ruffinelli, 1546).

also be used to justify speaking of ‘fractions’ as ‘non-integral rational numbers,’
or ‘irrational’ numbers, etc.” (186/178). Indeed, Klein reports that Vieta him-
self “calls improper fractions ‘monades non purae’” (186 n. 137/278 n. 266)
or “‘numeri fracti,’” while he calls ‘irrational’ numbers, “depending on ancient
terminology—‘numeri asymmetri,’ in contrast to the ‘numeri symmetri.’”
However, “like Diophantus, Vieta knows no negative numbers, if for no other
reason than the fact that they cannot be represented in the geometric ‘exegetic,’
[because] the parallelism of geometric and arithmetical analysis must always
be preserved.” 
For Klein, then, even though the new concept of species introduced
by Vieta “actually realizes the fundamental transformation of the concep-
tual foundations” (152/149) of the Greek ἀριθμός, the “new ‘number’ con-
cept as such which is the basis of the ‘symbolic’ procedure” (152/149) that is
invented by Vieta with this new species concept is not made “completely ex-
plicit” by him, but by Simon Stevin.157 Nevertheless, because Vieta’s species
are “comprehensible only within the language of symbolic formalism” (183/
175), that is, in what “is fully enunciated first in Vieta as alone capable of
representing the ‘finding of finding,’ namely ‘zetetic,’” Klein credits him with
making possible “the most important tool of mathematical natural science,
the formula, . . . which, above all, opens up a new way of ‘understanding’ that
was inaccessible to ancient ἐπιστήμη.” 
Klein on Vieta’s Reinterpretation of the Diophantine Procedure
293
————————
157. See § 96 above, where Klein’s first suggestion of this is mentioned.

Chapter Twenty-three
Klein’s Account of the Concept of Number
and the Number Concepts in Stevin,
Descartes, and Wallis
§ 107. Stevin’s Idea of a “ Wise Age” and His Project 
for Its Renewal
In contrast to Vieta, whose conservatism regarding the tradition, as we have
seen, bound him to the traditional ἀριθμός-concept (i.e., a determinate
amount of monads), even as his logistice speciosa invented the modern con-
cept of number (i.e., the concept of ‘amount in general’), Klein writes that
Simon Stevin (1548–1620) “decidedly prefers novel approaches and un-
usual theses” (195/186). Stevin thus “lightly pushes aside the science of the
schools and has little respect even for the authority of the Greeks”
(198/190). Indeed, regarding the latter, “he always draws invidious com-
parisons between Arabic and Greek science” (199/190) on the basis of “the
Arabic ciphers and positional system,” which “appears to him to be immea-
surably superior to the Greek notation.” Notwithstanding his harsh judg-
ment of the Greeks, however, Stevin nevertheless “is possessed by the idea of
a ‘renewal’” (196/186) of a “‘wise age,’ the ‘siècle sage,’ which once existed
and which must be brought back” (196/186–87). Klein quotes at length
Stevin’s account of this age:
We call the wise age that in which men had a wonderful knowledge of sci-
ence which we recognize without fail by certain signs, although without
knowing who they were, or in what place, or when. [. . .] It has become a
matter of common usage to call the barbarous age that time which extends
from about 900 or a thousand years up to about 150 years past, since men
were for 700 or 800 years in the condition of imbeciles without the practice
of letters and sciences—which condition had its origin in the burning of the
books through troubles, wars, and destructions; afterwards affairs could,
with a great deal of labor, be restored, or almost restored, to their former
state; but although the aforementioned preceding times could call themselves

a wise age in respect to the barbarous age just mentioned, nevertheless we
have not consented to the definition of such a wise age, since both taken to-
gether are nothing but the true barbarous age in comparison to that unknown
time at which we state that it {i.e., the wise age} was, without any doubt, in
existence.158 (196/187–88)
For Stevin, then, the “‘barbarous age’ . . . extends ‘from the beginning
of the Greeks to the present’ (p. 108, col. 2)” (196/188). Klein reports that
for Stevin the “‘signs’ that in earlier times a ‘golden age’ (aurea aetas) of sci-
ence actually existed” include the following: 1) “The traces of a perfected as-
tronomical knowledge in Hipparchus and Ptolemy” and “‘certain writings
in the Arabic tongue’ (p. 107, col. 1).” 2) “Algebra . . . , which represents one
of the strangest ‘vestiges’ of the ‘wise age’ (p. 108, col. 1)” (197/188), and of
which no trace can be found “in the writings of the Chaldaeans, the Hebrews,
the Romans, and even the Greeks, for, as Stevin expressly adds, ‘Diophantus
is modern’ (ibid.).” 3) “The books of Euclid” (197/189), which “pass on to us
‘something admirable and very necessary to see and to read, namely the order
in the method of writing on mathematics in that . . . time of the wise age’ (p.
109, col. 2).” 4) “Information concerning the height of clouds, which appears
in an Arabic work and which Stevin does not hesitate to trace back to the sci-
ence of the ‘wise age.’” And, finally, 5) “‘Alchemy,’ which was unknown to the
Greeks and whose most expert representative Stevin sees in Hermes Tris-
megistos!” 
Klein holds that Stevin’s “general plan for the gradual recovery of the
knowledge of the ‘wise age’” (197–98/189) “represents the first project for
‘organized research’ (II, p. 110 ff.)” (198/189) and that it is based “[o]n the
presupposition that the human ability to know has not changed since that
time” (197/189). Klein reports the following four points to Stevin’s plan. 1)
“Many observations (especially in astronomy, ‘alchemy,’ and medicine) must
be made, and this must be done by many people living at many different
points of the earth and belonging to nations as different as possible” (198/
189). 2) These observations and their “(primarily mathematical) exploita-
tion” are to be communicated in “each man’s own mother tongue,” and thus
“not learned Latin, which is accessible to few.” 3) The languages used to ac-
complish this communication, however, must be up to the task, since “not
all languages are fit for this purpose.” Languages in which “words are very
easily compounded” are singled out by Stevin as being especially suited to it,
“which is why even now so many mathematical terms of Greek origin are in
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
295
————————
158. Simon Stevin, Geographie, in Les Oeuvres Mathématiques de Simon Stevin de
Bruges, ed. Albert Girad (Leiden: Elsevir, 1634), 106, col. 2. 

use” (198/189–90), though, on his view, “Greek is far surpassed by Flemish”
(198/190) in this respect. And, finally, 4) “In every scientific presentation
and in all teaching activity the right order must be preserved,” which means
for Stevin “the procedure of the mathematical disciplines is exemplary: ‘I have
not noted any better 〈order〉for the matter of mathematics than that of the
wise age’ (p. 110, col. 2).”
§ 108. Stevin’s Critique of the Traditional ᾿Αριθμός- Concept
Klein finds that Stevin’s contribution to the project of this “renewal” was
guided by his seeing “in the notion of a wise age, once a fact and now to be
reestablished, the basis for the necessity of a thorough investigation of tradi-
tional views both for the sake of the primeval truths which might be con-
tained in them and also to test the conventional concepts for their reliability
and usefulness.” Beyond Stevin’s “invidious comparisons between Arabic and
Greek science,” which tout the superiority of the former’s “ciphers and posi-
tional system” and “which he is inclined to view as the heritage of the ‘wise
age’” (199/190), he also “undertakes a fundamental critique of the traditional
‘ἀριθμός concept,’” that is, of ‘number’ conceived as a definite amount of def-
i nite objects. The basis of this critique is precisely “this Arabic cipher system,”
and its point of departure is “the concept, decisive indeed, of the ‘one,’ the
‘monad,’ the ‘unitas.’”
Klein avers that “the symbolic character of the new ‘number’ concept
fully appears” (199/191) in a syllogism used by Stevin to critique the tradi-
tional exclusion of the unit as a number. After stating that “‘Arithmetic is the
science of numbers’ (Arithmetique est las science des nombres)”159 and that
“‘Number is that by which the quantity of each thing is revealed’ (Nombre est
cela par lequel s’explique la quantité de chacune chose),” Stevin states “‘that
the unit is a number’ (que l’unité est nombre).” Klein reports that “He declares
. . . that he has read all the ‘old and new philosophers’ who have pronounced
on this question and has spoken with many scholars, not because he had any
doubts with respect to this assertion—‘no, definitely not, since I was as as-
sured of this as if nature herself had told me with her own mouth’—but in
order to be armed against all objections (p. 2r).” For Stevin, the general claim
“that the unit is not ‘nombre,’ but only ‘its principle or beginning,’” is some-
thing that, according to Klein, he considers to be “completely false.” Klein re-
produces his argument for this as follows:
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
296
————————
159. Simon Stevin, Arithmetique, in Oeuvres Mathématiques, p. 1v. 

the part is “of the same material” . . . as the whole; the unit is a part of a mul-
titude of units; consequently the unit is “of the same material” . . . as a mul-
titude of units; “but the ‘material’ of a multitude of units is ‘number’ . . . ;
therefore the ‘material’ of the unit, and thus the unit itself, is “number.” He
who denies this last step can be compared to someone who denies “that a
piece of bread is bread.” (199–200/191)
Klein maintains that “The decisive premise” (200/191) of this syllogism “is
the one in which the ‘material of a multitude of units’ is equated with ‘num-
ber.’” This can be seen insofar as “Stevin here simply accepts the classical def-
inition of numerus as ‘a multitude consisting of units’ . . . , but he understands
this conceptual determination as the ‘material’ of the thing to be defined, in
the same sense in which one speaks of the material (materia) of water or of
bread” (200/191–92). Thus, for Klein, it is “[o]nly on the basis of such an in-
terpretation” (200/192) that “the first premise of the syllogism, according to
which the ‘part’ is of the same material as the ‘whole,’” is “relevant.” 
Klein does not think, however, that this means that “Stevin commits
a paralogism.” For “The fundamental presupposition which underlies his un-
derstanding—without, to be sure, him being able to see through it as such—
is precisely the identification of the mode of being of the object with the
mode of being of the concept related to the object.” This means nothing less,
according to Klein, than that “the one immense difficulty within ancient
ontology, namely, to determine the relation between the ‘being’ of the ob-
ject itself and the ‘being’ of the object in thought, is here (and elsewhere) ac-
corded a ‘matter-of-course’ solution160 whose presuppositions and the extent
of whose significance are simply bypassed in the discussion.” Klein stresses
that “The consequence of this solution is the symbolic understanding of the
object itself, an understanding in which its actual objectivity is posited as
identical with the mode of being of a ‘generalobject.’” Moreover, he maintains
that this symbolic understanding amounts to an understanding “through
which the object of an ‘intentio secunda’ (second intention), namely a concept
as such, is transformed into the object of an ‘intentio prima’ (first intention).” 
§ 109. Stevin’s Symbolic Understanding of Numerus
Klein shows that “Stevin himself confirms” that “Such a symbolic under-
standing of numerus or quantitas is precisely what is presupposed in the syl-
logism.” Stevin does so when he relates that the “‘absence of the necessary
apparatus, namely of ciphers’ (Geographie, II, p. 108)” (200/192–93) is
“[t]he true reason for the [Greek] assertion that the unit is not ‘number’ but
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
297
————————
160. See § 104 above.

the principium, the ἀρχήof ‘number’” (200/192). This absence “explains
immediately why they were not arithmeticians” (200/193), as they misin-
terpreted as “‘units’” (201/193) “a sign called a ‘point’ (‘.’) that they had in-
herited from the ‘wise age’ and which was identical with the present-day
sign ‘0’” (200–1/193). They thus represented the units “with the aid of such
points” (201/193), as “‘these points were used 〈by the Greeks〉among their
ciphers’ (p. 108)” (201 n. 166/288 n. 296). So the Greeks, on Stevin’s view,
were “misled by their false interpretation of the arithmetic sign ‘.’ (the ‘poinct
Arabique’)” (201/193) to “conceive of ‘one’ as the principium of ‘number’
and not itself ‘number,’” whereas “In truth, not the unit but the nought is the
principium of number—it, and not the unit, is the true analogue to the geo-
metric point.” This false interpretation, moreover, gave “the whole ‘bar-
barous age’ its characteristic ‘unarithmetical’ stamp.” 
Klein holds that it is because Stevin “transfers the role of ἀρχή, which
had heretofore been assigned to the unit, to the nought: ‘zero is the true and
natural beginning’ ( . . . Arithmetic, p. 4r)” (202/193), that it is “so essential”
“[t]hat the unit itself must be ‘number.’” Indeed, it is precisely “his regard for
the sign notation” that “determines him to do this,” as “he completely iden-
tifies the nought with the sign ‘0,’ whose full significance can be conceived
only within the cipher-system as a whole.” And, what is more, this state of af-
fairs “holds not only for the nought, but for all ‘quantities’ represented by ‘ci-
phers.’” In fact, Klein notes that “This is also the reason for the well-known
shift in meaning of the word ‘cifra’ or ‘chiffre,’ which was borrowed from the
Arabic” (202 n. 168/289 n. 298) and which meant “at first only nought” and
then “it gradually comes to be the common designation for all ten ‘ciphers.’”
Thus, “As ‘arithmetician’ Stevin no longer has in view amounts of units which
are determinate in each case but the unlimited possibility of compounding ci-
phers according to definite ‘rules of calculation’” (202/193). Klein empha-
sizes that this means that Stevin “no longer knows ‘definite amounts of units’
but only ‘numbers’ expressed in ciphers” (202/194), which is to say, “he con-
ceives the ‘quantities’ with which he is dealing in a symbolic way.” 
§ 110. Stevin’s Assimilation of Numbers to Geometrical 
Formations
One consequence of Stevin’s symbolic understanding of numbers for Klein
is that it “immediately leads to a far more complete assimilation of ‘num-
bers’ to geometric formations than was ever possible for the ‘definite
amounts of definite objects’ and ‘magnitudes’ of antiquity.” On the one
hand, this is because “the symbolic understanding makes ‘number,’ as we
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
298

have seen, appear as a ‘material’ comparable to the material of bread and water.”
On the other hand, “the continuous extension of a line is compared to an ar-
bitrarily continuable lining up of ciphers which yield continually new ‘num-
bers’” (203/194) in Stevin’s writings. Regarding the comparability of ‘number’
to material in the sense of bread and water, Klein quotes Stevin’s view that
“‘The community and similarity of magnitude and number is so universal that
it almost resembles identity’” (202/194).161 Regarding the comparability of
the continuous extension of a line and the lining up of ciphers, Klein reports
that Stevin maintains that just as “a line ABis continuously lengthened by the
addition of a point C in such a way that a new line ACresults, then, by the
same right, one may say that the number 6, by the ‘addition’ of 0, continuously
increases to the number 60!” (202–3/194). Consequently, “This means that
numbers too are continuous structures and not ‘discrete,’ as the ‘barbarous age’
asserted” (203/194), which is exactly what Stevin “formulates . . . explicitly:
‘that number is not at all discontinuous quantity’ (p. 4v).” 
The similarity of magnitude and number extends to the status of their
“principles,” respectively, the point and the nought. Therefore, “Just as a line
is not lengthened by the addition of a point, so also ‘number,’ e.g., 6, is not in-
creased by the addition of nought, for 6 + 0 = 6” (202/194). Thus, “neither
the nought nor a point are ‘parts’ of a ‘number’ or a line” (203/195). More-
over, “neither can infinitely many points ‘taken together’ form a line, nor can
infinitely many zeros ‘together’ form a ‘number.’” However, just as “the unit
is as much ‘part’ of a ‘number,’ and thus itself ‘number’ . . . , as a smaller line is
part of a larger and is certainly itself ‘line’” (203/195), so too “the ‘parts’ of
the unit are, in turn, also ‘numbers,’ namely ‘fractional numbers,’ which de-
crease infinitely.” Thus, not only “the unit is divisible as a matter of course,”
according to Stevin, but also, as a consequence of this, there “arises the com-
plete correspondence of geometric magnitudes and ‘numbers.’” Given the
truly revolutionary implications of this breakdown of the “ancient view of
the ‘discreteness’ of definite amounts of definite objects” (203/195), Klein
quotes Stevin at length on this matter:
As to a continuous body of water corresponds a continuous wetness, so to a
continuous magnitude corresponds a continuous number. Likewise, as the
continuous wetness of the entire body of water is subject to the same division
and separation as the water, so the continuous number is subject to the same
division and separation as its magnitude, in such a way that these two quanti-
ties cannot be distinguished by continuity or discontinuity. (Arithmetic, p. 5r)
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
299
————————
161. Klein holds that with this move, the “symbolic interpretation of geometric for-
mations is herewith accomplished” (202 n. 169/289 n. 299), although “it becomes clearly vis-
ible only in Descartes.”

Hence, “The ‘units’ of a ‘number’ are not ‘disioinctes’ but ‘conioinctes’ (p.
5v),” not discontinuous but continuous.
Klein points out that it is on the basis of “the new ‘number’ concept”
(204/195) that Stevin is able to address the consequences of the “schism be-
tween the actualunderstanding of ‘number’ and the understanding clinging to
the traditional ‘number’ concept, as a ‘definite amount of definite objects’”
(204/195–96), consequences that Klein maintains include rejecting the “tra-
ditional appellations of ‘absurd’ or ‘surd’ or ‘irrational’ (i.e., un-speakable)
numbers” (204/195). According to Klein, Stevin “attacks” (204/195) these
traditional appellations with the thesis “‘that there are no absurd, irrational, ir-
regular, inexplicable, or surd numbers’ (Arithmetic, p. 33 and p. 202, Thesis
IV)” (204/196), a thesis that Stevin supports with the claim that “‘incom-
mensurability does not cause the incommensurable terms to be surds,’ which
is immediately obvious for incommensurable lines and planes. For example, √8
is a ‘root’ (racine)” and “‘[e]very ‘root’ is a ‘number’ (p. 30; cf. p. 25).” As a
consequence, Stevin “rejects the Diophantine (or Anatolian) terms ‘side,’
‘square,’ ‘cube’ (latus, quadratum, cubus), etc.” He does so, however, while still
retaining “the distinction between ‘arithmetical’ and ‘geometrical’ numbers.”
Hence, he understands “‘[a]n arithmetical number . . . as one expressed with-
out adjective of size’ (p. 6r),” to which he contrasts “‘roots,’ ‘quadratic’ numbers,
‘cubic’ numbers, etc.,” which he calls “‘nombres Geometriques’ (p. 6v; 9 ff.).”
Moreover, Stevin holds that “‘any arithmetic numbers whatsoevercan be squared
or cubed numbers, etc. (p. 30),’” while “the ‘geometric numbers’” (205/196),
“insofar as their ‘absolute,’ i.e., numerical value is not known,” “enter algebraic
computations as indeterminate ‘quantities.’” Consequently, Stevin maintains
that “‘The beginning of quantity is every arithmetic number or any radical
whatever’ (Def. XIV),” which means that “just as 0 is the ‘beginning’ of ‘arith-
metic numbers, so any arbitrary ‘arithmetic’ number is the ‘beginning’ of these
algebraic ‘quantities.’” Finally, Klein holds that “Stevin is also the first mathe-
matician who understands the subtraction of a ‘number’ as the addition of a
‘negative number’” (205/197). For Klein, Stevin’s theses here and the conclu-
sions he draws from them demonstrate that “Stevin is merely assimilating the
concept of ‘number’ to operations on ‘numbers’ already long established.” And
a significant consequence of this is that “He thus once and for all fixes the or-
dinary understanding of the nature of number, for which being able ‘to count’
is tantamount to knowing how to handle ‘ciphers.’” 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
300

§ 111. Descartes’s Postulation of a New Mode of “Abstraction”
and a New Possibility of “Understanding ” 
as Underlying Symbolic Calculation
According to Klein, “It is an open question how much particularly Descartes
owes” to Stevin. Nevertheless, Klein judges that Descartes’s “apprehension of
‘numbers’ is far more tradition-bound than Stevin’s, although, on the other
hand, he sees through their conceptual structure with more clarity” (205–
6/197).162 Klein focuses his account of “the ‘number’ concept of Descartes”
(207/197) on his “early Regulae ad directionem ingenii(Rules for the Direction
of the Mind, ca.1628), because it is apparently here that the original intentions
of Descartes and the specific characteristics of his conceptual mode receive
their clearest expression.” Klein’s account singles out Descartes’s two main,
interrelated achievements as follows: First, “he identifies ‘algebra’ understood
as symbolic logistic with geometry interpreted by him for the first time as a
symbolic science” (217/206). (Thus, for Klein, “Descartes does not, as is often
thoughtlessly said, identify ‘arithmetic’ and ‘geometry.’”) Second, “Descartes’
great idea now consists of identifying, by means of ‘methodological’ consid-
erations, the ‘general’ object of this mathesis universalis—which can be rep-
resented and conceived only symbolically—with the substance of the world,
with corporeality as ‘extensio’” (207/197). On Klein’s view, Des cartes ac-
complishes the latter by connecting “two different trains of thought: (1) the
conception of algebra as a ‘general’ theory of proportions, whose object, only
symbolically comprehensible, acquires its specific characteristics from the nu-
merical realm . . . , and (2) the identification of this ‘symbolic’ mathematical
object with the object of ‘true physics’” (208/198). 
Klein shows that “The connection of these two trains of thought is
made possible by the ‘methodical’ concept of ‘certain and evident cognition’
(cognitio certa et evidens).” In his judgment, Descartes’s “original identifica-
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
301
————————
162. Caton takes issue with this judgment, arguing that “to see through their concep-
tual structure as symbols, according to Klein’s thesis, is identical with abandoning their con-
ceptual structure as symbols” (Caton, 224). As we will see below, however, the “conceptual
structure” that Klein maintains Descartes “sees through” concerns the relationship of the
“pure” concept of numerus, as “‘multitude in general’” (211/202), to the disregarding of “the
monads counted, the units” (210 n. 184/295 n. 314) that is essential to “the special level of ‘ab-
straction’” belonging to the “new ‘number’ concept.” Stevin’s comprehension of numbers re-
jects explicitly, as “unarithmetical,” the traditional view of number as a “multitude consisting
of units”; and, as we shall see, Descartes’s “tradition-bound” apprehension does not simply re-
ject outright this view of number in the account of the meaning of the “abstract” status of the
“new” number concept he provides, which is why Klein can claim that “Descartes and, as far
as we can see, only Descartes, struggles to fix the exact meaning of such an ‘abstraction’” (210
n. 184/295–96 n. 314).

tion of the ‘general mathematical object with extension having figure” (208
n. 180/294 n. 310)” results in “Descartes’ ‘method,’ generally, developing from
the need for a justification of the placewhich he assigns to algebra.” Moreover,
for Klein this means that “The point of view of ‘methodical’ cognition is thus
secondary vis-à-vis” this original identification. However, because “everything
depends on the justification of this identification, the ‘method’ gradually gains
a more and more central significance, in the course of which its rules are bor-
rowed from the ‘mathesis universalis’ itself.” Consequently, on Klein’s view, “the
road of ‘inventio,’ which the ‘mathesis universalis’ understood as ‘general alge-
bra’ follows, is discovered as a way of cognition generally most appropriate to
the human understanding. . . . In this sense the . . . ‘rules for the direction of the
mind’ . . . are indeed identical both with the ‘rules’ of the ‘mathesis universalis’
and with those of the ‘method’ as such.” 
With regard to the Regulae themselves, Klein maintains that “In these
formulations Descartes . . . postulates—with an explicitness perhaps novel in
the history of science—a new mode of ‘abstraction’ and a new possibility of
‘understanding’” (210/200). In particular, Klein finds that Descartes’s iden-
tification of the “general” object of the “‘new’ discipline” (207/197) of sym-
bolic calculation, in the guise of contemporary algebra, with ‘extension’
understood as the substance of the world’s corporeality, is an identification
that “first gains symbolic mathematics that fundamental place in the system of
knowledge, which it has never since lost” (207/198). Descartes’s account of
the “abstraction” that makes possible the symbolic representations that are
essential for symbolic calculation, an “abstraction” that Klein calls “a ‘symbolic
abstraction’” (212/202),163 represents, according to Klein, Descartes’s attempt
to render perspicuous the precise cognitive status of these representations.
Indeed, as we shall see below, Klein’s presentation of Descartes’s Regulae es-
tablishes a foundational link between the new mode of abstraction and the
new possibility for understanding in Descartes’s thought.
§ 112. The Fundamental Cognitive Role Attributed by
Descartes to the Imaginatio
Klein traces the “fundamental role” (208/198) that Descartes attributes to
“the imaginatio (= phantasia)” back to the “unmistakably Stoic origin” of the
“Cartesian concept of knowledge,” an origin evident in Descartes’s “method-
ical” concept of “certain and evident cognition.” To this concept there “corre-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
302
————————
163. The English translation renders symbolische Abstraktion as ‘symbol-generating
abstraction’. See n. 165 below for a discussion of the reason we translate it as ‘symbolic ab-
straction’.

sponds ‘apprehension’ (κατάληψις), that is to say, the ‘assent’ (συγκατάθεσις)
given to an ‘apprehensional image’ (φαντασία καταληπτική).” This accounts, in
part, for why “the imaginatio is, in the Regulae, always in the foreground.” The
prominence of the imaginatioin the Regulaeand its role in cognition, however,
does not signal for Klein that it has a foundational role in the genesis of the
concepts in Descartes’s “new” concept of knowledge. These concepts are “‘ab-
stract beings’ (entia abstracta)” (210/200), and as such for Descartes they “are
the products of the ‘naked’ or ‘pure intellect’ (intellectus purus), which is only
called ‘pure’ insofar as the ‘cognitive power’ (vis cogno scens) that it exhibits is
free from all admixture with ‘images’ or ‘representations,’ is entirely ‘divorced
from the aid of any bodily image’ (absque ullius imaginis corporeae adju-
mento),” and performs its functions entirely “‘by itself’ (sola agit – Rule XII,
416, 4 and 419, 10).” The role played by the imagination concerns its “power”
(211/201), a power distinct from the “pure intellect” that “must employ” it “in
order to be at all able to get hold of what has been separated as such [from
‘images’ or ‘representations’].” Specifically, “the imaginative power . . . here en-
ters the service of a faculty directed precisely toward something ‘unvisualizable,’
namely the ‘pure intellect’” and the “abstract beings” that are its contents,
which thereby enables the “pure intellect,” “within the ‘realm’ of this ‘alien’
imaginative power,” nevertheless to use it in order “to be able to represent ‘vi-
sually’” that which the “pure intellect,” in accord with the “performance of its
functions,” has “abstracted” from “every immediate reference to the world.” Thus,
on Klein’s view, “the imaginative power makespossible a symbolicrepresentation
of the indeterminate content which has been ‘separated’ by the ‘naked’ intellect”
(211/202). Klein unpacks all of this in great detail, beginning with Descartes’s
discussion of the precise nature of the “abstract beings” separated by the “pure
intellect,” next taking up Descartes’s account of the relation between the “pure
intellect” and the “‘ideas’ which the imagination offers it” (211/201), and con-
cluding with Descartes’s “reconciliation” (214/203) of “the traditional deter-
minateness of the numerus, which Descartes, in contrast to Stevin, perfectly
appreciates,164 with the indeterminacy of the new ‘algebraic’ quantities.”
Klein reports that “In Rule XIV (444 ff.), while treating of the role of
the imagination, Descartes includes a discussion of the equivocality of certain
concepts” (208/198), the point of which concerns the need, in order to pre-
serve their truth by avoiding contradictions, to separate them completely from
the imagination. Thus, “[i]n reference to the assertion that ‘extension is not
body’ (extensio non est corpus),” Descartes “claims that in this case ‘no special
idea corresponds to this word “extension” in the imagination’ . . . , that rather
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
303
————————
164. See n. 162 above.

‘this whole assertion is effected by the pure intellect which alone has the abil-
ity of separating abstract beings of that sort’” (208–9/198). Other assertions of
this type include “‘number is not the thing enumerated’ (numerus non est res
numerata) and ‘a unit is not a quantity’ (unitas non est quantitas)!” (209/199).
Because “‘All of these and similar propositions must be altogether divorced
from the imagination in order to be true,’” “[i]f one were to try to ‘represent’
them to oneself by means of the imagination, one would necessarily arrive at
contradictions—for in the imagination the ‘idea’ of extension cannot be sep-
arated from the ‘idea’ of body, nor the ‘idea’ of number from the ‘idea’ of the
thing enumerated, nor the ‘idea’ of unity from the ‘idea’ of quantity.” 
Klein reports, however, that with respect to other propositions Des -
cartes maintains “it is allowed and even necessary to call to aid the power of the
imagination.” The propositions Descartes has in mind are those in which 
the designated words, to be sure, are used with the same significance and in
the same way as in those propositions that have been “abstracted” by the
“naked intellect” from the “ideas” that are accessible to the power of the
imagination, namely they refer to these “abstracted” formations, but, at the
same time, they do not explicitly refer to the content of these separated
“ideas,” as their meaning refers rather to the matters themselves that follow
from them, i.e., the matters as they appear in the “imagination.” 
Klein quotes Descartes to this effect: 
We must carefully note that in all other propositions in which these terms—
although they retain the same meaning and are asserted in the same way as
when abstracted from their subjects—do not [explicitly] exclude or deny
anything from which they are not really distinct, we both can and ought to
call our imagination to aid.
Thus, for example, when a proposition is about numerus, “we shall have to
‘represent’ to ourselves an object which can be measured by a ‘multitude of
units’ (per multas unitates),” and we shall have to do so “even if the (‘naked’)
intellect should mean precisely ‘mere multitude’ (solam multitudinem),
namely multitudinousness as such.” That is because “we are not permitted to
make the error of believing that the concept (conceptus) of numerus (to
which corresponds the ‘idea’ of numerus in the ‘imagination’) excludes the
res numerata, the ‘ennumerated thing’ itself.” This error, which treats the
“pure concepts” of the “naked intellect” as having no contact with the world,
“is exactly what is not, and indeed cannot be, the case, in Descartes’ opinion”
(210/200). In the case of numbers, “if one does this, one eventually begins to
ascribe deep secrets to ‘numbers’ and to hunt after phantoms.” Of course,
given Descartes’s views about the “pure intellect,” whose “constant presup-
position is that the ‘pure’ intellect in itself has no relation at all to the being of
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
304

the world and to the things in the world” (212/202), it is not at all easy to grasp
how the concepts proper to such an intellect nevertheless possess such a re-
lation. The issue here, obviously, is “the insoluble problem of Cartesian doc-
trine” (212/203), namely, how “the relation between ‘body’ and ‘soul’ . . . is
to be understood.” However, on Klein’s view, “For Descartes himself this dif-
ficulty is not a crucial one only because he meets it originally in the realm of
mathematics, namely at that moment when it becomes important to recon-
cile the traditional determinateness of the numerus, which Descartes, in con-
trast to Stevin, perfectly appreciates, with the indeterminacy of the new
‘algebraic’ quantities” (213–14/203). Indeed, not only does Descartes meet
it here, but he believes that on the basis of “the mediation of a special faculty,
namely precisely that of the imagination” (212/202), both the mathematical
problem of reconciling determinacy and indeterminacy and the ontological
problem of reconciling body and soul can be achieved. 
§ 113. Descartes on the Pure Intellect’s Use of the Power of 
the Imagination to Reconcile the Mathematical 
Problem of Determinacy and Indeterminacy
Regarding the “pure” intellect’s use of the imagination to reconcile the math-
ematical problem of determinacy and indeterminacy, Klein presents Des -
cartes’s thinking as follows: 
When, for instance, the “naked” or “pure” intellect separates from a multi-
tude of units “represented” in the imagination (a “definite amount” of units,
that is), their “multitudinousness” as such, i.e., the “mere multitude” (sola
multitudo), the ‘naked’ indeterminate multitude to which simply nothing
“true,” nothing truly in “existence,” and hence no “true idea” of an existent
corresponds, it must employ the power of the imagination in order to be at
all able to get hold of the thing separated.
It must do so because 
under those circumstances the intellectus or ‘mind’ (mens) is dealing only
with itself, and only in this case can one speak of an ‘intellectio’ and ‘intel-
legere,’ “in that the mind, when it thinks, in a way turns itself toward itself ” . . .
and thereupon “beholds some one of the ideas which are within itself” ( . . .
Rule XII, 419, 8 ff.). (210/200–1)
The mind’s act of beholding its concepts, the actio intellectus (211 n. 185/296
n. 315), “is called by Descartes an intuitus, literally, an insight: ‘the unwaver-
ing grasp of a clear and attentive mind’ (mentis purae et attentae non dubius
conceptus) “consists in ‘grasping – Rule III, 368, 18).” The concepts so grasped,
namely, “‘simple things’ (res simplices)” (211/201), are either “‘purely intel-
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
305

lectual’ (pure intellectuales),” which belong to the “‘spiritual’” realm, or “‘com-
munes,’” “which belong to the ‘spiritual’ as well as to the ‘bodily’ realm.” The
former include “‘cognitio,’ ‘dubium,’ ‘ignorantia,’ ‘volitio,’ etc. (cf. Rule III,
368, 21 ff.)” and the latter “‘existentia,’ ‘unitias,’ ‘duratio,’ etc.” Among the lat-
ter, Descartes also includes “the traditional ‘communes notiones’—κοινὰ
ἀξιώματα or ἔννοιαι—such as, for instance, the assertion that ‘two magnitudes
which are equal to a third are equal to each other,’” and “he expressly points
out that the intuitus can, and even must, extend also to ‘discursive’ states of
affairs, thus also to ‘relations’ and ‘proportions’” (211 n. 185/296 n. 315).
Based on these considerations, Klein maintains that for Descartes the
pure intellect, “which refers only to itself” and is thus “bare of any immediate
reference to the world” (211/201), is appropriately characterized as “a faculty
directed precisely toward something ‘unvisualizable.’” However, Klein also
holds that because for Descartes it “is also able to turn (or ‘apply’) itself to
the ‘ideas’ which the imagination offers it, and can even ‘separate’ single con-
stituents of these ideas [i.e., the res simplices],” “the intellect has, strictly speak-
ing, already ceased to be ‘pure,’” even though “it retains the ability proper to
it—and foreign to the power of the imagination—of carrying out this kind of
‘separating’ operation.” It is for this very reason, then, that “within the realm
of the ‘alien’ imaginative power, it must make use of this very imaginative
power” “in order to be able to get hold of what has been separated as such”
from “images” or “representations,” that is, in order to get hold of the res sim-
plices as “abstract beings.” Thus, for instance, “the imaginative power, which
ordinarily allows us to be able to represent ‘visually’ ‘five units’ (perhaps as
‘points’), here enters the service” of the “pure intellect,” which “comprehends
‘fiveness’ as something separated from ‘five’ counted points or other arbitrary
things—as mere ‘multitude as such,’ as ‘naked’ multitude” (211/201–2). In
so doing, “the imaginative power makes possible a symbolic representation of
the indeterminate content which has been ‘separated’ by the ‘naked’ intellect—
this is what Descartes must emphasize” (211/202), according to Klein. 
§ 114. Klein’s Reactivation of the “Abstraction” in 
Descartes as “Symbolic Abstraction”
Klein maintains that “the ‘abstraction’ being spoken about here must ac-
cordingly be called ‘symbolic abstraction’” (211–12/202).165 Before reacti-
vating precisely how the “pure intellect,” subsequent to its abstraction of
concepts from the determinate images presented to it by the imagination, is
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
306
————————
165. As we noted above (n. 163), in the English translation of Klein’s GMTOA sym-

nevertheless able to use the imagination’s “power” to render visible to it (the
“pure intellect”) “representations” of its otherwise invisible “pure concepts,”
Klein highlights both the novelty of this “symbolic abstraction” and its dis-
tinction from the “ancient mode of separation or ‘abstraction’ (ἀφαίρεσις)”
(212/202). Moreover, he also signals its foundational significance in estab-
lishing what will become the opposition between “‘intuition’ and ‘concep-
tion’” in post-Cartesian thought. Regarding the ancient mode of abstraction,
from “here on” it “appears . . . as a ‘direct’ or ‘imaginative’ abstraction: The
insights of the ancient mathematicians ‘pertain more to the eyes and the
imagination than to the intellect’ (magis ad oculos et imaginationenem per-
tinent, quam ad intellectum – Rule IV, 375, 18 f.).” Indeed, on Klein’s view,
it is precisely the presupposition of the Cartesian “symbolic abstraction” that
explains “why the ancient ‘number’ concept can at present166 be character-
ized as having its ‘intuitability.’” Regarding the opposition between ‘intu-
ition’ and ‘conception’, Klein claims that Descartes’s symbolic abstraction
“alone gives rise to its possibility,” as well as to the possibility, of “being able
to posit ‘intuition’ as a separate source of cognition alongside of that be-
longing to the understanding.”167
Klein’s account of why Descartes thinks that the mediating “power of
the imagination” makes possible the “pure” intellect’s grasping of symbolic
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
307
————————
bolische Abstraktion is rendered as ‘symbol-generating abstraction’, in recognition of his char-
acterization of the role that Descartes’s account of abstraction plays in the generation of the
symbols for the mathesis universalis, and the translator’s belief that, properly speaking, this ab-
straction itself is not “symbolic.” From the preceding, we have seen that one of the condi-
tions responsible for the cognition of marks (algebraic letter signs, Descartes’s figures) as
symbols is the imagination’s power to make visible “representations” of the indeterminate
“ideas” that the “pure” intellect’s power of abstraction has separated from the imagination’s
own determinate “ideas.” Moreover, we have seen that another condition is that the “pure” in-
tellect, notwithstanding this use of the “foreign” power of the imagination, must maintain its
capacity to keep its indeterminate “ideas” separate from the determinate “ideas” offered to it
by the imagination if the determinacy of the marks made visible by this same imagination’s
power are to be apprehended as “symbols.” Because it is precisely the involvement of the
“pure” intellect’s abstractive power in maintaining the separation that is responsible for its ap-
prehension of the algebraic letters and geometrical figures that belong to the mathesis univer-
salis as “symbols” rather than as determinate images (and therefore determinate “ideas”), on
my view it remains appropriate to characterize the abstraction involved as “symbolic.”
166. Klein refers at this point in his text to his earlier discussion of the studies of Julius
Stenzel and Oskar Becker, both of which attempt to draw the distinction between the ancient
and modern number concepts on the basis of the former’s “intuitability” (65/62). Klein’s point,
both in his earlier discussion and now, is that this basis for the misunderstanding of this dis-
tinction “is guided after all by our number concept,” the presupposition of which obscures ac-
cess to the non-conceptual, “one-over-a-determinate-many” structure of ἀριθμός.
167. The ‘intuition’ at issue here, of course, is not Descartes’s intuitus, which, as we
have seen, is “conceptual” or “intellectual” in a sense that rules out precisely the intuition as An-
schauung that is involved in the opposition here between ‘intuition’ and ‘conception’.

representations of its pure concepts in a new mode of abstraction, indeed,
one that reconciles the “traditional determinateness of the numerus . . . with
the indeterminacy of the new ‘algebraic’ quantities,” begins with a discus-
sion of the “figures” in the “figural representation” (214/203) characteristic
of Descartes’s geometry. Klein stresses that “Everything depends on under-
standing that the ‘figures’ with which the ‘mathesis universalis’ deals, namely
‘rectilinear and rectangular planes’ as well as ‘straight lines’ . . . have, as far as
their mode of being is concerned, no longer anything to do with the ‘figures’
of what had up till then been the ordinary ‘geometry.’” He quotes Descartes
at length to support this (214/203–4):
We easily conclude: here propositions must be just as much abstracted from
those very figures with which geometers deal, if the inquiry involves these, as
from any other subject matter; and for this purpose none need be retained
besides rectilinear and rectangular plane surfaces, or straight lines, which
we also call figures because by means of them we can imagine a subject which
is in truth extended {namely in three dimensions} just as well as by means of
a plane surface. ( . . . Rule XIV, 452, 14 ff.).
In addition to emphasizing that the “figures” in Descartes’s mathesis
universalis do not represent the figures of ordinary geometry, Klein also
points out that for Descartes the proportions and therefore equations with
which it deals can, if a certain condition is met, “be understood as ‘numbers’”
(215/204). That is, proportions and equations can be understood as “multi-
tude” in the sense belonging to “one of those numbers with which ‘algebra’
deals in setting up proportions among ‘A,’ ‘B,’ and ‘C.’” The condition is that
the “‘common measure’ (communis mensura),” specifically the “particular
‘unit’ (unitas),” must be “known for each case” in the instance of the com-
parison of “‘continuous and undivided magnitudes’ (magnitudines continuae
et indivisae), ‘lines’ and ‘planes’” (214/204), which then permits “us to set up
proportions (and thus equations).” Thus, “if that condition is met, these con-
tinuous magnitudes can immediately be understood as ‘numbers’” (215/204),
“numbers” that, moreover, “need no longer be referred to the ‘common mea -
sure’ because measuring (mensura) as such is here no longer the concern, but
only ‘arrangement’ (ordo).” Klein quotes Descartes to this effect: 
[We must understand], too, that we are able afterwards to arrange the mul-
titude of units in such an order that the difficulty which before was one of
solving a problem of measurement now depends only on observing an order,
and that the aid which our art gives us in this process is very great. ( . . . Rule
XIV, 452, 2–6).
Descartes’s “figures,” therefore, “appear as ‘numbers’ only through the
‘mediating unit’ (mediante unitate)” (215 n. 189/299 n. 319), a “unit,” as we
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
308

have seen, that is “itself understood as ‘unit of measurement’ (mensura).” Thus,
according to Klein, even though “[t]he ‘measure’ is here, to be sure, applied
only to symbolic formations,” “this does not change the fact that Descartes
basically retains the traditional—Peripatetic—understanding of the ἕν.” This
understanding, as we have seen,168 takes the ἕν—in contrast to the Platonic
view of it as a “common thing” (κοινόν)—to be a common “measure” (μέτρον).
By understanding the “unit” in this manner, Descartes, in Klein’s judgment,
“failsto pursue his own, different, original notion, according to which the unit
is a ‘res simplex communis’ and therefore a res simplex intellectualis.”169
On Klein’s view a major consequence of Descartes’s understanding of
proportion in terms of ordo and not mensura is that “a plane or linear ‘figure’
represents no less and no differently a ‘multitude or number’ (multitudinem
sive numerum) than a ‘continuous magnitude’” (215/204). This means that
“Each ‘figure’ is therefore not a representation of a determinate amount of
units of measurement (as are the straight lines of Euclid’s arithmetical books)”
(215/205). Rather, “it is the primary task and the truly proper function of such
‘figures’ ‘to image’ the ‘true idea’ (vera idea) of number (numerus).” When
we are “[c]onfronted with an indeterminate multitude, i.e., with any alge-
braic quantity,” we are therefore in a position to be “misled by the pure intel-
lect” and to “want to understand” such a quantity “as a ‘mere multitude’ (sola
multidudo), that is, as a formation separated from all ‘enumerated things’ (res
numeratae).” In order, then, “not to fall into error, we must indeed . . . ‘repre-
sent’ to ourselves ‘some subject measurable by many units’ (subjectum aliquod
per multas unitates mensurabile),” which, according to Klein, is precisely what
is accomplished by Descartes’s “figures.” They accomplish this because like
the letters in algebra (notae), they are visible—and thus something that is
“measurable by many units”—even though their status as figures is emphati-
cally not representative of the figures belonging to ordinary geometry. In
other words, Descartes’s figures represent the “indeterminate multitude” of
what, although it is “in truth” not separated from enumerated and extended
things, is nevertheless not conceptually equivalent to them either. This is to
say, every figure, as just such a representation, is “a ‘symbol’—obtained through
‘symbolic abstraction’—of an indeterminate multitude.” Moreover, Klein
holds that this symbol “is exactly the same as the letter sign (together with its
‘degree’ designation) that occurs in ‘algebra,’ especially in Vieta’s analytic.” 
Indeed, for Klein it is precisely “[t]his ‘symbolic’ character of Carte-
sian ‘figures’ that first makes possible the mutual correspondence of ‘lines’
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
309
————————
168. See § 87 above.
169. On the symbolic understanding of the ‘unit’ or ‘one’, see § 118 below and n. 187.

with ‘letter signs’ or ‘ciphers’ which obtains in Cartesian mathematics” (215–
16/205). Klein reports that “Descartes himself says [this] explicitly: ‘It should
be noted . . . that we . . . here abstract no less from numbers themselves than we
did just before from geometric figures or from anything else you like.’ ( . . . Rule
XVI, 455 f.)” (216/205). Thus, Klein concludes that this means that “Pre-
cisely the same reinterpretation which the traditional concept of ἀριθμός un-
dergoes at the hands of Vieta, Stevin, and the other contemporary algebraists,
is effected by Descartes—and this is his original achievement—in the realm
of traditional γεωμετρία” (217/206). Hence, on Klein’s view, “The symbolic
abstraction which leads from the ordinary numbers [numeri] to letter signs,
to the ‘notae’ or ‘termini generales’ . . . , also called ‘puri et nudi’ . . . , needs the
imagination in exactly the same way as when it leads to ‘figures’” (216/205).
In connection with this, Klein stresses: “The mode of being of these ‘figures’
is, therefore, to repeat, none other than that of algebraic ‘numbers’—of Vieta’s
‘species’” (216–17/206). 
§ 115. Klein’s Use of the Scholastic Distinction between
“First and Second Intentions” to Fix Conceptually 
the Status of Descartes’s Symbolic Concepts
Klein therefore maintains that “Descartes’ ‘mathesis universalis’ corresponds
completely to Vieta’s ‘zetetic,’ by means of which is realized, with the aid of
‘logistice speciosa,’ the ‘new’ and ‘pure’ algebra, interpreted as a general ‘an-
alytical art’” (217/206). This correspondence obtains because “both have
in mind a universal science.” Where they differ concerns the relationship be-
tween this science and traditional arithmetic and geometry. As we have seen,
“Vieta sees the most important part of analytic in ‘rhetic’ or ‘exegetic’ . . . ,
in which numerical computations and the geometric constructions repre-
sent two different possibilities of application (so that the traditional con-
ception of geometry as such is here preserved).” In Descartes, however, the
traditional conception of geometry is not preserved, since he “begins by un-
derstanding geometric ‘figures’ as formations whose ‘being’ is determined
solely by their ‘symbolic’ character.” Indeed, Klein reports (215 n. 189/299
n. 319) that 
Descartes, incidentally, from the very beginning distinguishes “two kinds of
figures” (duo genera figurarum), namely those which represent a “multi-
tudo,” e.g., 
i.e., a “numerus triangularis” . . . , or 
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
310
..  .
.  .  .

i.e., a genealogical “tree which displays someone’s family relations” . . . , and
on the other hand, those which represent a “magnitudo,” e.g., 
, , etc. 
(Rule XIV, 450 f.).
However, “The symbolic ‘figure’ which forms the object of the mathesis uni-
versalis” is not to be found among these “completely traditional nonsymbolic
formations,” as it is rather precisely “what is ‘common to’ such figures, that is,
‘figurality’ itself.”
Klein again uses “the contemporary literature of the schools to fix yet
more exactly that conceptual character of algebraic symbols which has al-
ready been variously outlined” (218/206),170 although in this case he does so
in conjunction with “Descartes’ assertions” about the mediation of the imag-
ination in reconciling the mathematical problem of the relation between de-
terminacy and indeterminacy, and, in addition, to bring greater clarity to “the
sense in which we spoke earlier of ‘symbolic abstraction’” (222/208). Klein
begins by establishing a connection between Descartes’s designation of “the
‘sola multidudo’ which the intellect ‘separates’ from the ‘idea’ of number [nu-
merus] it finds available in the imagination as an ‘abstract being’ (ens ab-
stractum)” (220/206) and what is “called an ens rationisin the language of the
schools.” Klein reports, following Étienne Gilson,171 that “the Summa of Eu-
stachius a Sancto Paulo” (220/206) characterizes “‘second intentions’ (secun-
dae intentiones)” (220–21/207) as one of three kinds of ens rationis (‘being
of reason’) that “owes its ‘being’ to the operation of the intellect alone” (221/
207). Thus, second intentions, in Eustachius’s words quoted by Klein, “‘do
not belong to things unless a certain operation of the intellect is presupposed,
wherefore these beings of reason are said to depend on the intellect for their
existence and connection.’” For Klein, then, Descartes’s “‘mere multitude’
(sola multitudo), multitudinousness as such, which has its ‘being’ by grace
of the ‘pure intellect,’ is truly an ens abstractum or ens rationis in the sense of
a ‘second intention.’” 
Moreover, the “process of separating” that Descartes claims is re-
sponsible for bringing about the “being” in question insofar as “the ‘pure in-
tellect’ ventures into the ‘alien realm’ of the ‘imagination’” “must,” according
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
311
————————
170. See § 106 above.
171. Étienne Gilson, Index scolastico-cartésien (Paris: Alcan, 1912), 107.
PATER
FILIUS
FILIA

to Klein, “be more precisely described” in a manner that takes its clues from
Eustachius’s “more exact” determination of the second intention. In this de-
termination, Eustachius, “appealing to prevailing terminology, defines ‘sec-
ond intention’ as an ens rationis ‘that is conceived as belonging to a thing
known by virtue of its being known, and which cannot exist except as some-
thing present in the intellect, since it is conceived {not originally but} second-
arily and through a self-relating action of the mind’ (quod concipitur accidere
rei cognitae, ex eo quod cognita est, quodque non aliter potest existere quam
objective in intellectu, cum secundario et per reflexam mentis operationem
concipitur).” Klein describes as follows the “process of separating” in
Descartes in accord with this “more exact” determination of second inten-
tion: “The intellect, when directed to the ‘idea’ of a number [numerus] as a
‘multitude of units’ (multitudo unitatum – πλῆθος μονάδων) offered to it by
the imagination, . . . turns, as its nature requires, toward its own ‘directed-
ness,’ its own knowing” (221/207–8). In so doing, “it sees the multitude of
units no longer ‘directly,’ no longer in the ‘performed act’ (actus exercitus . . . ),
but ‘indirectly,’ ‘secondarily’ (secundario), or, in the terms of another scholas-
tic expression, in the ‘signified act’ (actus signatus172).” With this turn, then,
what “is now immediately ‘objective’” for the intellect “is its own conceiving
of that ‘multitude of units,’” a conceiving that having become objective is
equivalent to “the ‘concept’ (conceptus) of number [numerus] as such.”
Notwithstanding the fact that what is being conceived by the intellect in its
conceiving is a multitude of units, however, “this multitude itself nevertheless
appears to it as ‘something,’ namely as one and therefore an ‘ens,’ a ‘being.’” For
Klein, “This is precisely what the ‘abstraction’ [abstractio] which the intel-
lect undertakes consists in: It transforms the multitude of the number [nu-
merus] into a seemingly ‘independent’ being, into an ‘ens,’ if only an ‘ens
rationis.’” Klein emphasizes that what is of “crucial importance” (221–22/
208) in order for this abstraction to generate a symbol is that “the ‘ens ratio-
nis,’ as a ‘second intention,’” or, more precisely, “as the intended object of a
second intention” (222 n. 194/306 n. 324), “becomes graspable—with the
aid of the imagination—in the mode that the intellect, in turn, is able to
take up as a ‘first intention’” (222/208). This is to say, the imagination assists
the intellect in making into the object of a first intention something that, in
the language and conceptuality of the schools, is properly the object of a sec-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
312
————————
172. The translator of Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, Eva
Brann, adds the following parenthetical gloss of actus signatus: “i.e., an act the object of whose
intention is already an expressly signified concept, as opposed to the object of the first inten-
tion which is a being on which the actus exercitus is immediately exercised” (222/208).

ond intention.173 When this happens—and for Klein it does not happen
within the context of the horizon of the conceptual presuppositions of the
school philosophy of the scholastics174—“we are dealing with a symbol, either
with an ‘algebraic’ letter-sign or with a ‘geometric’ figure as understood by
Descartes.”
§ 116. Descartes on the Non-metaphorical Reception by the
Imagination of the Extension of Bodies as Bridging the Gap
between Non-determinate and Determinate Magnitudes
According to Klein, the imagination’s “‘service’ function” (222/208) with
“respect to the intellect,” in which it is defined by the way it “insures the pos-
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
313
————————
173. Richard Kennington, in his otherwise excellent synopsis of Klein’s account of
how the “Cartesian numerus is acquired” (Kennington, Review of Klein’s Lectures and Essays),
inexplicably identifies the genesis of its symbolic status with the abstractive transformation of
the “multitude” belonging to a “multitude of units” into a “multitude itself” or “‘general mag-
nitude.’” Thus, he writes: “An amount is initially abstracted from a multiplicity of things; but
this amount is then taken just as amount and not an amount of any determinate sort of things,
hence becoming a ‘general magnitude,’ that is, a ‘symbol’ which because of its indeterminacy
can be represented algebraically; the result of computation of such second intentional entities
is then imputed to first intentional beings.” As can be seen from the account just given, how-
ever, Kennington here is at odds with Klein’s presentation of the issues on three related points:
1) While the abstractive transformation of a determinate multitude or multiplicity into mul-
titude itself or general magnitude is indeed part of Klein’s account of the process of symbolic
abstraction, Klein clearly identifies the imagination’s mediating role as what is “crucial” to this
process, since it functions to make the “intended object of a second intention,” namely, this
“multitude itself” or “general magnitude,” graspable as an object of a first intention. 2) This, in
turn, is accomplished by the algebraic letter signs or the “figures” of Descartes’s mathesis uni-
versalis, which, “with the help of the imagination,” transform the object of a second intention
(the unimaginable pure concept of “multitude/magnitude itself”) into the object of a first in-
tention (the letter sign or Cartesian “figure”). Thus, it is not the case that what is “represented
algebraically” is the general magnitude understood as a symbol, because, as we have seen, for
Klein it is not the indeterminacy of the general magnitude that is symbolic but rather the rep-
resentation of this indeterminacy by something that is, in a fashion, determinate and thus ac-
cessible in a “first intentional” manner: letter signs or Cartesian “figures.” Finally, 3) because
for Klein these symbols are precisely the objects of first intentions, even though what they
represent are objects of second intentions, there is no need to “impute” the results of “com-
putation of such second intentional entities” to “first intentional beings,” since, again, it is pre-
cisely the grasping of these “second intentional entities” as “first intentional beings” that
comprises their “symbolic” status. The question, then, that Kennington raises with respect to
Klein’s account of symbolic abstraction, of “whether the first and second intentions have been
confused” (presumably by Descartes’s thought and therefore the modernity it makes possi-
ble), seems to be off the mark insofar as Klein uses these scholastic distinctions in the service
of his descriptively orientated de-sedimentation of something, namely “symbolic cognition,”
whose condition of possibility for Klein rests upon something that cannot be got at in terms
of a putative confusion of levels of intention.
174. See § 106, n. 147 above.

sibility of symbolic knowledge in general and, in particular, of the mathesis
universalis as a general theory of proportions and equations,” is something
that “depends . . . on a ‘real,’ and not a ‘metaphorical,’ ‘rendering’ of the cor-
poreal world” (224/210) by the very same imagination. Thus, Klein con-
cludes that, for Descartes, “Everything which we receive from the ‘world’
with the aid of the ‘external senses’ (sensus externi) is transferred by way of
the sensus communis to the imagination by a series of ‘seal impressions,’ and
this occurs in such a way that the parts of the body affected by the ‘impres-
sions’ (impressiones), including the imagination, take on the shape, the ‘fig-
ure,’ which belongs to that part of the world which is making the impression
(cf. Rule XII, 412 ff.)” (223/210). This reception by the imagination, via
impressions, of “the actual [wirkliche] ‘extension’ of bodies” (222/209), of
“their corporeality as such,” something that Descartes stresses “‘must not be
thought to be said metaphorically’ (neque hoc per analogiam dici putan-
dum est)” (223/210), means that “this very same corporeal nature belongs,
according to Descartes, to the imagination (or phantasia) with all the ideas
present ‘in’ it” (222/209). For Klein, “This and nothing else explains why
the imagination can guarantee the ability of the mathesis universalis to grasp
the structure of the ‘true world’ and so to prove itself a ‘wonderful science’
(scientia mirabilis)” (224/210).
Indeed, Klein notes that notwithstanding the fact that “The doctrine
of ‘impressions’ (τυπώσις – typosis), especially in relation to the imaginatio, is,
to begin with, again unquestionably Stoic” (223 n. 196/306 n. 326), the “pre-
cise distinction between the traditional part and what is specifically Descartes’
own and therefore ‘new’” is located in Descartes’s rejection of the metaphor-
ical understanding of the impression’s status in the soul. Thus, while “in an-
cient philosophy τυπώσις is always understood in such a way that the ‘im-
pression’ in the soul is not taken literally but is simply regarded in each case
as some sort of counterpart to the ‘looks’ of the thing precisely as it pre sents
itself to our (‘external’) senses” (223 n. 196/307 n. 326), this is a “position which
Descartes explicitly opposes.” Moreover, “the Cartesian conception of this
process is completely original in reducing everything perceptible by the (ex-
ternal) senses, that is, besides the ‘things’ themselves also their colors, warmth,
coldness, hardness, roughness, sweetness, etc., to ‘figures,’ which are supposed
to present the true ‘nature’ of the ‘things’ or ‘forces’ or ‘properties’ in ques-
tion, namely precisely that nature which is inaccessible to the external senses”
(224 n. 196/307 n. 326). Hence, what “the intellect ‘sees’ when it ‘turns to-
ward’ the ‘impressions’ ‘in’ or ‘on’ the part of the brain which is the ‘phanta-
sia vel imaginatio’” (224 n. 196/308 n. 326) are precisely “the variety of the
infinitely many possible ‘figures’” (224 n. 196/307 n. 326) that are responsi-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
314

ble for “[t]he variety of these ‘things,’ ‘forces,’ or ‘properties.’” Finally, for Klein,
even though Descartes initially “introduces only as a suppositio” (224 n.
196/308 n. 326) this understanding of perception, “these original assump-
tions, especially those underlying the understanding of extensio, remain not
only the basis of Descartes’ later writings, but are, in fact—admittedly or un-
admittedly—presupposed by all modern physiology and physiological psy-
chology even to this day.” 
However, the magnitudes that belong to the extension of bodies in the
world and therefore to the corporeal nature of the imagination itself are “spe-
cific,” which is to say, determinate, while “the subject of proportions and equa-
tions” (222/208) treated by “the mathesis universalis deals only with
‘magnitudes in general’ (magnitudeines in genere)” (222/209), that is, “in-
determinate magnitudes,” which, as we have seen, “are conceived by the in-
tellect as ‘entia abstracta.’” Regarding either type of magnitude, Klein writes
that “Descartes argues in Rule XIV” that “Only that kind of thing” (222/
208) “‘which accepts the more or less’ (quod recipit majus et minus) . . . can
be called magnitude” (222/209). The determinacy of “specific” magnitudes
and the indeterminacy of “magnitudes in general” give rise to the issue of
whether, and if so, how, exactly, they are related. On Klein’s view, Descartes’s
argues for their relationship on the basis of the legitimacy of the transfer of
what is said about indeterminate to determinate magnitudes. To justify this
transfer, Descartes appeals both to the “‘figurality’” of the “actual [wirklich]
extension” of the determinate magnitudes presented in the imagination and
to the fact that the pure intellect relies on the “aid” of the imagination in its
treatment of general magnitudes. When everything but the figurality of the
actual extension of bodies is “disregarded,” then it is nothing other than this
“figurality itself,” as it is depicted by the imagination, that allows it to form
“a bridge to the world of ‘bodies’ for Descartes” (222/208). This is because
“figurality” has its basis in the imagination, which “always presents precisely
that within the corporeal world which actually [wirklich] constitutes its true
nature, its ‘substance,’ its ‘corporeality’” (224/210). Klein quotes Descartes at
length to substantiate this claim (223/209–10):
In order to imagine something even then {in the treatment of general mag-
nitudes} and so as not to use the intellect purely but with the aid of specific [i.e.,
particular] forms depicted in the image-making organ, we must finally note
that nothing can be said of magnitudes in general which cannot also be as-
cribed to some specific form or other. From this we easily conclude that there
will be no little profit in transferring that which the intellect allows us to say
about magnitudes in general to that specific form of magnitude which is de-
picted most easily and distinctly in our imagination; this is indeed the real ex-
tension of a body abstracted from everything else, except that it has figure, as
follows from what was said about it in the twelfth rule, where we conceived
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
315

of the image-making organ itself, with the ideas existing in it, as being noth-
ing but a true body, really extended and having figure. ( . . . Rule XIV, 440 f.). 
From this transferability of what is said about magnitude in general to
specific or determinate magnitude, Klein draws the conclusion that “Exten-
sion has, accordingly, a twofold character for Descartes: It is ‘symbolic’—as the
object of ‘general algebra,’ and it is ‘real’—as the ‘substance’ of the corporeal
world” (225/210–11). Indeed, Klein articulates this more precisely when he
writes: “what in Descartes’ thinking confers on extension the dignity proper
to the substantial ‘being’ of the corporeal world is exactly its symbolic objec-
tivity in the framework of the mathesis universalis” (225/211). With this,
“the foundation on which Newton will raise the structure of his mathemat-
ical science of nature,” namely, “the conceptual basis of ‘classical physics,’
which has been called ‘Euclidean space,’ has been created.” The fact that “the
importance of the imaginatio in the Cartesian system declines more and
more” (225 n. 198/309 n. 328) in the development of Descartes’s thought,
“which leads him to find the guarantee for the certainty of ‘clear and distinct,’
that is, above all, mathematical cognition—and consequently also the guar-
antee of the possibility of a ‘true physics’—via a detour into metaphysics
whose warrant is ultimately granted by God,” leaves “[t]he character of the ex-
tensioitself,” in Klein’s judgment, “essentially untouched by this development.” 
§ 117. Wallis’s Completion of the Introduction of 
the New Number Concept
According to Klein, John Wallis’s (1616–1703)175 book, Universal Mathe-
matics [Mathesis universalis], or the Whole arithmetical enterprise as handed
down both by the Philosophical and the Mathematical Tradition, embracing
both Numerical and Specious or Symbolic Arithmetic as well as the Geometric
method of calculation; furthermore the traditional theory of Ratio and Propor-
tion, also the Doctrine of Logarithms; and other matters which will be indicated
by the Table of Chapter Headings (1657),176 presents “[t]he final act in the in-
troduction of the new ‘number’ concept” (225/211). Wallis’s discussion 1)
makes apparent “in what the difference between ‘thinking’ (cogitare) and
‘saying’ (dicere), as Bachet formulates it . . . really consists” (227/213),177 2)
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
316
————————
175. Wallis contributed substantially to the origins of calculus and is generally re-
garded as the most influential English mathematician before Newton.
176. Klein states that “he quotes from the complete edition undertaken by Wallis
himself (1693–1699)” (226 n. 200/309 n. 330): John Wallis, Opera mathematica, 3 vols.
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1693–1699).
177. See § 98 above.

stresses the “‘arithmetic’ nature” (229/216) of the “‘symbols or species’ (sym-
bola seu species)” with which the logistice speciosa calculates, such that they are
understood to be “both ‘general magnitudes’ and precisely also—‘numbers’”
(231/218), and, finally, 3) presents “[t]he object of arithmetic and logistic in
their algebraic expansion . . . as ‘number,’ . . . symbolically conceived as ratio”
(235/223). For Klein, all of this means not only that the “conception” of the
object of arithmetic and logistic is now completely “consonant with that of
algebra as a general theory of proportions and ratios,” but also that “The ‘ma-
terial’ of this universal and fundamental science is no longer furnished by
‘pure’ units whose mode of being may be subject to dispute, since they can be
conceived as formations that are either independent or obtained by ‘abstrac-
tion’ (ἀφαίρεσις)” (235/223–24). Rather, this “material” is now furnished by
“‘numbers,’ whose being no longer presents any problem since, as the products
of symbolic abstraction, they are immediately graspable in the notation”
(235/224).
§ 118. Wallis’s Initial Account of the Unit Both as 
the Principle of Number and as Itself a Number
Klein reports that the point of departure for Wallis’s consideration of the “true
‘principle of number’” (226/212) is “the question ‘whether the unit is a num-
ber’ (an Unitas sit Numerus – pp. 24–27).” When Wallis’s initial answer to
this question—that ‘one’ is a number while the ‘unit’ is the principle of num-
ber—is compared with “conceptual mode of ancient arithmetic” (227/213),
the sedimentation of the distinction between thinking and saying that, for
Klein, occurs in the conceptual mode of the modern (symbolic) understand-
ing of number178 is brought to the fore. Wallis’s reason for treating the “unit”
as the principle of number has its basis in “the complete parallelization of
‘arithmetical’ with ‘geometrical’ procedure” (226/212), which is “by now ac-
cepted altogether as a matter of course.” Hence, Klein quotes Wallis to this ef-
fect: “‘As far as principles are concerned, the point is that of magnitude, while
the unit is that of number, a principle commonly proposed . . . since number is
commonly defined as a multitude of units’ ( . . . p. 20)” (226/212). 
This understanding of the principle of number, however, does not pre-
vent Wallis from deviating from the conclusion that is commonly drawn from
the unit’s status as the principle of number (defined as a multitude of units),
namely, that because it is lacking in multitude, it is not a number. He reasons
that “one” is indeed a number, “for ‘one’ answers the question ‘How many
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
317
————————
178. Ibid.

are there?’” Owing to the importance of Wallis’s elaboration of this issue for
highlighting the sedimentation under discussion, Klein quotes at length Wal-
lis’s elaboration of the reason why “one” is a number (226–27/212–13): 
When I assert that “four” has the same force as “four units,” then “units”
{here} are neither number nor a {constituent} part of a number, but either the
denomination {i.e., the number-name} of the number or the term giving the
denomination, or the thing numbered itself. However, “four” is indeed the
number of these units. Thus also, when I assert that “one” has the same force
as “one unit,” “one monad,” then “unit” is the denomination of the term giv-
ing the denomination of the number, but “one” is a number, namely the mul-
titude of units (the word multitude being taken in a loose sense . . . : for “one”
says “how many” or “how many units” are asserted to be present, namely a
single one.
On Klein’s view, the distinction Wallis draws here between “the ‘unitas’ or
μονάς” (227/213), which “one might on this account be able to deny . . . is
‘number,’” and the “‘unum’ or ἕν,” whose “‘numerical’ character it is impossi-
ble to deny,” has its basis in precisely the previously mentioned distinction
between ‘thinking’ and ‘saying’. Thus, “By ‘four’ or ‘six,’ we do, indeed, mean
four or six units, but by way of a detour through the ‘number,’ which alone is
directly expressed and addressed, and this means precisely that it is under-
stood without the counted things, and consequently only as ‘symbol.’” For
thinking, then, “units” are indeed what a number means. However, in saying
‘number’, what is said “in the context of the symbolic conception” of number
is precisely “objectless.” Klein here emphasizes once more that “This ‘indi-
rection’ of the understanding of a ‘definite amount of definite objects,’ which
characterizes modern consciousness, can, to be sure, become visible only if
the conceptual mode of ancient arithmetic is kept in mind.” As we have seen,
within the context of the latter “the concept of the ‘four’ or ‘six,’ or even of the
‘unit,’ refers immediately to the particular unit or units, be they presented as
sensibly perceived things or pure noetic formations and be these formations,
moreover, understood as independent or as merely ‘abstracted.’” Furthermore,
Klein again stresses that “there is no immediate occasion for questioning the
mode of being of the ‘symbol’ itself,” since “The whole ontological prob-
lematic of the ancient concept of definite amount,” which, as we have seen, is
preoccupied with the issue of accounting for the mode of being proper to the
“one over many” unity of the ἀριθμός,179 becomes quite literally “without an
object”180 within the context of the symbolic number conception. Finally,
Klein again cautions that “This state of affairs is, of course, completely dis-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
318
————————
179. See n. 79 above.
180. That is, it loses the direct reference of the ἀριθμός to a sensible or noetic multi-
tude.

torted if it is simply asserted that the modern number concept possesses a re-
markably high degree of ‘abstractness,’ without bothering to investigate the
real mode of this ‘abstractness’” (227/213–14).
§ 119. Wallis’s Account of the Nought as Also 
the Principle of Number
Wallis’s initial account of the ‘unit’ as the “‘principium numeri,’ correspon-
ding to the ‘numerus’ understood as ‘unitatum multitudo’” (226/211) is, ac-
cording to Klein, introduced by him “explicitly only to save the ‘usual’
definitions” (226/212). Hence, Klein quotes Wallis’s view that “‘As can be
ascertained with certainty by anyone who looks 〈into the matter〉more deeply
as soon as the arithmetic operations 〈i.e., calculations〉are compared with the
〈accompanying〉geometric constructions’” (227/214), “the ‘nought’”—
which “presents for the number domain the sole analogue to the geometrical
point”—is the “true ‘principle of number.’” Wallis attempts to bring the “tra-
ditional opinion . . . into accord with his own” (228/214) on the basis of an
appeal to the two senses in which “[s]omething can be a ‘principle’ of some-
thing”: when it “is the ‘first which is such’ (primum quod sic) as to be of the
same nature as the thing itself,” and when it “is the ‘last which is not’ (ultimum
quod non) such as to be of the same nature as the thing itself.” It is thus “[i]n
the first sense [that] the unit may indeed be called the ‘principle of number,’
while the nought is a ‘principle’ only in the second sense.” 
The status of the nought as the principle of number allows Wallis—as
the following passage from his Mathesis universalis cited by Klein makes
clear—to assert the priority of arithmetic over geometry, “‘since, in truth, the
objects of arithmetic are of a higher and more abstract nature than those of
geometry’” (229/215). This priority leads to the claim that “‘Universal alge-
bra is in truth arithmetic, not geometry, and must therefore be explained rather
on arithmetic than geometric principles’ ( . . . p. 56)” (229/215–16). Wallis
maintained, moreover, that “The ancients happened to have overlooked”
(228/214) this priority insofar as they failed to realize “the fact that the anal-
ogy which exists [between the principles of arithmetic and geometry] is not
between the ‘point’ and the ‘unit,’ but between the ‘point’ and the ‘nought.’”
As a result, the ancients “were able to develop their algebra only for ‘geo-
metric magnitudes’ (quantitates Geometricae – p. 53) and, worse yet, only for
‘heterogeneous’ geometric magnitudes: ‘for lines, and planes compared with
solids, and also other, imaginary quantities of still more dimensions’” (228/
214–15). Wallis asks, “‘But why did they resort to geometric (rather than
arithmetic), and also to heterogeneous (rather than homogeneous) quanti-
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
319

ties?’” (228/215). And he answers, “I see no reason more likely than that they
chose the ‘one’ (and not, as they ought to have, the ‘nought’) among arith-
metical objects to equate with the geometric ‘point’.” Klein notes that Wallis
is “clearly following here” (228 n. 206/310 n. 336) “the opinion of Stevin,”
though, as we shall see, his working out of “the crucial point—to understand
‘Algebra or Analytic’ as an ‘Universal Art’ and yet to confine it within the
bounds of the realm of arithmetic” (228/215) takes him beyond both Stevin’s
number concept and his understanding of the “analytic art.” 
§ 120. Wallis’s Emphasis on the Arithmetical Status of 
the Symbol or Species of the “General Analytic”
The priority of arithmetic over geometry for Wallis means that “‘geometry is,
as it were, subordinated to arithmetic’” (229/216), which makes it “‘to that ex-
tent a special application of the universal assertions of arithmetic181 to its [spe-
cial] objects’.” With this, Klein maintains that the “twofold character” that
belongs to the “object” of the “general analytic,” that is, to the “species,” as on
the one hand a ‘general magnitude’ and on the other—“at the same time”—
as something whose “determination is essentially ‘arithmetic,’”182 undergoes
a shift away from Vieta’s “emphasis . . . on the universality of the species.” In
Wallis, “the same twofold character is displayed by the algebraic magnitudes,
the ‘symbols or species’ (symbola seu species),” with the important difference
that “here their ‘arithmetic’ state is more perspicuous: they are unambigu-
ously ‘numeri’—‘numbers.’” Klein thus quotes Wallis, who is here “speaking
of algebraic nomenclature . . . : ‘Let it suffice at any rate to point out that the
various algebraic powers, by whatever name they may be called, are nothing
else than numbers or lines or also other mutually homogeneous quantities in
continuous proportion.’ ( . . . p. 57)” (231/218). For Klein, this means that
the “universality of the ‘potestates algebricae’ excludes them neither from
having a ‘numerical’ character attributed to them nor from being interpreted
‘arithmetically’ or ‘logistically.’” This is because, in Klein’s judgment, Wallis
does not see them “as mere (reference) signs but as symbols: in themselves
they not only ‘represent,’ but they also ‘are’ mathematical objects.”
Klein supports this judgment on the basis of Wallis’s statement that
“‘Since all numbers {properly so-called} are constituted out of units, they are
in fact homogeneous quantities’ (cum . . . numeri omnes [proprie dicti] ex
unitatibus constituantur [. . .] sunt vere Homogeneae [sc. quantitates] . . . )”
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
320
————————
181. That is, ‘arithmetic’ understood as logistice speciosa, not logistice numerosa.
182. See § 114 above.

(230/217). Klein maintains that even though Wallis’s argument here “ap-
parently fails to do justice precisely to the universal character of ‘algebraic
numbers,’ for the argument holds only if the algebraic ‘numeri’ are conceived
also as ‘numbers properly so-called’ (numeri proprie dicti),” that is, as “‘def-
inite amounts of units,’” it is nevertheless actually the case that the “argu-
mentation itself already presupposes a ‘symbolic’ understanding even of the
ordinary ‘definite amounts of units,’ i.e., of the numeri proprie dicti.” Klein
maintains this on the basis both of an analysis of 1) the bracketed words in
Wallis’s text that he (Klein) omitted from the quote above and 2) a consid-
eration of how Wallis deals with relations expressed in equations that are
made between “algebraic powers” that are not of the same “degree.” 
Regarding (1), the words in question are “‘vel saltem ad unitatem vere
rationem habeant’ (or at least are really in a ratio with the unit)” (230 n.
210/311 n. 340). According to Klein, “They invalidate the meaning of the
main sentence and show directly the ambiguity which the expression ‘nu-
meri proprie dicti’ has in Wallis.” This is the case, because, as we will see
below, when number is understood as something that “indicates a certain
‘ratio’” (233/221), it “no longer means a ‘definite amount of. . . .’”
Regarding (2), “the requirement of ‘homogeneity,’ which is that ‘all com-
parisons [i.e., all relations expressed in equations]of quantity with a view to
their equality must be made only among quantities of the same degree’” (229/
216), and, which, as we have seen,183 in Vieta is represented by the explicitly
stated “‘first and eternal law of equations or proportions’” (181/173), is, on
Klein’s view of the matter, “fulfilled, as it were, automatically” (229/217) for
Wallis. Klein draws this conclusion because, for Wallis, “algebraic equations are
in themselves homogeneous,” as can be seen when he writes, “‘it often happens
that equations are made among various powers not of the same height [of de-
gree]; this, although acceptable for arithmetic degrees, is by no means acceptable
for geometric dimensions.’” For Wallis, then, “equations between powers of
various ‘height,’” of which he gives as examples “2a2 = 6a and 2a3 = 6a2,” are
homogeneous, because “The ‘arithmetic degrees’ (Gradus Arithmetici) are
nothing other than ‘numbersin continuous proportions’ (numeri continue pro-
portionales).” Indeed, for him, “‘The universal art of ‘algebra’ or ‘analytic’ rests
on this as on a foundation; and if these things which we have said about degrees,
ascending or descending in whatever order, are well understood, a great light
flashes forth for the understanding and for the handling of so-called ‘algebraic
powers’” (230 n. 208/310–11 n. 338). Thus, Klein writes that “The homo-
geneity among all ‘ordinary’ as well as algebraic ‘numbers’ is for Wallis, in ef-
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
321
————————
183. See § 106 above.

fect, the result of their membership in one and the same ‘genus,’ namely the
‘number’ genus as such” (230/217). Whereas for Vieta “homogeneity” was “a
requisite condition for operating with ‘algebraic magnitudes’” (230–31/218),
for Wallis it “characterizes their very composition: they are essentially homo-
geneous and just for this reason ‘universal.’” Specifically, “the commonality of
having the character of signs” (230/217) that belongs to “all the members” of
the “number” genus “immediately manifests” “the unity of this ‘genus,’” such
that “this and only this makes them appear as ‘homogeneous’” (230–31/218).
§ 121. The Homogeneity of Algebraic Numbers as Rooted for
Wallis in the Unity of the Sign Character of Their Symbols
Klein takes the “symbolic” character of these signs—manifest in the insep-
arability of their composition as signs from their status as mathematical ob-
jects, specifically from their status as “algebraic numbers”—to mean that,
for Wallis, “All possible ‘numbers’ now belong to one and the same, dimen-
sionless, ‘genus’—their homogeneity is identical with their symbolic character
as such” (231/218). And because of this, “The dimension, more exactly, the
‘altitude’ or height of an algebraic magnitude no longer changes its ‘genus,’”184
which means that “Wallis no longer needs special ‘rung’ (i.e., degree) desig-
nations for each single algebraic ‘number.’” The “genus” of such unknown
magnitudes no longer changes because “As symbols they are both ‘general
magnitudes’ and precisely also—‘numbers.’” 
Klein confirms Wallis’s identification of the homogeneity of numeri
with their status as symbols with a consideration of Wallis’s views on the re-
spective ancient and modern understandings of the ‘unit’ and the different
understandings of ‘number’ that follow from this. Klein shows how the divis-
ibility of the unit for Wallis leads to the view that “a ‘ratio,’ a ‘relation,’ under-
lies every ‘number’ as such” (232/220). Moreover, he shows that the “real
reason for this interpretation of ‘number’” (233/221) is rooted in the fact that
‘ratio’ for Wallis is “symbolically conceived” (235/223), which, in turn, means
that for Wallis the “comparisons” constitutive of ratios belong to the “‘nu-
merical genus’ (genus numerosum)” (234/222) and are therefore numbers. 
Regarding the unit, Wallis was well aware of the fact that the ancients
“‘allowed almost no numbers other than integers; nor did they allow the ma-
terial of arithmetic to be infinitely divisible like that of geometry, but they
required [division]to stop at the unit’ ( . . . Chap. XXXV, p. 183)” (231/219).
By contrast, “‘When arithmetic wishes to imitate in some way the infinite di-
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
322
————————
184. Which was the case for Vieta. See § 106 above.

visibility of geometry, it supposes a unit or a one which is something whole,
as it were, but divisible into as many parts as you please.’ ( . . . Chap. XII, p.
60).” Thus, for the “‘moderns’ it [the ‘unit’] is, as something continuous (ut quid
continuum), divisible into as many (equal) parts as you please” (231/218–
19). Consequently, in contrast to the ancients, who speak only of “‘true num-
bers properly so-called (meaning integers) which are composed of units’”
(231/219), “The moderns . . . are entitled, on the basis of the internal ‘conti-
nuity’ of the unit as well as of the whole numerical realm, to speak of frac-
tional numbers (numeri fracti), of irrational numbers (numeri surdi), and
also of ‘algebraic numbers’” (232/219). Klein emphasizes, however, that be-
cause “numeri, and especially the unit itself, can, in turn, be characterized as
continuous only by reason of a symbolic interpretation, or more exactly, only
in symbolic abstraction” (232/220), “Wallis, who makes a continual effort
to remain as true as possible to tradition and to retain the ancient terminol-
ogy, has, on the one hand, great doubts whether fractions, for instance, can
be understood as ‘numeri.’” Thus, Wallis writes, “But ‘fractions,’ or ‘broken
numbers’ are not so much numbers as ‘fragments of the unit’ ( . . . Chap. XII,
p. 60),” and, as such, “in between ‘one’ and ‘nought’.” Yet he also writes, “But
I add that we have now passed ‘into another genus’ . . . so that the ‘broken
number’ is not so much a number as an index of the ratio numbers have to one
another ( . . . Chap. IV, p. 27).” In Klein’s judgment, then, “this last remark it-
self shows that ‘fractions’ are, in fact, nothing but ‘numbers,’” since what they
“index,” a “ratio,” Wallis articulates as having as its terms precisely “numbers.”
Moreover, Wallis states explicitly that “a ‘ratio,’ a ‘relation,’ underlies every
‘number’ as such.” He states this “In his discussion of the fifth book of Eu-
clid’s Elements (that is, of the ‘general theory of proportions’), whose propo-
sitions Wallis undertakes to prove ‘arithmetically,’ i.e., ‘algebraically.’” Klein
quotes from this discussion at length (232–33/ 220–21):
For this fifth book of the Elements is, like the whole theory of proportions,
arithmetical rather than geometric. And so also the whole of arithmetic itself
seems, on closer inspection, to be nothing other than a theory of ratios, and the
numbers themselves nothing but the “indices” of all the possible ratios whose
common consequent is 1, the unit. For when 1 or the unit is taken as the
{identical} reference quantum, all the rest of the numbers (be they whole, or bro-
ken or even irrational) are the “indices” or “exponents” of all the different ratios
possible in relation to the reference quantum. ( . . . [Chap. XXXV,] p. 183). 
Klein remarks, “Thus here ‘number’ no longer means a ‘definite amount of
. . .’” (233/221), since Wallis is quite clear that “a ‘number’ now indicates a
certain ‘ratio,’ a λόγος in the sense of Euclid.” As such, it “can be designated
as a ‘whole’ or a ‘broken’ or an ‘irrational’ number—or, more briefly, as a ‘ra-
tional’ or ‘irrational’ number—only with reference to this ratio.” However,
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
323

for Klein, despite Wallis’s interpretation of the ratio indicated by number as
a ratio in Euclid’s sense, a consideration of Wallis’s account of “‘comparatio,’
the relating of magnitudes to one another,” discloses that the ratio at issue for
Wallis is not Euclid’s but “a symbolically conceived ratio” (235/223). 
Klein holds that Wallis’s deviation from Euclid is rooted in the dis-
tinction Wallis makes regarding “two possible ways of ‘comparing’” the mag-
nitudes at issue in Euclid’s “requirement of homogeneity,” which holds that
“only magnitudes of ‘the same kind’ can be ‘compared’ with one another, can
have a relation to one another.” Thus, Klein finds that Wallis maintains that
“We may either ask whether, or by what ‘part,’ or by ‘how much,’ one [mag-
nitude] exceeds the other, i.e., what the ‘difference’ between them is; or we
may ask how many times one magnitude contains the other, or how many
parts of one the other forms, i.e., what their ‘relation’ (in the narrower sense
of ratio), is (p. 134)” (232/221). The “‘difference’ (differentia)” in the first
case “is found by ‘subtraction’ (subductio),” while the “‘ratio’” in the second
case “is always the result of a division of one magnitude by another”
(233/222). Because the difference established by subtraction “is always of the
same kind as the magnitudes compared,” Klein maintains, for Wallis, “it fol-
lows that the differences themselves cannot be put in relation to one another
without further ‘comparisons’ with one another” (233/221–22). By contrast,
because “the ‘ratio’ is always the result of a division of one magnitude by an-
other” (233/222), it is established directly, without further comparisons, as “it
can be read off the ‘quotient’ which is the result of this division.”
§ 122. Wallis’s Understanding of Algebraic Numbers 
as Symbolically Conceived Ratios
Klein makes perspicuous the relation of the quotient to the ratio that is cru-
cial for understanding Wallis’s concept of symbolic number by unpacking
what Wallis means by the “reading off ” of the ratio from the quotient. The
relation between “dividend and the divisor” yields two possibilities. Either
they “are ‘of the same kind’ (homogeneous)” or they “are ‘of a different kind’
(heterogeneous).” In the former case, it follows that “they have the same
amount of ‘dimensions,’185 so that the quotient indicates how often or how
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
324
————————
185. Klein maintains that “‘Dimension’ is here understood exactly as in Descartes (Reg-
ulae, X, 447–449), except that Descartes does not stress the dimensionlessness of the numeri
themselves as emphatically as Wallis does” (233 n. 215/311 n. 345). (Descartes’s account of ‘di-
mension’ in Rule X is, in part, as follows: “By ‘dimension’ we mean simply a mode or aspect in
respect of which some subject is considered to be measurable. Thus, length, breadth, and depth
are not the only dimensions of a body: weight too is a dimension. . . . The mode which gives
rise to number is strictly speaking a species of dimension” [Regulae, 447].) Klein goes on to say, 

many times one magnitude is contained in the other” (233–34/222). The
“quotient itself ” (234/222) therefore, is a number that “has no dimension,”
because “‘where any species is divided by another of exactly the same di-
mensions, a quantity of no dimension arises’ ( . . . cf. p. 103).” In the latter
case, where the dividend and divisor are of different kinds, it follows that
they “do not have the same amount of dimensions, in which case division
proper is not involved but an ‘application’ (applicatio),186 although it is car-
ried out as if the ‘quantities were considered as good as numeri.’” The quan-
tities involved in an applicatio “likewise produce quotients which are a
dimensionless number [numerus].” Klein notes that for Wallis the realization
of either possibility belonging to the relation of the dividend and divisor is
such that “every ‘quotient’ of a division is . . . a ‘number’ (numerus)”
(233/222), and, indeed, a number without dimensions.
In Klein’s judgment, then, the “dimensionlessness” of such numbers
for Wallis is thus “identical” (234/223) with their “‘indicating’ or ‘expo-
nential’ role . . . as the ‘indices of ratios.’” Accordingly, Wallis concludes from
this that “all ‘quotients’ (and this means all ‘ratios,’ all relations, no matter of
what kind of magnitude) are—as ‘dimensionless’ formations—‘of the same
kind’ (homogeneous), such that they can all be compared with one another”
(234/222). Klein bases his view of this matter on the following passages
cited from Wallis (234/222–23): 
And hence it is clear that all ratios of whatever quantities taken in turn are ho-
mogeneous among one another.
When a comparison in terms of ratio is made, the resultant ratio often
{namely with the exception only of the ‘numerical genus’ itself } leaves the
genus of the quantities compared, and passes into the numerical genus, what-
ever the genus of the quantities compared may have been.
And, Klein stresses, “this can only mean that all numeri are homogeneous”
(234/223), and thus that “Their homogeneity is identical with their dimen-
sionlessness.” 
For Klein “The dimensionlessness of numbers is therefore in fact iden-
tical with their symbolic character,” because their role as indices of ratios “is im-
mediately visible in the notation, the ‘notatio.’” Klein writes, “This is why
Klein on Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis
325
————————
“The reason for this is that for Descartes the ‘figures’ with which the mathesis universalis op-
erates are exactly as symbolic as the ‘numbers’” (233 n. 215/311 n. 345), whereas in “Wallis .
. . as in Vieta, the traditional conception of geometric structures is preserved, as it is, inciden-
tally, also later.”
186. Klein notes that applicatio corresponds “to the Greek term παραβολή (parabola,
that which falls alongside)” (234 n. 216/312 n. 346), and that “Vieta, who refuses to recog-
nize the law of homogeneity as valid precisely in the case of division, also uses the ‘adplicare’
for ‘dividing.’”

Wallis can say: ‘And since indeed “double” and “half” and “triple” and “third,”
etc., are to be taken just as names of ratios, while the symbols of the half and
the third, i.e., ½, ⅓, are reckoned among the numbers (namely those that are
fractioned), why not so reckon the symbols of the double and the triple, i.e., 2∕1,
3∕1 or 2, 3?’” (234–35/223). Not only is it clear from this passage that “the
‘notation’ (notatio) leads Wallis to call the ‘one’ or ‘unit’ a ‘denominator’”
(235/223),187 but “in this very passage he adds explicitly: ‘And this [i.e., the
notation] is the chief reason188 why I assert that the whole theory of ratios be-
longs more to arithmetical than to geometrical investigations.’” The priority
that Wallis places on arithmetic over geometry is also evident in his under-
standing of the meaning of the word ‘magnitude’ in Euclid. Klein again
quotes Wallis: “‘and the whole fifth book of Euclid is arithmetic, however
specifically, as if concerned with [geometric] magnitudes, propositions may
be presented, propositions which could meanwhile be carried out just as cor-
rectly for any quantities desired in general, and this is the sense in which the
word “magnitudes” must be understood in Euclid’” (235 n. 218/ 312 n. 348). 
Klein thus concludes that it is “only in terms of a symbolic reinterpre-
tation of the ancient ‘definite amounts of definite objects,’ of the ἀριθμός,”
that “the universality of arithmetic as a ‘general theory of ratios,’ which de-
pends on the homogeneity of all ‘numbers,’ can be understood” (235/223).
A major consequence of this reinterpretation is that “The object of arith-
metic and logistic in their algebraic expansion is now determined as ‘number,’
and this means as a symbolically conceived ratio.” Not only is this concep-
tion of number, as ratio, “consonant with that of algebra as a general theory
of proportions and ratios,” but also as the “material” of arithmetic and logis-
tic, its “being no longer presents any problem,” since, unlike the problemat-
ical mode of being of the ancient “material” (ὕλη), its mode of being “is
immediately graspable in the notation” (235/224). That is to say, unlike the
“pure” units that make up the “material” of ἀριθμός, whose mode of being can
be subject to dispute because “they can be conceived formations that are ei-
ther independent or obtained by ‘abstraction’ (ἀφαίρεσις)” (235/223–24),
Klein finds that in Wallis’s Mathesis Universalis the symbolic ‘being’ of
“‘numbers’” (235/224)—their character as dimensionless—is indisputable.
III. Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers in Husserl and Klein
326
————————
187. Wallis’s “symbolic” understanding of the ‘one’ or ‘unit’ thus realizes, in effect,
Descartes’s notion of the unit as a res simplex communis and therefore a res simplex intellec-
tualis, a notion, as we have seen, that Klein maintains Descartes did not “pursue” (see § 114).
188. Klein’s emphasis.

Part Four
Husserl and Klein 
on the Origination of 
the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics


Chapter Twenty-four
Husserl and Klein on the Fundamental 
Diﬀerence between Symbolic and 
Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 123. Klein’s Critical Appropriation of Husserl’s Crisis
Seen within the Context of the Results of 
Klein’s Investigation of the Origin of Algebra
Having completed our exposition of Klein’s historical investigation and
desedimentation of the origin of algebra, we are now in a position to take up
and critically assess the questions raised in the conclusion to Part One of our
study.1 Klein’s deviation from Husserl in his account of the actual develop-
ment of symbolic mathematics, as well as the questions left open in its wake,
can now be reconsidered within the context of Klein’s Greek Mathematical
Thought and the Origin of Algebra. This reconsideration is required inasmuch
as this work is undoubtedly the basis for that deviation, despite the fact that
Klein did not mention it in his 1940 article, “Phenomenology and the His-
tory of Science.”2 The context provided by the former work will allow us to
assess critically the systematic relationship of Klein’s thought to Husserl’s re-
garding the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics. And it will also
allow us to explore the implications of Klein’s thought for Husserl’s unfin-
ished phenomenological project of securing, in the transcendental constitu-
tion of the perceptual life-world, the ontological foundation of the logic
operative in symbolic mathematics.
As we saw in Part One, Klein’s articulation of his deviation from
Husserl has two foci. Each is related to his overall assessment of the limits of
Husserl’s recognition of the role of symbolic formulae in the universal for-
malization of nature accomplished by mathematical physics. Husserl did not
————————
1. See Part I, §§ 21–22.
2. See Part I, § 4.

recognize that this physics’ anticipation of an exact nature involves an arith-
metical sedimentation that is coincident with the origin of its employment of
symbolic mathematics. The first of these foci concerns Husserl’s failure to ap-
preciate “the importance of Stevin’s algebraic work” (PHS, 70) for “the Carte-
sian idea of a mathesis universalis.” For Klein, his failure is evident in the fact
that Husserl ascribes to Leibniz the origin of “the conception of a universal
and symbolic science (mathesis universalis, ars combinatoria) which is prior to
any ‘material’ mathematical discipline and any ‘material’ logic.” The second
focal point concerns Husserl’s failure to recognize the importance of the “fu-
sion of the traditional theory of ratios and proportions with the ‘algebraic’ art
of equations” (80) for the anticipation of an exact nature and the mathemat-
ical formalization that is a necessary condition for bringing it about.
Klein’s deviation from Husserl raises three questions whose answers re-
mained open at the conclusion of Part One above. 1) What precisely does
the method of symbolic abstraction entail, especially in connection with its
difference from the ancient ἀφαίρεσις? 2) Why does Klein formulate the re-
activation of this method, and the rediscovery of the “original arithmetical ev-
idence” of Greek mathematics promised by its desedimentation, as a task in
1940 by Klein—without any mention of his Greek Mathematical Thought
and the Origin of Algebra? 3) Does—and if so, how—what Klein character-
izes as the “third task arising from the attempt to reactivate the ‘sedimented
history’ of the ‘exact’ nature” (84), the task of “the rediscovery of the presci-
entific world and its true origins,” differ from Husserl’s formulation of this
problem?
The stage for our reconsideration of Klein’s deviation from Husserl
and the questions it raises will be set by first analyzing what Klein neither an-
alyzed nor commented upon, Husserl’s investigation of the origin of sym-
bolic numbers in Philosophy of Arithmetic. Husserl’s failure to account for the
logical origin of signitively symbolic numbers on the basis of authentic car-
dinal numbers will then be analyzed from the perspective of Klein’s account
of the origination of symbolic numbers in symbolic abstraction.
§ 124. Husserl and Klein on the Difference between 
Non-symbolic and Symbolic Numbers
We had occasion to comment provisionally, in Part Two of our study,3 on the
significance of Klein’s statement that Husserl’s logical researches “amount
to in fact a reproduction and precise understanding of the ‘formalization’
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
330
————————
3. See Part II, § 27.

which took place in mathematics (and philosophy) ever since Vieta and
Descartes” (70). We did so by stressing that Klein’s qualification (“amount
to”) here suggests that Husserl, lacking a detailed knowledge of the actual
history of this formalization, was not aware of this fact. Klein’s research in
Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra, of course, purports
to provide just such a detailed account of the actual history, a history rooted
neither in empirical events nor accidental contingencies, but in an aspect of
the historicity of the aprioricity of the formal meaning structures4 that com-
prises one, albeit an essential one, of the conditions that make modern math-
ematical physics possible. 
Klein’s account of this history will provide the context for, first of all,
our consideration of his articulation of the conceptuality of the Greek
ἀριθμός-concept in relation to Husserl’s articulation of the authentic cardi-
nal number concept.5 Our consideration will substantiate our argument, ad-
e Diﬀerence between Symbolic and Non-symbolic Numbers
331
————————
4. Regarding the historicity of a priori meaning structures, see Part I, § 20. 
5. As we have seen, both Klein and Husserl use the same term to designate non-symbolic
numbers, Anzahlen, although (as we have also seen) Klein maintains a strict terminological dis-
tinction between Anzahl and Zahl (see Part II, § 36, n. 8), whereas Husserl (see Part III, § 40,
n. 2) does not. Because it is our claim that Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of non-symbolic num-
bers correspond to one another without, however, being identical, we will refer to the number
concept at issue here for Husserl as the “authentic cardinal number concept” and the one for
Klein as the “Greek ἀριθμός-concept.” 
Talk of ‘concept’ in connection with either Husserl’s or Klein’s account of non-symbolic
numbers is, of course, misleading. Both accounts identify and indeed stress that the most
salient feature of such numbers is that they are not concepts in the sense of abstracta whose
mode of being is independent from the items to which they refer qua their status as definite
amounts of something. That is, both stress that the “content” of number concepts is not con-
ceptual, but a multitude of items that are discrete and generically arbitrary. Nevertheless, when
comparing Husserl’s and Klein’s characterizations of non-symbolic numbers, it is difficult to
avoid formulating and referring to what is involved here as their respective “concepts” of such
numbers. By this, it must be emphasized, nothing more is meant than the calling of attention
to the similarities and differences that come to light as a consequence of comparisons of their
respective accounts of numbers. Likewise, Klein’s account of the ancient and the modern char-
acterizations of non-symbolic and symbolic numbers, and Husserl’s account of symbolic and
non-symbolic numbers, encounter this same difficulty.
Moreover, talk about either thinker’s account of non-symbolic number concepts must
be sharply distinguished from their talk about the “concept of” non-symbolic or symbolic num-
bers. We have seen (Part III, §§ 61–62) that, for Klein, the “concept of number” does not refer
directly to the composition characteristic of the specific numbers themselves as “number con-
cepts;” for instance, among the latter it can be said—in the case of both the Greek ἀριθμός-con-
cept and Husserl’s authentic cardinal number concept—that neither zero nor fractions are
included, while it cannot be said that zero or fractions either are, or are not, “concepts of num-
ber.” On the contrary, with respect to the “concept of number” it is the structure common to
the non-symbolic or symbolic numbers themselves that is at stake. For example, both Husserl
and Klein characterize as determinate the concept of non-symbolic numbers. This means that
common to non-symbolic numbers is their reference to a definite amount of definite items. It 

umbrated in Part Three above,6 that a correspondence obtains between these
two concepts of number. Establishing this correspondence will provide the
basis for substantiating the rest of the argument, namely, that Husserl’s fail-
ure in Philosophy of Arithmetic to establish authentic cardinal numbers as
the foundation of signitively symbolic numbers mirrors Klein’s account of
the fundamental difference between the Greek ἀριθμός-concept and the
symbolic number concept that came into existence with the origin of alge-
bra. Finally, notwithstanding this correspondence, a decisive difference be-
tween what Klein desediments as the Greek concept of ἀριθμός and what
Husserl in Philosophy of Arithmetic and later writings characterizes as the
concept of cardinal number will emerge. This difference concerns the all-
important logical issue of the relation between non-symbolic numbers and
formal meaning per se. Its thematization and analysis will provide the point
of departure for our assessment of Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of the orig-
ination of the logic of symbolic mathematics.
Husserl’s account of authentic cardinal numbers, like Klein’s account of
the Greek ἀριθμοί, rests on an acute awareness of what is taken to be a given,
namely, that there is a fundamental difference between symbolic and non-
symbolic number concepts. Both thinkers single out the same two crucial
factors in this difference. The first is that non-symbolic numbers refer di-
rectly to items that are discrete, multitudinous (i.e., more than one), and pre-
cisely so many. As such, non-symbolic numbers manifestly are not abstracta,
that is, conceptual entities that are capable of existing apart from the items to
which they refer. On the contrary, the very status of each authentic cardinal
number as an authentic cardinal number for Husserl and each ἀριθμός as an
ἀριθμός for Klein is inseparable from the items to which they refer, items that
are determined with respect to their amount by the number in question. The
second factor is that symbolic numbers are capable of existing as abstracta, as
conceptual entities that are separable from, which is to say, independentof, the
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
332
————————
does not mean, however, that the concept of being determinate is inseparable from the com-
position of these numbers “themselves.” Again, we will refer to Husserl’s and Klein’s respective
accounts of non-symbolic numbers as their accounts of “non-symbolic number concepts,” in
recognition of the fact that even though they both concern what is ostensibly the same thing
(namely, non-symbolic numbers), their accounts, when compared, are nevertheless not iden-
tical. Finally, we should mention that Klein’s distinction between ancient and modern num-
ber concepts emerges from his comparison of the different modes of being that he presents as
characterizing what for each tradition composes the true being of numbers themselves. Hence,
it is this difference that is referred to when their respective “number concepts” are mentioned,
and not necessarily the view that for either (or both) of these traditions the numbers in ques-
tion are themselves concepts. 
6. See Part II, § 38.

items to which non-symbolic numbers necessarily refer for both Husserl and
Klein.
Likewise for these two thinkers, the insight into this difference, which
concerns both the ontological and the logical statusof symbolic and non-sym-
bolic numbers, occasions the investigation of the relationship between these
two different kinds of number concepts. In Husserl’s case, the investigation of
this relationship presupposes that notwithstanding the fundamental differ-
ence between authentic and symbolic number concepts, they are nevertheless
logically equivalent insofar as each has the same object7 as its referent—albeit
one has it directly (the authentic) and the other indirectly (the symbolic). In
Klein’s case, the investigation of this relationship is guided by the opposite as-
sumption, that the two kinds of number concepts are not logically equivalent
insofar as one (the ἀριθμός) has as its direct referent the definite amount of a
multitude of definite items, while the other (the symbolic) has no referent—
direct or indirect—at all in this sense. Rather than refer to anything, the sym-
bolic number is itself the direct referent of a perception that is inseparable
from the calculational rules that assign to it a numerical status.8 Thus, for
Klein, symbolic numbers are, properly speaking, not“concepts” at all but signs
whose numerical status is dependent upon (and therefore inseparable from) a
set of canonically established syntactical rules, rules that are based in turn on
an axiom system that determines the “object” to which they apply.
Husserl’s attempt to demonstrate the logical equivalence9 of authentic
and symbolic number concepts by clarifying their presentations in psycho-
logical experience gradually led him to recognize that symbolic number con-
cepts, or, more precisely, signitively symbolic numbers (which, properly
speaking for Husserl, are not conceptsat all), are logically equivalent to neither
authentic nor ideally inauthentic numbers.10 In the course of Husserl’s analy-
ses, signitively symbolic numbers proved to have their basis not in concepts
that, properly understood, have a cognitive relationship to individual objects
but rather in precisely the demonstrable lack of this type of cognitive rela-
tionship. These numbers are based in the manifestation of sensible signs whose
numerical meaning is established by the conventionally established rules for
their calculation,11 not by their direct or indirect relationship to multitudes of
e Diﬀerence between Symbolic and Non-symbolic Numbers
333
————————
7. See Part III, § 47.
8. See Part III, §§ 103, 106, 112, and 121.
9. Concerning Husserl’s understanding of the logical equivalence of concepts, see Part
III, § 44.
10. Concerning Husserl’s distinction between signitively symbolic, inauthentic, and
authentic number concepts, see Part III, §§ 46–48.
11. See Part III, § 50.

units. These rules, in turn, acquire for Husserl their numerical warrant on the
basis of their establishment as “signitive surrogates” for the systematic number
concepts and systematically conceptual number operations that form the basis
of arithmetical knowledge.12 Indeed, establishing the rigorous parallelism be-
tween the rules that secure the numerical meaning of the former and the con-
cepts and conceptual operations of the latter is precisely what, at the end of
Philosophy of Arithmetic, Husserl attributes to the accomplishment of univer-
sal arithmetic. It is an accomplishment, moreover, that guarantees that calcu-
lation with signitively symbolic numbers will yield results that are logically
equivalent to operations on ideally symbolic but nevertheless conceptualnum-
bers. And, therefore, it is an accomplishment that establishes “the rules of the
game” governing signitively symbolic calculation as a surrogate for systematic
arithmetic’s conceptual operations and the knowledge it produces.
§ 125. Husserl on the Authentic Cardinal Number Concept
and Klein on the Greek ᾿Αριθμός-Concept 
The main reason that Husserl’s investigation of the origin of symbolic num-
bers reaches the conclusion that they are not logically equivalent to au-
thentic cardinal numbers is shared by Klein’s point of departure for the
investigation of modern symbolic numbers in relation to the Greek ἀριθμοί.
For both Husserl and Klein, non-symbolic numbers specify a definite
amount of items belonging to a discrete multitude, items that are theoreti-
cally formulated as a multiplicity of units. Due to this agreement, they both
identify the number ‘two’ as the first non-symbolic number.13 They both
agree also that symbolic numbers manifestly do not specify definite amounts
of definite items or units. The similarity of their accounts does not end here,
however. Their accounts also agree that non-symbolic numbers are initially
accessed through the activity of enumeration or counting. And they both
contend that counting, in turn, presupposes the availability of an indeter-
minate multitude of items and an interest in answering, with respect to this
multitude, the question ‘How many?’ Hence, for Husserl and Klein, ac-
counting for non-symbolic numbers is closely connected to accounting for
what it is that makes a multitude available for enumeration.14 And, in what
is perhaps the most important correlation between Husserl’s account of au-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
334
————————
12. See Part III, § 49.
13. Concerning Husserl’s position on this point, see Part III, § 41; concerning Klein’s,
see § 61.
14. For Husserl’s assessment of this issue, see Part III, § 45; for Klein’s, see §§ 61, 84,
and 87.

thentic cardinal numbers and Klein’s account of ἀριθμοί, they agree that the
unity of the whole proper to the numbers in question manifestly does not
have its basis in their parts.
This last point deserves closer scrutiny. Both Husserl and Klein con-
sider the parts of non-symbolic numbers, the items or units of a multitude
determined with respect to its definite amount, not to be parts of that which
composes the unity of this amount. For Husserl, this is the case because, ei-
ther in themselves or in terms of their relations, these parts are incapable of
providing any basis sufficient to account for the collective unity into which
they are combined as a definite authentic cardinal number.15 For Klein, it is
the case because what can be truly said of each of the parts proper to an
ἀριθμός is something that cannot be truly said of the unity of the whole that
composes it and vice versa. Specifically, what can be truly said of the parts is
that each is one, while what can be truly said of the ἀριθμός as a whole is that
it is precisely not one. Furthermore, what can be truly said of all the parts
taken together, that they are just this ἀριθμός, cannot be said of each part.16
For example, in the ἀριθμός ‘two’, what is true of each item or unit that is a
part of this ἀριθμός is that it is ‘one’, which is something that is not true of
the ἀριθμός itself, which is precisely not ‘one’ but ‘two’.
Husserl’s and Klein’s recognition of this non-identity of the parts and
the whole proper to non-symbolic numbers yields further important points
of agreement in their accounts of such numbers. One is that, strictly speak-
ing, there is no authentic cardinal number or ἀριθμός “in general.” That is be-
cause each thinker regards the commonality at issue in non-symbolic
numbers as precisely not a characteristic that pertains to each of them as a
different number. Each number is a whole whose unity determines a definite
amount of parts and thus determines them such that the whole of each num-
ber determines a different definite amount of parts. For instance, the non-
symbolic numbers ‘two’ and ‘three’—qua their delimiting just two and just
three of something—have no commonality because, considered precisely as
amounts, what is numerically decisive is their difference as amounts.17 For
Husserl as for Klein, then, it makes no sense (for non-symbolic numbers) to
talk about a ‘number concept in general’ since no such thing exists.18 What
e Diﬀerence between Symbolic and Non-symbolic Numbers
335
————————
15. See Part III, §§ 41–42.
16. See Part III, § 70.
17. Consequently, to speak of the difference between each number as a difference in
the “property” of the multitudes characteristic of each (different) number is misleading, for it
suggests what is precisely not the case, namely, that the differentia between numbers is the re-
sult of their sharing the common quality of a property.
18. For Husserl on this issue, see Part III, §§ 41 and 49; for Klein, see § 61.

is common to non-symbolic numbers as numbers is therefore something that
is not, properly speaking, numerical. For Husserl, the commonality in the au-
thentic meaning of the ‘generic concept of cardinal number’ concerns the
fact that each cardinal number is a species of the concept of multiplicity.19
However, each species is different because a different amount of content falls
under each one, for example, ‘two items or units’, ‘three items or units’, and so
on—and not a different amount of the concept of multiplicity. For Klein, it
is the same: each ἀριθμός presents a delimitation of the contents of a multi-
plicity that is different, and each different delimitation, as precisely “so many”
items or units, is manifestly not directed to the concept of multiplicity.20
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
336
————————
19. See Part III, §§ 41 and 45.
20. See Part III, §§ 61–62.

Chapter Twenty-ﬁve
Husserl and Klein on the Origin and 
Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 126. Husserl’s Appeal to Acts of Collective Combination to
Account for the Unity of the Whole of Each 
Authentic Cardinal Number
Notwithstanding the agreement on these points between Husserl and Klein
regarding non-symbolic number concepts, important differences emerge
when their respective accounts of the origin of these concepts are considered.
These differences are not confined to the origin of non-symbolic numbers,
but (as we shall see) also concern the very structure of non-symbolic numbers.
Nevertheless, even here there is an important point of coincidence insofar as
the question of origin for each thinker stems from the recognition of the same
problematic. Husserl’s philosophical motivation for turning (in Philosophy of
Arithmetic) to psychology to assist in a matter of conceptual clarification is
rooted in his recognition that the peculiar collective unity of the whole of
each authentic cardinal number cannot be accounted for by any relation
among or within the items or units that are inseparable from it.21 In other
words, the whole that each authentic cardinal number presents is a whole of
parts that presents a unity that is manifestly irreducible to the unity belong-
ing to the parts of which it is the whole. It is precisely in the service of at-
tempting to account for this numerical unity that Husserl—not only in
Philosophy of Arithmetic but, as we shall see, in all his subsequent analyses—
turned to the cognitive act in which the unity at issue is presented so as to
clarify what conceptual analysis per se proves to be incapable of clarifying.
Klein’s account—or, more precisely, Klein’s account of the Greek
philosophical accounts of the mode of being of ἀριθμοί-concepts—likewise
is rooted in the recognition of the problem that the peculiar whole mani-
————————
21. See Part III, § 45.

fested by numerical unity presents for conceptual analysis.22 However, on
his telling, neither of the two paradigmatic Greek analyses of this problem,
Plato’s and Aristotle’s, attempts to resolve it in a manner even remotely sim-
ilar to Husserl’s attempt, though, as we shall see, elements of each of these are
sedimented in Husserl’s analyses.
Husserl’s initial23 approach to the peculiar unity of the numerical
whole in question appealed to acts of “collective combination,” which he
claimed are locatable in the experiences that generate both authentic multi-
tudes and authentic cardinal numbers.24 He sought to account for the origin
of the unity proper to the wholes of each by appealing to what he interpreted
as the psychological (inner) experience of “grasping-as-one” either the inde-
terminate assemblage of items (or units) in a multitude (or group) or their
delimitation in a determinate aggregate, namely, in an authentic cardinal
number. The unity of a multiplicity or cardinal number was supposed to
arise in the reflexion25 on the experiences of collective combination, a re-
flexion that grasps the respective collections at issue as collections and
thereby yields what the conceptual analysis of the unity of the assemblages
cannot: the peculiar whole responsible for the unity that exceeds the rela-
tionship and composition of the parts belonging to the collection.
§ 127. Husserl’s Appeal to Psychological Experience to 
Account for the Origin of the Categorial Unity Belonging to
the Concept of ‘Anything ’ Characteristic of the Units 
Proper to Multiplicities and Cardinal Numbers
Husserl also appealed to psychological experience to account for the origin
of the categorial unity proper to the whole of the concept of multiplicity and
thereby to the unity of the delimitation of this concept that the species of
cardinal numbers manifest. For Husserl, the unity of this concept, together
with the unity of each of the concepts by which it is delimited, is such that
there is no restriction with respect to the genus of the content it takes in, so
long as each constituent is something, a certain one. Consequently, both the
concept of multiplicity and the concept of authentic cardinal number belong
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
338
————————
22. See Part III, §§ 69, 88, and 90.
23. That is, Husserl’s approach in Philosophy of Arithmetic, which unless otherwise
noted, is the source of the views being attributed to him here.
24. See Part III, § 45.
25. Dallas Willard correctly notes in his “Translator’s Introduction” to Philosophy of
Arithmetic that for Husserl “‘Reflexion’ with an ‘x’ indicates reflexivity, self-reference” (lxi),
and should therefore be distinguished from ‘reflection’, which indicates “a process of consid-
eration, meditation, thoughtfulness.”

to the categories that are most universal and emptiest of content insofar as
each also contains the concept of ‘anything’ (Etwas).26 The psychological
experience wherein the concept of multiplicity originates is rooted in an ab-
stractive process based on individual contents as they are given in collective
combination. The items manifest in the latter, even the most heterogeneous,
are passed over in the abstraction in which the most universal and emptiest
concept of multiplicity originates. The slightest attention to them as con-
tents with any kind of determination is therefore lacking in this abstraction,
such that the main interest is focused on their collective combination. Each
individual content is therefore “considered and attended to only as some
content or other, each one as a certain something, a certain one” (PA, 79).
Regarding the psychological origin proper to the concept of ‘anything’,
which Husserl explicitly states “the concept of the multiplicity also contains”
(80), he writes that “Obviously the concept anything owes its origination to
reflexion upon the psychical act of presenting, for which precisely any de-
terminate object may be given as the content.” This means that this concept
“itself must be designated as a relative determination” because it “belongs
to the content of any concrete object only in that external and non-literal
fashion common to any sort of relative or negative attribute.” However, de-
spite its status as a relative determination, Husserl contends that the “re-
flexion mentioned” is always “carried out” when “some sort of content is
present” and thus that this concept of ‘anything’ plays a “crucial role . . . in
the origination of the general concept of multiplicity.” It does so insofar as
“each particular one from among the determinate contents encompassed by
the concrete presentation of a multiplicity is thought under the mediation
of the concept of anything, and is attended to only insofar as it falls under
that concept” (80–81). It is in this way, and this way alone, then, that, ac-
cording to Husserl’s account in Philosophy of Arithmetic, “there comes about
that utter depletion of content which confers upon the concept of multi-
plicity its universality” (81).
Husserl observes that the collective combination is indicated in lan-
guage by the conjunction ‘and’ and maintains that when this observation is
combined with the result of the abstraction process that originates the con-
cept of multiplicity, the content of the concept of multiplicity in general is
expressed. This concept means nothing other than “a certain something and
a certain something and a certain something, etc.; or, some one and some
one and some one thing, etc.; or, more briefly, one and one and one, etc.” (80).
Authentic cardinal numbers originate when the indeterminateness of what
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
339
————————
26. See Part III, § 41.

is expressed by the concept of multiplicity is done away with, in enumeration
or counting, such that ‘one and one’ are delimited, ‘one, one, and one’, and
so on.
§ 128. The Decisive Contrast between Husserl’s and Klein’s
Accounts of the Being of the Units in Non-symbolic Numbers
Before considering Husserl’s own critique of this account of the origin of the
concept proper to multiplicity and its delimitation as the authentic cardinal
numbers,27 we shall first consider Klein’s articulation of Plato’s and Aristo-
tle’s contrasting accounts of the ἀριθμός-concept and its origin. This is nec-
essary because, on our view, these accounts, when compared to Husserl’s
account of the concept of cardinal number and its origin, disclose an im-
portant difference in Husserl’s and Klein’s respective articulation of the
structure of non-symbolic numbers: a difference, moreover, that is common
to Plato and Aristotle despite their otherwise quite different accounts of the
origin of ἀριθμοί. Because (as we shall see) Husserl’s accounts, subsequent to
Philosophy of Arithmetic, of the origin of the concept of multiplicity and that
of authentic cardinal number do not modify his view of their structures but
only of the “constitution” of their origins, the results of this comparison will
assume a systematic significance for our study.
According to Klein, Aristotle’s dispute with Plato over mathematical
objects was not about their “being” but their “mode of being.”28 In the case
of arithmetic, this means that they were in agreement that arithmetically
mathematical inquiry has as its object a discrete field of “pure,” which is to
say noetic, monads, each of which is “one” and therefore all of which are iden-
tical. Moreover, it means that they were in agreement that each ἀριθμός de-
limits a definite amount of such monads, that the amount delimited by each
is different, and that therefore each ἀριθμός is demarcated from another. Fi-
nally, they agreed that ‘one’ is the ἀρχήof ἀριθμός. 
Prior to our consideration of Klein’s articulation of Plato’s and Aris-
totle’s different accounts of the mode of being of ἀριθμοί, both in relation
to each other and to Husserl’s account of the origin of non-symbolic cardi-
nal numbers, it is necessary to point out a decisive contrast between the
structure of the ἀριθμός-concept in Plato and Aristotle and the authentic
cardinal number concept in Husserl. While both exhibit identical structures
insofar as each ἀριθμός and each authentic cardinal number is understood
————————
27. See § 158 below.
28. See Part III, § 84.
340
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics

to delimit a definite amount of definite units, the structure of these definite
units differs significantly in Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts. In Klein’s expo-
sition of the Greek account, the structure of what the definite amount de-
limits is ontologically determined as a multitude. That is, the noetic monads
that are the units of an ἀριθμός are themselves multitudinous. As such, they
are not “concepts” but beings—noetic beings, to be precise. The non-con-
ceptual status of the monads in a multitude is evident from the fact that they
are not characterized as εἴδη, which is how they would have to be character-
ized to exhibit a conceptual structure within the context of Plato’s and Aris-
totle’s accounts of ἐπιστήμη.29 Moreover, neither do they “fall under” any
concepts (including, of course, the concept of multiplicity) nor are they de-
termined by concepts that are not identical to them but which nevertheless
“express” them. Indeed, the controversy between Aristotle and Plato over
noetic monads concerns neither their discreteness nor their multitudinous-
ness as beings, but rather whether their mode of being multiple or discrete is
dependent upon, or independent of, the multiplicity and discreteness of so-
matic beings. 
For Husserl the units of an authentic cardinal number are manifestly
not beings in the sense that they are for Plato and Aristotle; rather each is an
extension of the universal and materially empty concept of anything, or of
one for short. Each is an extension of this concept in the precise sense that
as a relative determination of anything at all that is presented in experience,
the units that belong to each multitude delimited in counting by authentic
cardinal numbers do not have the ontological status that Klein finds attrib-
uted to the monads of an ἀριθμός. The units at issue in Husserl are not al-
ready available to the mind prior to the activity that yields both a multitude
and its delimitation; they are not available prior to the inception of collec-
tive combination but become so only subsequent to it. This contrasts sharply
with Klein’s account of Plato’s and Aristotle’s noetic monads, since these are
available to the mind prior to its initiation of the process that yields ἀριθμοί,
that is, prior to counting. 
The significance of the ontological difference noted here between the
characterization of the units belonging to non-symbolic numbers in Husserl
and Klein will be pursued in detail below when their respective accounts of
the origin of such units is compared in view of the problem of the origina-
tion of the formalization that makes possible the logic of symbolic mathe-
matics. 
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
341
————————
29. See Part III, § 63.

§ 129. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Purity of 
Mathematical ᾿Αριθμοί
Plato’s recognition of two factors led him30 to posit as “pure” the mode of
being belonging to the mathematical ἀριθμοί that are the objects of both the
praxis of counting and theoretical arithmetic. One factor is the supposition of
the unchanging and exact nature of arithmetical knowledge (ἐπιστήμη), while
the other is the availability of ἀριθμοί to the soul before it begins counting sen-
sible beings (αἰσθητά), the definite amounts of which are delimited in each
ἀριθμός. This factor is what is responsible for the dianoetic supposition
(ὑπόθεσις) that the true referents of counting and arithmetical knowledge are
not the monads or units proper to sensible beings, which, as unequal and di-
visible (thus, subject to change), are therefore incompatible with knowledge.
Rather, the true referents are the identical and indivisible intelligible (νοητόν)
units that thought (διάνοια) supposes to underlie its counting of sensible be-
ings. These units are intelligible because their identity, along with their indi-
visible and unchanging nature, is recognizable only by thought—not by the
senses.31 The second factor that led Plato to posit the “pure” mode of being of
mathematical ἀριθμοίis what is responsible for his so-called chorismos thesis.
The availability of ἀριθμοί to the soul before its διάνοια counts αἰσθητάpoints
to the ontological independence of the ἀριθμοί whose units are intelligible
from the ἀριθμοί whose units are sensible. More precisely, this availability
points to the intelligible units’ separateness from sensible beings that must be
supposed in order to account for the unchanging and exact status of arith-
metical knowledge.32
Thus the availability of ἀριθμοί to the soul prior to its having rendered
definite the amount of this or that multitude of sensible beings, combined
with the supposition of the exact and unchanging nature of knowledge, leads
to the Platonic thesis that the mode of being of the pure ἀριθμοί investigated
by arithmetically mathematical knowledge is separate from sensible beings.
§ 130. Klein on Plato’s Account of the “Being One” of 
Each Mathematical ᾿Αριθμός as Different from 
the “Being One” of Mathematical Monads
The peculiar state of affairs indicated by each ἀριθμός, whereby it permits a
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
342
————————
30. Unless otherwise noted, the following summary and analyses of Plato and Aris-
totle represent Klein’s interpretation of both.
31. See Part III, § 62.
32. See Part III, § 66.

multitude of either sensible or intelligible beings to be grasped as one defi-
nite amount (e.g., as ‘two’, ‘three’, and so on), gives rise to another Platonic
supposition: the supposition that the peculiar “one over many” unity yielded
by each ἀριθμός has its basis in a common thing (κοινόν) whose unity is
rooted, in turn, in an ontological kind (γένος) that is fundamentally different
from the mathematical kind that is responsible for the unity of each one of
the multitudinous units unified by each ἀριθμός.33 That is, it gives rise to the
supposition that the unity proper to each ‘two’, each ‘three’, and so on, is some-
thing that has its basis in a unity that is different in kind from the unity of the
monads that mathematicians suppose to be unified in each ἀριθμός in order
to account for counting and arithmetical knowledge. That is because the kind
of unity belonging to the units that compose either the sensible beings
counted in praxis or the pure beings investigated by theoretical arithmetic is
incapable of accounting for the difference in kind that characterizes the uni-
ties belonging to each different ἀριθμός. For instance, the kind of unity be-
longing to the being one of ‘two’, ‘three’, ‘four’, and so on, is different in the
case of each ἀριθμός and thus cannot be accounted for by the kind of unity
characteristic of the “being one” of each monad, which is the same for each
monad. More explicitly, because each ἀριθμός is precisely the delimitation of
a different amount of multitudinous items, the being one of the “one over
many” unity belonging to each ἀριθμός likewisehas to be different for each dif-
ferent number. According to Plato’s reasoning, this is something that the
“being one” of the units in a multitude is not able to account for, because the
being one of each unit in a multitude is identical. 
Hence the “being one” of the units (and therefore their kind of unity)
that compose a multitude is unable to account for the “being one” that be-
longs to the unity of each different ἀριθμός. For the unity proper to the beings
in a multitude does not exclude its opposite. So the unity of a multitude is un-
like the arithmetical unity that comprises the integral whole of each definite
amount of units. The “being one” of the latter whole, that is, the whole of an
ἀριθμός, composes the exactness proper to its delimitation of the units in a
multitude, an exactness that excludes its opposite—the “unlimited”—from
its unity. On the contrary, the unity of each being in a multitude is intelligible
only as a unit among other units. That is to say, as a result of its being a part of
a multitude, each unit is intelligible only insofar as it is thought of as being in-
separable from the other units that compose the multitude. The unity of the
unit’s intelligibility therefore includes (in precisely this sense) its opposite, the
“unlimited.” Whether the beings that compose a multitude are unequal and di-
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
343
————————
33. See Part III, § 75.

visible (as in a sensible multitude) or exact and indivisible (as in an intelligi-
ble multitude), the being “one” of each such being is a being one among other
ones. As such, the “unity” of each one is homogeneous with each of the un-
limitedly many other members of the multitude to which each, as a unit in a
multitude, necessarily belongs. Thus, the “being one” of each sensible being is
homogeneous with the other ones insofar as they are all alike in being unequal
and divisible (and therefore changing). Likewise, the being one of each intel-
ligible being is homogeneous to the other ones, insofar as they are all identi-
cal and indivisible (and therefore unchanging). In either case, the kind of
“unity” that belongs to the “being one” of each monad mustbe different from
that of the kind of “being one” of each ἀριθμόςbecause the “being one” of each
ἀριθμός—or, more precisely, of each different ἀριθμός—is not homogeneous
with and therefore is different from every other.34
§ 131. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Non-mathematical
Unity Responsible for the “Being One” of 
the Whole Belonging to Each ᾿Αριθμός
Precisely the recognition of the last-mentioned point, the heterogeneity of
1) the “being one” of the units belonging to the multitude delimited by each
different ἀριθμός and 2) the “being one” of each ἀριθμός as the whole that
brings about this delimitation, is what occasions the Platonic supposition
that another kind of unity (one other than that which characterizes the units
in a multitude) is responsible for the “being one” proper to the whole of
each ἀριθμός. This other kind of unity is therefore supposed to be different
from what determines the unity belonging to the beings in the multitudes
dealt with either by the praxis of counting or arithmetical ἐπιστήμη. To ac-
count for the unity presupposed by the “being one” of the whole compos-
ing each (different) ἀριθμός,35 the following is supposed: that the unity of
the arithmetical “being one” composing each of these different wholes is
provided by a different γένος. As a function of the difference between each
of the γένη that provides the basis of the integrity belonging to each (differ-
ent) ἀριθμός, the character of each γένος as a κοινόν (common thing) is, par-
adoxically, not common to any other γένος; that is, it is not common among
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
344
————————
34. See Part III, §§ 68 and 75.
35. The “being one” of this unity, we want to stress, is something that neither the sen-
sible nor the intelligible ones that belong to the multitudes unified by the integrity of the
whole of each number can account for, because the unity of each ἀριθμός, as a different ἀριθμός,
must needs be different, whereas the unity of each unit in a multitude of units must be ho-
mogeneous.

any of the other γένη that give integrity to the different ἀριθμοί. The non-
identity or incomparability of the γένη in question, which must be supposed
in order to account for what need not be supposed because it is manifestly
the case—namely, that there are different ἀριθμοί and therefore differences
among the “being one” composing each different ἀριθμός—thus points to in-
telligible structures whose “being one” unifies each different delimitation
of a multitude differently. Furthermore, it points to a resultant unity that is
nevertheless fundamentally different from the unity of the beings that com-
pose a mathematical multitude.36
Insofar as the intelligible structures pointed to in the manner under
consideration are responsible for the unification of the integral wholes that
are responsible, in turn, for differently delimited multitudes (ἀριθμοί), they are
posited as having something in common with the structure of such integral
wholes, that is, with the integral wholes that compose ἀριθμοί. Specifically,
they share the latter’s “one over many” mode of being. However, because pre-
cisely the unity belonging to this “one over many” mode of being remains un-
accounted for by the kind of unity that mathematicians suppose accounts for
the “being one” of the units that compose the multitudes that each ἀριθμός
delimits, the (one over many) kind of unity under consideration here points
to a unity that is different in kind from that which belongs to ἀριθμοί; more
exactly, it points to a unity that is different from the unity that characterizes
mathematical ἀριθμοί.37 Mathematical ἀριθμοίdelimit units that are homo-
geneous in relation to one another and that maintain their homogeneity in
relation to the integrity of the whole composing each different ἀριθμός. The
composition of these ones, together with their relationship to the wholes
(ἀριθμοί) that delimit them, contrasts sharply with the delimitation of the in-
tegrity of the different wholes themselves that belong to each ἀριθμός. Each
ἀριθμός, as a different ἀριθμός (i.e., ‘two’, ‘three’, etc.), points to a delimitation
of units—namely, to each ἀριθμός itself considered as a unity—that must be
heterogeneous from the integrity of the wholes proper to all the other ἀριθμοί
that differ from it. Each ἀριθμός must be heterogeneous, for inseparable from
the delimitation of one mathematical ἀριθμός from another is its differentia-
tion as the integral whole responsible for the “being one” proper to each dif-
ferent ἀριθμός. Moreover, the fact that there are arbitrarily many such integral
wholes38 (i.e., many ‘twos’, many ‘threes’, and so on) in the realm of sensible
and intelligible units means that the mathematical ἀριθμοί that delimit these
345
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
————————
36. See Part III, § 75.
37. See Part III, § 76.
38. Ibid.

units are, like these units themselves, also inseparable from their opposite: in
being many, the mathematical ἀριθμοίthat delimit the sensible and intelligi-
ble units supposed by mathematicians therefore are also unlimited. 
§ 132. Klein on Plato’s Account of the Solution Provided by
᾿ΑριθμοὶΕἰδητικοίto the Aporias Raised by 
᾿Αριθμοὶ Μαθηματικοί
Plato’s solution to the aporias that are generated by the inseparability from
their opposite (from the unlimited) of both kinds of mathematical unity—
the unity of the units comprising multitudes and the unity of the ἀριθμοί
that delimit them—is provided by the supposition of ἀριθμοὶεἰδητικοί. By
positing an ontological—and therefore higher—mode of being as belonging
to the νοητόν (intelligible being) than the mathematical one, the ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί address the paradoxical “mixing” of the one and the many (and
therefore, the mixing of opposites) that characterizes the mathematical
νοητόν. Because their mode of being is ontological, the ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί pro-
vide the foundation for the mathematical mode of being of the νοητόν. In-
sofar as they are ontological, their mode of being is “higher”: the ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοίrender intelligible the mathematical mode of being of ἀριθμοί,
which—being aporetic—would otherwise remain incomprehensible. The
γένος of each ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός is posited as the condition responsible for the
unity of the κοινόν that is, in turn, responsible for the mathematical unity of
each different ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός. Being responsible for the unity belong-
ing to the latter’s integrity, the unity of the different γένη of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί
must reside in a commonality that is inseparable from the structural ele-
ments of the ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί. This, of course, contrasts with the “being
one” of the monad’s mathematical unity, which is completely independent
of the “being one” proper to the mathematical structure of the ἀριθμός and
therefore has nothing in common with it.39 The ontological unity, which is
inseparable from the commonality definitive of the κοινόν that provides the
foundation for the aporetic mode of being that characterizes mathematical
unity, must be unique to the ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός in question; it cannot exist
beside or outside its structural parts. It cannot do so because otherwise the
unity in question would be common to other ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίand therefore
common to other ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοίinasmuch as it is precisely the sup-
posed function of the ontological mode of being of the former ἀριθμοί to
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
346
————————
39. The unity of the monad is not numerical because each is precisely one and not
many, while the unity of the mathematical ἀριθμός is both one and many.

provide the foundation for the mathematical mode of being of the latter. A
common unity, of course, is precisely what cannot be if something like ἀριθμοὶ
μαθηματικοί are to be at all.40 To insure the intelligibility of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματι -
κοί, then, the parts of ἀριθμοὶεἰδητικοί, namely their εἴδη, must—in explicit
contrast to the parts of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί—be incomparable.41
The mode of being belonging to the unity of each of the ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί, which must be supposed as incomparable in order to account for
the “being one” of each of the different ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί, must also be
supposed as what is responsible for the sequence (two, three, four, and so
on) “natural” to the latter ἀριθμοί. That is because the supposition of the ho-
mogeneity of the multitude of mathematical monads cannot account for
the sequence that their arithmetical delimitation unquestionably yields. It
cannot do so for the simple reason that nothing is ordered within the iden-
tity of what is homogeneous. The order (τάξις) of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί, then,
must be supposed to originate in the order proper to ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί. It
must be supposed to originate in the γένος of each one of them, the κοινόν
of which, because it does not exist beside or outside the elements it unifies,
determines its relation to its neighboring γένη in terms of prior and poste-
rior. And, again, it must be supposed to do this because the natural sequence
of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοίwould otherwise remain unintelligible.42
Finally, at the head of the τάξις of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίis the “One itself,”
whose absolute priority—as complete, whole—must be supposed in order
to render intelligible the unity inseparable from the “being one” of both
mathematical and eidetic ἀριθμοί. What must be supposed is a one (ἕν) that
is unlike the ones supposed by mathematics, that is, unlike the ones whose
unity is delimited by its opposite, namely, the multitude from which each
mathematical one is inseparable. Only the supposition of a ἕν whose unity
needs nothing other than itself, and therefore needs nothing other, no op-
position, in order to be delimited as what it is, can make intelligible some-
thing like the “being one” of wholes that delimit mathematical and eidetic
multitudes.43
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
347
————————
40. See Part III, § 76.
41. Mathematical monads, being identical, are therefore incapable of providing a basis
for the difference between, e.g., two monads and three monads, that is, the difference between
the mode of being one (the integrity) of the “dyad” and the mode of being one of the “triad.”
Eidetic monads, being incomparable with one another, include within themselves the artic-
ulation of the condition of difference that is exhibited by the in fact different mathematical
ἀριθμοί. See Part III, § 75.
42. See Part III, § 77.
43. See Part III, § 81.

§ 133. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Inseparable Mode
of the Being of ᾿Αριθμοίfrom Sensible Beings
Aristotle’s account of the origin of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί represents a funda-
mental critique of the Platonic account. Moreover, it is an account that is
comprehensible only in the context of the Platonic one, since it explicitly
takes issue with the chorismos thesis, the attribution of a generic unity to
ἀριθμοί, and the necessity of the supposition of a non-mathematical one (ἕν)
in order to ground arithmetically mathematical unity. It bears emphasizing,
however, that what is disputed is not the being of ἀριθμοί, characterized as the
discrete delimitations of the field of noetic units into definite amounts, the
ἀρχήof which is one but rather their mode of being.
The Platonic determination of the mode of being of “pure” ἀριθμοίon the
basis of the attempt to account for the possibility of counting sensible beings
misses precisely the ontological dependence that is characteristic of each
ἀριθμός. From the fact that it is possible to articulate the parts of something in
declarative speech (τῷ λόγοῳ) before denominating the whole, it does not fol-
low that the “being” (τῇ ουσίᾳ) of these parts has priority over the being of the
whole. Likewise, it does not follow from the assertion that there is an ἀριθμός
of something that this ἀριθμός exists outside of that which it delimits with re-
spect to its definite amount. For example, in calling a human being ‘white’, no
other being is meant than precisely this white human being. Likewise, in the as-
sertion ‘three trees’, ‘three’ has the same status as the ‘white’; the definite amount
of trees (e.g., ‘three’) therefore has no proper φύσις. The “being so many” of
trees, like their being green, is dependent on there being trees.44
For Aristotle, then, the ontological status of ἀριθμοί is determined by
their natural meaning: the assertion that certain things are present in a spe-
cific ἀριθμός means only that such a thing is present in just this definite mul-
titude. This characterization of the mode of being of number, however,
presents the problem of how one is to account for the purely noetical qual-
ity of ἀριθμοὶ μαθηματικοί. This is a problem for Aristotle because, unlike
Plato, who posits an ontological independence of the νοητόν from sensible
beings, Aristotle’s reliance on the natural meaning (revealed in the analysis
of ordinary speech) of ἀριθμοίprecludes the supposition behind the Platonic
position. That is, it precludes the ὑπόθεσις that the homogeneous, indivisi-
ble (and therefore unchanging) characteristics proper to the ἀρχήof ἀριθμοί
in mathematical ἐπιστήμη are grounded in a mode of being separate from
αἰσθητά. Aristotle instead articulates the being belonging to these charac-
teristics as one of ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως, of being “lifted off,” “drawn off,” or, in other
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
348
————————
44. See Part III, § 85.

words, being “abstracted” from sensible beings. The mathematical objects
(τὰ μαθηματικά) studied by mathematical ἐπιστήμη, which in their being are
not detached from sensible beings, are therefore nevertheless studied as if
they were detached or separated. 
§ 134. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Abstracted Mode of
Being of Mathematical Objects
How is it that someone who thinks mathematical objects is able to do so as
separate from sensible beings, even though they are not separate? The an-
swer to this question arises by considering how the “single parts” (μέρη) of
sensible beings are gotten hold of in the λόγος. When the aspects of a sensi-
ble thing are distinguished in speech, one after the other, from the concrete
context of their being, a context without which they would not exist—for
example, ‘this’ ‘round’ ‘white’ ‘column’—it is apparent that the nexus of being
that links all the parts together is disregarded in a manner that allows each
part to be singled out and apprehended separately. This “disregard” estab-
lishes a new mode of seeing that allows something in sensible beings to come
before its regard in a manner that, for all their variety and transitoriness, is un-
changing. As such, it remains always in the same condition and therefore sat-
isfies the demand that for Aristotle, as for Plato, must be satisfied for a being
to be an object of ἐπιστήμη. Thus, Aristotle writes: “Each thing may be viewed
best in this way—if one posits that which is not separate as separate, just as the
arithmetician and the geometer do” (Metaph. M, 1078 a 21–23).45
The “lifting off” characteristic of abstraction expresses nothing other
than the “disregard” that makes possible the articulation in the λόγος of the
single parts of a sensible thing, a disregard in which sensible beings are de-
prived of their sensible qualities and individual differences. In a manner of
speaking, they wither away, becoming mere pieces of bodies or mere bodies
themselves, such that a demonstrative discipline becomes possible, one that,
as it were, “reads off” such pieces or bodies their arithmetical and geometri-
cal aspects, namely, how many or how extensive they are. Moreover, the the-
oretical mathematician, in making the subject matter of study that which
comes into view in abstraction, no longer views what has been abstractedly
lifted off as having its basis in mere bodies. Rather, disregarding all that is
sensible, the mathematician regards what has been abstracted in this manner
merely as “pieces,” pieces whose content, being indifferent to all that is sensi-
ble, leaves only that which is asked about in the question ‘how many’ together
349
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
————————
45. See Part III, § 86.

with continuous magnitude. In the case of what is investigated with respect
to its ἀριθμός, these abstract pieces are transformed into neutral monads, into
merely countable pieces of things whose sensible qualities have withered away.
Thus, it is not an original separation but a subsequent indifference that char-
acterizes the mode of being of pure ἀριθμοί. The task of determining how this
mode of being itself is to be understood, however, belongs not to mathemat-
ics but alone to πρώτη φιλοσοφία. That is because mathematics simply has to
accept the mode of being of the various original abstract beings that com-
prise the pregiven contents of arithmetic and geometry (e.g., the ‘one’, the
‘line’, the ‘plane’, and so on) and deal with them only insofar as their non-
contradictory connections are demonstrable.
§ 135. Klein on Aristotle’s Critique of the Platonic Solution
to the Problem of the Unity of an ᾿Αριθμός-Assemblage
It follows for Aristotle from the monad’s abstract mode of being that the
Platonic solution to the problem of the unity of an ἀριθμός-assemblage, that
is, to the question how the “many” can be understood as “one” at all, is un-
tenable. In the first place, it is untenable because the positing of a “common
thing” (κοινόν) above and alongside the multitude of units supposedly uni-
fied by the integrity of its γένος attributes unity to something that, properly
speaking, cannot be one at all. It cannot be one because what is meant in
speaking of an ἀριθμός is precisely something that is more than one thing.
Things are one by immediate contact, mingling, or the disposition of their
parts, none of which are possible when it comes to the monads in the dyad,
triad, and so on. Rather, just as two men are not one thing over and above
both of them, so too in the case of two pure monads.46 In the second place,
on account of what ἀριθμοίare one, “no one says anything” (Metaph. Λ, 1075
b 34). The ‘no one’ here being Plato and the Platonists, all of whom (on
Aristotle’s view) are silent about what causes something that is intrinsically
more than one nevertheless to be one, which on Aristotle’s understanding of
ἀριθμός is patently impossible. 
The Platonic view of the generic unity of ἀριθμοίis the consequence of
the supposition of the detachment and therefore independence of noetic mo -
nads from sensible beings. This supposition removes the basis for appealing to
the natural articulation of ever-different and divisible sensible beings to ac-
count for the originof the delimitation and unification of single ἀριθμοί. Hav-
ing eliminated this ultimate foundation of all possible unity, the chorismos
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
350
————————
46. See Part III, § 87.

thesis seduces the one who posits it into embracing the view that the possi-
bility of collecting together two monads in one ἀριθμός-assemblage has to be
the effect of an original and therefore independent γένος or εἶδος. However,
being in truth nothing other than sensible beings that have been reduced by
abstraction to mere countable pieces of such beings, monads are, like ἀισθητά,
divisible. This means that when “one” monad is divided into “two,” there is
nothing but their being two that may be termed their ‘twoness’. That is, there
is no “one thing”—the whole of which is beyond or beside the monads in
question—that provides the integrity of their delimitation as two. Thus, for
Aristotle, an ἀριθμός is precisely not one thing but a “heap” (σωρός) of sensible
beings or abstract monads. An ἀριθμός, therefore, is precisely nothing more
than these parts, for it is only what has been or can be counted.
This last point is crucial to Aristotle for understanding properly the
soul’s preknowledge of all possible ἀριθμοί, which, following Plato, should be
called a “stored possession” (κτῆσις)—in contrast to a “possession in use”
(ἕξις). Because an ἀριθμός is something that coincides with what is counted,
the “pure” (that is, “indifferent” to the determinate qualities of sensible be-
ings) noetic structures available to the soul prior to counting must not be
spoken of as one thing that, in turn, points to a κοινόν that should be under-
stood as a whole above and outside the multitude of counted objects. On the
contrary, because the availability of such structures originally becomes
known in counting, it is likewise rooted in the practice of counting sensible
multitudes and extracting from them, ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως, “pure” monads. As a
consequence, ἀριθμοίof “pure” monads involve, no less than ἀριθμοίof sen-
sible beings, “heaps”—in this case, heaps of “pure” monads. They are there-
fore “one” only in the sense that something can be said to extend “over the
whole” (καθόλου), which rules out their being “one thing” any more than
ἀριθμοίof sensible beings.47
§ 136. Klein on Aristotle’s Answer to the Question of 
the Unity Belonging to ᾿Αριθμός
Aristotle’s answer to the question of what it is that is responsible for the unity
proper to ἀριθμός, a question that he maintains is unanswered in the generic
Platonic account of ἀριθμός, begins by posing it only for actuallycounted mul-
titudes. Such multitudes, as multitudes of homogeneous ones, comprise a
unity insofar as each multitude is measured by its own one. Counting pre-
supposes the homogeneity of that which is counted, which means that in
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
351
————————
47. See Part III, § 88.

counting one and the same thing is fixed upon, such that its definite amount
is arrived at only after one and the same thing has been counted over. The ‘one’,
then, has priority notin counting as the superiority of a genus over a species but
rather in its character as the “measure” (μέτρον) by which the definite amount
of a multitude is determined. The “being one” of sensible beings marks both
the possibility of their being counted and the indivisibility of the “one” that,
insofar as it supplies the measure of what is counted, is “one sensible thing” and
therefore undivided. For example, the “being one” of each apple in an ἀριθμός
of apples is not divided and therefore does not have a division, even though
each apple as a sensible being can be divided, as can any other sensible being.
Indivisibility therefore belongs to what is counted only insofar as it is the ori-
gin of the measure of the count, because “whatever does not have a division,
insofar as it does not have it, is in that respect called one” (Metaph. Δ 6, 1016
b 4–6). Any specific ἀριθμός is therefore “a multitude measured by the one” (I
6, 1057 a 3–4). As such, its “being” (οὐσία) is the multitude of units as such,
in the precise sense of the “how many” it indicates. Thus, οὐσία is understood
here to be derived insofar as what each ἀριθμός is is not something that is sep-
arate or detached from the definite amount of homogeneous units it delimits.
Thus, for example, “six” units are not “two times three” or “three time two”
units but precisely “once six.” For Aristotle, then, there is no such thing as the
six, with a noetic being that would be distinct from the many hexads that de-
limit this or that multitude of “once six” units.
§ 137. Klein on Aristotle’s Account of the Origination of 
the Μονάς as Measure
The “totally indivisible” (πάντῃ ἀδιαίρετον) and “completely exact” (ἀκριβέ -
στατον) status that the arithmetician understands the μονάς to possess arises
for Aristotle on the basis of the elevation of a habitual procedure to the rank
of ἐπιστήμη. The habitual expression of the sensible beings in every count in
terms of their “being one”—for example, instead of saying ‘one apple, two ap-
ples, three apples’, what is said is rather ‘one, two, three’—points already to the
purely arithmetical status of sensible beings as countable material. When this
status is abstractedly “lifted off” sensible beings, the mathematical μονάς orig-
inates. And it originates as nothing more than the character of being a mea -
sure as such, a character expressed through its indivisibility and exactness.
The character of the one as measure is what is responsible for the universal ap-
plicability of “pure” ἀριθμοί, namely, the applicability of the μονάς to any arbi-
trarily countable being whatsoever. The μονάς is applicable in this way because
its mode of being is not one of being separate from the sensible beings that are
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
352

the source of its abstracted origin. Hence, it is only because sensible beings (as
the kind of beings that they are) are one and indivisible that the arithmetician
(having already abstractedly posited the μονάς as totally indivisible) is then
able to see what always follows from any given sensible being insofar as it is
subject to being counted or calculated with as a “unit.” Thus, for example, a
human being as the kind of being it is, namely as human being, is one and in-
divisible and as such the abstract μονάς is applicable to it.48
e Origin and Structure of Non-symbolic Numbers
353
————————
48. See Part III, § 89.

Chapter Twenty-six
Structural Diﬀerences in Husserl’s and
Klein’s Accounts of the Mode of Being of
Non-symbolic Numbers
§ 138. The Different Accounts of the Mode of Being of 
the “One” in Husserl, Plato, and Aristotle
The differences in the mode of being proper to non-symbolic numbers pre-
sented in Husserl’s account of authentic cardinal numbers and Klein’s ac-
count of the ἀριθμός-concept in Plato and Aristotle concern three issues, all
of which are crucial for understanding and assessing Husserl’s and Klein’s
presentations of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics. The
first issue is the status of the unit or the one, which all accounts character-
ize as discrete and multitudinous and as the element whose delimitation in
counting yields non-symbolic numbers. The second issue is the status of the
“being one” of the whole composing each non-symbolic number, an issue
that includes both the peculiar “one over many” unity belonging to the
whole of each non-symbolic number, as well as each number’s ordered dif-
ferentiation—qua precisely this unity—from other non-symbolic numbers.
The third and final issue is the scope of the intelligibility of non-symbolic
numbers, their ability to render definite the amounts of any arbitrary thing
at all that happen within the ambit of counting.
The articulation of these differences will permit us to consider their
significance for Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of the origination of the logic
of symbolic mathematics, a consideration that will enable us to assess the
philosophical significance of Klein’s deviation from Husserl on the nature of
the origin of the mathematization of nature.
The “one” for Husserl is a formal category that is nearly identical to
that of the formal category of anything, the correlation with the concept of
multiplicity being that which “alone marks out the concept of one over and

against that of anything” (PA, 84). This means that in Husserl’s account, as in
Plato’s account of the “being one” proper to mathematical monads, the con-
cept ‘one’ is inseparable from its opposite, the concept of multiplicity. Husserl
maintains, however, that for “number abstraction” this correlation “is not a
point that in any way comes into consideration.” His reason for maintaining
this is that when it is counted, “each object of the multiplicity is thought
merely as a ‘something’,” which means “the ‘something’ is already ‘one’” as far
as the delimitation—qua cardinal numbers—of the items in a multiplicity is
concerned.
The one for Plato is differentiated in accordance with the distinction
and foundational relationship between the “being one” of mathematical be-
ings and the incomparable unity of the “One itself.” As the ultimate foun-
dation of the unity belonging to mathematical and ontological beings, the
“One itself ” transcends them both. The noetic one is a mathematical being
whose unity is independent of somatic beings but dependent on the unity
of the One itself, because, as multitudinous, mathematical being is incapable
of accounting for the singularity composing the unity of the “one” that the
mathematical mode of being a multitude nevertheless presupposes. 
For Aristotle the one is that aspect of somatic beings that functions as
their measure when they are counted, and it is therefore a being—albeit a
secondary being. The mathematical being of the noetic one is nothing other
than the isolation of this measure aspect of somatic beings, an isolation that
at once disregards all the sensible characteristics of these beings that are un-
related to their being a measure and “lifts off ” from any sensible context
what has been so isolated. What remains as a result of this process is a “pure”
piece of somatic being, the νοητόν of the one.
§ 139. The Different Accounts of the “Being One” and 
Ordered Sequence Characteristic of the Wholes Composing
Non-symbolic Numbers in Husserl, Plato, and Aristotle
The “being one” of the whole composing each non-symbolic number for
Husserl is rooted in a psychological unity, namely, in the reflexion on the
act of combining together the ones in a multiplicity. The ordered sequence
of non-symbolic numbers is likewise rooted in a psychological unity, again
in the reflexion on the collective combination that unfolds with the succes-
sive addition of ‘ones’ to delimited multitudes, beginning with ‘one and one’.
The “being one” composing the whole of each non-symbolic number
for Plato is rooted in a trans-mathematical, which is to say, ontological generic
unity, albeit one that is different for each different number. Therefore, when
Structural Diﬀerences in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts
355

the mode of “being one” of more than one number, the mode of “being one”
of numbers, is considered, it can be said—in precisely this sense—that the
unity in question here is “heterogeneous.” It is a unity that is the condition re-
sponsible for the structural integrity of the somatically independent and
generically unique assemblages of ontological beings (γένη or εἴδη) that make
possible the “one over many” unity of each mathematical number. Moreover,
the unity of the structural integrity of each such assemblage is dependent
upon the unity of the trans-mathematical and trans-ontological “One itself,”
because the mode of being belonging to both mathematical and ontological
multitudes presupposes (rather than accounts for) the unity of a “being one”
whose completeness excludes any possible relation with what is not one and
therefore other than its unity. The ordered sequence of non-symbolic num-
bers is determined by the priority and posterity that characterizes the rela-
tionship to one another of the generic wholes composing each of the
heterogeneous assemblages of ontological beings that are responsible for the
integrity of the natural succession of mathematical numbers. 
For Aristotle the “being one” of the whole composing each non-sym-
bolic number is nothing other than the measure by which the definite amount
of ones that are delimited by each non-symbolic number is determined. The
ordered sequence of non-symbolic numbers is determined by the natural ar-
ticulation of the “heaps” of ones that make up each such number.
§ 140. The Different Accounts of the Conditions Responsible
for the Scope of the Intelligibility of Non-symbolic 
Numbers in Husserl, Plato, and Aristotle
The scope of the intelligibility of non-symbolic numbers, such that it in-
cludes the enumerative delimitation of any arbitrary object whatever, is ac-
complished for Husserl on the basis of the generic emptiness, which is to
say, the formal generality of the category anything. The abstractive lack of at-
tentiveness to the content of what is counted, which brings about the utter
depletion of its specificity that allows it to fall under the materially indeter-
minate concept of anything, is what confers universality on multiplicities
and their numerical delimitation. 
In Plato, the scope of the intelligibility of non-symbolic numbers is
also unlimited, though the basis for this is different than in Husserl. Non-
somatic noetic beings, the indivisibility and unchanging nature of which
comprise the purity of the true referent proper to counting and calculation,
are what permit any arbitrary being whatever to be enumerated. They per-
mit this, because what are really numbered when more than one of any spe-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
356

cific kind of being is counted are just these pure noetic beings, and not be-
ings determined in any other way.
For Aristotle noetic beings likewise are what are responsible for the
numeration of any arbitrary being, but (unlike in Plato) not because of their
independence from somatic beings. On the contrary, it is precisely their de-
pendence on such beings that is responsible for this, as abstracted pieces of
the being one and being indivisible of the generic what that belongs to any
somatic being. Because any somatic being, as the kind of being it is, is both
one and indivisible, the abstracted being of the noetic one is applicable to any
arbitrary kind of somatic being. 
§ 141. The Structural Differences between Husserl’s and
Klein’s Accounts of the Mode of Being of 
Non-symbolic Numbers
Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of the mode of being proper to non-symbolic
numbers diverge in ways that are significant not only in their own right but
even more so for their respective accounts of the origination of the logic of
symbolic mathematics. Among these divergences, the most important con-
cern their radically different accounts of the origin and character of the “ones”
that are the elements of the multitude delimited by non-symbolic numbers.
Notwithstanding Husserl’s appeal to “abstraction” in his account of their ori-
gin, specifically in his subsumption of abstracted individual contents under
the formal category of anything that yields the ones that are a part of the con-
cept of multiplicity, the abstraction and therefore their origin is radically dif-
ferent from Klein’s presentation of what is involved in Aristotle’s appeal to ἐξ
ἀφαιρέσεως. 
The intelligibility of noetic ones for Aristotle is inseparable from their
origin in somatic beings, an origin whose involvement in abstractive “disre-
gard” is admittedly similar to Husserl’s account of the abstractive depletion
of individual contents. Nevertheless, Husserl’s abstractive disregard prepares
the way for thinking these contents via the mediation of a concept whose ori-
gin is not abstractive, namely, under the concept of anything that originates
in the reflexion on the act of presenting, while for Aristotle the disregarding
at issue in abstraction is not preparatory to anything. Disregarding the sen-
sible characteristics of somatic beings, save for their “being one,” and thereby
isolating what makes them countable in a manner that allows this to be
treated as if it were separate from what it—in truth—is inseparable from,
has nothing to do with concepts for Aristotle: what is abstracted in this man-
ner is not a concept but still a being, a somatic being shorn of all its indi-
357
Structural Diﬀerences in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts

vidual differences and sensible characteristics. The purely noetic quality of
the abstracted being that follows from this mode of origination is therefore
inseparable from that in which it originates. As such, not only is the ab-
stracted noetic one still a part of the somatic being from which it is ab-
stracted, but its sensible indeterminacy is also limited because of this. This
last point becomes quite evident when that which is responsible for the ab-
stracted noetic one’s applicability to any arbitrary sensible being whatever is
considered, the isomorphism of each being one and undivided in their kind. 
In a word, then, the indeterminacy of the ones’ content in Husserl’s ac-
count of the mode of being of the elements in the multitude delimited by
non-symbolic numbers is the result not only of a concept but of a concept
that is totally foreign to both Aristotle’s and Plato’s accounts of the noetic
one, namely, of the ‘object in general’. We have just seen why the intelligi-
bility of the noetic ones in Aristotle not only supposes nothing of the kind,
but also is incapable of doing so. And again, the reason is that the noetic
ones are beings whose mode of being is inseparable from their origin in de-
terminate beings, which means that their applicability to any beings what-
ever is rooted in an isomorphism between their being one and indivisible
and the being one and indivisible of the kind that characterizes the what of
any determinate being. 
For Plato the non-conceptual mode of being of the noetic ones is even
more striking, for the chorismos thesis that posits them supposes that their
mode of being as beings is completely independent of somatic beings: not
only are such beings therefore not abstract in Aristotle’s sense, but neither are
they general in the sense of Husserl’s concept of ‘anything’. They are not “ab-
stract” because their ontological independence precludes their being “lifted
off” anything; they are not general because as beings they are determined by
both multitudinousness and homogeneity. 
§ 142. The Divergence in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts of
Non-symbolic Numbers 
Husserl’s account of the diversity of the collectively combined and delim-
ited ones—that is, the different cardinal numbers—is radically different
from Plato’s and, while in some ways similar to Aristotle’s, ultimately radi-
cally different from his as well. Like Aristotle and therefore unlike Plato,
Husserl does not appeal to heterogeneous unities in order to account for the
differences in integrity proper to the “one over many” unity belonging to
the (different) aggregates of ‘one and one’, and of ‘one, one, and one’, and so
on. For Husserl, the difference between the unity of each, in the former case
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
358

‘two’ and the latter ‘three’, is nothing more than the difference in the form
of the combination of delimited ones. Likewise for Aristotle—or, more
properly, Husserl’s account is Aristotelian in just this regard—the unity of
each non-symbolic number is just the counted heaps of ones, and nothing
more. However, whereas for Aristotle the unity—as an ἀριθμός—of the heap
originates in the measure character of the one that is counted repeatedly in
arriving at the amount of the same thing, for Husserl the unity belonging to
the whole of each non-symbolic number originates in the reflexion upon
the collective combination that combines and delimits the multitude of ones
(that answer the question ‘how many?’). The unity that results from this re-
flexion is neither ontologically generic in the Platonic sense nor formally
conceptual in the sense in which Husserl himself characterizes the unity that
belongs to the category of anything, but rather psychological. It is psycho-
logical in the sense that the origin of the relation between the ones that com-
pose the delimited multitudes of non-symbolic numbers is established by
the psychological act that combines them. (Precisely the problem of the log-
ical status of this relation, which is obscured in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s ac-
count of its genesis in psychological acts of combining, is what Husserl
addresses in his subsequent self-critique of this work, considered below. Out
of this criticism will come his attempt to account for the relation of arith-
metic and mathematics generally to logic by understanding mathematics as
part of logic.) 
Neither Husserl’s nor Aristotle’s account of the diversity proper to
non-symbolic numbers, however, addresses the main issue raised in Klein’s
presentation of the Platonic position: the inability of the kind of unity that
belongs to the homogeneity of the ones proper to unlimited and limited
multitudes alike to account for the differences between the exact amounts
that characterize each limited multitude as a different non-symbolic num-
ber. The exact delimitation of ‘one, one, and one’ cannot account for their
being ‘three’ according to the Platonic position, because each ‘one’ is one
and the same;49 nowhere in and nothing about these ones in any way speci-
fies or otherwise addresses why, for instance, ‘one and one’ should be both
identified as ‘two’ and differentiated from ‘one, one, and one’ (the identifica-
tion of which as ‘three’ is equally problematic), etc. Moreover, the appeal to
the unity of the “one over many” relation of the whole that is generated in
the reflexion on the psychological act of collective combination cannot ac-
Structural Diﬀerences in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts
359
————————
49. J. N. Findlay essentially repeats the Platonic argument against Husserl when he
notes that “Husserl has not considered what may be involved in the necessary diversity of the
abstract somethings collected, since something and something and something is not three if
the somethings are one and the same” (“Translators Introduction,” LI, 14).

count for the identity and differentiation at stake here either, because (on
Husserl’s own account) what differentiates one such whole from another—
which is to say, one non-symbolic number from another—is precisely the
combination of ones: ‘one and one’ is therefore differentiated from ‘one,
one, and one’. The “one over many” structure of the collective connection
(expressed by the ‘and’) of a) ‘one and one’ is therefore the same as b) ‘one,
one, and one’, and so on. 
Aristotle’s account of the being of non-symbolic numbers as heaps faces
the same problem, since there is nothing in different heaps of homogeneous
ones to specify or address the issue of why any heap should be identified as a
dyad or triad. There is also the problem of why heaps identified as either of
the latter should be differentiated from the other in accordance with the re-
lation of prior and posterior50—that is to say, why heaps of identical ones
should be related sequentially. 
The Platonic solution to the problems connected both with the
“being one” of the differentiated “one over many” kind of unity character-
istic of mathematical numbers and with their sequential order, the ontolog-
ical supposition of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί, is at best only a limited one, however.
While this solution does indeed make clear the aporetic nature of both of
these problems when one attempts to solve them using the kind of unity
that determines a mathematical multitude, its supposition of a generic unity
belonging to non-mathematical numbers has the disadvantage that it ex-
ceeds the sphere of intelligibility provided by so-called natural predication.51
Specifically, the natural meaning of ἀριθμός, as a multitude of countable
items, is lost because the monads that compose an ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός are in-
comparable and therefore uncountable.
The final point of divergence between Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts
of the mode of being of non-symbolic numbers concerns how they charac-
terize the condition or conditions responsible for the unrestricted scope of
their intelligibility. At issue here is not whether such numbers have the ca-
pacity to delimit amounts of any arbitrary beings or objects whatever: that
non-symbolic numbers are able to accomplish this is something that neither
Husserl nor Klein contests. However, the comparison of their accounts of
how these numbers are able to accomplish this, of what in their structural
modes of being makes possible the unrestricted scope of the intelligibility in-
volved in this accomplishment, discloses that their respective accounts are
indeed at odds with one another. For Husserl, non-symbolic numbers can
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
360
————————
50. See Part III, § 90, n. 87.
51. See Part III, § 83.

delimit any arbitrary beings or objects whatever because part of their very
structure includes the formal concept of—in effect—‘anything whatever’.52
Any object or thing can be counted because, once its determinative qualities
are abstracted, it is able to fall under the formal concept ‘anything whatever’.53
Klein’s account of the mode of being characteristic of non-symbolic
numbers (the ancient Greek ἀριθμοί) that is responsible for the scope of their
intelligibility with regard to any arbitrary kind of being whatever is non-con-
ceptual. Neither the formal concept of ‘anything whatever’ (or ‘object in gen-
eral’) nor the concept of ‘number in general’ is involved for either Plato or
Aristotle in the structure of ἀριθμοίthat is responsible for their ability to de-
limit unrestrictedly any kind of being. Beings—not concepts—are what
allow this, beings that, notwithstanding their different origins for Plato and
Aristotle, can only be thought. Thought as discrete, multitudinous, and in-
divisible, noetic beings are neither undetermined nor “general” in Husserl’s
—distinctly modern—sense of an ‘object in general’. Nevertheless, as deter-
minate intelligible beings, “pure” monads can account for the unrestricted
scope of the intelligibility of non-symbolic numbers. For Plato, they ac-
complish this by being the true objects of both practical and theoretical
arithmetic. For Aristotle, their abstractive relation to the mode of being one
and indivisible belonging to the “kinds” of sensible beings allows them to
enter into an enumerative relation with the “kind” that belongs to any sen-
sible being.
————————
52. In Philosophy of Arithmetic this formal concept is referred to as the anything
(Etwas), although he will eventually articulate it as the Etwas-überhaupt (anything whatever).
53. Using Husserl’s terminology in Philosophy of Arithmetic, the formal concept of the
Etwas can never be the content of a presentation, because its conceptual status originates in
the reflexion on the act of presentation itself. This is why he there considers it a “negative” de-
termination of the content of presentational acts, content that, to be sure, on this account
must be present in order for the concept of the anything to be thought. It should be also noted
here that even after Husserl abandons this overtly psychological account of the origin of the
formal concept of the anything, neither his account of its materially empty character nor its in-
ability to be experienced in (using Husserl’s later terminology) straightforward perceptual ex-
perience will be altered. 
361
Structural Diﬀerences in Husserl’s and Klein’s Accounts

Chapter Twenty-seven
Digression: 
e Development of Husserl’s ought, 
aer Philosophy of Arithmetic, on 
the “Logical” Status of the Symbolic 
Calculus, the Constitution of Collective
Unity, and the Phenomenological 
Foundation of the Mathesis Universalis
§ 143. The Need to Revisit the “Standard View” of 
the Development of Husserl’s Thought
The widespread view that Husserl both acknowledged and adequately ad-
dressed the shortcomings of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psychologism, at least
in principle, in his Logical Investigations has resulted in what we shall refer
to here as the “standard view” of the development of his thought subsequent
to his critique of his first work. According to this view, from the SixthLog-
ical Investigation onward, Husserl’s phenomenology, in both method and
substance, “overcomes” his first work’s illegitimate appeal to psychological
acts and structures to account for the objectivity of logical structures. The
key to this overcoming is located in Husserl’s introduction of the distinc-
tion between cognitive “acts” and the “objects” of acts, and his recognition
that the “ideality” of logical objectivity can, in principle, be established only
by acts that apprehend “categories” as objectivities given to cognitive acts
rather than (as in psychologism) by acts that apprehend the structure and
content of the acts that present these objectivities. 
From the standpoint of our guiding concern with Husserl’s account of
the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics, the standard view of the
development of Husserl’s thought is too general. Under the categories that are

putatively given to cognitive acts, it includes the collective unity of cardinal
numbers and multitudes or sets (Mengen)54 and assumes that the basic inten-
tional paradigm of acts that present “empty cognitive intentions” and acts that
present their “fulfillment” in the givenness of the logical objectivities them-
selves, which Husserl developed with respect to the “categorial intuition” of
logical “states of affairs,” holds also with respect to the apprehension of the ide-
ality of collective unity. On our view, this assumption cannot withstand a crit-
ical scrutiny of the content of Husserl’s attempts to resolve the “logical” problem
posed by multiplicities, because these attempts (from the Logical Investigations
on) clearly distinguish the kinds of logical unity characteristic of the whole and
parts of a collection from the whole and the parts of an individual object and,
correspondingly, the nature and “constitution” of their respective unities. 
Related to the standard view on Husserl’s “overcoming” of psycholo-
gism is the likewise standard view that Husserl’s mature logical investigations
in Formal and Transcendental Logic present a phenomenological theory of
judgment that adequately accounts for the origination of the distinction as
well as unity of the formal logic and formal mathematics that compose the
“pure” (completely formalized) mathesis universalis. Husserl’s account of the
origination of the logic of formal, if not symbolic, mathematics, is therefore
to be found in this text. On our view, his analyses in Formal and Transcen-
dental Logic of the structure and composition of the “pure” mathesis univer-
salis not only are insufficiently complete to warrant the view in question, but
also Husserl himself is acutely aware of the programmatic nature of his analy-
ses that is responsible for their incompleteness and says as much in their pre -
sentation. To this it has to be added that, on our view, the shortcomings of
those later analyses are rendered especially perspicuous if they are approached
from within the context of the development (subsequent to Philosophy of
Arithmetic) of his thought related to the logic of symbolic mathematics found
in both his major works and other key texts. 
To expose the prejudices that inform the standard view on the matters
that are of central concern in our study, a significant digression is required be-
fore we take up our final discussion of Husserl’s and Klein’s accounts of the logic
of symbolic mathematics. The task thereby will be to present the development
of Husserl’s thought on these matters in a manner that brings into bold relief
his mature views on them. To this end, we shall trace this development as it re-
lates to his views on the logic of the symbolic calculus, his critique of psychol-
ogism, and the phenomenological foundation of the “pure” mathesis universalis.
Digression: e Development of Husserl’s ought
363
————————
54. Regarding the transformation in the general meaning of the term Menge subse-
quent to Philosophy of Arithmetic, see n. 60 below.

Chapter Twenty-eight
Husserl’s Accounts of the Symbolic Calculus,
the Critique of Psychologism, and the Phe-
nomenological Foundation of the Mathesis
Universalis aer Philosophy of Arithmetic
§ 144. Husserl’s Account of the Symbolic Calculus 
after Philosophy of Arithmetic
Subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic, Husserl’s position on the origination
of the logic of symbolic mathematics is no longer ambiguous in his writings
inasmuch as they clearly express his abandonment of the thesis that the tech-
nique of symbolic calculation in universal arithmetic is logically equivalent to
arithmetical calculation that employs arithmetical concepts. Husserl charac-
terized symbolic calculation as the “surrogate” for genuine arithmetical think-
ing and concepts, but he now characterizes the logic that permits it to
accomplish this as “external,” in the precise sense of a technical procedure that
is grounded in syntactical rules—the “rules of the game”—rather than in gen-
uine arithmetical thinking and concepts. Because the external logic of the sym-
bolic calculus operative in universal arithmetic (and, for that matter, in formal
logic) produces valid results when measured by the standard of non-algebraic
and therefore “genuine” mathematical (or logical) thinking, Husserl still main-
tains that it functions as a “surrogate” for the latter. However, he does not take
this surrogate function to originate in the identity of the logical content of the
symbolic calculus and genuine thinking. In the case of universal arithmetic,
Husserl understands its symbolic algorithm to function independently of the
various concepts of its possible objects. In the case of formal logic, the algebraic
(and therefore symbolic) treatment of the rules for correct judgment presup-
poses rather than establishes the logical criteria for the truth and falsity of the
concepts (formal categories) of genuine logical judgment.

The clarity with which Husserl establishes that the symbolic calculus
is neither deduction nor its logic is not matched by a similar clarity regard-
ing the relation of its external logic to genuine logical thought. That is, his
thesis regarding the relation of the symbolic calculus to genuine thought is
negative: the symbolic calculus is not an artificial language—indeed, it is not
a language at all because it is not expressive of any kind of thought. The op-
erational rules and signs that compose the symbolic calculus are conceptually
blind surrogates for genuine deduction, and its algorithm is a mechanical
procedure that saves us from having to engage in complicated and laborious
deductions and enables us to produce its results with greater speed, certainty,
and ease than conceptually deductive thinking. But the “rules of the game”
that compose the “algebra of logic” are themselves not logic, which gives rise
to what Husserl himself characterizes as the difficult questions about the
essence and logical justification of its calculative method. Yet it is precisely
these questions, despite Husserl’s recognition of their importance, that nev-
ertheless remain unaddressed and therefore unanswered in his mature works. 
We shall show that when Husserl discusses the symbolic calculus in his
mature works, he always does so in terms of the negative thesis that its “rules
of the game” represent neither genuine logic nor the theory of such logic. To
this end, we shall first consider in detail the text that initially presents this
thesis, Husserl’s “Review of Ernst Schröder’s Vorlesungen über die Algebra der
Logik.”55 Published in 1891, Husserl’s account therein of the symbolic calcu-
lus as “mere” calculational technique clearly goes beyond the view of it ex-
pressed in his 1890 letter to Stumpf, where Husserl characterizes the symbolic
calculus of universal arithmetic as part of formal logic and describes formal
logic itself as a symbolic technique. In the Schröder review, Husserl distin-
guishes the calculus from “pure” deduction because he now understands the
technical device of a calculus of pure deduction to be external to the logic
proper to the pure implications belonging to any judgments whatever. Rather
than being capable of providing a logic of pure deduction, Husserl under-
stands the symbolic calculus to be a technique for making deduction “super-
fluous.” In 1903, Husserl credits his Schröder review with having “laid bare
the follies of extensional logic,”56 that is, the logic of classes that Schröder and
Husserl’s Accounts aer Philosophy of Arithmetic
365
————————
55. Edmund Husserl, “Ernst Schröder’s Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik,” Göt-
tingische gelehrte Anzeigen (1891), 243–78; reprinted in Hua XXII, 3–43; English transla-
tion: “Review of Ernst Schröder’s Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik,” in Early Writings,
trans. Dallas Willard, 52–91. Henceforth cited as ‘Schröder Review’, with page references
to the Husserliana edition and the English translation, respectively.
56. Edmund Husserl, “Melchior Palágyi, Der Streit der Psychologisten und Formali sten
in der modernen Logik,” Zeitschrift für Psychologie und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane31 (1903),

others use as the basis for the symbolic calculus. That precisely the view of the
essential distinction between pure logic and the “logical” calculus expressed
in his Schröder review informs all of Husserl’s subsequent thought on the
symbolic algorithm will be shown next, with the consideration of his accounts
of the “rules of the game” status of the symbolic calculus in his last work (Cri-
sis), as well as in his two major logical works (Logical Investigations and For-
mal and Transcendental Logic).
In a 1913 discussion of the development of his thought, Husserl artic-
ulates a more or less straight line leading from his preoccupation with sym-
bolic thinking in mathematics57 to his “breakthrough”58 to phenomenology.
He characterizes how, “[a]bove all” (ILI, 126), this breakthrough was con-
nected with his investigations of “the cognitive accomplishment of arithmetic
and pure analytical mathematics in general,” and their focus on “its purely
symbolical procedural techniques, in which the authentic, originally under-
standable meaning is violated under the heading of the ‘imaginary’ and ap-
pears to be turned into countersense.” Husserl attributes the appearance of
this countersense as what “led his thinking to the signitive and purely lin-
guistic aspects of thought and cognitive processes, and from that point on to
necessary universal investigations, investigations that concerned a universal
clarification of the meaning, exact delimitation, and characteristic accom-
plishment of formal logic.” He relates that “after many troubles,” he was able
to “understand theoretically” what he characterizes as “the immense impor-
tance for consciousness of the ‘merely symbolic thinking’ belonging to the
so-called external logic operative in mathematics.” However, he also writes:
“But how symbolic thinking is ‘possible,’ how objective mathematical and
logical connections are themselves constituted in subjectivity—and how the
evidence for this is to be understood, how, in other words, the mathematical
can be given in the medium of what is psychic and nevertheless be objectively
valid, all of this remained mysterious” (127–28). Husserl’s breakthrough to
phenomenology, then, is, in his words, “tied to these investigations,” which
means for him that they are two-sided. There is, “on the one side, the so to
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
366
————————
152–61, here 155; “Review of Melchior Palágyi’s Der Streit der Psychologisten und Forma l-
i sten in der modernen Logik,” in Early Writings, 197–206, here 199.
57. In 1906, Husserl wrote, “Extension of my efforts to the whole domain of the
purely logical was no doubt occasioned, more than anything else, by engagement with the log-
ical calculus during the Winter of 1890” (Personal Notes, 491).
58. Edmund Husserl, “Entwurf einer ‘Vorrede’ zu den Logischen Untersuchungen
(1913),” ed. Eugen Fink, Tijdschrift voor Philosophie 1 (1939), 106–33, here 124; English trans-
lation: Introduction to the Logical Investigations, trans. Philip J. Bossert and Curtis H. Peters
(The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975). Henceforth cited as ILI with German page references, which are
included in the margins of the English translation.

say ontological delimitation of the pure mathesis universalis” (128) and “on
the other side, the separation [Ablösung] [of mathematics and logic] from
psychologism.” 
We shall trace below the path that leads from Husserl’s consideration
of the possibility of symbolic thinking in mathematics and logic to both sides
of the breakthrough to phenomenology, with the goal of assessing the extent
to which his phenomenological investigations succeed in accounting for this
possibility. 
§ 145. Husserl’s Critique of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s 
Psychologism
On the side of the “separation” from psychologism, we shall consider
Husserl’s critique of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psychologism. This critique
locates a species of “logical psychologism” in that work’s attempt to account
for the logical unity of the collection in an abstraction directed toward the
inner perception of the mental act of collecting. Husserl now recognizes
such an abstraction to be capable only of accounting for the concept of col-
lecting, but not for the logical unity of the collection itself characteristic of
the concept of cardinal number. He credits his “fully conscious and radical
turn” (128) to Platonism with enabling him to realize that the logical unity
of the concept of number and every other logical concept is “pure,” in the
precise sense that logical meaning “in itself ” excludes all psychological con-
tent. Husserl initially ties the phenomenological overcoming of logical psy-
chologism to the recognition that the object of judgment is arrived at by
abstracting not from the mental act of judging but from this act’s object.
The symbolic presentation that is part of the act of judgment is therefore
understood to relate signitively to the presentation of a categorial object,
and not to the presentation of the act of judging. Husserl terms the non-sig-
nitive presentation of a categorial object ‘categorial intuition’, which occurs
in an abstraction from the sensuous perception of objects that renders pres-
ent the categorial object itself in a non-symbolic manner.
Our critical assessment of Husserl’s initial account of categorial intu-
ition in the Logical Investigations will show (in §§ 163–69 below) that he dis-
tinguishes the acts and objective contents of the judgment from the acts and
contents of the collection and that his analyses of categorial intuition focus
on the judgment’s predicative states of affairs. This will have the significant
consequence of leaving incomplete the phenomenological account of the col-
lectively objective correlate of the symbolically significative presentation of
the ‘and’ that Husserl’s analyses maintain refers to the collection as the logical
Husserl’s Accounts aer Philosophy of Arithmetic
367

object proper to the act of collecting. We shall therefore conclude that the ac-
count of categorial intuition in the Investigationsdoes not resolve the problem
of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psychologistic account of the logical unity of the
concept of cardinal number and that of collectiva generally. 
Husserl’s “mature” treatment of the constitution of the logical unity of
the collection and cardinal number in Experience and Judgment59 follows
the Logical Investigations in distinguishing judgments that posit predica-
tions in relation to substrate objects from judgments that posit the collection
as an objective unity. The analyses in Experience and Judgment go beyond
those in the Investigations, however, insofar as they locate a decisive differ-
ence in these two types of positing. In predicative positing the substrate ob-
ject is pregiven to the judicative spontaneity that posits the predicate in
relation to the substrate, whereas in collective positing the collection is not
pregiven as an objective substrate. Husserl attributes the emergence of the
collective unity as a substrate object—that is, as a “set”60—to the reflective
thematization of the presentation of the collection that results from the col-
lective combination of objects. Our critical assessment of these analyses
shows their proximity to Philosophy of Arithmetic’s discredited psycholo-
gism and concludes that they do not satisfy the “truly” Platonistic standard
that Husserl himself set for overcoming psychologism, that pure logical
meaning “in itself ” must exclude in principle all psychic content. 
Husserl’s mature statement of how phenomenology is able to over-
come psychologism no longer appeals to abstractive categorial intuition but
to the capacity of temporally individuated multiplicities of acts to refer to
numerically identical objects that, as such, are not temporally individuated.
The “supratemporality” of the reference of multiple acts to the “same” ob-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
368
————————
59. Edmund Husserl, Erfahrung und Urteil [1939], ed. Ludwig Landgrebe (Hamburg:
Meiner, 1985), 254; English translation: Experience and Judgment, trans. James S. Churchill
and Karl Ameriks (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1973), 215.
Landgrebe, under Husserl’s direction and supervision, prepared this volume on the
basis of the texts of Husserl’s four-hour lecture course entitled “Genetic Logic,” first given in
winter semester 1919–20, together with supplementary manuscripts from 1910–14 and other
lectures from the 1920s. However, the resultant text includes no critical apparatus that would
enable the reader to identify sources or dates of the material. See, however, Dieter Lohmar,
“Zu der Entstehung und den Ausgangsmaterialien von Edmund Husserls Werk Erfahrung
und Urteil,” Husserl Studies 13 (1996), 31–71, which provides a detailed reconstruction of
Landgrebe’s sources and establishes their dates—or most likely dates—of composition.
60. Because Husserl published Philosophy of Arithmetic four years prior Cantor’s
Beiträge zur Begründung der transfiniten Mengenlehre (1895), we have avoided translating
Menge as ‘set’ in Husserl’s first work on the grounds that because set theory proper is inaugu-
rated with Cantor’s work, such a rendering would be anachronistic. In Husserl’s works subse-
quent to the publication of Cantor’s work, however, we render Menge as ‘set’ where the context
requires it, as we have done here.

ject implies, according to Husserl, the “omnitemporality” of their numeri-
cally identical referent. Husserl therefore maintains that the basis for the
principled distinction between the real and the ideal is secured by the latter’s
omnitemporality and that with it psychologism, understood as the reduc-
tion of the ideal to the reality of the psyche, is overcome once and for all. Our
critical assessment of these analyses has demonstrated that they do not ad-
dress the kind of psychologism that Husserl himself identifies in Philosophy
of Arithmetic and, moreover, that their appeal to the numerical identity of
the referent of a multiplicity of acts presupposes rather than establishes the
logical unity of this numerical identity.
§ 146. Husserl’s Account of the Phenomenological Foundation
of the Mathesis Universalis
On the side of the ontological delimitation of the mathesis universalis, we
shall consider Husserl’s assignment of the task of investigating the pure logi-
cal “in itself” to a new science (pure logic), his formulation of this science in
accordance with (what he takes to be) Leibniz’s idea of a mathesis universalis,
and his account of its phenomenological foundation. Husserl’s embrace of
Platonism in order to overcome the logical “embarrassment” of psychologism
created the problem of how to establish the relationship between the signi-
tive thinking characteristic of logical judgment and the logical meaning “in
itself” characteristic of categorial form. Husserl’s phenomenological approach
to this problem is informed by his pre-phenomenological formulation of the
distinction between the signitive thinking that defines the “merely symbolic”
technique of the symbolic calculus and the signitive thinking that defines
thinking in the pure logical judgment. The latter thinking is also “symbolic”
due to its status as a presentation that refers to its categorial object in a non-
intuitive manner, though it is not symbolic in the non-conceptual sense of the
algorithmic manipulation of sense-perceptible signs according to the syntax
provided by the “rules of the game.” Because he is convinced of the logically
derivative status of the “merely symbolic” technique of algorithmic calcula-
tion, Husserl’s phenomenological investigations of the relationship between
the signification categories of pure logic and the formal categories of formal
ontology do not raise what he himself characterized as the difficult questions
about the logical justification of the symbolic calculus. That is, Husserl begins
with the conviction that the elemental and operational signs of the latter are
not logical objects in their own right but that they derive their “logical” sig-
nificance entirely from the combination o forms proper to materially empty
objects (“empty anythings”)—of which their letter signs represent the lawful
Husserl’s Accounts aer Philosophy of Arithmetic
369

forms. We shall show that Husserl does not investigate how these letter signs
are able to represent the lawful forms of formal logical combination. 
What Husserl does investigate is Leibniz’s idea of the mathesis uni-
versalis as a single systematic science embracing both formal logic and formal
mathematics. Husserl formulates this investigation as the phenomenologi-
cal project of establishing the unitary object domain of logical and mathe-
matical analytics. This project entails accounting for both the unity and
distinction between formalized logic and formalized mathematics, which
Husserl comes to term (respectively) apophantic logic and formal ontology.
Due to the traditional difference in the objects investigated by logic and
mathematics, Husserl is acutely aware that establishing the idea of the math-
esis universalis as the unity of the distinct disciplines of apophantic logic and
formal ontology hinges on establishing the unity of the object domain in-
vestigated by each discipline. That is, because of the singular nature of the
object investigated by predicative logic and the plural (manifold) nature of
the “object” investigated by mathematical analysis, the unity of the object
domain investigated by formalized logic and formalized mathematics (for-
mal ontology) is not something Husserl thinks can be justifiably assumed at
the outset of the project of establishing a phenomenological foundation for
the Leibnizian idea of a mathesis universalis. Husserl acknowledges in his
final work on logic (Formal and Transcendental Logic) that his first logical
work (Logical Investigations) did not establish the unity of these sciences
and that therefore the unity of their object was likewise not established.
That is, he recognized that the correlation between the signitive judgment
characteristic of formal logic and the categorial judgment characteristic of
formal ontology is not established phenomenologically in the Investigations. 
Husserl’s investigations in Formal and Transcendental Logic present
three considerations indicative of the phenomenological foundation of the
correlation between apophantic logic and formal ontology: 1) that the
mathematical theory of sets and the theory of cardinal numbers relate to the
same object domain as apophantic logic, namely, the empty universe of ‘any
object whatever’ or ‘anything whatever’; 2) that all formally ontological cat-
egorial forms of objects ultimately make their appearance in apophantic
judgments; and 3) that the “ontological” meaning that is inseparable from
the formalized categories ‘any object whatever’ and ‘anything whatever’ has
its genesis in the perceptual experience of individual objects. Our critical as-
sessment of these considerations will show that each falls short of establish-
ing the foundation for the unity of apophantic logic and formal ontology,
that is to say, each falls short of establishing their unitary formalized object
domain. And because of this, we shall show that Husserl’s mature logical in-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
370

vestigations provide neither a justification for the logic of symbolic mathe-
matics nor a satisfactory account of the origin of the formalization that
makes symbolic mathematics possible. 
In the case of (1), we shall demonstrate that Husserl himself recog-
nizes that the mathematical and logical reference to the object domain of
the ‘anything whatever’ does not establish the unity of formal logic and for-
mal mathematics because of the singular modality of its logical treatment
and the plural modality of its mathematical treatment. In the case of (2), we
shall demonstrate that the formalizing logical operation of “nominalization”
to which Husserl appeals to account for the transformation of the plural
judgment into an apophantic judgment directed toward a singular logical
substrate presupposes that the pre-formalized unity of the plurality has al-
ready been accounted for. That is, nominalization does not resolve the prob-
lem of the logical unity of the collection that Husserl acknowledges gave rise
to Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psychologism. In the case of (3), we shall
demonstrate that Husserl’s account of the relation to the experience of in-
dividual objects of the ontological meaning proper to the formal categories
belonging to formal ontology is inconsistent with the formalized logical
meaning of these categories. By appealing to an abstraction that takes its
point of departure from the individual object, Husserl’s analyses in Formal
and Transcendental Logic and elsewhere are incapable of accounting for the
formalization in which the materially empty concept of ‘any object what-
ever’ or ‘anything whatever’ originates. 
Husserl’s Accounts aer Philosophy of Arithmetic
371

Chapter Twenty-nine
Husserl’s Critique of Symbolic Calculation 
in His Schröder Review
§ 147. The Applicability to Mathematics of Husserl’s Critique
of the Symbolic Calculational Technique in Logic 
Husserl’s discussion of symbolic calculation in the Schröder review is guided
by his critique of the author’s presentation of an algebraic calculus as logic,
and in fact as an “‘exact’ logic” (Schröder, 20/68). Nevertheless, it is clear that
Husserl considers his critique of Schröder’s mistaken, and indeed self-decep-
tive61 approach to the relationship between logical thinking and calculational
technique to be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to the relationship between
mathematical thinking and calculational technique in mathematics. Husserl
buttresses his main critical point here as follows: “The logical calculus is, thus,
a calculus of pure deduction; but it is not its logic. In it we have its logic as lit-
tle as the arithmetica universalis, which spans the whole domain of numbers,
is a logic of that domain” (8/57). When considering the cognitive value of
the logical calculus itself, Husserl argues that the failure of its practitioners to
properly understand its scope and limits is no more reason to reject it than
there is reason to reject universal arithmetic, for “the most gifted of its [uni-
versal arithmetic’s] representatives are, and always have been, far removed
from a deeper grasp of its fundamental principles” (22/70). Indeed, he then
points to a parallel between logical and mathematical calculation: 
those who have bravely worked on through the [logical] calculus and familiar-
ized themselves to some degree with its technique, will find it hard to deny that
it performs a function similar to that of the arithmetical calculus in the domain
————————
61. Husserl writes that “one can hardly deceive himself more about his true goal than
the author does here” (Schröder, 5/54), and explains that he “will go into the details of this
deception” because “it is characteristic of the whole of extensional logic.”

of number—even though one not so grand in scope. One can hardly deny that
the calculus puts at our disposal methods which, in the restricted domain ac-
cessible to it, spare us extremely complicated and laborious deductions, and
achieve their results more quickly, more certainly, and above all more easily—
presupposing, of course, a full mastery of the calculus! (22/70–71)
The conclusion Husserl draws from one of the two main points of his
review—that the symbolic calculus is not a true logic but rather a time-sav-
ing technique—is also applicable, on his view, to the symbolic calculus oper-
ative in mathematics. His point that the symbolic calculation belonging to the
logical calculus substitutes “a rule-governed process of transposing and re-
placing signs with signs—for actual inferring” (21/69), and is therefore “an
external surrogate for deduction” (8/56) that functions as a time-saving tech-
nique rather than as a true logic, is also applicable to the external logic oper-
ative in symbolic mathematics. Therefore, in both cases Husserl understands
calculation as “a blind procedure with symbols, [which operates] according
to mechanically reiterated rules for the transformation and transposition of
the signs in the respective algorithm” (7/55–56).
§ 148. The Two Foci of Husserl’s Schröder Review : 
Calculus Is Not Deduction and Extensional Logic 
Is Part of Intensional Logic
Turning to the details of Husserl’s review, we note its two foci. The first is
that “calculation is not deduction” (8/56). The second is that “insofar as ex-
tensional logic [Logik des Umfangs] has any sense and meaning at all—and
thus not as a new logic, but rather as a special logical technique—it belongs
totally within intensional logic [Inhaltslogik]” (20/68). Husserl bases his ar-
gument for the first point on his claim that there is an “essential difference
between a language and an algorithm” (21/69)—the latter being understood
as a step-by-step procedure for solving a problem in a finite number of steps.
This difference means that the major presupposition of Schröder’s argument
for presenting logic as an algebra and, as such, as an exact logic in contrast
to the old logic, that it “invents an artificial language” (20/68) free of the am-
biguities that plague natural language, is utterly unfounded. Husserl bases
his argument for the second point on his claim that “every judgment about
extension is truly a judgment about content” (19/68) and therefore “that
when doing extensional logic we yet stand within intensional logic, or sub-
ordinate to it” (20/68).
Husserl’s argument that calculation is not deduction is embedded in
a deeper and farther-reaching set of claims about the nature and scope of
Husserl’s Critique of Symbolic Calculation in His Schröder Review
373

logic itself. Although these claims are neither explored nor substantiated in
the review, they are nevertheless significant because they touch on the prob-
lematic nature of the relationship between logic and mathematics, a rela-
tionship that Husserl’s mature self-understanding considered all but
resolved, save for the details, in the ontological delimitation of the pure
mathesis universalis in the Logical Investigations.62 Husserl’s claims regard-
ing the nature and scope of logic are situated within the context of his cri-
tique of Schröder’s characterization of the “essential elements of deductive
logic” (5/54). This critique takes Schröder to task for: 1) confusing “a mere
partial domain” within deductive logic, the domain of “pure deduction”
(6/55), “with deductive logic itself ”; 2) failing to realize that “logic, as the
universal theory of deduction,” includes more than the activity of deduc-
tion; specifically, it includes “the theory of all those mental activities which,
though not themselves deductions, yet serve in the derivation of scientific
truths” (7/56), mental activities that are therefore part of the “logical activ-
ities which are used in all deductive disciplines and which constitute the
essence of their methods” (6/55); and, finally, 3) falling short of his goal of
“presenting a logic of pure deduction alone” (7/56), but instead presenting
“no more and no less than a calculus of pure deduction.”
§ 149. The Calculus of Pure Deduction Is Neither Deduction
per se Nor Its Logic
The cumulative result of these three shortcomings, according to Husserl, is
that “the ‘laws’ of the calculus” (8/57) “are also nothing less than they are the
norms of all ‘valid thinking,’ or, more precisely, of inference conforming to
pure implications.” As norms, these “laws are not rules to which everyone does
and must conform, so far as they infer correctly.” In marked contrast to this,
“they are only rules which one can follow on any occasion, with full confi-
dence of a correct result.” Deciding the issue of “whether the deduction was a
correct one,” however, “is something which they cannot decide,” and they can-
not do so because “the logical theoryof deduction” (9/57) is “not even touched
upon” by the “algorithmic formulae” (8/57) that present these rules. In short,
“the canon for the deductive activities involved in knowing” is “in nowise mir-
rored” in the logical calculus of formal deduction.
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
374
————————
62. Illustrative of this is Husserl’s quoting at length in Formal and Transcendental Logic
his characterization in the Logical Investigations of “the strict characterization of the idea of a
formal theory of theory forms—correlatively, a formal theory of multiplicities” (FTL, 79),
the latter being the idea of what he subsequent to the Investigations calls a formal ontology, be-
cause “I cannot improve upon it.”

Husserl characterizes the mere partial domain in Schröder’s misun-
derstanding of the scope of deductive logic as “none other than that of purely
formal deduction” (6/55). Husserl writes: 
More precisely stated, it is the domain of pure implications between any judg-
ments whatsoever—in the case of which, as pure, there is no consideration of
the peculiar characteristics of the contents of the judged terms. Because of
this we have, in the concrete case, the possibility of replacing the terms with
general signs, of inferring according to the general schema, and only then re-
placing the signs by their specific meanings. Whatever can be deduced from
any system of given premisses on the basis of their mere “form” falls into this
domain—but nothing more.
Husserl’s critical concern is clearly not with the formalization of deduction
described here but with what he presents as Schröder’s restriction of the en-
tire domain of logic to the “pure” deduction that follows from this formal-
ization. Moreover, Husserl takes Schröder to task for failing to provide “a
logic of pure deduction” (7/56) to which he reduces logic’s entire domain.
What he provides instead, on Husserl’s view, is “a calculus of pure deduction,”
which Husserl characterizes as “a device for making deduction superfluous.”
That is because the calculus
is nothing other than a technique for manipulating signs: one which, by its
system of rules, makes it possible, given a fitting symbolization of the prem-
ises (their number and complexity may, moreover, be ever so great), to arrive
at the totality of pure deductions invested in those premises, or at their sym-
bolic correlates. But calculation is no deduction. Rather, it is an external sur-
rogate for deduction. (8/56)
Being an external surrogate for deduction, “the ‘algebra of logic’” (8/57)
does not address “the hard questions about the essence and logical justifica-
tion of the calculative method” (8/56–57). It does not do so because 
the logic of this algebraic calculus does not fall within the mental horizon of
the investigators who take the calculus to just be deductive logic—especially
since, in fact, the mental operations upon which the calculus is based do not
themselves belong within that domain of pure deductions which it exclu-
sively governs. (8/57)
According to Husserl, Schröder’s mistake—and that of the formalists
who, like him, reduce logic to formal or pure deduction and then reduce, in
turn, pure deduction to an algebraic algorithm (in the guise of a symbolic
calculus)—is rooted in the mistaken view that the symbolic calculus is a lan-
guage, albeit an artificial one. Invented by the “new logic” (20/68), Schröder
and others present the symbolic calculus as an exact logic, because the signs
it employs do not suffer from the ambiguities of natural language, of which
the old logic availed itself and which therefore was responsible for its inex-
Husserl’s Critique of Symbolic Calculation in His Schröder Review
375

actitude. However, for Husserl the signs at issue in the symbolic calculus are
manifestly not linguistic: “the correlation of symbols and thoughts set up at
the outset” (21/69) of the process of substituting a calculus for actual logical
thinking does not express these thoughts, “For the function of the sign here
absolutely is not to accompany the thought as its expression” (21/69–70). Not
being expressive, the signs that function as the symbols belonging to the cal-
culus do not fulfill the “peculiar function of language” (21/69), which “con-
sists in the symbolic expression of mental phenomena.” Thus, “A language is
not a symbolic method for the systematic derivation of conclusions, and a
calculus is not a symbolic method for the systematic expression of mental
phenomena.” Indeed, Husserl argues, “The art corresponding to linguistic
designation is grammar” (21/69), which “does not teach us how we should
judge, and it also does not give rules concerning how we can derive correct
judgments indirectly, through symbolic devices. Rather it only teaches us
how we are to express judgments correctly in language.” The implication here
is clearly that the art that teaches us how we should judge—namely, logic—
is not grammar and therefore not linguistic. What exactly logic is, however,
Husserl does not say explicitly in the Schröder review; what he does say is
what it is not: it is identical with neither deduction nor pure deduction; it
does not coincide with the symbolic calculus; it is neither a language nor its
grammar and therefore it is the art of neither natural nor artificial language.
What Husserl does express explicitly about logic is that extensional logic is ei-
ther part of or subordinate to intensional logic. We shall now take up his ar-
guments in support of this claim.
§ 150. Extensional Logic’s Subordination to Intensional Logic
Husserl severely criticizes Schröder’s interpretation of the algebra belonging
to the new logic as a calculus of classes, or as an extensional logic, on the
grounds that “every judgment about extensions is truly a judgment of con-
tent” (19/68). This means that such judgments cannot be separated—as
Schröder claims—from intensional logic and its function of providing “the
specification” (16/64) of a concept’s “content.” Husserl elaborates his argu-
ment for this as follows: “If we judge that class A is contained in class B, then
it is affirmed that the object of the concept class A is an object of the concept
contained in class B. Now we could also replace these concepts by their ex-
tensions, and form the relevant judgments. But the same point is to be made
in turn about these class judgments. And so on in infinitum” (19/68).
Husserl’s point here is that the judgments about a class itself can refer only to
its object, the class, insofar as it is the specification of the content of the con-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
376

cept ‘class’. As a consequence, Husserl concludes, “so little is it true that the
logic of extension is to be treated independently of the logic of intension, and
so little is the former ‘fixed untroubled by the latter’ [as Schröder maintains],
that when doing extensional logic we yet stand within intensional logic, or
subordinate to it.” Moreover, “what is meant, and alone can be meant”
(16/64), by “the definition of a concept by means of its extension” is “an in-
direct definition of the conceptual content to be defined by means of another
conceptual content corresponding equivalently to the first in virtue of hav-
ing the same extension.” Husserl maintains that this suffices “to make it
known that the ideal of an ‘extensional logic,’ i.e., a logic which in principle
considers only extensions of concepts, is futile, because it is objectless.”
It should also be noted that because Husserl considers “classes by them-
selves” (15/63) to be “nothing other than collectivities,” a close relationship
between extensional logic and mathematics obtains, insofar as one under-
stands mathematics—as Husserl does—to have as its subject matter collec-
tivities (multitudes, cardinal numbers, manifolds, and so on). Indeed, because
“only insofar as they are collectivities does the calculus consider them [i.e.,
classes],” it follows “that the calculus in its universal conception is to be des-
ignated as a universal calculus of collectivities, from which the class calculus
proceeds only by means of the special interpretation of the collectivities as ex-
tensions of concepts.” And, as we shall see, just as Husserl understands the
extensional logic yielded by the special interpretation of the universal calcu-
lus “as a special logical technique” (20/68) that, as such, “belongs totally
within intensional logic,” so too will he understand (in his subsequent works)
the universal calculus of collectivities (i.e., symbolic mathematics) as some-
thing that belongs totally within the pure mathesis universalis. Finally, we
shall also see that by characterizing the mathesis universalis precisely as the
correlationof formal logic and formal ontology, Husserl consciously brings to-
gether, under the heading of the general object belonging to the formal cat-
egory ‘anything whatever’, the subject matters of mathematics and formal
logic. Or, more precisely, we shall see that he characterizes the formal disci-
plines of mathematics and logic as investigating and therefore referring to the
same universal object. 
Husserl’s Critique of Symbolic Calculation in His Schröder Review
377

Chapter irty
e Separation of Logic from Symbolic 
Calculation in Husserl’s Later Works
§ 151. The Contrast of the Schröder Review’s Separation of
Logic from Symbolic Calculation with Their Status 
in Philosophy of Arithmetic
Husserl’s characterization in the Schröder review of the symbolic thinking
operative in mathematics goes beyond his account in Philosophy of Arith-
metic, and does so in a manner that is consistent with what he says about
these matters in the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations” of 1913.
The concept of an external logic that is applicable to “merely symbolic”
thinking is totally absent from Philosophy of Arithmetic. The question of the
logical foundation of signitively symbolic calculation is left unresolved at
the conclusion of the latter work.63 More precisely, the question left unre-
solved there concerns which of the two actual number concepts operative in
Husserl’s investigations—the cardinal number concept or the normative sys-
tematic number concept—the signitively symbolic number concepts64 “are
the logically qualified stand-ins for” (PA, 272). The assumption behind the
very way in which this question is posed, which presupposes that there is a
logical relationship between signitively symbolic numbers and the number
concepts for which they function as surrogates, is precisely what Husserl
rules out in the Schröder review. His argument that the symbolic calculus,
as an “external surrogate for deduction” (Schröder, 8/56), “is not its logic”
(8/57) is decisive on this point. It is not its logic because it does not touch
the “logical theory of deduction.” Strictly speaking, then, Husserl concludes
in the Schröder review that the relationship between the symbolic calcu-
————————
63. See Part III, §§ 51–52.
64. Strictly speaking, the rule-governed numeral signs that compose signitively sym-
bolic numbers are not concepts for Husserl. 

lus—logical or mathematical, on this point it makes no difference—and the
actual thinking and concepts for which it is the surrogate is not logical.
Therefore, in contrast to Philosophy of Arithmetic, “merely symbolic think-
ing” in the Schröder review is not the logically qualified stand-in for the
thinking and concepts for which its rule-governed technique substitutes a
calculation process, and it is not such because its “logic” is in effect external
to the thinking and concepts for which it acts as a surrogate. 
This understanding of the logical status of the symbolic calculus, how-
ever, does not lead Husserl to reject as logically irrelevant what, in the “Intro-
duction to theLogical Investigations,” he refers to as its “so-called external logic.”
On the contrary, as we have seen, he applauds—in so many words—the “im-
mense importance for consciousness” (ILI, 127) of the calculus insofar as it
“puts at our disposal methods which, in the restricted domain accessible to it,
spare us extremely complicated and laborious deductions, and achieve their re-
sults more quickly, more certainly, and above all more easily” (Schröder, 23/71).
This last point, of course, is something that Husserl’s arguments in the Schröder
review arrive at on the basis of what he characterizes in the 1913 “Introduc-
tion” as the ability to “understand theoretically” (ILI, 127) the immense im-
portance for consciousness of the external logic of merely symbolic thinking in
mathematics. It should be noted, however, that this theoretical understanding
is something that (in the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations”) he situ-
ates within the context of the “mystery” belonging to the question how sym-
bolic thinking in mathematics is possible, the question of how mathematical
and logical connections can be constituted in subjectivity and yet, through its
psychic medium, give mathematical objects that are objectively valid. 
§ 152. The Consistency of the Crisis and the Schröder Review
regarding Symbolic Calculation
Husserl’s major discussions of symbolic mathematics subsequent to the
Schröder review are found in the Logical Investigations, Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic, and the Crisis. The strongest evidence that his mature
thought on the logic of symbolic mathematics remains consistent with that
in the Schröder review is the fact that Husserl’s last work characterizes the
symbolic calculus operative in algebraic arithmetic as a calculating technique
that excludes original thinking and genuine meaning. Thus, in the Crisis,
Husserl characterizes “the already formal but limited algebraic arithmetic”
(Crisis, 121/46) as “a sort of technique.” By this he means nothing other than
what he meant in the Schröder review when he characterized signitively
symbolic calculation as a technique, as the following makes obvious:
Husserl’s Separation of Logic from Symbolic Calculation
379

Like arithmetic itself, in technically developing its methodology it [i.e., alge-
braic arithmetic] is drawn into a process of transformation, through which it
becomes a sort of technique; that is, it becomes a mere art of achieving, through
a calculating technique according to technical rules, results the genuine sense
of whose truth can be secured only in a thinking that is both directed to the
subject matter itself and actually skilled in achieving insight into it. Merely
those modes of thought and evidence are now in action, which are indispen-
sable for a technique as such. One operates with letters and signs for connec-
tions and relations (+, ×, =, etc.), combining and ordering them together
according to the rules of the game, in a manner that, in fact, is essentially no
different from a game of cards or chess. Here the originalthinking, which gives
this technical procedure its authentic meaning and the rule-governed results
their truth . . . is excluded. 
This passage contains the two hallmarks of his discussion of merely symbolic
calculation in the Schröder review, namely, 1) understanding its procedure in
terms of a rule-governed process that, ipso facto, 2) excludes the original think-
ing that establishes both the rules’ and the game’s cognitive legitimacy. More-
over, Husserl also considers both the formalization and technization involved
here to be epistemically legitimate, just as he does in the Schröder review. He
thus grants that “the process whereby material mathematics is put into formal-
logical form, and formal logic, in turn, expanded and made self-sufficient as
pure analysis or the theory of manifolds, is perfectly legitimate, indeed neces-
sary, as is the technization with which from time to time the entire procedure
completely loses itself in a merely technical thinking” (122/47).
§ 153. The Consistency of Formal and Transcendental Logic
and the Schröder Review regarding Symbolic Calculation
The Schröder review’s approach to symbolic calculation is likewise evident in
Formal and Transcendental Logic, where, under the heading of § 33, “Actual
Formal Mathematics and the Rules of the Game,” Husserl discusses both “[t]he
danger of becoming lost in an excessive symbolism” (FTL, 86) and the “only”
way to avoid it. He says that the only way to avoid becoming lost thereby is to
realize that if “one builds only a discipline comprising deductive games with sym-
bols” (87), then it “does not become an actual theory of multiplicities until one
regards the game-symbols as signs for actual objects of thinking—units, sets,
multiplicities—and bestows on the rules of the game the significance of law-
formsapplying to these multiplicities.” In evidence here is clearly the framework
of the Schröder review, whereby the rules of the game belonging to the calcu-
lus characteristic of merely symbolic thinking acquire their cognitive legitimacy
solely on the basis of a thinking that is “actual,” actual in the sense that it is di-
rected to and governed by insight into the genuine subject matter of mathe-
matics and not “its symbolic analog” (88).
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
380

§ 154. The Consistency of the Logical Investigations with 
the Schröder Review’s Framework for Addressing 
Symbolic Calculation
Husserl’s most sustained discussion in the Logical Investigations of “symbolic-
arithmetical thought and calculation” (LI, 75/305) and “‘merely symbolic’
mathematical thought” generally occurs in § 20 of the First Investigation,
where he radically distinguishes the symbolic character of non-intuitive
mathematical thought from the symbolic character of non-intuitive, non-
mathematical thought. He writes in connection with this distinction that he
is “only concerned to remove confusions readily caused by misunderstanding”
two different kinds of symbolic thinking. There is 1) the “[n]on-intuitive
symbolic thought” belonging to “most of the range both of ordinary, relaxed
thought and the strict thought of science,” which is “‘merely symbolic’” (73/
304) in the sense that it is not accompanied by “illustrative imagery” of its ob-
jects. And then there is 2) the non-intuitive thought of mathematics, which
is symbolic in the sense that it “employs surrogative operational concepts.”
Husserl is very clear here that he thinks the symbolic status of each of these
types of non-intuitive thought “are two quite different things” (75/305). He
is likewise very clear that his removal of the confusion that results from not
distinguishing these two types of thought in no way amounts to the “logical
justification” and determination of the limits of the merely symbolic mathe-
matical procedure. He explicitly raises the question of whether the account
of the symbolic character of non-intuitive, non-mathematical thought, which
leads to the distinction between mathematical and non-mathematical kinds
of symbolic thinking, “conflicts with quite certain facts involved in the analy-
sis of arithmetical symbolic thought, facts I myself have stressed elsewhere (in
my Philosophy of Arithmetic)” (74/210). Regarding non-mathematical sym-
bolic thought, he says that it “is quite inadequately described if one talks of a
‘surrogative function of signs,’ as if the signs themselves did duty for something,
and as if our interest in symbolic thinking were directed at the signs them-
selves” (73/210). This, of course, might appear to conflict with Husserl’s con-
tention in Philosophy of Arithmetic and the Schröder review that the signs
belonging to signitively symbolic calculation function precisely as “surro-
gates” for systematically conceptual arithmetical thinking. However, Husserl
stresses that there is no conflict because, “Looked at more closely, . . . it is not
signs, in the mere sense of physical objects, whose theory, combination, etc.,
would be of the slightest use” (74/210) in arithmetical calculation. Rather,
the “true meaning of the signs in question” is characterized here exactly as it
is in the Schröder review, in terms of “their, so to speak, ‘games-meaning,’ a
meaning orientated towards the game of calculation and its well-known rules”
Husserl’s Separation of Logic from Symbolic Calculation
381

(74/210–11). These “arithmetical signs” (74/211), when treated “as mere
counters in the rule-sense,” are what lead to “numerical signs or formulae
whose interpretation in their original, truly arithmetical senses also repre-
sents the solution of corresponding arithmetical problems” (74–75/211).
§ 155. Husserl’s Pre-phenomenological Appraisal of Merely
Symbolic Thinking Precludes His Phenomenolog y from 
Pursuing Questions regarding the Essence and 
Logical Justification of the Calculative Method 
Husserl’s characterization of the “rules of the game” status of the merely sym-
bolical thinking belonging to the algebraic calculus and his clear under-
standing, in the Schröder review and subsequently, of these rules as bereft of
genuine logical meaning and actual logical thinking will prove to be extremely
significant when considered in the context of our comparative assessment of
his and Klein’s thought on the origination of the logic of symbolic mathe-
matics. What is at stake here is no minor philological matter, but rather the
fact that Husserl regarded his early, pre-phenomenological appraisal of the
external logic operative in the merely symbolic algebraic calculi of so-called
symbolic logic and mathematics to have settled the matter. As Willard notes
in his introduction to Husserl’s Early Writings (xxv), Husserl “continued to
regard the results of his early critiques of them [i.e., the ‘formalists’] as so de-
finitive that ‘formalistic’ issues are hardly mentioned in the Logical Investi-
gations or elsewhere subsequently.” To this we would add only that when he
does mention them, it is clearly in the terms we have just considered. 
Husserl’s reliance on the results of his early critique has major impli-
cations for his phenomenological account of the origination of the logic of
symbolic mathematics. Once he fixes the locus of logic as outside the rules of
the game that govern the symbolic calculus, he no longer asks what he char-
acterized in the Schröder review as “the hard questions about the essence
and logical justification of the calculative method” (Schröder, 8/56–57). We
have seen that these questions were precisely what guided his investigations
and analyses in Philosophy of Arithmetic, and that in the Schröder review he
still characterized them as “unavoidable” (8/57)—even as they remained
unasked in it. Apparently, however, he no longer saw any need to raise these
questions once he had satisfied himself that the true source of the logical le-
gitimacy belonging to the calculational results of merely symbolic thinking
stems from neither the signs themselves nor the operational rules for their
combination and manipulation, but solely from the actual thinking and con-
cepts that yield the laws for the combination forms proper to the formal cat-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
382

egories to which these signs and rules ultimately lead back.65 This means that
the problem governing Philosophy of Arithmetic, namely, how symbolic num-
ber concepts are able to function as the “logically qualified stand-ins for”
(PA, 272) the actual number concepts and therefore how the “parallel” be-
tween 1) the signs and rules for operating on these signs and 2) the system-
atic concepts and laws that establish the signs’ and rules’ cognitive legitimacy
is not addressed in any of Husserl’s subsequent works. In a word, how the
“fitting symbolization” between signs, rules, and the categorial laws is es-
tablished in the algebraic algorithms operative in the calculational proce-
dures proper to mathematics and formal logic is not investigated in Husserl’s
conception of the phenomenology of the foundation of logic.66 He is con-
vinced that the logical status of these algorithms is derivative of and there-
fore founded in a mode of thinking that is not symbolic in the sense that
the algebraic calculus is merely symbolic. It is therefore to this more original
mode of symbolic thinking, a mode that he eventually no longer character-
izes as symbolic but as “intentional,” that Husserl devotes his phenomeno-
logical investigations into the foundation of pure logic. 
§ 156. Husserl’s Account of the Doubly Derivative Meaning of
the Formal Nature of the Calculational Procedure 
Determinative of the Symbolic Calculus 
Husserl’s critique of the logical status of the symbolic calculus thus may be
said to make an essential distinction between formal logic and the calcula-
tional procedure operative in merely symbolic thinking. According to this
distinction, not only is the latter not the true locus of formal logic, but,
strictly speaking, it is not logical at all—and therefore a fortiori not a formal
logic. As a calculational procedure, the symbolic calculus is therefore “for-
mal” in a doubly derivative sense. First, its procedure is limited to “the do-
Husserl’s Separation of Logic from Symbolic Calculation
383
————————
65. That is, they lead back to these laws and categories insofar as they are their “fitting
symbolization” (Schröder, 8/56).
66. In this connection, Carl Friedrich Gethmann notes that “Husserl’s conception of
foundation remains conspicuously unspecific with respect to formal logic”; see his “Hermeneu-
tical Phenomenology and Logical Intuitionism: On Oskar Becker’s Mathematical Existence,”
trans. Marcus Brainard, New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy
III (2003), 143–60, here 150. In particular, “he does not apply the question of foundation to
the instruments that precisely enable combination according to a calculus, namely proposi-
tional connectors and quantifiers.” To this we would add that Husserl does not apply the foun-
dational question to these instruments for the reasons we have just sketched, namely, because
he considers a calculus not to be formal logic but rather a technique that substitutes a blind cal-
culational procedure for the solving of formal deductions.

main of pure implications between any judgments whatsoever” (Schröder,
6/55), namely, to judgments that are formal in the sense that “there is no in-
terest in the distinctive characteristics of the contents of the judged terms.”
Second, its application is restricted to the formal judgments about classes
(i.e., extensional logic), which means that it is but a part, and a technical
part at that, of the formal judgments about contents (i.e., intensional logic). 
We shall see that Husserl’s account of the logically derivative status of
the symbolic calculus means that, in significant contrast to Klein, he un-
derstands formal logic, and therefore the formally derivative, external logic
operative in merely symbolic mathematics, to have an origin apart from the
symbolic calculus operative in either symbolic mathematics or so-called for-
mal logic. Klein will be shown to hold the opposite view, that the origin of
the formalization that makes both formal mathematics and formal logic pos-
sible is inseparable from the origin of the symbolic calculus. Thus, while
both thinkers are in agreement regarding the materially indeterminate char-
acter proper to the “object” of formalized thinking, specifically its status as
a “general object,” their accounts of its origination differ sharply. In prepa-
ration for our assessment of their respective accounts of the origination of
the logic of symbolic calculus, we shall now turn our attention to the devel-
opment of Husserl’s understanding, subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic,
of the origin of this general object, his terms for which are the formal cate-
gories of ‘anything whatever’ and ‘any object whatever’.
§ 157. Characterization of the Reference to the Empty 
Universe ‘Any Object Whatever’ of the Elements 
Belonging to Multitudes and the Units Belonging to Number
Husserl’s mature logical investigations (in Formal and Transcendental Logic)
trace “the idea of a universal science, a formal mathematics in the fully com-
prehensive sense, whose universal province is unshakably delimited as the do-
main of the highest form-concept, any object whatever—or the domain of
anything whatever, conceived with the emptiest universality,” to “the naturally
broadest universality of the concepts of set and number.” More precisely, he
relates that it was his consideration of “the concepts of element and unit
which respectively determine their meaning” which led to his recognition
that “the theory of sets and the theory of cardinal numbers refer to the empty
universe, any object or anything whatever.”67 Husserl characterizes the “for-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
384
————————
67. Husserl’s text includes a footnote indicating that this “was already done in my
Philosophy of Arithmetic” (FTL, 68 n. 1).

mal universality” of this domain as one that, “in principle, disregards every
material determination of objects,” and maintains that “if this mathematics is
built up—after the fashion of the expositions in the Logical Investigations—
within the total complex of the idea of a logic” (86), then “it appears as the
highest level of logical analytics, founded on the essentially preceding lower
level” of logic. Moreover, he regards it as “natural to view this whole mathe-
matics as an ontology (an a priori theory of objects), though a formal one, re-
lating to the pure modes of ‘anything whatever’” (68). Indeed, Husserl
maintains that “The formalness of these disciplines lies . . . in this relation to
‘any objectivity whatever’, ‘anything whatever’” (76), and that it is precisely
this “universal concept that should delimit the unitary province of these dis-
ciplines (which obviously belong together)” (68).
Husserl’s articulation of the “idea” of “a full and entire mathesis uni-
versalis” (87) in Formal and Transcendental Logicis tied, then, to this account
of “a great problem,” namely, that of the “systematic order” involved in “build-
ing” what he characterizes as “a formal mathematics that does not float in the
air but stands on its foundations and is inseparably one with them.” This
problem, which “is none other than the problem of a full and entire logical an-
alytics,” and the progress Husserl makes toward resolving it in the Logic will
be discussed in greater detail below. Before doing so, however, it is necessary
to consider precisely how Husserl understood the logical shortcomings of
Philosophy of Arithmetic’s appeal to the “reflexion” on acts to account for the
origin of logical relations to be overcome in his later works leading up to For-
mal and Transcendental Logic. Because our study is focused on his and Klein’s
accounts of the origination of the formal category ‘general or universal object’,
we shall focus on Husserl’s accounts of the origination of the cardinal num-
ber concepts and the domain of “the empty universe anything or anything
whatever” (FTL, 68) subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic.
Husserl’s Separation of Logic from Symbolic Calculation
385

Chapter irty-one
Husserl on the Shortcomings of the Appeal
to the “Reﬂexion” on Acts to Account for the
Origin of Logical Relations in the Works
Leading up to the Logical Investigations
§ 158. The Concept of Cardinal Number Is Essentially 
Different from the Concept of Collecting
Husserl’s account of the development of his thought subsequent to Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic zeroes in on what he presents as the shortcomings of the
latter’s appeal to “psychological reflexion in Brentano’s sense” (ILI, 127) to
account for “the unity of a collection,” the “concept of unity” (127), and, fi-
nally, “the concept of cardinal number.” Significantly, Husserl acknowledges
that “The unity of a collection is no material unity, grounded in the col-
lected items” (127) and that therefore there was “certainly something cor-
rect” in his view that “the presentation of a ‘set’ was supposed to arise out of
the collective combination.” However, he explicitly calls into question the
ability of the “‘reflexion’ on the act of collecting” (127) to yield the unity of
the set, because “from the reflexion on acts” of collecting “the concept of
collecting . . . is all that can result”—not the concept of the unity of the col-
lection. Indeed, Husserl reports that “doubts unsettled, even tormented”
him “already in the very beginnings” with respect to the question of whether
“the concept of cardinal number [is] not something essentially different
from the concept of collecting,” doubts that “then extended to all categor-
ial concepts as I later called them and finally in another form to all concepts
of objectivities of any sort whatever.” It is important to note, for our pur-
poses, that included in what Husserl reports that he was now calling into
question is the account of the concept of unity as something that “arises
from reflexion on the act of positing-as-anything.” 

Husserl confirms in the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations”
what we established in our discussion of his Schröder review’s abandonment
of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s initial thesis of the logical equivalence of au-
thentic and inauthentic (symbolic) presentations.68 Thus, he writes: “The
customary appeal in the Brentano school to inauthentic [symbolic] presen-
tation, presentation through relations, could not help” to dispel his doubts
because “that was only an expression in the place of a solution.” He likewise
calls attention to his view that the concept of the unity belonging to the col-
lective combination is something that “takes its place among the funda-
mental forms of ‘categorial’ consciousness in the sense of the Logical
Investigations” (126), albeit it does so in terms of “its contrast to these forms
of unity.” 
§ 159. The Loss of the Contrast between Mathematically 
Collective Unity and Logically Categorial Unity 
in Husserl’s Critical Response to Psychologism
The importance of this last point needs to be stressed because Husserl is here
differentiating the categorial unity belonging to the concept of multitude,
which he is now characterizing as “a basic form of the synthetically multi-rayed
consciousness,” from the basic forms of unity belonging to the pure logical cat-
egories of the Logical Investigations. This differentiation has significant im-
plications for our critical assessment of his account of “the inner unity of
formal logic with the pure theory of numbers” (130). Husserl’s account of the
unitary province of formal logic and formal mathematics is based on his prem-
ise that each, as a formal discipline, is related to the empty universality of any
objectivity or any thing whatever. In our critical assessment, however, we shall
argue that Husserl’s account of the difference between 1) the formal unities be-
longing to multitudes and cardinal number concepts and 2) the formal unities
belonging to the formal categories constituted in pure logical judgments fun-
damentally calls into question the possibility of realizing his idea of unifying
pure mathematics and pure logic on the basis of their both being related to
the formal objectivity proper to any objectivity or any thing whatever.69 We
Husserl on the Shortcomings of the Appeal to “Reﬂexion” on Acts
387
————————
68. See Part III, §§ 47–48.
69. See below, §§ 186–87, where we show that notwithstanding the standard interpre-
tation of Formal and Transcendental Logic, which maintains that Husserl established in that
work the unitary province proper to formal logic and formal mathematics, Husserl is well aware
that his investigations in Formal and Transcendental Logic are provisional, such that, as he points
out at one point, “the problem of the unity or difference of logical analytics [i.e., formal logic]
and formal mathematics can by no means be regarded as already resolved” (FTL, 70).

mention this now because we are about to articulate the main lines of Husserl’s
self-critical response to Philosophy of Arithmetic’s attempt to account for the
unities of multitudes, cardinal number concepts, and the positing-as-anything,
in terms of reflexions on psychological acts. We want to point out that his pri-
mary concern in Philosophy of Arithmetic to account for the unities proper to
multitudes and cardinal number concepts gets lost in Husserl’s critical response
to the inadequacy of such reflexions to account for any kind of logical unity.
The radical distinction he draws between what is purely logical and what is
psychological, a distinction made in order to overcome the psychologism in-
herent in Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psychological attempt to account for pre-
cisely these unities, is addressed only with respect to the independence of pure
logical (categorial) unity from psychological acts—and not the independence
of pure mathematical (collective) unity from such acts.
§ 160. Husserl’s “Separation” of Logic and Mathematics 
from Psychologism
Husserl formulates the basis of his “separation” of logic and mathematics from
psychologism in terms of the following distinction: “everything ‘purely’ log-
ical is an ‘in itself,’ an ‘ideal’; that which belongs to the proper essential con-
tent of this in itself contains nothing ‘psychic,’ no acts, nothing of the actuality
of subjects or empirically factual persons at all” (113/20). This distinction
itself is rooted in Husserl’s claim that “it is evident that truths are what they
are, and that, in particular, laws, grounds, principles are what they are,
whether we have insight into them or not” (LI, 240/233). More precisely,
his point here is that no part of the meaning and validity belonging to the
content of what he calls the “[i]deal conditions for the possibility of knowl-
edge” (239/232) is dependent on “the empirical peculiarity of human knowl-
edge as psychologically conditioned” (240/233). This means that such
conditions “cannot be valid insofar as we have insight into them,” but rather
“that we can only have insight into them insofar as they are valid.” 
However, Husserl does not understand the radical distinction made
here, between “the thought-act on the one side and the thought-significance
[Denkbedeutung] on the other” (ILI, 113), to rule out any relation between
thinking and the purely logical in-itself. Not only is he convinced that
“[s]omehow they necessarily belong together,” but also the articulation and
investigation of this belonging together becomes a major preoccupation of
his phenomenological philosophy. Nevertheless, he is also convinced that
before this relationship can be properly formulated, one has to feel “the em-
barrassment of the matter [i.e., psychologism] deeply and in the most in-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
388

tense form possible” (114) and to see oneself “compelled by the critical dis-
solution of the blinding prejudices of psychologism to recognize the purely
logical idealities.” Once the latter are recognized, the claim that “There cor-
responds to this unique field of existing objectivities a science, a ‘pure logic,’
which seeks knowledge exclusively related to these ideal objectivities, a
knowledge that therefore forms its judgments on the basis of pure signifi-
cations and signified objectivities as such (in completely pure and uncondi-
tioned universality)” (113), should likewise be recognized and, indeed,
recognized as compelling.
§ 161. Husserl and the Systematic Development of 
the Mathesis Universalis
Husserl’s discussion of the separation of what is logical from what is psycho-
logical, both here and elsewhere in his works, oddly enough does not make
explicit reference to the implications that the Platonism involved in this sep-
aration must have for the specific types of unity he had sought to account for
psychologically in Philosophy of Arithmetic. Subsequent to Husserl’s “fully
conscious and radical turn [from psychologism] and the ‘Platonism’70 that is
given with it” (128), the question of the origination—or, in his later termi-
nology, the constitution—of the unity of a collection, the cardinal number
concepts, and the concept of formal unity itself (the formal category of the
any object or objectivity whatever or anything whatever), if it is addressed at all
by him, is answered in a manner that elides the role attributed here to Pla-
tonism in his break with psychologism.71Husserl’s account of his development
in the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations” provides an important clue
as to why this became the case. He credits his study of Lotze’s logic, specifi-
cally “his inspired interpretation of Plato’s doctrine of Ideas” (129), as what
“gave me my first big insight,” insofar as “Lotze spoke already of truths in
themselves.” From this, “the thought suggested itself” to Husserl “to transfer
all of the mathematical and a major part of traditional logic into the realm of
the ideal.” Husserl then goes on to relate the following: “With regard to the
logic that before I had interpreted psychologistically and which had perplexed
me as a mathematical logician, I, thanks to a fortunate circumstance [i.e., his
study of Lotze], no longer needed lengthy and detailed deliberations regard-
Husserl on the Shortcomings of the Appeal to “Reﬂexion” on Acts
389
————————
70. Throughout the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations,” Husserl embraces
Paul Natorp’s account of pure logic as “‘the ideal in this truly Platonic sense’” (ILI, 113). 
71. This claim is substantiated below with reference to Husserl’s discussion of these
types of unity in the Logical Investigations, Formal and Transcendental Logic, and Experience
and Judgment. 

ing its separation from that which is psychological.” Indeed, armed with the
“recognition of this ideal sphere of being and knowledge” (113/20), Husserl
turned his attention to “a task that lies in the same direction, namely, to de-
termine the natural boundary of the logical-ideal sphere, and thus to grasp the
idea of pure logic in its full scope.” As we have already mentioned, Husserl
identifies the subject matter of this pure logic as the universal object, the do-
main of the form-concept ‘any object whatever’, to which, among other
things, the elements of the multitudes and the units of cardinal number con-
cepts investigated in Philosophy of Arithmetic refer. Husserl’s subsequent in-
vestigations of the scope of the idea of pure logic, as well as his investigations
of “the ‘being-in-itself’ of the ideal sphere in its relation to consciousness”
(114–15/22), are devoted to working out the idea that concludes the first
volume of his Logical Investigations, the Prolegomena to Pure Logic. Specifi-
cally, that because formal mathematics and formal logic are both defined by
their relation to the materially empty universe of the domain of the univer-
sal object, they belong together “as the systematic development of the math-
esis universalis, which . . . was already anticipated by Leibniz” (113/20). In
line with this, because formal logic, like formal mathematics, “refers to the
formal idea of object, to the ‘anything whatever’” (123/30–31), it too, like
such mathematics, “can be characterized as formal ontology” (123/31). 
§ 162. Husserl’s Idea of Pure Logic and the Task of Working
out the Theoretical Relationship between 
Formal Mathematics and Formal Logic
As a consequence of his characterization of the idea of pure logic, Husserl’s
concern with formal mathematics subsequent to his critique of psychologism
in the Prolegomena was to work out the theoretical relationship between such
mathematics and formal logic. By ‘formal mathematics’ he understands “all of
the pure ‘analytical’ doctrines of mathematics (arithmetic, number theory, al-
gebra, etc.) and the entire area of formal theories, or rather, the theory of
manifolds72 in the broadest sense” (121/28). And by ‘formal logic’ he un-
derstands “that particular concept of formal logic which remains as a residue
of ideal doctrines dealing with ‘propositions’ and validity after the removal
from traditional logic of all the psychological misunderstandings and the
normative-practical goal positings.” For our purposes, three developments in
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
390
————————
72. By ‘manifold’ (Mannigfalitigkeit or Mannigfalt) Husserl understands a mathe-
matical “object” composed entirely of purely formal relations governed by a finite number of
axioms. 

Husserl’s thought concerning this theoretical relationship are of interest. First
is the distinction made in the Logical Investigations between ‘significance cat-
egories’ (Bedeutungskategorien) and ‘formal objective categories’, the latter
being understood as the correlates of the former. Second is the refinement of
this distinction made in Formal and Transcendental Logic as a distinction
that, strictly speaking, is no longer categorial, namely, the distinction between
‘apophantic logic’ and ‘formal ontology’. (This distinction is likewise made in
Husserl’s understanding of their essential correlation.) And third is the in-
conclusive articulation in the Logic of the unitary province of 1) traditional
formal mathematical analysis and 2) judgments in the traditional sense. By
‘traditional mathematics’ Husserl understands “the mathematics of multi-
tudes and sets, of combinations and permutations, of cardinal numbers (the
modes of how-many), of ordinal numbers belonging to various levels, of man-
ifolds with their well-known forms” (FTL, 67), while he understands ‘pred-
icative propositions’ as judgments in the traditional sense.
In what follows, we shall trace these three developments and show
three things: a) that, beyond what we find in Philosophy of Arithmetic, Hus -
serl does not significantly modify his account of the origin of the unity of
multitudes and cardinal number concepts; b) that the form-concept of the
universal object is said to “arise by virtue of formalization” (106), a process
about which Husserl says very little, other than to characterize it as an “ab-
straction” from the material content of the experience of something individ-
ual; and c) that while (a) is rooted in the effects of Husserl’s enduring
Platonism, specifically his “transfer of all of the mathematical . . . to the realm
of the ideal,” (b) is rooted in Husserl’s equally enduring Aristotelianism,
namely, the characterization of the mode of being of mathematical unity as
inseparable from individual beings or objects.
Husserl on the Shortcomings of the Appeal to “Reﬂexion” on Acts
391

Chapter irty-two
Husserl’s Attempt in the Logical Investigations
to Establish a Relationship between “Mere”
ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical
Validity by Appealing to Concrete, Universal,
and Formalizing Modes of Abstraction and
Categorial Intuition 
§ 163. Husserl’s Account in the Logical Investigations of 
the Fulfillment of Signification Categories in Formal 
Objective Categories: Categorial Intuition
Husserl’s distinction in the Logical Investigations between ‘significance cat-
egories’ and ‘formal objective categories’ addresses the relation between
thinking and the pure “in itself ” of ideality that emerges as a result of his
break with psychologism. This distinction represents Husserl’s initial at-
tempt to account for how it is that the “in itself ” of ideality enters into a re-
lationship with thinking by distinguishing between the “mere” thinking of
such ideality and the state of affairs wherein the “in itself ” of ideality is in-
tuitively rendered present as a logically pure objectivity. 
Mere thinking, which occurs “in symbolic acts” (LI, 566/694), acts
whose symbolic quality Husserl maintains is the “significational essence of
expressive acts,” manifests what he calls an “intentional relation” (381/555).
As intentional, these acts are “directed toward” something either sensibly or
categorially objective in a manner that has “a priori precedence over empir-
ical, psychological facticity.” This precedence for Husserl is exhibited by
what he calls the “unity of the descriptive genus ‘intention’ (‘act-character’),”
where ‘descriptive’ points to the heart of his conception of ‘pure phenome-
nology’ in the Investigations. Husserl explains that pure phenomenology, in

contrast to empirical, psychological facticity, does not apprehend the “con-
tingency, temporality and transience of our [psychic] acts” (175/181), but
rather grasps, “in a purely descriptive understanding” (382/55), the “essen-
tial determination of ‘psychical phenomena’ or ‘acts.’” Descriptive under-
standing occurs in what Husserl calls “ideation,”73 which is a methodical
procedure that compares examples of the immediate experience of some-
thing (in the case at hand, symbolic acts of thinking) in order to apprehend
“the pure, phenomenologically generic idea” of these experiences as such.
Such apprehension prescinds from the empirical content of the experiential
examples in a manner that allows it to grasp that which, subsequent to this
prescission, is inseparable from the compared experiences as such.
Thinking—or more precisely, the “categorial forms in predicating”
(667/781), forms that Husserl characterizes as “the categorial forms of sig-
nifications” (670/784) and that compose “propositional elements” (667/
782)—belongs together with the “in itself” of ideality, what he refers to as
“the object itself in its categorial formation” (671/785). Husserl characterizes
the “belonging together” in the following manner. The “state of affairs sup-
posed” (668/782) by a judgment, “[t]he object with these categorial forms”
(671/785), is something that “is not merely referred to, as is the case where
significations function merely symbolically, but it is set before our very eyes
in just these forms.” When unpacked, the metaphor ‘to set before our very
eyes’ means that what is signitively referred to by the signification’s categor-
ial forms is “self-given, or at least putatively given, in the fulfillment which at
times invests the judgment, the becoming conscious of the state of affairs sup-
posed” (668/782). Thus, in cases of fulfillment, what is referred to by formal
words, by propositions about forms of quantity and logical categories, is in-
tuited in an intuition that terminates in what is referred to, namely, in the
formal category intended by the signifying intention of the “mere” thinking
that characterizes the formal words and propositions. Husserl characterizes
judging as involving “not only signification intentions belonging to actual
predications, but the fulfillments that in the end fit them completely”
(668/783). Thus, “formal words such as ‘the’, ‘a’, ‘some’, ‘many’, ‘few’, ‘two’, ‘is’,
‘not’, ‘which’, ‘and’, ‘or’, etc.” (657/774), along with propositions about “the
forms of quantity and the determinations of cardinal numbers, etc.”
(667/782), and “the logical categories such as being and non-being, unity, plu-
rality, totality, cardinal number, ground, consequence, etc.”74 (668/782), are
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
393
————————
73. See § 165 below.
74. Husserl’s initial inclusion of the word ‘and’, together with propositions about quan-
tity, and logical categories such as ‘plurality’ and ‘cardinal number’, as examples, respectively, 

all capable of being fulfilled. The function of their fulfillment “obliges us to
give the name ‘perception’ to each fulfilling act of confirmatory self-presen-
tation, to each fulfilling act whatever the name of an ‘intuition,’ and to its in-
tentional correlate the name of ‘object’” (671/785). Husserl terms such
intuition, which establishes “the relation between the signification-intention
and the signification-fulfillment” (538/668), ‘categorial intuition’ in recogni-
tion of the nature of the object given in its fulfilling act. 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
394
————————
of formal words, signification intentions, and categorial intentions that are all capable of being
intuitively fulfilled, is very misleading. Most commentators have interpreted this to mean that
the structure of the intuitive fulfillment of these examples is identical (or, at the very least,
structurally similar) to that of the examples of the logical words and logical categories with
which they are included. Thus, in the case most relevant to our concerns, the intuitive fulfill-
ment of the formal word “and” is interpreted to obtain along the lines of the fulfillment of a
(logically) categorial signification intention in a (logically) categorial objectivity, which, as we
have just seen (see also § 166 below), is how Husserl characterizes the complete structure of log-
ical judgments in the Logical Investigations. 
For examples of this interpretation, see Barry Smith, who treats “‘the conjunctive con-
nection A and B and C and . . .’” on a par with “those categorial acts in which we move from some
sensible, material object to the corresponding material species or universal” (“Logic and Formal
Ontology,” in J. N. Mohanty and William R. McKenna, eds., Husserl’s Phenomenology: A Text-
book [Washington, D.C.: Center for Advanced Research in Phenomenology and University
Press of America, 1989], 29–67, here 50), and Robert Sokolowski, who with respect to the con-
junction ‘A and B’ distinguishes between its being “only emptily, signitively, verbally meant” and
its being “intuitively meant,” in a manner that treats ‘A and B’ as a “categorial object” (Husserlian
Meditations, 38). For a notable exception to this interpretative tendency, see Dieter Lohmar,
who, in connection with precisely the issue we are raising, notes that for Husserl “collectiva are
not ‘states of affairs’ (nicht selbst Sachverhalte)” (“Husserl’s Concept of Categorial Intuition,” in
Dan Zahavi and Frederik Stjernfelt, eds., One Hundred Years of Phenomenology [Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 2002], 125–45, here 145). See also n. 86 below for a discussion of his account of the pe-
culiar—when compared with that of “states of affairs”—character of the relationship between in-
tention and fulfillment in the case of the “synthetic categorial intention ‘and’ itself” (144). 
What is overlooked in this line of interpretation, however, is that later in the Logical
Investigations (and, subsequently, in Experience and Judgment and Formal and Transcenden-
tal Logic) Husserl makes a sharp distinction between the categorial status of the collection as
such and that of the “state of affairs” (see § 168 below). A consequence of overlooking this is
that one fails to recognize the inapplicability of the “signification act intention–signification
act fulfillment” judgment structure to the manner in which the act of collection means the
unity of the collection as such. This distinction itself is indicated by Husserl’s account of the
different logical functions proper to the word ‘is’ (the copula) (see § 169 below) in the state
of affairs and the word ‘and’ in the collection. After his initial, “only superficially indicated
and very roughly characterized” (673/786) account of categorial intuition in the Logical In-
vestigations, which lumps all formal categories under the rubric of the fulfillment structure
of judgments, Husserl begins to address the implications of the difference between the in-
tentional unity of the collection as such and that of the “state of affairs” on the respective
modes of their intentional fulfillment. Indeed, while Husserl is quite clear that the latter
arises as the fulfillment of a significative intention or intentions, we shall endeavor to show
that it is not at all clear in the Investigations that for him the intentional unity of the collec-
tion as such arises similarly (see § 169) and that it is quite clear in his later logical works (see
below §§ 173–74) that the unities in question do not arise in a similar manner at all. 

§ 164. Formal Categories Comprising the “State of Affairs”
Are Not in Acts of Judgment as Objects of Reflexion 
But Are the Objects of These Acts
Husserl introduces “the concept of state of affairs” (669/783) to characterize
“the objective correlate of the complete judgment,” or, more precisely, the cat-
egorially objective correlate. In marked contrast to his account of the origin
of formal categories in Philosophy of Arithmetic, in the Logical Investigations
Husserl maintains that “the concept of state of affairs cannot arise out of re-
flexion on judgments, since this could only yield us concepts of judgment or
of real constituents of judgments.” The “abstractive foundation which allows
us to realize the concepts in question” (670/784), namely, the formal cate-
gories that compose the “state of affairs,” is therefore “[n]ot in these acts [of
judgment] as objects [of reflexion], but in the objects of these acts” (670/783). 
The precise status and character of the “objects” of the acts of judgment,
however, is not exactly easy to discern on the basis of Husserl’s presentation of
categorial intuition in the Investigations, in part because he characterizes it as
sharing the “essential homogeneity of the function of fulfillment” (671/785)
that is exhibited by “the sensuous concept of perception” (672/785). Regarding
the act of judgment, Husserl maintains that “It falls within the great class of
acts whose peculiarity it is that in them something appears as ‘actual,’ as ‘self-
given.’” But when Husserl’s investigation moves beyond what he himself
characterizes as so far an “only superficially indicated and very roughly char-
acterized” (673/786) account of the “distinction between ‘sensuous’ and ‘su-
persensuous’ perceptions,” the strict analogy between the two types of
perception breaks down. Thus, while “in sense perception, the ‘external’ thing
appears in ‘one blow,’ as soon as our regard falls upon it” (676/788), in cate-
gorial acts the categorial element is either included in or presupposes an act or
acts of straightforward perception. Categorial acts are therefore “founded acts”
(681/792), and as such they manifest “quite different acts in which con-
cretely determinate states of affairs, collections75 and disjunctions are given as
complex thought-objects, or as objects of higher order, which include their
foundational objects as really intrinsic [reell] parts in themselves” (676/788).
More exactly, only in one set of categorial acts is this the case, because for
Husserl there is “another setof categorial acts, in which the objects of the found-
ing actsdo not enter intothe intention of the founded one, and would only re-
veal their close relation to it in relational acts” (690/799). These latter acts
present what Husserl calls “the region of universal intuition” (690/800).
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
395
————————
75. But see § 168 below, where we consider Husserl’s sharp distinction between the
categorial character of collections and states of affairs.

§ 165. Different Abstractive Modes of Categorial Intuition:
Concrete and Universal Intuition of Categories
The categorial acts involved in universal intuition differ from those involved
in the concrete intuition of categories with respect to their mode of ab-
straction. Concrete acts are abstract “merely in the sense of a setting-in-re-
lief of some non-independent moment in a sensible object,” which is a
process that takes place when the same object apprehended in a “straight-
forward” manner is “grasped by us in explicating fashion” (681/792). By
contrast, Husserl characterizes universal intuition in terms of categorial acts
whose mode of abstraction is “ideational” (690/800), which, in distinction
to the concrete intuition of categories, yields “no such non-independent mo-
ment,” but instead “brings to consciousness, to actual givenness” this mo-
ment’s “idea, its universal.” Thus, whereas the “acts of articulation” (681/
792) belonging to the abstractive explication and grasping of the sensible
object are “so founded upon straightforward perception that the synthetic
intention was subsidiarily directed to the objects of the founding perceptions,
inasmuch as it held them together in ideal ‘contents’ or brought them to a
relational unity” (690/799), in ideational abstraction “a new categorial act-
character emerges, in which a new style of objectivity becomes apparent”
(690/800).
The categorial acts of ideational abstraction, however, are also
“founded,” albeit on a different foundation than that which founds the ab-
stractive acts of concrete categorial intuition. Instead of being directly
founded on straightforwardly apprehended sensible objects, ideational ab-
straction is directly founded on the abstractive acts of concrete categorial in-
tuition, which are founded, in turn, on the straightforward apprehension of
these objects. Hence, the acts of ideational abstraction are mediately founded
on the perception of sensible objects and immediately founded on the acts of
concrete categorial intuition. The abstractive “setting in relief” of “the man-
ifold single moments of ‘one and the same species’” (691/800) or formal cat-
egory that characterizes concrete categorial intuition becomes the basis for
the “new act-forms” of ideational abstraction. Husserl characterizes these new
acts as “acts of universal determination, acts, that is, which determine objects
universally as subsumed under a certain species A, or acts in which undeter-
mined single objects of a species A become present to us.” He maintains, “We
must presuppose such an act in order that this species itself” (690/800), as
something that is “able to stand before our eyes as one and the same,” can be
intuited in contrast to the manifold moments of it intuited by the “single acts
of abstraction” characteristic of concrete categorial intuition. 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
396

Ideational abstraction, then, “operates on the ground of primary intu-
itions” of the universality characteristic of categorial forms and “becomes
conscious of the identity of the universal” (691/800), an identity that is man-
ifest “in an overarching act of identification which brings all such single acts
of abstraction into one synthesis.” Therefore, “In an act of abstraction, which
need not involve the use of an abstract name, the universal itself is given to
us.” It is so given not “in a merely significative manner, as in cases of merely
understanding universal names, but we grasp it, it appears to us.”
§ 166. Husserl’s Admission That Neither Concrete Nor 
Universal Categorial Intuition Is Independent of 
All Sensible Relations
Husserl’s account of ideational abstraction, and not simply his account of
concrete categorial intuition, represents his response both to the logical
shortcomings of his earlier attempt to establish the origin of categorial con-
cepts by reflexion on psychic acts and also to the problem of establishing
the relation of thinking to the “in itself” of pure logical objectivity. The mere
abstractive setting-in-relief of non-independent moments of the sensible ob-
ject, in which the categorial object is self-given as the fulfillment of the sig-
nificational intentions of propositional judgments, does not yield the pure
logical category at all but only a single moment of it—what Husserl else-
where calls its “instance” (174/180). Indeed, in whatever manner these mo-
ments or instances are understood, this much at least is clear about them:
their apprehension, being inseparable from the straightforward sensuously
perceptual acts and perceptions on which they are founded, does not yield
what Husserl’s initial exposition of them claimed they yielded, namely, the
formal categories themselves independent of all sensible relations—and this
by Husserl’s own admission.76 Ideational abstraction, to which Husserl, fol-
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
397
————————
76. In this connection, it is interesting to note that in Husserl’s account of the devel-
opment of his thought in his “Introduction to the Logical Investigations” he mentions that
“the radical conquest of ‘psychologism’ in its most basic and universal form” (ILI, 338) was
“achieved” (by himself ) only “around 1908,” when “the important insight was gained that a
distinction between transcendental phenomenology and rational psychology has to be made.” 
See John Drummond’s excellent discussion of this issue in “The Logical Investigations:
Paving the Way to a Transcendental Logic,” in Zahavi and Stjernfelt, eds., One Hundred Years
of Phenomenology, 31–40. As Drummond puts it, Husserl’s attempt in the Logical Investiga-
tions to avoid psychologism, by making certain contents of the concrete act “the instantiation
of an essence, a meaning-species” (35), involves “some sleight of hand” (36) that precludes it
from solving the “problem of accounting phenomenologically for the origin of ideal meanings.”
Drummond articulates the sleight of hand in terms of Husserl’s distinction—made in the first
edition of the Investigations but abandoned in the second—between 1) the “really intrinsic” 

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
398
————————
(reell) contents of concrete acts, namely, “the fact of being directed to a particular object [i.e.,
the ‘matter’ of the act] in a determinate manner [i.e., the ‘quality’ of the act] with a particular
‘how’ of presentation [i.e., the ‘presentational content’ of the act, its difference between ‘empty’
signification and ‘full’ intuition]” and 2) the “intentional contents.” When this distinction is
in force, only the former, which Husserl characterizes as the really intrinsic, he identifies “psy-
chological contents” (35) as “the proper object of phenomenological description,” and be-
cause of this Drummond shows that Husserl’s appeal to the species content of the latter “to
avoid psychologism—carries us beyond the phenomenological contents of the act and cannot
be included in a phenomenological description” (36). Drummond clearly lays out what makes
the manner of Husserl’s appeal here one of “instantiation,” namely, Husserl’s understanding of
“the identity of a species” as “[t]he identity of meaning among many acts intending the same
object in the same way.” What establishes this appeal as an appeal that extends beyond the
phenomenological contents of an act is Husserl’s having restricted phenomenological de-
scription to the act’s “really intrinsic” contents, which “by hypothesis” are not intentional.
Hence, if this restriction is adhered to, the object and ideal status proper to “[t]he meaning-
species appears as a deus ex machina.” This is because the psychological restriction Husserl
places on phenomenological description prevents him from using such description to account
for the very identity that needs to be established—if the psychological relativity of the really
intrinsic contents of concrete acts is to be overcome in a manner that would insure their in-
tentional relation to the ideal meaning of the species. The identity in question here, as that of
certain moments belonging to the really intrinsic contents of concrete acts, an identity that,
as the identical content of more than one psychological act, is supposed to establish (via this very
identity) the identity proper to the ideal intentional content of the species-meaning, therefore
presupposes “the notion of intentional essence.” In other words, “To avoid psychologism, the so-
called phenomenological description must appeal to the (not descriptively contained) inten-
tional essence precisely because the essence has priority over its instantiation, but this appeal
is, by hypothesis, barred.”
Drummond identifies Husserl’s inclusion (in the second edition of the Investigations)
of the intentional contents within the act’s phenomenological content as the manner in which
the Investigations pave the way to a transcendental logic. Drummond sees in this Husserl’s im-
plicit recognition that the “intentional relation of consciousness to the world” (38) is “a whole
comprising non-independent parts, some of which are really intrinsic and some of which are
intentional,” and maintains that this recognition “leads to a fundamental change in Husserl’s
account of intentionality and meaning.” Drummond’s articulation of this change as some-
thing that “Husserl explicitly acknowledges” (38) in Formal and Transcendental Logic, namely,
that there is a distinction between “the ir-reality of meaning” (39) and that of “the ideality of
a species,” such that “Husserl can distinguish the identity of meaning from the identity of a
species,” will be considered below (see § 188) in our discussion of that text. 
For our present purpose, it needs to be pointed out that we support our claim that
Husserl recognized the dependence of concrete and universal categorial intuition on sensible
relations by appealing to his account of the objective self-givennesses of the concrete and uni-
versal categories to which these modes of categorial intuition refer. As we have seen (§ 162),
Husserl appeals to different modes of abstraction in order to account for the appearance to us,
as actual, of the single moments of the species, as well as the species themselves, in a manner
that is not merely significative. In his account of both of these modes of abstraction, he is quite
keen to emphasize that the objective status of either the single moment of the species or the
species itself is not based in an identity of the really intrinsic contents of acts but in the objects
of these acts. Thus, in the case of concretely determinate categorial objects, as well as catego-
rial objects of higher order, Husserl stresses that it is “their foundational objects” (LI,
676/788)—and therefore (presumably) not their foundational acts—that are included “as re-
ally intrinsic parts in themselves.” Husserl’s recognition that categorial objects include sensible 

lowing this admission, appeals as being able to yield such “pure” logical con-
cepts, nevertheless also appears to fall short of such an accomplishment, be-
cause, as he presents it, even this kind of abstraction is still founded—albeit
mediately—on sense perceptions. 
§ 167. Formalizing Abstraction as Distinct from Both 
Abstraction as Emphasis on Non-independent 
Moments and Ideating Abstraction
There is another form of abstraction, however, that Husserl discusses in the
Logical Investigations, namely “formalizing abstraction” (291/482), which
he maintains “is something quite different from what is usually aimed at
under the title of ‘abstraction.’” It differs from abstraction characterized as
“the emphasis on a non-independent ‘moment’ of a content, or the corre-
sponding ideation under the title of ‘ideating abstraction’” (292 n. */482 n.
1), which is to say, it differs from the two kinds of abstraction in the Inves-
tigations that we have considered so far. Formalizing abstraction differs from
these other types of abstraction in that, rather than set into relief a univer-
sal in a concrete perceptual content—for instance, “the universal redness in
a concrete visual datum” (291/482)—or apprehend directly this universal it-
self, it involves “abstracting from the specificity of the species contents in
question” belonging to these other forms of abstraction. 
Precisely how one abstracts from such contents in their specificity is
something about which Husserl is not very clear in the Logical Investigations
and—as we have already suggested—in his other works. He writes in the In-
vestigations: “In formalization we replace the names standing for the species
of content in question by indefinite expressions such as a certain species of
content, a certain other species of content etc. At the same time, on the signifi-
cational side, corresponding substitutions of purely categorial for material
thinking takes place” (291–92/482). In the footnote to this passage, Husserl
explicitly calls attention to “the role of formalization for constituting the
idea of pure logic as mathesis universalis” (292 n. */482 n. 1) and refers to his
discussion of both in §§ 67–72 of the Prolegomena. In light of this footnote,
however, it is surprising to find that while Husserl does discuss the tasks of
pure logic in these sections, he makes no explicit mention of formalization.
In connection with pure logic, he does mention that “we are dealing with
nothing but concepts, which already in their function make it clear that they
are independent of the particularity of any material contents of cognition”
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
399
————————
objects is precisely what is behind our claim here that he “admits” the non-independence of
both types of abstraction from sensible relations in the Investigations.

(245/237). He includes among such concepts “state of affairs, unity, multi-
plicity, cardinal number” and comments that “they arise solely in relation to
our various ‘functions of thinking,’ namely, in possible thought acts as such
or in the correlates that can be grasped on the concrete basis of these acts”
(246/237). But when Husserl addresses here the question of the origin of
these concepts, a question he explicitly formulates in terms of “a phenome-
nological origin or—if we prefer to rule out unsuitable talk of [psychologi-
cal] origins, only bred in confusion—the concern with insight into the essence
of the concepts involved” (246/238), he speaks not of formalizing abstrac-
tion but of ideational intuition. Husserl writes, “We can achieve such an end
[i.e., insight into the essence] only by intuitive presentation of the essence in
adequate ideation, or, in the case of complicated concepts, through knowl-
edge of the essentiality of the elementary concepts present in them, and of
the concepts of their forms of combination.” 
Husserl’s apparent inconsistency here, if indeed the ideational intu-
ition appealed to in this context as the source of insight into the essence of
the formal categories of pure logic is the same as the ideating abstraction
that he elsewhere distinguishes from the formalizing abstraction maintained
to be responsible for these very same categories, is not our major concern.
Rather, our concern lies with Husserl’s accounts of the origin—or, in light
of his remarks directly above, the phenomenological essence—of the for-
mal arithmetical concepts that he accounted for in Philosophy of Arithmetic
on the basis of reflexions upon psychological acts. In other words, how, sub-
sequent to his critique of psychologism, does he account for the unity of the
collections of units at issue in multiplicities and cardinal number concepts,
a unity signified by the ‘and’, as well as for the unity of the materially empty
formal concept ‘any object’ or ‘anything whatever’? 
§ 168. The Categorial Distinction between Synthetic Forms 
of Collectiva and States of Affairs
So far we have seen that in the Logical Investigations Husserl rejects any ac-
count of logical categories arising through reflexion on certain psychic acts
(668/782), categories that include those of interest to us, namely, ‘plurality’,
‘cardinal number’, and ‘unity’. On the basis of the general account of the con-
cept of judgment that Husserl provides immediately following this rejection,
which expands it to include both the act of signification intention and the act
of signification fulfillment, it might seem reasonable to expect that the con-
cepts on which we are now focusing would be accounted for on the basis of
the categorial intuition of logical categories. They would be phenomeno-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
400

logically clarified with respect to their non-psychological origin or essence, on
the basis of propositional elements and propositional forms of combination
whose significational intentions find their fulfillment in the state of affairs
proper to the logical categories and combinational forms signified by them.
However, we have already seen that Husserl distinguishes the two types of
abstraction involved in propositional judgments from the abstraction in-
volved in the formalization of logical categories, among the latter of which are
included precisely the categories that interest us.77 Moreover, he explicitly
distinguishes the “synthetic forms” of “collectiva” (688/798) from “states of af-
fairs,” saying point blankly that they “are not themselves states of affairs.” That
is, Husserl differentiates 1) the forms of the collections whose “givennesses”
are “constituted” in “the acts . . . which furnish a fulfilling intuition” for the
conjunction ‘and’ and 2) the concrete and higher-level categories emphasized
in judgments about the content of the object of straightforward perception.
They are thus distinguished, even as he recognizes that the former synthetic
forms “nevertheless play a large part in connection with states of affairs.” 
Owing to the role that collections play in Husserl’s account of the pe-
culiar unities of the wholes of pluralities and cardinal number concepts in
Philosophy of Arithmetic, we shall take a very close look at what he has to say
about them in the Logical Investigations. He writes that “What intuitively
corresponds” to the word ‘and’ 
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
401
————————
77. In the first volume of his Ideas from 1913—Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenolo-
gie und phänomenologischen Philosophie, I. Buch. Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänom-
enologie, ed. Karl Schuhmann (The Hague: Nijhof, 1976); English translation: Ideas
Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. First Book, trans.
Fred Kersten (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1982); henceforth cited as Ideas I with German page ref-
erence, which is included in the margins of the English translation—Husserl thematizes the
distinction between the types of logical categories involved in these different types of ab-
straction under the heading of “Generalization and Formalization” (26). There he says: “One
must sharply distinguish the relationship belonging to generalization and specialization from
the essentially heterogeneous relationships belonging, on the one hand, to the universaliza-
tion of something materially filled into the formal in the sense of pure logic and, on the other
hand, to the converse: the materialization of something logically formal. In other words:
generalization is something totally different from that formalization which plays such a large
role in, e.g., mathematical analysis; and specialization is something totally different from de-
formalization, from ‘filling out’ an empty logico-mathematical form or a formal truth.”
Husserl does not, however, discuss here or elsewhere in Ideas I the abstractive (or any other
type of) processes that would initially yield the “pure logical essence” belonging to formal-
ization or the “essential genera” belonging to generalization. Rather, he appeals to the au-
thority of “eidetic intuition”: “To verify this radical separation we must, as in all such cases,
go back to eidetic intuition which at once teaches us that logical form essences (e.g., the cat-
egories) are not ‘inherent’ in the materially filled singularizations in the same manner in
which the universal red is ‘inherent’ in different nuances of red” (27).

is not anything, as we rather roughly put it above, that can be grasped with
one’s hands, or apprehended with any [inner or outer] sense, as it can also
not really be represented in an image, e.g., in painting. I can paint A and I
can paint B, and I can paint them both on the same canvas: I cannot, how-
ever, paint the both, nor paint the A and the B. Here we have only one pos-
sibility which is always open to us: to perform a new act of conjunction or
collection on the basis of the two single acts of intuition, and so mean the
connection of the objects A and B. (688–89/798)
What Husserl says here is very close to what he says in Philosophy of Arith-
metic insofar as the source of the unity of a collection is not attributed to
anything that can be manifested in or by the relationship of its contents but
to the act that conjoins or collects them. However, whereas in Philosophy of
Arithmetic a reflexion on this act itself was characterized as the origin of the
collective relation belonging to the unity of the collection, as can be seen
from the last part of the foregoing quotation, in the Investigations this act is
characterized as meaning the connection and hence the unity of the collec-
tion. Thus, Husserl observes: 
That we speak of an act which unites these perceptions, and not of any con-
nection or mere coexistence of these perceptions in consciousness, depends
on the situation that a unitary intentional relation is here given, and a uni-
tary object which corresponds to it; the object can only be constituted in
such a connection of acts, just as a state of affairs can only be constituted in
a relational act-connection. (689/798–99)
§ 169. The Unity of the Collection as Such Is Neither Isomor-
phic Nor Homologous with the Unity of the State of Affairs
Based on what Husserl says in the Investigations, however, the exact charac-
ter or status of the unitary object that the unitary intentional relation of the
act of collection means and to which it is therefore related intentionally is not
readily discernible. (Indeed, as we shall see, what he says on this matter in his
subsequent works does not make things any easier in this regard.) Clearly,
the intended unity is not supposed to be a concept that originates in a relation
that is generated by the psychic act of combining together the items that be-
long to a collection. The unity is not supposed to emerge from the reflexion
on the generic similarity of the acts of collecting, as Husserl had thought in
Philosophy of Arithmetic, because he now realizes that such a unity—owing
to its psychological origin—cannot be logical; it cannot be logical in the
precise sense of what is meant by logical unity, namely, a relationship that is
valid in a manner that ipso facto excludes any psychological component’s
being responsible for, and indeed being involved in, its validity in any way.
Logical categories arise not through reflexion on certain psychical acts but in
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
402

acts that present the objective correlates of logically signitive intentions—and
Husserl tells us that the unity belonging to the collective concept of plural-
ity counts among the logical categories. 
Does this mean, then, that the unity of the plurality meant by the in-
tentionality proper to the act of collection is a categorial form that “gives it-
self ” in an act that presents the fulfillment of the collecting act’s signitive
intentionality? (This is how its unity would have to be given if its givenness
were akin to that of the categorial objectivities corresponding to the unity
of propositional elements or propositional forms of combination.) Not at all,
if we follow what Husserl, in the Logical Investigations and elsewhere, has to
say both about logical judgments and what in the Investigations is referred to
as “the character of an authentic intuition of the collection as such”
(690/799). 
Husserl is quite clear that logically signitive intentions, together with
their signification categories, are propositional components of logical judg-
ments, judgments that also include the acts of signification fulfillment. This
fulfillment terminates in the formal categories (and relations) that compose
the objectivity of the state of affairs of a judgment, and Husserl also quite
clearly states, as we have just seen, that collectiva are not themselves states of
affairs. This immediately gives rise to the question of whether Husserl un-
derstands the intentionality proper to acts of collection or conjunction to
have its basis in logical acts of judgment. And this is to ask whether Husserl
gives any indication or otherwise provides any evidence that the way in
which the act of collection means its intentional object is isomorphic to or
otherwise homologous with the way a logical judgment signifies its inten-
tional object. In the case of a logical judgment, the intentional relation to the
intended logical object (the formal categories and the forms of their com-
bination) is clearly inseparable from the signification categories that belong
to the signitive proposition. But is this the case with the intentional relation
belonging to what Husserl calls “the authentic intuition of the collection as
such”? Is the collection as such, which is to say, its unity as distinct from any
act or acts of collecting, something that has its counterpart in some kind of
significational intention that means it? 
In answer to this question, it must be said that Husserl not only does not
give any such indication or provide any such evidence, but, as we shall see,78 in
his most detailed and mature consideration of this issue, he draws a sharp con-
trast between “the judgment ordinarily favored by logic” and “the predicative
‘propositions’ in the broader sense, in which there is a connection in the form
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
403
————————
78. See §§ 173–74 below, esp. n. 85.

of ‘and’, ‘or’, etc.” (EJ, 254/215). In making this distinction, Husserl rejects pre-
cisely what would have to be supposed as the case in order for the structural
identity or isomorphism under consideration to obtain. He writes that the
predicative prepositions ‘and’ and ‘or’ “do not confer on what is formed by
them an independence of the same kind as does the copulative connection”
(254/214); they do not confer “the ‘copulative’form of unity” of the “truly apo-
phantic predicative judgment” that is favored by logic. This form of unity,
“which attains clearest linguistic expression in the connection of the subject
and predicate in the ‘is’ form,” “does not take place” (135/121) in “the syn-
thesis which occurs in the grasping of plurality” (134/119–20). Hence, in Ex-
perience and Judgment, Husserl characterizes the connection expressed by the
conjunction “and” as a connection that is founded in something other than the
explicative grasping of the concrete categorial structures (as he refers to it in the
Investigations). 
Thus, it is certain that for Husserl the relationship between the inten-
tion belonging to the act of collection that meansthe collection, and so means
it in a manner that employs or otherwise makes use of the “andas an objective
logical form” (LI, 689/799), is related to the collection as such in a manner
that is different from the manner in which the signification intention in a log-
ical judgment is related to the state of affairs as such. How, exactly, the collec-
tive intention is related to the collection as such in a manner that maintains the
latter’s independence from the act of collecting, however, Husserl does not
make clear in the Investigations or—as we shall show—anywhere else in his
writings. 
§ 170. The Contrast between Straightfor ward Perceptions of
Sensuously Unified Multitudes and Authentic Intuitions of
the Collection as Such 
In the Logical Investigations Husserl contrasts “the conjunctive perceptions,
in which alone the consciousness of plurality is authentically constituted,”
with “the straightforward perceptions of sensuously unified groups, series,
swarms, etc.” Referring explicitly to the analysis of the latter in Philosophy of
Arithmetic, he claims that the straightforwardly apprehended multitudes do
“not possess the character of authentic intuition of the collection as such”
(690/799), because, as “‘figural’ or ‘quasi-qualitative’ moments of sensuous
intuition” (689/799), they merely “serve as signs of plurality.” These sensu-
ously apprehended signs therefore function as “sensuous points of departure
for the cognition of the pluralities in question in a manner that is mediated
signitively—such that cognition now has no need for an articulated grasp
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
404

and knowledge of the single items [in the plurality]” (689–90/799). And
because the cognition in question is signitive, it is something that “for that
reason still does not possess the character of authentic intuition of the col-
lection as such” (690/799). 
Husserl’s reference here to Philosophy of Arithmetic provides us with
the occasion to recall the fact that the analysis of figural moments in that
work was intended to establish a basis in sensible presentations for the sym-
bolic presentation of groups. Moreover, it allows us to recall that Husserl
there expressed the view that “the symbolic presentations of groups form the
foundation for the symbolic presentation of numbers” (PA, 222).79 What
Husserl says here in the Investigations about the signitive cognition of the col-
lection that takes place in the straightforward perception of pluralities is, of
course, consistent with the view presented in Philosophy of Arithmetic. It
therefore accords with the view that the significative dimension of such cog-
nition permits the apprehension of the plurality as such in a manner that dis-
penses with the need to grasp its items singly. The further suggestion here in
the Investigations, however, that apprehension in this sense still falls short of
an authentic intuition of the collection as such, is something that is not found
in Philosophy of Arithmetic. That is because in the latter, authentic cognition
was the intuitive grasping of the single items of a group or plurality while si-
multaneously grasping them as members of the group in question. By con-
trast, in the Investigations Husserl’s reference to authentic intuition explicitly
refers to the authentic intuition of the plurality as a ‘collection as such’,
namely, to the authentic intuition of the concept or categorial from of ‘col-
lection’. In Philosophy of Arithmetic, this concept was said to arise from the re-
flexion upon the act of collection, that is, on the inner sense perception of
the generic unity of the psychological acts proper to collective combination.
In the Investigations, of course, precisely this account of the ‘collection as such’
has been ruled out by the critique of psychologism.
§ 171. The Radical Departure of the Logical Investigations
from Philosophy of Arithmetic’s Account of Number as 
the Delimitation of an Indeterminate Plurality of Units
Ruling out the psychological origin of the unity of the concept or formal cat-
egory of a collection is not the same thing, however, as accounting for the
non-psychological origin or phenomenological essence of this unity. In Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic, the recognition of the peculiar character of the collec-
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
405
————————
79. See Part III, § 48.

tion’s unity, its function to unify items that (considered either in themselves
or in relation to one another) are manifestly unable to support or otherwise
provide the foundation for their belonging together as a collective unity, mo-
tivated Husserl’s attempt to exhibit this unity on the basis of its origin in the
psychological act of collecting. Husserl’s interest in collective unity in Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic was guided by that work’s logical investigation of the
fundamental concepts of universal arithmetic, the concepts of multiplicity,
cardinal number, and the ‘anything’, all of which were there characterized as
formal categories—and so characterized because of the ability of pluralities
and cardinal numbers to unify collectively any arbitrary objects whatever. 
In the Logical Investigations the most sustained discussion of the arith-
metical dimension of the collection occurs in the Prolegomena, which means
that it comes before Husserl’s discussion in the Sixth Logical Investigation of
categorial intuition. The Prolegomena’s discussion itself is noteworthy be-
cause, among other things, it makes no mention of the peculiar character of
the collective unity in multiplicities and cardinal numbers that, as we have
seen, led Husserl in Philosophy of Arithmetic to attempt to account for its log-
ical status by appealing to acts of collective combination. Moreover, it makes
no mention of the combining function of the ‘and’ in acts of counting.
Husserl situates the Prolegomena’s discussion by affirming that “The forma-
tions produced in all arithmetical operations refer back to certain psychic
acts of arithmetical operation” (LI, 173/179). He goes on to say, “only in re-
flexion on these can we ‘exhibit’ what a cardinal number, a sum, a product,
etc., is.” Nevertheless, he maintains that “In spite of the ‘psychological origin’
of arithmetical concepts,” it would be a fallacious “μετάβασις εἰς ἄλλο γένος80
to demand that mathematical laws should be psychological.” Thus, “Num-
bers, sums, products and so forth are not such causal acts of counting, adding
and multiplying etc., as proceed here and there.” Husserl attempts to clarify
this fundamental distinction between the psychological and the mathemat-
ical by articulating the difference between 1) the presentation and the count-
ing of five and 2) the ideal species of the form: number five. He writes:
The number five is not my own or anyone else’s counting of five, it is also not
my presentation or anyone else’s presentation of five. It is in the latter regard
a possible object of acts of presentation, whereas, in the former, it is the ideal
species of a form, which in certain acts of counting has its concrete instance on
the side of what is objective in the constituted collection. (173–74/179–80)
By ‘possible object of a presentation’ Husserl means to stress that the num-
ber ‘five’ (or any other number) cannot “be regarded without absurdity as a
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
406
————————
80. That is, “change into some other genus.”

part or a side of a psychic experience, and therefore it cannot be grasped as
something that is real” (174/180).81 This objective independence of the
number ‘five’ from psychological reality, which for Husserl means from acts
perceived in reflexion or inner perception, is no doubt that for which his
appeal to the counted number ‘five’ as an instance of the ideal species of the
number ‘five’ is intended to account. 
Husserl articulates the relationship between number species and in-
stance in the case of the number ‘five’ as follows:
If we clearly make present to ourselves what the number five authentically is,
we likewise engender an authentic presentation of five, which means we must
first form an articulated act of collective presentation of any five objects what-
ever. Intuitively given in this presentation is the collection in a certain artic-
ulated form and with this an instance of the number species in question.
Noteworthy here is, first of all, the close correlation that is maintained be-
tween the authentic number ‘five’ and the authentic presentation of “five”
objects, which would accord with Philosophy of Arithmetic’s account of the
authentic concept and presentation of number. However, the account of the
collection being intuitively given as an “articulated form” that instantiates
the number species ‘five’ represents a radical departure from the account in
Philosophy of Arithmetic. That is because, in Philosophy of Arithmetic, au-
thentic number species were accounted for in terms of the delimitation of an
indeterminate multiplicity, where both the multiplicity and its delimitation
were accounted for on the basis of the collective combination—expressed by
the ‘and’—of units characterized as arbitrary objects falling under the formal
categorial concept of ‘anything’.82 It is thus likewise noteworthy that in the
Logical Investigations’ account of authentic numbers there is no mention of
the ‘and’ in connection with the collective unity of numbers nor of the for-
mal concept that allows any objects whatever to be so unified. 
§ 172. Husserl’s Account of “Absolute” Numbers Leaves 
Unanswered the Question of Whether Either Kind of 
Abstract Number Has the Status of a Formal Collection
Husserl’s account goes on to articulate how it is that the ideal form-species
of the number in question comes to be apprehended as it is apart from its
presentation in this or that singular act of intuitively constituted collection:
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
407
————————
81. In the first edition of the Logical Investigations, Husserl writes the following after
this: “Indeed, in the act of counting we find the individual, as a singular instance of the
species, possesses an ideal unity. However, this unity is not a piece of the singularity.”
82. See Part III, § 45.

Looking at this intuited instance we perform now an “abstraction,” i.e., we
extricate not only the non-independent moment of the collection-form
from what is intuited as such, but we grasp in it the idea: the number five as
the species of the form appears in consciousness’ sphere of meaning. What
is now meant is neither this instance nor what is intuited as a whole, and
likewise not the form inherent in and inseparable from it; what is meant is
rather the ideal form of the species, which in the sense of arithmetic is ab-
solutely unitary, and in whose acts an instance of itself may also be intuited
in the constitution of collections, and intuited thus without any part of it
being touched by the contingency of such acts with their temporality and
transience. Acts of counting come and go and cannot be meaningfully men-
tioned in the same breath as numbers. (174–75/180)
From this account of the abstraction of the ideal form proper to the species
of number, it appears that unlike in Philosophy of Arithmetic, where the form
of the species of an authentic number is nothing other than the form of the
conjunction of ones that arises in their collective combination, the species—
as what it is, namely, something that is absolutely unitary—is now some-
thing quite literally separate from such acts. Therefore, the “form” of the five
objects intuitively given in a counted collection is decidedly not the “ideal
form of the species,” because the latter in being what it is remains totally in-
different to and therefore different from the acts in which it is nevertheless
first apprehended—albeit indirectly, through its “instance.” Based on what
Husserl says here about the abstraction that extricates the “ideal form of the
species” from this instance, it appears to be unlike the formalizing type of ab-
straction discussed elsewhere in the Logical Investigations and closest in char-
acter to the type that places emphasis on the non-independent moment of
a content and thereby apprehends in ideation the pure species itself. 
However, what is apprehended in the abstraction of the ideal form
species proper to numbers is already formal in the sense in which the pure
forms yielded by formalizing abstraction are formal. This is evident from
Husserl’s account of the “ideal singular unities” (175/180) that belong to the
ideal form of the species that is characteristic of each of the numbers with
which “arithmetical propositions are concerned.” These singular unities are
“lowest species in a distinctive sense that is sharply differentiated from the
species of empirical classes,” a sense that “holds both of numerical propositions
(which are arithmetically singular) and of algebraic propositions (which are
arithmetically general).” As distinct from the species of empirical classes, either
type of proposition “by no means tells us anything about what is real, neither
the real things counted, nor about the real acts in which they are counted, in
which such and such indirect numerical characteristics are constituted for us.”
Consequently, “They are rather concerned with absolute numbers and num-
ber-combinations in their abstract purity and ideality” (175/180–81). 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
408

The contrast here with Philosophy of Arithmetic’s account of the uni-
versality of number concepts is striking; it includes no discussion of the for-
mal universality of the units whose collective combination was there held to
belong to the authentic cardinal number concepts, nor of the indirect ap-
prehension of such collections by systematically ideal symbolic number con-
cepts; moreover, the eventual replacement (in calculation) of the latter by
“surrogate” signs (i.e., the signitively symbolic numerals) that function as
“normative” numbers receives no mention. While it can be inferred from
Husserl’s account of absolute numbers in the Prolegomena that he still holds
instances of absolute numbers to appear or otherwise show up in the intuitive
acts of collecting any objects whatever, that is, in acts of counting, it seems
that what renders such acts capable of combining such arbitrarily considered
objects is not that each is considered abstractly (in the sense of Philosophy of
Arithmetic’s characterization of abstraction) as ‘anything’, a ‘certain one’. On
the contrary, it seems that in the Prolegomena it is precisely the abstract sta-
tus itself of each singular form of the number species, rather than, as Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic presents it, the formal universality of the units putatively
combined into collections that is responsible for the formal universality of
numbers—as well as for the arithmetical propositions that Husserl clearly
thinks are related to such numbers. What is not clear from this account, how-
ever, is whether Husserl understands such absolute numbers, either in them-
selves or in their instances, to have the status of formal collections.83 As we
have seen, in Husserl’s Sixth Logical Investigation, the authentic intuition of
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
409
————————
83. Barry Smith draws the proper logical conclusion from Husserl’s account here in
the Prolegomena of numbers as “species,” when he comments on “how well this Husserlian
view of species in terms of perfect identity works for species from the realm of categorial forms”
(“Logic and Formal Ontology,” 65 n. 34). That is, the perfect identity of two instances of the
absolute number five, which emerges when “two separate collections of five items are com-
pared,” points to there being “indeed something perfectly and straightforwardly identical in the
two collections: their respective individual fivehoods are absolutely alike, and this regardless
of all differences in their underlying matters.” Smith’s faithfulness to Husserl’s account here,
however, has as one consequence the elision of precisely the issue that we are maintaining
comes to the fore when the Prolegomena’s account of absolute numbers as species is considered
in light of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s (along with the Logical Investigations’ proper and Husserl’s
later logical works’) characterization of authentic cardinal numbers and authentic cardinal
number concepts as collections, namely, whether (to follow Smith’s phrasing) the “fivehoods”
in question, being materially empty and therefore formal categorial structures, present formal
collections. 
Insofar as the “instances” of the fivehoods that are compared become objective in cer-
tain acts of counting, the ‘and’—though not mentioned in this connection in either the Pro-
legomena or by Smith—would (for Husserl to remain consistent with his accounts—in
Philosophy of Arithmetic, as well as in his later logical works—of cardinal numbers as collec-
tions) have to be a factor in the categorial structure of the numerical unity of the five counted 

the collection as such is considered in connection with the logically syntacti-
cal form of the ‘and’,”though without considering the collection’s delimita-
tion (or constitution) as a number. Moreover, we have pointed out not only
that Husserl does not clarify the character of such an intuition, except in the
negative sense of being distinguished from the relational categorial intuition
belonging to logical judgments, but also that his discussion of numbers in
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
410
————————
items as an instance of fivehood. Moreover, the materially empty, formal categorial status of
the ‘and’ would also have to be a factor. The question, then, is what happens to the ‘and’ and
the collective categorial unity it indicates when the compared instances of fivehood are grasped
(or otherwise apprehended) as instances of the same species? Does the ‘and’ together with the
collective unity of the five items disappear in what Smith (35) refers to as the “ideal objects,
which are what result when such empirical groupings [i.e., the counted instances of five items]
are treated in specie, disembarrassed of all contingent association with particular empirical ma-
terial and context”? To maintain, as Smith does, that “Two different sorts of objects are then
involved: empirical objects, which get counted, thereby yielding empirical groupings (as, e.g.,
when we talk of there being ‘a number of objects on the table’) and ideal objects,” not only
does not solve the problem but raises the very specter of the Platonism that Smith—though
not Husserl, to judge by his account of his self-development in the “Introduction to the Log-
ical Investigations,” as we have seen—is so keen to avoid in his account of Husserl’s characteri-
zation of species in the Logical Investigations.
The specter of Platonism, of course, is Smith’s problem only insofar as he embraces
Husserl’s account of the species in the Prolegomena, which, it bears pointing out again, occurs
at an earlier point in his investigations than its presumably more mature treatment in the Log-
ical Investigations proper, especially in the Sixth Logical Investigation. However, even leaving
aside a developmental approach to this issue, Husserl’s account breaks down for internal reasons
alone, reasons that Smith does not consider when he maintains that “Husserl’s theory of lin-
guistic meaning, like his theory of logic, is therefore non-Platonistic in the sense that it is free
of any conception of meanings as ideal or abstract objects hanging in the void in a way which
would leave them cut apart from concrete acts of language use” (33). Smith maintains that this
is the case because Husserl’s account of meaning as species, as illustrated in the above numer-
ical example, accounts for the connection between concrete linguistic and meaning acts and
their “empirical” objects on the basis of both being “instances” of “any given meaning-species,
namely that part or moment which is responsible for the act’s intentionality.” In connection
with this, Smith endorses Husserl’s view “‘that the Platonistic [Smith’s addition] idea of a straight-
forward perception’” (57), or a “straightforward intuition,” of the species “‘is absurd.’” Rather,
he holds that, on Husserl’s view, “a fulfilled directedness to a species” (54), as the moments of
identity in concrete acts, occurs “in a process of what Husserl calls ‘ideating abstraction.’” 
There are two immediate problems with this view of the matter, one that is Husserl’s
and one Smith’s. Regarding the latter, as we have seen (§ 164), Husserl quite clearly distin-
guishes the formalizing abstraction that yields the categorial structure of the formal universality
at issue in pure logic as mathesis universalis, and, therefore, the formal universality of the pure
species of numbers, from the status of the universality yielded by ideating abstraction. As
Husserl puts it in Ideas I, generalization, which in the Logical Investigations is achieved through
ideating abstraction, is heterogeneous to formalization (see n. 77 above). Smith’s account of
the formal status of the species, as “disembarrassed of all contingent association with particu-
lar empirical material and context,” appeals therefore to a process that Husserl himself distin-
guished from the process that yields the formality of the species. The other immediate
problem, however—and is Husserl’s—is reproduced by Smith in his account of the two kinds 

the Prolegomena maintains that they belong to a different genus than that of
the psychological acts of collection proper to counting.
Husserl’s reasoning behind the move to absolute numbers in the Pro-
legomena, of course, is clear: he no longer considers the appeal to the generic
unity of psychological acts of collective combination to account for the log-
ical unity of numbers, subsequent to his critique of psychologism, capable of
sustaining the logical meaning that this appeal was intended to sustain. How-
ever, as we have just seen, one result of the separation of the unity belonging
to both the ideal instances of numbers and to the ideal forms of their species
from acts of collective combination is that the formal status of the numeri-
cal collection is no longer clear. Another result is that it is difficult to har-
monize Husserl’s account of the logical form of the ‘and’ in the Sixth Logical
Investigation, as something that is apparently meant in the intentional acts
that characterize conjoining and collecting, with the Prolegomena’s account
of the total separation of the unity belonging to numbers from the acts of
collecting that nevertheless must first execute the collective presentation of
a number of any objects whatever—in order for an instance of the number
species in question to be given intuitively in the collection presented in these
acts. Even if we make the reasonable assumption that the Sixth Investiga-
tion’s account of this issue is the more developed one, this resolves nothing,
but only highlights the incompleteness of Husserl’s thought on the matter
in the Logical Investigations.
“Mere” ought and the “In Itself ” of Pure Logical Validity
411
————————
of objects involved in the relationship between the instance of the species and the species it-
self. Briefly put, to characterize the former as ‘empirical’ and the latter as ‘ideal’ is indeed typ-
ical of the most traditional form of Platonism, namely, that of its so-called “two world” theory.
In the case at hand, the fivehood of the empirical collections of five, as ideal, must neverthe-
less be what is responsible for the unity of the collected empirical items as five. (This is the case
since, otherwise, the unity of the empirical collection would be empirical, which is the very
thing the appeal to the ideal species is attempting to forestall.) Not only, as we have suggested,
does the appeal to the relationship between empirical and ideal objects here not address the
problem of whether the ideal objects are formal collections, but neither does it address the
matter of the origin of the materially empty and therefore formalized ideality of such ideal
objects. In other words, what fails to be addressed and therefore resolved in Husserl’s account
of number as species in the Prolegomena is how what, in his “Introduction to the Logical In-
vestigations,” he unabashedly referred to as the “Platonism” of the non-empirical content of
formalized ideality of the species, is not overcome so much as brought back into a relationship
with thinking. (See § 191 below, where we trace Husserl’s attempt to do just this and assess—
on internal grounds—his success in doing so.)

Chapter irty-three
Husserl’s Account of the Constitution of the
Collection, Number, and the ‘Universal
Whatever’ in Experience and Judgment
§173. The “ Turning of the Regard” to Grasp the Collection 
as One Object
Husserl’s Experience and Judgment contains discussions that address both
how the collection comes to be apprehended as a collection and how, from the
“indeterminate plurality” (446/368) constituted in particular judgments,
cardinal numbers “are originally and directly produced” (447/368). Neither
discussion, however, addresses the issue that we have found to be problematic
in the Logical Investigations: the precise character of the intentional referent
intended by the relation proper to the conjunction ‘and’ operative in acts of
collecting and counting; the precise character, in other words, of the collec-
tively objective categories and categorial relations intentionally signified by
such acts—what the Investigations terms the ‘collection as such’. Neverthe-
less, because the discussions in Experience and Judgment represent Husserl’s
most mature thought on these issues, they bear close scrutiny.
Husserl’s account of how a collection becomes an object begins by reaf-
firming the Investigations’ distinction between the objectivities proper to
states of affairs and to collectiva. In line with this, he maintains that “States
of affairs are not the only objectivities of the understanding which are con-
stituted in predicatively productive spontaneity” (292/244). That is because
the collective as such, the “object set,” is also constituted in “the predicative
judgment,” albeit in a manner that is different from how states of affairs lead
to logical formations of sense. The difference concerns primarily the pre-
predicative and, in this sense, “pre-constitutive” level of the acts in which the
object substrate posited in the copulative judgment is formed, and the higher
level of acts in which the collective is formed as an objective substrate. Both

forms of predicative spontaneity, the “narrower” copulative linkage and the
“broader” conjunctive linkage, are “founded” judgments and therefore lead
to the preconstitution of their respective objectivities on the basis of acts of
pregiven syntheses together with their contents. However, Husserl maintains
that the collective linkage “does not lead to the logical formation of sense, to
deposits of sense in object-substrates in the same way as copulative spon-
taneity.” The collective as an “objective substrate” is not what is preconsti-
tuted in the predicative spontaneity that “leads, like all predicative
spontaneity, to the preconstitution of a new objectivity, that of the object
‘set’” (292/245); rather, what is preconstituted in collective predicative spon-
taneity is “the noetic unity of a consciousness but not yet the unity of an ob-
ject in the proper sense, that is, in the sense of a thematic object-substrate”
(294/246). 
The collective initially emerges in what Husserl refers to as “the do-
main of receptivity” (292/245), wherein “there is already a plural contem-
plation [mehrheitliches Betrachten] as a collective taking of things together.”
Involved here is “not merely grasping one object after the next, but a hanging
on to the grasp of the one object with the grasping of the other, and so forth.”
However, in “this unity of taking objects together, the collection is still not
one object.” That is, in the plural contemplation of objects “the pair, the col-
lection, more generally, the set of both objects” is, properly speaking, not con-
stituted; rather, “we have, more than ever, only a preconstituted object, a ‘plural-
ity’” (293/246). Thus, for Husserl, “as long as we carry out a merely collective
grasping together [kollektives Zumsammengreifen],” the apprehension of the
collection as such, as an “authentic object, something identifiable” (293/246)
“as one object” (293/245), does not come about.
In order for the collection, say, “the pair,” to be grasped as such, that is,
as a “total object A + B,” a “turning regard is first required” (293/246), by
which Husserl means to indicate a “retrospective apprehension” in which the
set, as a “thematic object-substrate,” is apprehended following its preconsti-
tutive “active formation” as a plurality. The active formation of a plurality
comes about insofar as 
we can direct the regard of advertence and apprehension toward the pair, to-
ward the one and the other of the pair, whereby these are objects. If we do
this, then the repeated individual concentration, the concentrated partial
apprehension, now of the A and then of the B, functions as a kind of expli-
cation, as an act of running through the total object A + B. (293/245). 
Only in this manner, in what Husserl calls “the act of plural explication”
(293/246), can the assemblage of the total object “be given, in order that it
may be apprehended in self-givenness and contemplated as such.” Husserl
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
413

goes on to characterize the “active formation” that leads up to the self-given-
ness and contemplation of the collection as a total object as a “collective syn-
thesis” (294/246). In this regard he characterizes, for instance, the collective
synthesis ‘A and B and C’ as “the noetic unity of a consciousness, but not yet
the unity of an object in the authentic sense.” By ‘noetic unity of a con-
sciousness’ Husserl understands the aspect of “the colligating consciousness”
that, in its act of plural explication, “contains a plurality of objects encom-
passed in unity.” According to Husserl, the noetic unity at issue here is not
the collective, in the sense of “a unique object that has many members”: it is
not, therefore, the “unity of an object in the authentic sense, namely, in the
sense of a thematic objective-substrate.” Rather, the unity of an object in this
sense is only pre-constituted in the synthetic collecting, such that the “pre-
sentation (A, B) has priority over the collection (A + B) in which the as-
semblage is an object” (293/245). In order for the pre-constituted plurality
of the “collective combination” (293/246), “originally sprung from the plu-
ral explication of A and B,” to become an objective “substrate” and thus an
authentic object, something else is required. What is required is “a retro-
spective apprehension” (EJ, 294/246) that “follows the completion of the col-
ligation,” and this renders the set thematic in a manner that “is given to the
ego as an object, as something identifiable.”
As Husserl presents it, the manner in which the noetic unity of the
pre-predicative plurality is transformed into the authentically objective (and
presumably noematic) unity of the set is the same as that of “all objects pro-
duced in predicative spontaneity: a syntactical objectivity is pre-constituted
in a spontaneity, but only after it is completed can it become a theme, it being
an object only in retrospective apprehension” (293–94/246). 
§ 174. The Proximity of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s 
Psychologism to Experience and Judgment’s Account of 
the Objective Constitution of the Collection
Of course the content of what is pre-constituted in the case of the objectivity
of a collection is not the same as what is pre-constituted in the case of a state
of affairs, because the relational syntax of the latter objectivity is founded in
prepredicative relational syntheses, while the collective syntax of the former
objectivity is founded in prepredicative collective syntheses.84 Indeed, be-
yond affirming that, subsequent to the presentation formed by collecting in
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
414
————————
84. Regarding the syntactical difference, see § 168 above. See the following note for
a detailed explication of Husserl’s account of the synthetic difference.

the mode of plural explicating, the collection as such becomes a thematic ob-
ject (the set) and therefore an objective substrate, Husserl sheds no light on
how the retrospective apprehension transforms the noetic “unity” belonging
to the “predicatively productive spontaneity” of collecting objects together
into the noematic “unity” of the collection itself.85 The objective unity of the
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
415
————————
85. Abraham Stone has recently argued that when Husserl singles out the noetic unity
of the collective synthesis, he is not suggesting, in the case of collecting, that there is a noetic
process without a corresponding noematic correlate. Rather, not only is this impossible once
Husserl introduces (in Ideas I, § 88) the noesis-noema correlation, but also the analysis of
conjunctive unity in Experience and Judgment tells against this being Husserl’s meaning.
(Abraham D. Stone, “Comments on Burt’s Paper,” unpublished, presented at the 35th An-
nual Husserl Circle meeting, University College, Dublin, June 2005.) Specifically, Husserl
clearly understands the conjunctive unity in the form of the ‘and’ to fall among “the pred-
icative ‘posita’ in the broader sense” (EJ, 254/215), which means that a noematic unity,
posited in the object, is clearly involved here. Stone’s argument presents with exemplary clar-
ity the “standard” view of the applicability to the unity proper to collections of the categor-
ial unity proper to “states of affairs.” (Because the thesis we are advancing here challenges this
view of the matter, we shall discuss Stone’s argument in detail.) 
This being the case, Stone’s argument continues, there is nothing uniquely problem-
atic in Husserl’s claim that the “preconstitution” of the unity of the collection itself, as a set,
comes about in “a kind of judgment [that] posits, in spontaneity, a new unity—based on, but
not to be identified with, a preceding prepredicative unity.” The predicative judgment in the
broader sense responsible for collective linkage, just like the judgment in the narrower sense
responsible for copulative linkage, preconstitutes the unity of an object—the set and the state
of affairs, respectively—that is then thematized in the “retrospective apprehension” as a new
object. 
If there is a special problem in Husserl’s account of the unity of sets, Stone concludes,
it has to be found at an earlier level of Husserl’s analysis, in what Husserl, at one point, refers
to as “the domain of receptivity” (292/244). Moreover, Stone points out that in § 24d Husserl
(at this level) marks “an essential difference” (135/120) between 1) the explication of a par-
ticular object, which Husserl calls “explicative contemplation” (124/112), and 2) “the ap-
prehension of plurality” (134/119–20), in which “the unity of configuration” (134/120) of
a plurality is “apperceived from the first as existing in a pluralistic way, as a plurality of objects,
and this apperception is ‘realized.’” And Stone thinks that any special problem in Husserl’s
analysis will have to be found in this difference, specifically in the role that Husserl assigns to
“passive synthesis” in the “combination” that preconstitutes the latter. We shall return to con-
sider the precise locus and character of what Stone signals as problematic here, after first tak-
ing a closer look at Husserl’s characterization of the difference in question.
What is different here concerns not only the kinds of objects involved (particular in
the former case and plural in the latter) but also the sources of the intentional unities proper
to the respective “single activities” (135/121) that, respectively, explicate or apprehend these
objects. Husserl articulates these differences in the context of a specific similarity, the “anal-
ogy” (135/120) between the succession of activities involved in the explicative contempla-
tion of a particular object and in the apprehension of a plurality. In both cases, an “intentional
modification” (131/118)—which Husserl characterizes “precisely as a still-retaining-in-grasp”
(see 135/120)—of the succession of singular acts composing the apprehension of their re-
spective objects is involved. By linking these acts together in a manner such that each subse-
quent act retains something of the previous act, this modification yields a synthetic unity of
their activity that “persists throughout the succession” (135/120) of “partial apprehensions” of 

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
416
————————
the respective objects in question. Husserl refers to this synthesis as one in which “an over-
lapping takes place” (128/115), and characterizes it as follows: “The ego plays a continually
active role through the series of steps run through; in the second, it is still directed toward the
object of the first; it is directed, therefore, in spite of the privileged position of the new ob-
ject of primary apprehension, on both of them together: with the new and, through the new,
on the old. The two are together actively taken up by the ego; the indivisible ego is both.
The succession of the rays of attention and of apprehension has become a single double ray”
(128/115). Or, more precisely, he characterizes three of the four modes of overlapping (con-
sidered in Experience and Judgment) as involving a thematic object (or objects) that belong(s),
as a substrate, to the synthesis in the manner described here; the fourth type (the one in which
we are primarily interested) of synthesis, which Husserl characterizes as “the unity of the ac-
tivities in the running-through of a plurality” (135/121), is not united according to a princi-
ple that has its source in “activity”—as are the first three types—but in “passivity” (136/121).
To highlight Husserl’s account of this difference, and hence the “essential difference” between
“explicative contemplation” and the “apprehension of a plurality,” we need to consider briefly
his accounts of the first three modes of synthetic overlapping, which will allow us 1) to clar-
ify the specific mode of overlapping he attributes to explicative contemplation and then 2)
to lay out his account of its essential difference from the overlapping composing the appre-
hension of a plurality.
The first distinction Husserl makes in the modalities of overlapping concerns those
in which “a synthesis of coincidence comes about” (128/115) and those in which it does not
occur. When, “according to the objective sense” of the synthetic activity, such a synthesis takes
place, Husserl characterizes it as having the status of a “special identity-synthesis,” one in
which like or similar moments overlap in the object. He uses the example of passing “from
one color to another” (129/115–16) to illustrate an identity-synthesis. To the identity-syn-
thesis Husserl contrasts the mode of synthetic overlapping that occurs without identity, giv-
ing the example of passing “from a color over to a sound.” (For the transition of apprehension
from a color to a sound to occur, there must be an overlapping of the apprehension of the for-
mer in the apprehension of the latter and hence a “single double ray” of apprehension, but no
identity—because the objective senses of color and sound are manifestly different.) And to
both of these he contrasts “a completely unique synthesis of the coincidence of identity”
(129/116), namely, the “explicative coincidence.” This unique mode of overlapping concerns
“the synthesis ‘thing and property of the thing,’ and, in general, the synthesis ‘object and ob-
jective property,’” both of which “should not be confused with the total coincidence of iden-
tity with regard to objective sense.” That is because in the latter identity “we pass synthetically
from one presentation (mode of givenness) to others of the same object and thereby identify
that object with itself,” while “in the case of explicative coincidence, it is a question of an
identification which is wholly other, completely unique, in which continuity and discreteness
are bound together in a remarkable way.” 
Husserl goes on to characterize the coincidence involved in the synthesis of explica-
tion as a two-sided affair, in which “[s]ubstrate and determination are constituted . . . as cor-
relative members of a kind of coincidence” (129/116). On the one (substrate) side, there is
the coincidence proper to the “actually holding-in-grasp” (133/119) of the substrate object
(S), in which—“up to the point in which the explication begins” (133/119)—there is con-
tinuous “grasping and a having-in-the-grasp.” Once the explication commences, the activity
on the substrate side becomes modified as “the secondary still-retaining-in-grasp,” an activ-
ity that coincides with that of the other (explicated) side, where the coincidence proper yields
the still-retaining-in-grasp of each explicate (α, β, . . . ) belonging to S “as a sense-determinate
precipitate of S.” The coincidence of these two syntheses—the grasping in advance and re-
taining of the substrate and the progressive apprehension of its determinations—yields the
partial identification characteristic of the substrate’s relation to its determinations; it yields, 

Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
417
————————
in other words, what Husserl calls the ‘explicative coincidence’. He characterizes the “conti-
nuity” belonging to the explication as “a persisting synthesis of coincidence which concerns
the content of apprehensions as well as the activities themselves.” Regarding the activities
themselves, Husserl holds that “the active ego is and remains constantly turned toward S,” in
the sense that in “the active apprehending and being-directed toward the ‘whole,’ or, to speak
more precisely, the being directed toward the substrate S, [it] is implicitly ‘co’-directed toward
the α, . . .”; regarding the content, he maintains that “in the ‘emergence’ of the α, it is the S
which is apprehended and displayed ‘in its relation to’ α” (133–34/119). 
Now it is precisely this “partial identification” (135/121) belonging to the content of
the explicative coincidence, that is, to the substrate whole of a particular object and the parts
composing its internal determinations, that “does not take place” in the synthesis proper to
the apprehension of a plurality. To be sure, the latter also involves a “whole” related to the par-
tial apprehensions belonging to “a unity of activity,” an activity that—like the activity of ex-
plication—“grows up” and “persists throughout the succession” of the synthesis. However, both
the whole in question (the plurality) and the unity of the activities that persists in “running-
through” it must, according to Husserl, be “rigorously differentiated” (134/119) from the
whole and activities of explicative contemplation. In the case of the plurality as a whole, he
maintains this because, unlike the whole of explicative contemplation, which is the “goal of
active doing” (135/121) (in the sense of “a goal of knowledge gained through experience”),
the whole to which the apprehension of a plurality is related “is not seized in advance and re-
tained in active grasp in particular apprehensions.” And in the case of “the unity of the ac-
tivities” themselves, activities that partially apprehend the plurality “within an intentional
whole” (135/120), he claims that their unity “is produced, not by activity, but by a combina-
tion arising from sources of passivity” (135–36/121). 
These differences are rooted in Husserl’s account of the contrast in the modes of over-
lapping synthesis that characterize the explication of a particular object and the apprehension
of a plurality. In the former, the overlapping synthesis is articulated as the partial coincidence
of the unity belonging to the part-whole structure of the “internal determinations” (125/113)
proper to the object (substrate) itself. This unity comes about in the active taking together
of the substrate and its explicates, in a manner that concerns both the apprehensions and
their contents: the contents, e.g., Sα, (Sα)β, and so on, emerge as the continuous internal
transformation of the substrate, a transformation that occurs in conjunction with its active
apprehending, which is at once directed toward the substrate whole and co-directed toward
its explicates. In contrast to the active taking together of the part-whole contents in this mode
of overlapping synthesis, the overlapping synthesis of the activities belonging to the running-
through of a plurality that are characteristic of its apprehension do not involve part-whole
contents; what overlaps here is solely the unity of this running-through, in the sense that the
individual activities belonging to this running-through coincide as a unity that persists with
their successive “realization” of the plurality. Thus, in marked contrast with the explication
of a particular object, where the object apprehended (as a substrate) is explicated as a whole
together with its progressively explicated parts, the apprehension of a plurality does not ap-
prehend the plurality itself; the content of the overlapping synthesis that composes its (the
plurality as a whole) partial apprehensions therefore does not include the “object” of these ap-
prehensions. This is why Husserl stresses that in the synthesis that apprehends a plurality,
the individual activities involved in this apprehension do not partially coincide with the plu-
rality itself. He stresses this because it is precisely at this point that the “analogy” between the
two modes of overlapping synthesis breaks down. In other words, the activities composing the
apprehension of a plurality are not actively taken together with the plurality itself, in a man-
ner “in which the plurality is constituted as a specific object, as a ‘set’” (136/121). This is
also why Husserl stresses that the “combining [verbindende] activity” in which a plurality is
not only “run through” but “also actively taken together” with the unity of the single activi-

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
418
————————
ties that apprehend it is “completely other than that [i.e., the combining activity] which gives
unity to an explication.” That is because (as we have seen) the unity of an explication occurs
at the same synthetic level as the overlapping synthesis in which the partial coincidence of the
substrate (whole) and explicate (part) identities occurs, while the combining activity in which
the apprehension of a plurality is united with the plurality “constituted as a specific object,
as a ‘set,’” is characterized by Husserl as “an activity of a higher level.” (This activity culminates
in the “retrospective grasping” discussed in §§ 173–74 above.)
The difference between the unity of the content belonging to the “objects” proper to
explicative contemplation and to the apprehension of a plurality is likewise reflected in the
“principle” (135/121) that unites their single activities of explication and apprehension, re-
spectively. Thus, Husserl holds that, “From the very first, the explication has its unity in that
the object is continuously the theme and as such remains constantly in grasp in a modified
activity” (136/121). In other words, the principle of the unity of the single activities that
compose the explication is rooted in the “thematic object which is explicated” (134/120), and
it is so because it “belongs to the explication and in it assumes the status of substrate for its
explicates.” By contrast, Husserl maintains that the plurality does not belong—in this man-
ner—to the succession of the single activities that compose its partial apprehensions, because
these apprehensions are not directed toward it as a whole but rather occur within it, as the
unity of their “running-through activity moves constantly on the persistent background in
which plurality continually appears in a unitary configuration.” It is for this reason that
Husserl characterizes the source of the principle of the unity of these partial apprehensions
as “not in activity itself, but in combination arising from passivity” (135–38/121). Thus, what
is thematized in the activity of running-through a plurality, namely, its “individual members
. . . which excite the interest in advance and which are immediately thematized as individu-
als” (134/120), is not the source of this activity’s unity. Rather, it is “the likeness or similar-
ity already given by an association in the background,” which yields these individuals “not as
mere isolated individuals but as individuals linked together thematically.” Husserl maintains
that “to the extent that the interest” follows this (passively) already given likeness or similar-
ity, the plurality “is apperceived from the first as existing pluralistically,” in the sense that “the
configurative unity” of the passively associated likeness or similarity is realized “as a plural-
ity of objects.” Hence—and in striking contrast to the objective source of the unity of the
single activities belonging to explicative contemplation, namely, the substrate that is the-
matically grasped in advance and retained in the active grasp of particular explications—the
source of the unity of the single activities composing the particular apprehension of a plurality
is, however paradoxically it may sound, not the objectivity of the plurality. This is the case for
Husserl because the “coming-into-prominence of plural existents does not lead to a unitary
objective turning toward” the plurality. Hence, not only is the whole of a plurality something
that is not unified by the synthesis that occurs—as partial apprehensions—within it, but (in
the domain of receptivity) the synthetic unity of these partial apprehensions has precedence
over the objectivity of the whole of which they are the apprehensions, and it does so because
the unifying activity that constitutes the plurality itself as a whole, as an object (set), is (as we
have seen) “an activity of a higher level.” It is explicitly otherwise with the explication of a par-
ticular object: “But in explication we do not perform separate acts taking the explicates to-
gether; it requires no special interest of a new kind” (136/121).
Returning now to Stone’s argument, we shall first address his claim that Husserl’s sin-
gling out of the noetic unity of a collective synthesis does not mean, in the case of the pre-
constitution of the collection as an object, that Husserl thinks that a (collective) noematic
unity is not correlated to this noetic unity—which would be a situation radically unlike the
one involved in the explicative contemplation that preconstitutes the state of affairs. (To the
noetic unity of the “single double ray” co-directed to the substrate and its internal determi-
nations there corresponds the noematic unity of thing and property.) Rather, Stone maintains 

Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
419
————————
that Husserl “is taking it for granted that a noetic unity of consciousness has its correlate in a
noematic unity, and hence in a unity posited in the object.” As we have just seen, what com-
plicates this situation in the instance of the apprehension of a plurality is that Husserl char-
acterizes its difference from the explicative contemplation of a particular object as involving
both the sources of the unities belonging to their respective modalities of overlapping syn-
thesis and the relation of the unity of each synthesis to its content. 
This last point means that, in addition to the difference (pointed out by Stone) be-
tween the active source of the synthetic unity proper to the explication of a particular object
and the passive source of the synthetic unity proper to the apprehension of a plurality, there
is the difference between the contents of each synthesis. And it is precisely in terms of the dif-
ference in contents that Husserl’s reference to a “collective synthesis as a noetic unity of con-
sciousness,” which is made without mentioning a correlate in a noematic unity posited in the
collective object, should not be seen as taking it for granted that a noematic unity is being
posited in the “object” in a manner analogous to the way in which the positing of a noematic
unity of a particular object corresponds to the noetic unity of the consciousness of it. The rea-
son for maintaining a disanalogy here is rooted in Husserl’s account of the radically different
relationship between the particular “object” to its explicative contemplation and the “plural”
object to its apprehension in a plurality: the particular object belongs to its explication in the
precise sense that to the unity of the overlapping synthesis that explicates it there corresponds
the thematic unity of the explicated object as a whole; the plural object, however, in a marked
contrast that Husserl himself emphasizes, does not belong to its apprehension in the precise
sense that to the unity of the overlapping synthesis that apprehends it there does not corre-
spond the thematic unity of the apprehended object as a whole. Thus, as we have seen, Husserl
calls explicit attention to both the need for acts of a higher level to apprehend the plurality
as a thematic object (set) and to the absence of such a need to apprehend the particular ob-
ject as a thematic object. Hence, while it is clearly Husserl’s view that at this level (the do-
main of receptivity) of analysis, the (noetic) activities of explicative contemplation and
apprehension of a plurality have objective correlates, it is also his view that these correlates are
not analogous: the thematic objective correlate of the apprehension of a plurality are the in-
dividual objects that “realize” it, but not the plurality itself as a whole, while the thematic ob-
jective correlate of the explicative contemplation of a particular object is this object itself as
a whole.
Husserl stresses (in EJ, § 61) that the plurality itself as a whole is not thematically ap-
prehended, when he maintains (as we have seen in § 173 above) that the “presentation of (A,
B) has priority over the collecting of (A + B) in which the assemblage is an object.” Achiev-
ing the latter involves something more than the “apprehension of plurality” described and an-
alyzed in EJ, § 24d, which, as we have just seen, is not directed to the collection as an object.
Husserl (as we have seen above) calls what is initially involved here “plural explication”
(293/246) and characterizes it in unmistakably psychological terms: “we can direct the regard
of advertence and apprehension toward the pair, toward the one and the other of the pair,
whereby these are objects. If we do this, then the repeated individual concentration, the con-
centrated partial apprehension, now of the A and then of the B, functions as a kind of expli-
cation, as an act of running through the total object A + B” (293/245). Only in this manner,
he continues, can the assemblage of the total object “be given, in order that it may be appre-
hended in self-givenness and contemplated as such” (293/246). Of course, this total object
can only be given with the “turning of regard” that Husserl characterizes as ‘retrospective ap-
prehension’, which means that the pair, the total object as aggregate, is not really constituted
in the “unity of this apprehension of the two objects” that characterizes the newly introduced
plural explication, but rather that “the new object is preconstituted as a result, so to speak, as
something which we now [i.e., via retrospective apprehension—not plural explication] ap-
prehend as one and which we can explicate in the individual apprehension of A, B. . . .”

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
420
————————
The upshot of all of this is that when Husserl says (in EJ, § 61) that prior to the “ret-
rospective apprehension” of the objective unity of the collection itself only the noetic unity of
a collective consciousness is preconstituted, he means it, that is, he means that “in” the pre-
constituted unity established in collecting A and B and C there is neither the thematic nor the
objective unity of the collection: A + B + C, and this means that the (collective) unity of the ob-
jects colligated, as a unity that is at once thematic and objective, occurs at a higher level than the
unity proper to their colligation. It also means that the character of the preconstituted “object”
that the retrospective apprehension apprehends as the collection as such is not only different
from that of the preconstituted object that the retrospective apprehension apprehends in the
case of the particular object as such (the former being plural and the latter singular), but also
that their statuses are different, because the particular object is already thematically appre-
hended (as a whole) by the preconstitutive synthesis that explicates it, whereas “in order for the
collective combination, originally sprung from the act of plural explication of A and B to be-
come a substrate—i.e., a true object, something identifiable—a turning of regard is first re-
quired.” Thus, in the case of the collective object, the retrospective apprehension does double
duty, both thematizing it as a whole and objectifying it, while in the case of the particular ob-
ject, it objectifies a whole that has already been thematized—because the particular object has
already been apprehended thematically and therefore preconstituted as a (whole) unity. Fi-
nally, this means that the content of the collective unity as an object (the collection itself or
set) is not only directly related to the act of synthesis composing the collection but, moreover,
that it is precisely the retrospective thematization of the collectively relational unity established by
this act that transforms the noetic unity proper to it into the noematic unity of the posited collec-
tion (set). In other words, the status of what is preconstituted (and therefore founding) for the
noematic unity posited by the judicative spontaneity characteristic of the broader sense of
judgment at work in conjunctive unity is different from what is preconstituted and founding
for the noematic unity posited by the judicative spontaneity of the narrower sense of judg-
ment at work in copulative unity—and this difference goes beyond the difference in charac-
ter belonging to their respective plural and singular objects. Specifically, this difference must
be articulated as follows: The preconstitution of the noematic unity of the collection as such
(set) has its locus in the noetic act of collecting and not the pre-objective correlates of this act (the
individual objects which are the objects of the collecting); the preconstitution of the state of
affairs has its locus in the pre-objective correlates to the acts of explicative contemplation (the
substrate together with its internal determinations).
Thus we contend that the act of thematic apprehension accomplished in the retro-
spective apprehension by which, as Husserl puts it, “the set is given to the ego as an object”
(294/246) is an act that he clearly understands to be directed to a “synthetically unified con-
sciousness” and not, as in the case of the retrospective apprehension of a state of affairs, to the
object of a synthetically unified consciousness. It is for this reason that we hold that the act
of retrospective apprehension is being called on to do something different in the case of sets
than in that of states of affairs, namely, to transform a unity whose locus is in the act rather
than the object of a consciousness—which is, therefore, and for that very reason, a non-ob-
jective unity—into an objective unity. This is, of course, strongly reminiscent of Philosophy
of Arithmetic’s discredited attempt to account for the objective unity of the collection on the
basis of the psychological act of collecting (which we argue below). The “passive synthesis”
that Stone has singled out as problematic in Husserl’s account of the preconstitution of sets
is, on our view, related to but not identical with the problem we have identified here. That is
because (as we have seen) Husserl identifies the source of the “principle” that unifies the syn-
thetic unity of the apprehension of plurality as the “combination” arising from the “passivity”
belonging to associations of similarity and likeness, which gives rise to the “configurations”
that comprise the background basis for apprehending individual objects together “as indi-
viduals linked thematically.” Even if the claim (which Husserl does not make) were to be made

collection, the “set,” must have the status of an object that stands out from
both the collecting that pre-constituted it and the individual objects that now
belong to the set—individual objects that, prior to the constitution of the set
as an objective unity, were “encompassed” by the (pre-objective) unity of the
“colligating consciousness.” The necessity that the set’s objective unity possess
this status stems from the dictates of Husserl critique of Philosophy of Arith-
metic’s psychologism and the logical problem that is presented by the pecu-
liar character of collective unity as a whole. In the case of this critique, its
most basic tenet is that the content belonging to logical unity per se cannot
be established on the basis of reflexion on psychological acts, processes, or contents.
In the case of the logical problem, collective unity as a whole cannot be es-
tablished by qualities inhering in either the individual members or in the re-
lations between the members that belong to the collectivity as its parts. 
In other words, what remains obscure is precisely how it is that a redi-
rection of the regard of consciousness is able to turn the non-objective unity
characteristic of the presentation of collected objects into the objective unity
proper to a collection of objects, a unity that “is an object like any other.”
Husserl does not say, either here in Experience and Judgment or anywhere else
in his works, how this is possible. Of the collection as an objective unity, he
does say, “not only can it be totally identified as the identical element of many
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
421
————————
here that it is the “intentional whole” of this background that comprises the preconstitutive
unity of the set, the problem we have identified in Husserl’s account of retrospective appre-
hension in the case of sets would remain. For in order to be able to constitute the unity of the
set as an object of the understanding, the retrospective apprehension of such configurations
would be again charged with the task of both thematizing and objectivating a “noetic” unity,
albeit the noetic unity would in this case be the passive “bond” of the associations that com-
pose these configurations. 
Finally, two more points need to be made in connection with Husserl’s discussion of
these issues. First, the discussion in § 24d mentions neither the ‘and’ nor—because the asso-
ciative principle of thematic linkage is “likeness or similarity”—the apprehension of plurali-
ties composed of thematically different objects. And second, the discussion in § 61, which
explicitly refers to § 24d, introduces both the ‘and’ and pluralities composed of different ob-
jects (e.g., ‘A and B and C’) into the discussion—without, however, providing an account of
the transition to either from the domain of receptivity analyzed in § 24d. These inconsis-
tencies may be partially explained by the different source material that Landgrebe used to
compose the text. According to Lohmar, the first three subheadings (a–c) of § 24 are based
on Husserl’s “Lectures on Transcendental Logic,” delivered during winter semester 1920/21
(Lohmar, “Entstehung,” 45, 62), although they include supplementary additions written by
Husserl at the end of 1928 and the beginning of 1929, after he had seen Landgrebe’s first
draft of Experience and Judgment (50). The entirety of § 24’s subheading “d” (on the differ-
ence between the unity and content of particular and plural syntheses) was also composed by
Husserl as a part of these additions. All of § 61 is based on the 1920/21 lectures, with no ad-
ditions by Husserl (63). Thus, the places in Experience and Judgment where we have noted
the inconsistencies related in these two points have their sources in material composed at
different times. 

modes of givenness, but it can be explicated in an ever renewed identification,
an explication that is again and again a process of collecting” (294/246).
The particular force of the question being raised here derives from the
strong suspicion that Husserl’s appeal to the ability of the retrospective ap-
prehension to apprehend a collection as such by, in effect, “thematizing” the
presentation yielded by a completed process of collectively combining objects
is vulnerable to the very critique of psychologism that he himself leveled
against Philosophy of Arithmetic’s account of the origin of the objectivity
proper to collective unity. Namely, the basic claim here is that the result of a
synthetic process that does not have a proper objective correlate nevertheless
yields or otherwise originates—when grasped post factum—a synthetic object
as its proper objective correlate. Properly speaking, the objective correlate of
the act of collecting is the objects collected into a multitude, not their col-
lection as such. Husserl is both clear and consistent on this point. There is
nothing in these objects, taken in either their individuality or their relations
to one another, that can be considered to pre-constitute the collection to
which they belong only once they are colligated. That is why Husserl charac-
terizes the status of the preconstitution of the collection as such as a “noetic”
unity. The unity in question is therefore manifestly not noematic at this stage
in Experience and Judgment’s account of the constitution of the collection as
an objectivity, that is, an object capable of functioning as a substrate in pred-
icative judgments. Again, and on the contrary, Husserl is quite clear that this
comes about only when the presentation yielded by the act of collecting, and
not its objective correlates (which, as we have seen, are individual objects and
their relations), is thematized and posited in a “retrospective grasping.” 
This account of thematization and positing must be radically distin-
guished from the one Husserl gives of the relational synthesis that pre-con-
stitutes the objectivity belonging to a state of affairs. What is preconstituted
in this case is the overlapping synthesis of a noematically given thing and its
property (or properties), which function as the objective substrate for the
thematization and consequent positing that is characteristic of the predica-
tion belonging to the copulative judgment. In the collective synthesis that
pre-constitutes the collection as such, as we have seen, there is no objective
substrate in this sense. Rather, Husserl maintains that it is the collective pre-
sentation yielded by the act of collecting that pre-constitutes, as a noetic unity,
the collective unity as such. Husserl therefore characterizes the “objectivity”
of the collection (i.e., the set) as originating in the thematization of a pre-
given unity that is manifestly not presented as the objective correlate of an
act. Rather, it is in the presentation that is inseparable from and therefore
characteristic of the act itself that Husserl says the preconstitution of the
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
422

collection as such resides. And it is precisely this claim that justifies the sus-
picion that his account of the origin of the objective unity proper to the col-
lection as such in Experience and Judgment does not advance beyond the
discredited account in Philosophy of Arithmetic. Of course, the language dif-
fers in Experience and Judgment and Philosophy of Arithmetic: ‘colligating
consciousness’ instead of ‘psychological acts’, ‘retrospective grasping’ instead
of ‘reflexion’, ‘noetic unity’ instead of ‘collective presentation’, and so on. But
it is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the basic account remains the same:
that from a post hoc attentiveness to the (noetic) unification of objects that
occurs in the act of combining them into a “collection” there arises the (noe-
matic) unity of the logical form of the collection “itself.” Moreover, Husserl’s
account here does not even address, let alone provide clarification of, what
role, if any, signification and meaning intentions play both in the initial
process of collecting objects together and in the retrospective apprehension
of the results of this process. More precisely, the issue of whether symbolic
acts and their intuitive fulfillment (to use the language of the Logical Inves-
tigations) are involved in the preconstitution (to use the language of Experi-
ence and Judgment) of the collection as an object accomplished in the
process of collecting, or in the retrospective grasping of it as an objective
categorial form, is passed over in silence.86
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
423
————————
86. Dieter Lohmar addresses precisely these issues in his “Husserl’s Concept of Cat-
egorial Intuition.” He inquires into what is “sufficient to fulfill the categorial intention of the
multiplicity” (144) and suggests that “the categorial intention ‘and’ itself can be viewed as a
non-sensible content” and as such “can serve as the fulfilling content of the intention of the
collection” (144–45). He admits, however, that “The idea of an intention that contributes
to its own fulfillment might give the impression of circularity” (144).
Specifically, because in “collections we cannot do without the contribution of the
synthetic categorial intention ‘and’ itself,” it follows that “Collections owe their intuitivity
solely to the fact that we synthetically combine objects, that we collect them.” Nevertheless,
Lohmar argues against there being any circularity in this by pointing out, “it is the synthetic
activity of combining the objects of the founding acts into a new object, the collection, that
brings about the fulfillment.” This, of course, is the view that we have just criticized as being,
in essence, no different from Husserl’s discredited psychologistic account in the Philosophy
of Arithmetic. Lohmar appears to recognize this, and writes on “questions about what kind
of fulfilling . . . contents are found in collectiva” that “[w]e might suppose that what serves”
in this regard “is the experience of the performance of the act of collection (in inner percep-
tion).” However, he rejects this view, arguing that “it seems more reasonable to accept the
fact” about the ‘and’ being, in effect, both “an intention of the collection ‘a and b’” and its ful-
fillment, insofar as it is also “viewed as a non-sensible content.” Finally, Lohmar suggests that
the situation in which “the will to perform a synthetic intention is enough to fulfill an in-
tention” (145) is, “in the realm of intentions and categorial intentions,” a “special case,” “an
important exception,” and one that does not concern “knowledge in the narrow sense” inso-
far as a “collection is . . . itself not a contribution to knowledge at all, though it can be an im-
portant element in knowledge if we continue to perform judgments with respect to the
collectiva (or set).”

§ 175. Experience and Judgment’s Incomplete Account of the
Constitution of Cardinal Numbers
Husserl’s discussion of cardinal numbers in Experience and Judgment does
not resolve the issue of the constitution of their objectivity as determinate
collections, and it also departs from Philosophy of Arithmetic’s account of the
generic emptiness (and therefore formal universality) of the contents be-
longing to their concepts. The account of cardinal numbers in Experience
and Judgment occurs within the context of Husserl’s consideration of the plu-
ralities that fall under the heading of what he calls the “particular judgment”
(EJ, 446/367). He distinguishes particular judgments from “singular judg-
ments” (446/368), inasmuch as the latter “refer to individually determined
terms, e.g., ‘this rose is yellow’,”while the former refer “to some A or other in
general” (447/368). Hence, “the forms ‘an A’, ‘an A and an A’, or, likewise, ‘an
A and another’, ‘an A and another A, and again another A, and so on’, and
likewise the indeterminate plurality” (446/367–68) are particular judgments
in which “we stand with them near the origin of the primitive numerical forms”
(446/368). That is because, for Husserl, these “arise here as formations hav-
ing the function of indicating the ‘something or other’.” Nevertheless, with
both the formation indicative of the ‘something or other’ and the ‘indeter-
minate plurality’, we are only near but not yet coincident with the origin of
such forms, because Husserl maintains (in Experience and Judgment) that the
“Cardinal numbers are determinate pluralities of particular terms.”
Particular judgments emerge according to Husserl when the “direction
of interest” (445/367) shifts, from what it is when “the intention is involved
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
424
————————
In the context of our analysis, Lohmar’s clear presentation and discussion of these is-
sues raises two questions. First, is his suggestion that the ‘and’ fulfills the function of both the
categorial intention of the multiplicity and its objective fulfillment really so reasonable? Sec-
ond, is it the case that collections do not concern knowledge in the narrow sense?
Regarding our first question, there does not seem to be any textual evidence that
Husserl considered the logical status of the ‘and’ to be, in effect, both that of a signification
category and an objective category. Moreover, such a suggestion appears to reduce the ob-
jective categorial content of a set to a non-independent moment of the collection as such,
namely, to the syntactical connective responsible for uniting its elements. Such a reduction
would seem to exclude from the concept of the objective category of a collection the concept
of members or elements, which seems extremely problematical.
Regarding our second question, if the authentic cardinal number concept is charac-
terized as the delimitation of a plurality, that is, as a finite set, and if it is the case that cardinal
numbers play a role in knowledge in the narrow sense, it would follow that collections do in-
deed represent a most important contribution to knowledge. Indeed, the contribution would
appear to extend beyond the narrow mathematical sense of quantitative knowledge, since, as
we have suggested and shall explore in more detail below, Husserl understands the full un-
folding of the pure mathesis universalis to involve the fundamental unity of the objectivity
treated by logic and mathematics, namely, the pure manifolds investigated by formal ontology.

in the explication of individual objects” (445/366) to “an other form of inten-
tion” (445/367). In the explication of individual objects, the intention is di-
rected to an individual object in a manner that allows the progress of
predication to unfold, to “judge predicatively” (445/366) about the object’s
specific qualities. In the particular judgment, the interest of the intention is
“indifferent” (445/367) to the “individual specificity” (446/367) of an indi-
vidual object, as it is instead “constituted as a form of meaning singulars in
which it is only concerned with the identical validity of any one A or other,”
as a “general type.” Such an intention thus no longer judges “‘the rose is yel-
low’, but ‘a rose’,”or perhaps “‘still another’,”or “‘some roses are yellow’—some
meaning one and one, and so forth.” For Husserl, then, it is “this active and
productive attitude which determines the activity of [the particular] judg-
ment and saturates it in a characteristic manner” (446/368). Indeed, it is pre-
cisely this manner that is responsible for what “arises here as formations
having the function of ‘something or other’,”formations that bring judgment
“near the origin of primitive numerical forms.”
The cardinal numbers arise when a particular plurality yielded by the
“formations having the function of indicating the ‘some or other’” is rendered
a “determinate particular plurality”—and when the latter “is brought under
a corresponding form-concept.” The latter “belongs to the meaning of a car-
dinal number” in the sense that “by way of comparison and concept forma-
tion,” for example, “some apple or other and some apple or other, some pear
or other and some pear or other, and so on,” the form-concept of ‘some con-
cept or other’ emerges. It emerges insofar as what “is conceptually common”
to the compared items in the determinate plurality “expresses itself as some
A or other and some additional A or other, where A is ‘some concept or
other’.” Husserl explicitly states: “That is the cardinal number concept two,”
which means that this concept is the conjunction of ‘some concept or other’
and (another) concept or other—and, he goes on, “likewise for three, etc.” 
Husserl’s account here of cardinal number concepts as determinate
particular pluralities composed of some concept or other and some concept
or other, and so on, does not resolve the problem of the constitution of the
objectivity of the collection under discussion. No description is provided of
an objective referent that would correspond to the “collection” as something
that is irreducible either to the items that are combined by the ‘and’ or to
the noetic “unity” of the combining intention. Thus, neither the objectivity
of an indeterminate plurality nor that of the determinate pluralities is es-
tablished as something that, on the one hand, is other than the individual
items belonging to either type of collection. Nor is the objectivity in ques-
tion established, on the other hand, as something that encompasses these
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
425

individual items as items that belong either to the set or to the cardinal num-
ber. Rather, what Husserl’s descriptions articulate is the combination by the
‘and’ of particular judgment forms proper to “some object or other” and, on
the basis of the comparisons of such forms, the combination (again effected
by the ‘and’) of judgment forms proper to ‘some concept or other’. His claim
that the conjunction of “some concept [A] or other, and some concept [A]
or other” is the concept of the cardinal number two, and that with the con-
junction of an additional ‘and’ together with another ‘A’, the concept of the
cardinal number three is generated, and so on, therefore fails to account for
the objectivity of the purported concepts in question, ‘two’ and ‘three’. 
Stated as succinctly as possible, this failure has two aspects. First, the
objective referent of the ‘and’ in the case of either an indeterminate plural-
ity or determinate pluralities (cardinal numbers) is not established. By this
I mean, on the one hand, that the logical problem to which Husserl’s psy-
chologism in Philosophy of Arithmetic is the response is not resolved. The
objectivity of the collection, as a unity that cannot be grounded on predi-
cations directed toward individual objects, is not accounted for. On the
other hand, I mean that the shortcomings of Philosophy of Arithmetic’s psy-
chologism are not transcended, because Experience and Judgment does not
provide a descriptive articulation of the objectively collective referent of the
‘and’ that Husserl’s own critique of psychologism demanded. Second, what
J. N. Findlay noted with respect to the account of cardinal numbers in Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic likewise applies here, namely, that Husserl’s discussion
of the determinate pluralities that compose the concepts of cardinal numbers
“has not considered what may be involved in the necessary diversity of the
abstract anythings collected, since something and something and something
is not three if the anythings are one and the same.”87 Thus, even if one were
to maintain what I have argued cannot be maintained, that Husserl’s account
of the “retrospective apprehension” of the noetic unity manifest in the act of
colligating the individual items unified in an indeterminate collection is suf-
ficient to establish the noematic unity of the collection as the objective cor-
relate of a judgment, the problem of accounting for the diversity of the
objectivities proper to determinate collections would remain. Namely, the
differentia responsible for the determination of each cardinal number as a
well-ordered whole that not only differs from all the other cardinal num-
bers but also (beginning with ‘two’) is successively related to the preceding
cardinal number cannot be established on the basis of Husserl’s descriptions
of the combination of homogeneous elements into collections. 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
426
————————
87. Findlay, “Translator’s Introduction,” LI, 14. 

Finally, in connection with this last mentioned point about the homo-
geneity of the elements in Husserl’s account of cardinal numbers, it is both sig-
nificant and noteworthy that the account of the scope of their “universality”
in Experience and Judgmentdeviates from Philosophy of Arithmetic. The terms
that compose the determinate pluralities in Experience and Judgment are par-
ticular, namely, some A or other, or some concept or other, which means that
they contrast with the formal universality that characterizes the cardinal num-
ber concepts in Philosophy of Arithmetic. The latter’s account of the ‘and’ char-
acterized it as combining any object whatever that falls under the generically
empty concept of the ‘anything’. Indeed, in his self-interpretation of this mat-
ter in the “Introduction to the Logical Investigations” and Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic, Husserl characterizes the units belonging to cardinal number
concepts as falling under the formal concept of the ‘anything whatever’, the
meaning of which he explicitly articulates as encompassing any arbitrary ob-
ject or objectivity whatever. This, of course, contrasts with the judgment terms
that are presented as belonging to the cardinal number concepts in Experience
and Judgment, which we have just seen concern some concept or other, but
not what Husserl will call there the “arbitrary anything in general” (452/
372).88 In fact, in Experience and Judgment, Husserl refers to the latter as “a
completely new form,” and he not only contrasts it with the particular judgment
form, but he also characterizes it as being “dependent” upon it.
§ 176. The Original Givenness of the ‘Universal Whatever’
Husserl traces the new form at issue in the “universal whatever” (453/372)
to “possible simple, predicative judgments” (452/372) of the type that
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
427
————————
88. In an early essay entitled “On the Theory of the Aggregate,” Husserl makes a dis-
tinction between “pure numbers” and “concepts analogous” to these, “only less abstract,
through formation of aggregates whose members are taken exclusively from the extension of
a certain concept C” (“Zur Lehre vom Inbegriff,” in Philosophie der Arithmetik, 385–407; “On
the Theory of the Aggregate” [Essay 1], in Philosophy of Arithmetic, 359–83). (NB: The date
of this text is most likely five or more years later than 1891, which is the date given to it by the
editor of the Husserliana volume. See Stefania Centrone, Logic and the Philosophy of Mathe-
matics in the Early Husserl [Dordrecht: Springer, 2010], 81.) The unity of such numbers,
which Husserl calls ‘qualified’, is said by him to result “from the pure 1 through determination
by C.” However, Husserl maintains that if the unity C is thought “as undetermined, but as ar-
bitrarily determinable . . . then it is clear that the concept of the pure number can be regarded
as a special case of that concept, since the concept of the one presents itself, after all, as a spe-
cial case of the C, of the concept in general” (390). He goes on to say, “considering the matter
from this point of view, the pure number is regarded as that special qualified number whose
unit is the abstract one.” Husserl concludes that “This of course in no way conflicts with the
fact that given another—namely, our earlier—point of view, any concrete number falls under
the concept of pure number, so long as we precisely bring each unity C under the concept one.”

emerge when “we perceive that this A here and that A there are B”
(451/371). If, in “the progress of perception we find another A again and
again, and again and again find that it is B,” then, according to Husserl, “In
this progress arises an ever stronger presumption with each new occasion,
and we expect to find again the newly grasped A as B” (451–52/372). More-
over, “in this progress there is generated an open horizon of possible A’s as
real possibilities, presumably just waiting to be found” (452/372). Finally,
“we do what we are freely able to do, namely, we relate the supposed some
A or other to this open sphere,” which means that “in the attitude of partic-
ularity, ‘some’ A or other” is “thus produced before our regard” as “a pre-
sumptive A,” and “we grasp it at the same time in the form ‘something or
other, whatever it may be’.” By so grasping it, we are “no longer in this merely
particular attitude,” because what “we present anticipatively as an open chain
of A’s” is now grasped as “something or other, something arbitrary which
emerges out of this open sphere,” something that now has the status of the
“thought of a universal ‘something or other’” and to which is “attached in its
universality a necessity of being B.” 
According to Husserl “the novelty” at issue here is not that we have
“merely extracted ‘something or other’ in this particular form,” which, as we
have seen, is something that occurs in particular judgments. Rather, it consists
in “a completely new meaning form belonging to the states of affairs.” That
is because “the directly extracted A, which is indeed some A or other, is some-
thing that could have been arbitrarily taken instead of another in the chain,”
and it therefore becomes, “as it were, the representative for an arbitrary some-
thing whatever.” Husserl considers this account to be an “exposition of the
original givenness of any universal content whatever” (453/372), which, as
such, “is a higher structural form that includes in its meaning the idea of a par-
ticular whatever and raises it to a higher form.” As “an accomplishment of a
completely new kind, it is a judgment that does not simply place a predicate by
a determinately given subject, but it generates and grasps the new universal
validity belonging to such predications,” namely, that when “AB is univer-
sally given, then universally if something is A, it is also B” (452–53/372).
Husserl’s account here of the original givenness of the ‘universal what-
ever’, as a structural form that is higher than that of the idea of the ‘particu-
lar whatever’, raises more questions than it answers when it is considered in
the context of our concerns. For instance, is this an account of what he refers
to elsewhere in Experience and Judgment as ‘formalization’? Formalization
in Experience and Judgment is characterized as an “accomplishment”
(435/359) whereby materially determined concepts are “grasped under the
formal category ‘anything whatever’.” As such, this accomplishment involves
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
428

“a disregarding, an emptying of all objective, material determinations.” If
this account of Husserl’s of the shift from the merely particular attitude to
the novel attitude wherein the ‘universal whatever’ is given is indeed an ac-
count of this disregarding and emptying, it is hard not to wonder why he
makes no mention of the word ‘formalization’ in connection with it. 
§ 177. The Representational Function of the Particular 
Judgment Form ‘Something or Other’ to Bring About 
Universality Is Not Fundamentally Different from 
the Account in Philosophy of Arithmetic of 
How a Sensuously Unified Multitude Arises
In addition to the question of the relationship between the ‘universal what-
ever’ and the formal concept of ‘anything whatever’, a close look at the con-
tent of the Experience and Judgment’s account of the origination of the former
makes it hard to dispel the suspicion that its appeal to the representational
function of the particular judgment form ‘something or other’ to produce
universality is not fundamentally different from the signitive account in Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic of how the unity of sensuously unified multitudes arises.
We have seen that in the Logical Investigations Husserl rules out the possibil-
ity that the account in Philosophy of Arithmetic could possess the status of an
“authentic intuition of the collection as such” (LI, 690/799), because its ac-
cess to the unity of the collection as such is “mediated significatively.” We
have also seen89 that this significative mediation is said in Philosophy of Arith-
metic to emerge when, at a certain point in the “term by term” (PA, 211) col-
lective combination of the members that belong to a certain sensuous
multitude or group, this “rudimentary process then serves as the sign for the
full process intended” (213). Because completing the full process would en-
tail grasping all the items that belong to the group in question, which is a psy-
chological impossibility, Husserl maintains that at a certain point in the
collection process “the group intuition guarantees us that the process begun
can be continued.” Recall that in the Investigations Husserl’s criticism of this
account of grasping—indirectly and therefore symbolically—the unity of the
collection as such was not that its account of such a process is inaccurate but
rather that it is insufficient to establish the logical status of the unity proper
to the collections in question. And it is not up to this task precisely because
its appeal to a significative process was deemed incapable of yielding an intu-
ition of the collection as such, that is, the intuition of the collection as a log-
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
429
————————
89. See Part III, § 46.

ical object whose very meaning as logical—according to the critique of psy-
chologism—can in no way be dependent upon a significative or particular
judgment process. 
It would seem that the account, mutatis mutandis, in Experience and
Judgment is vulnerable to this very criticism insofar as it credits a significa-
tive process with the generation of a logical structure. Granted, Experience
and Judgment makes no mention of acts, psychological or otherwise, as does
Philosophy of Arithmetic. Moreover, the unity at issue in the latter is sensu-
ous or material, whereas that in Experience and Judgment is formal. Never-
theless, the target of Husserl’s critique of psychologism in the Logical
Investigations does not distinguish between material and formalized logical
meaning: this critique clearly maintains that the logical unity of both types
of meaning is independent of the mediation signs for the precise reason that
Husserl characterizes its “in itself” status as the non-symbolic referent of sym-
bolic pre sentation. As a consequence, it may well be impossible to harmonize
this characterization of the status of logical unity and form with Experience
and Judgment’s talk of an attitude that generates universal judgment struc-
tures, and indeed an attitude whose judgmental form is initially particular,
from its freely taking its anticipation of a particular judgment form as rep-
resentative of “the progress of perception” (452/372).90 And it may be im-
possible because the Investigations’ critique of psychologism clearly
maintains that the locus of logical unity is not signification but the referent
of signification, a referent that is neither an act nor its (or its object’s) sym-
bolic pre sentation.
§ 178. Sum and Substance of Husserl’s Accounts of the Unity
of Indeterminate and Determinate Collections and 
the ‘Anything Whatever’ between Philosophy of Arithmetic
and Formal and Transcendental Logic
At present, however, our main intent is not to assess the consistency of
Husserl’s thought on these issues but to trace the development of its treat-
ment, subsequent to Philosophy of Arithmetic and leading up to Formal and
Transcendental Logic, of the concepts that concern us, namely, the objective
unity of pluralities (sets), cardinal number concepts, and the formal con-
cept of the ‘anything whatever’. We have seen, first of all, that the context in
which Husserl’s critique of psychologism occurs is his prior disassociation of
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
430
————————
90. According to Lohmar, all the material in Experience and Judgment on the gener-
ation of universal judgment structures is drawn from Husserl’s winter semester 1922/23 lec-
ture course “Einleitung in die Philosophie” (Lohmar, “Entstehung,” 48, 68).

what he characterizes as the “merely symbolic” arithmetical and logical tech-
niques of the algebraic calculus from the spheres, respectively, of properly
(conceptual) mathematical and logical cognition. Moreover, we have seen
that the effect of this disassociation is twofold. On the one hand, the letter
signs belonging to the merely symbolic thinking operative in the algebraic
calculus are characterized as syntactical derivatives of the “rules of the game,”
which somehow act as “surrogates” for the genuine thinking and concepts
that belong to mathematics and logic. On the other hand, proper thinking
in mathematics is now characterized as part of formal logic, whereas the
merely symbolic thinking of calculational technique is, strictly speaking, not
part of logical thinking and concepts at all.
We have likewise seen that the critique of psychologism that occurs
within the context of these developments after Philosophy of Arithmetic ef-
fects the separation in principle between concepts that are generated by re-
flexion on psychological acts, which is to say, concepts generated from inner
sense perception, and the pure “in itself ” of the concepts proper to the ob-
jectivity of logical form. Further, we have seen that the conscious Platonism
entailed in this separation renders acute the problem of how, nevertheless,
to account for the relationship between thinking and logical form. Finally,
we have seen that Husserl’s accounts between Philosophy of Arithmetic and
Formal and Transcendental Logic of the concepts that concern us leave four
main issues either unresolved or unclear.
1) In the Logical Investigations, the answer to the question of whether
the categorial intuition of the logical form of the collection as such involves the
fulfillment of a signification category belonging to a proposition is not clear.
Whether the non-signitive objective unity of the logical form of a collection
is something that is intended by a signification intention, that is, by a sym-
bolic presentation, and thus is capable of being given in the concrete or ideat-
ing abstraction in which such intentions, according to Husserl, find their
ultimate fulfillment, is not addressed. On the one hand, he includes pluralities
and cardinal numbers—both of which have the logical status of collections—
among the pure logical objects that find their fulfillment in the acts of logical
judgment that render intuitively present formal logical categories. This inclu-
sion suggests that the intuition of their objective unity would involve the ful-
fillment of signification intentions. On the other hand, he distinguishes the
logical status of the ‘and’ involved in the conjunctive unity of collections from
the relational unity belonging to states of affairs. This distinction suggests that
the intuition of the ‘and’ is brought to givenness neither by the abstraction
that sets into relief the non-independent moment of the categories belonging
to states of affairs nor by the ideational abstraction characteristic of the intu-
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
431

ition of such categories as such. The distinction does not, however, shed light
on how the collection as such is intuited as a logical object.
2) Nor is it clear in the Investigations whether it follows from the total
separation of psychological reality and logical ideality entailed in the cri-
tique of psychologism that the pure species forms of numbers, the instances
of which unify the collective presentation of the objects collected in count-
ing, are themselves formal collections. Achieving clarity on this issue is cru-
cial for grasping the relationship between the presentation of a) the
numerical unity given (in the intuition of counted collections of objects) as
an instance of the pure species form of the logical unity of the number in
question and b) this pure species form itself. 
3) Experience and Judgment gives an answer to the question of the sta-
tus of the objective unity of a collection that is left unresolved in the Logi-
cal Investigations, namely, that it indeed differs from the objective unity of
a state of affairs. Whereas the unity of a state of affairs is constituted in the
coincidence of the propositional intention and the intuitive fulfillment that
is characteristic of the “truly apophantic judgment,” the partial identity and
copulative form of unity of the subject and predicate “does not take place”
(EJ, 135/212) in the synthetic grasping of a plurality. An answer to the ques-
tion of how, then, the unity of the collection itself is given is also provided
in Experience and Judgment. The collective unity is said to be given in a ret-
rospective grasping of the noetic unity of the synthetic collecting of a plu-
rality of objects, the noetic unity being characterized as the preconstitution
of the objective unity that is grasped with its thematization. How such a
grasping is able to transform the noetic unity, which is inseparable from the
process of collecting, into an objective unity remains unclear in Experience
and Judgment. It is therefore not apparent how this account of the genesis
of the objectivity of the unity of the collection as such is able to meet the sine
qua non of Husserl’s critique of psychologism, that the objective concept of
logical unity is something that cannot be generated from the abstractive re-
flexion on the activity of collecting.
4) Questions about the formal concept ‘anything whatever’ go unan-
swered in Husserl’s analyses in the Logical Investigations and Experience and
Judgment. In the Investigations, precisely what the process of formalizing ab-
straction involves, especially in relation to the two other types of abstraction
from which Husserl distinguishes it (i.e., explicating and ideating), is not
clarified. Beyond the claim that formalization involves abstracting contents
from their material specificity, no light is shed on how this occurs. In Experi-
ence and Judgment, the accomplishment that generates the original givenness
of the judgment form ‘universal whatever’ is discussed, but two questions
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
432

remain open in connection with its relation to formalization. One is whether
this account is actually an account of formalization, which is characterized
elsewhere in Experience and Judgment as a disregarding and emptying of ob-
jective material determinations, since no explicit mention of formalization
occurs in the account of the original givenness of the “universal whatever”
as a judgment form. The other question is how it is that a significative
process, rooted in the attitude belonging to the particular judgment form,
is nevertheless able to generate a universal logical object form. What makes
the role of the particular judgment in this process especially questionable is
that such a process (mutatis mutandis) was characterized as unable to ac-
complish precisely this in the Prolegomena’s critique of psychologism.
Husserl’s accounts between Philosophy of Arithmetic and Formal and
Transcendental Logic of the objective unity of indeterminate and determi-
nate collections and the ‘anything whatever’ provide no definite, let alone
unproblematic, solutions to the logical problems that Philosophy of Arith-
metic confronted with respect to these concepts. These problems not only
remain, but when the measure of the critique of psychologism in the Prole-
gomena is applied to the Experience and Judgment’s investigations and con-
clusions, the suspicion that psychologism has not been overcome cannot be
avoided. In light of Husserl’s own observation in the “Introduction to the
Logical Investigations” that the problem of psychologism cannot really be
overcome prior to the transcendental turn taken by his phenomenology in
1908, this conclusion should not be so surprising, especially since Experience
and Judgment does not mention the transcendental reduction at all. How-
ever, as we shall see, Husserl’s investigations in Formal and Transcendental
Logic are likewise unable to stand up to his own critique of psychologism.
And while this, too, might seem surprising, we shall suggest, to the contrary,
that it is hardly surprising at all when one considers that the measure that
makes Husserl’s critique of psychologism possible is none other than that of
Platonism.
Husserl’s Account in Experience and Judgment
433

Chapter irty-four
Husserl’s Investigation of the Unitary Domain
of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology in
Formal and Transcendental Logic
§ 179. The Focus in Formal and Transcendental Logic on the
Relationship between Formal Ontolog y and Apophantic Logic
We have already seen that Husserl is quite explicit about Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic’s reliance upon the Prolegomena’s formulation of the rela-
tionship between formal mathematics and formal logic, a formulation that
the former work characterizes as unsurpassable. The idea taken up in the for-
mer is that of building a “full and entire mathesis universalis” (FTL, 87) in
which formal mathematics appears as “the highest level of logical analytics”
(86), an idea that is rooted in Husserl’s characterization of the unitary province
of formal mathematics and formal (analytical) logic as that of ‘anything what-
ever’. But unlike the Prolegomena, where this idea remains undeveloped, in
Formal and Transcendental Logic Husserl begins to articulate the concrete
steps necessary for its development. And he does so by focusing on a problem
that “is not yet propounded in the Logical Investigations” (75), the “problem
of the relationship between formal ontology and apophantic logic.”
Husserl’s characterization in Formal and Transcendental Logic of the
status of this problem in the Investigations is significant, especially when it is
considered in the light of our presentation of the unresolved issues in Husserl’s
accounts between Philosophy of Arithmetic and Formal and Transcendental
Logic of the objective unity of the concepts with which we are concerned. Its
significance is found in the fact that this problem is none other than that of
the nature of the relationship between 1) the formal categorial intentions
that in the Logical Investigations Husserl maintains are inseparable from pred-
ication significations and 2) the objective forms belonging to the materially

indeterminate categorial objects themselves to which these intentions are re-
lated. Husserl’s characterization in Formal and Transcendental Logic of the
exact nature of what is problematic in this relationship begins with a reference
to the concluding chapter of the Prolegomena, which he credits with the dis-
covery that “The formal ontological apriori arises in an inseparable coupling
with the apophantic apriori (that of the predication significations),” a discov-
ery that “necessarily brings with it a sensitivity to the problem of precisely
how this inseparability should be understood.” Husserl’s admission here that
this problem “is not yet propounded” in the Investigations is, of course, very
important for our own purposes, since it confirms our analyses’ conclusion of
its lack of resolution in the Investigations. 
In Formal and Transcendental Logic Husserl approaches the problem of
how to understand the intentional relationship between predication signifi-
cations and the formal categories to which they are (somehow) related by fo-
cusing on the relationship between formal logic—what he calls variously
‘formal apophantics’ or the ‘apophantic apriori’—and formal ontology. As
we have already briefly indicated, by the latter Husserl understands an a pri-
ori theory of objects, objects that are formal in the sense of being “modes of
anything-whatever” (68). By the former, he understands traditional Aris-
totelian logic, albeit with a structure that has been “formalized” (80) in a
manner that contrasts with the “concrete relation to reality” (70) of Aris-
totelian logic.91
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
435
————————
91. Olav Wiegand has called attention to Husserl’s bewildering use of the term ‘formal
logic’, pointing out that “On the one hand Husserl speaks of a ‘fully developed formal logic’
[EU, 2 (OW)], which, as mathesis universalis, would encompass abstract formal logic as well
as abstract mathematics,” while “On the other hand he speaks of formal logic as a special sci-
ence.” See Olav K. Wiegand, “Phenomenological-Semantic Investigations into Incomplete-
ness,” in O. K. Wiegand, R. J. Dostal, L. Embree, J. J. Kockelmans, and, J. N. Mohanty, eds.,
Phenomenology on Kant, German Idealism, Hermeneutics and Logic: Philosophical Essays in
Honor of Thomas M. Seebohm (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2000), 101–32, here 105 n. 26. (By ‘ab-
stract formal logic’, Wiegand means the logic that has broken with “the traditional logic that
has ultimately not severed its connection to the grammar of natural language” [104].) Owing
to these two ways in which Husserl refers to formal logic, Wiegand concludes, “it is up to the
reader to distinguish on every occasion whether Husserl is referring to traditional (Aris-
totelian) formal logic [i.e., formal logic as a special science] or to modern mathematical logic
as a discipline within the mathesis universalis” (105). 
In addition to agreeing with Wiegand’s account of this ambiguity, we also want to
stress that what underlies it is precisely Husserl’s recognition that Aristotle’s logic (and, there-
fore, traditional “Aristotelian logic”) is not formal in the sense that modern logic is formal, be-
cause the latter but not the former operates in the “sphere” (FTL, 42) that arises through the
processes of formalization or algebraization. What it means to operate in that way, and in-
deed how these processes may be related and what a phenomenological account of their con-
stitution should look like, is, of course, the focal point of our concern with Husserl’s account
of the origin of the logic of symbolic mathematics. Moreover, on our view, the failure to main-

Husserl characterizes Aristotelian logic from the perspective of “a for-
mal logic, as we understand such a discipline today and as Leibniz already
understood it in effecting his synthesis of formal logic (as apophantic) and
formal analysis to make the unity of a mathesis universalis” (42). Thus, on the
one hand, Husserl credits Aristotle with being “the first to bring out the idea
of form which was to determine the fundamental sense” of formal logic as
it is understood today. He regards Aristotle as “the first . . . to operate in the
apophantic sphere.” (Husserl characterizes the latter not only as “the sphere
of assertive propositions {judgments in the sense expressed by the word in
traditional logic}” but also as the sphere of “‘formalization’ or algebraiza-
tion” that “makes its appearance in modern algebra with Vieta.”) On the
other hand, however, Husserl recognizes that Aristotle “lacked formal on-
tology, and therefore lacked also the cognition that formal ontology is in-
trinsically prior to the ontology of realities” (70). The main consequence of
this lack is that “Aristotle relates his analytics to the real world and, in so
doing, has not yet excluded from his analytics the categories of reality” (43).
By approaching Aristotle in this manner, Husserl clearly exemplifies
the pattern for interpreting ancient science that Klein claims began with
Vieta, namely, viewing it from the perspective of its modern formalization.
Husserl therefore measures Aristotle’s achievement in terms of how close he
comes to the modern understanding of “formal ‘analysis’” (42) as something
that is distinct “from all material mathematical disciplines.” In consistency
with this approach, Husserl understands Aristotle’s use of letters in his logic
as substituting “algebraic letters for the words (terms)” in “materially deter-
minate propositions,” that is, in propositions that refer “to divers material
provinces or single matters” (42–43). Husserl says that this use “implied that
he substituted the moment ‘arbitrary anything’ for each materially filled
‘core’ in the judgments, while the remaining judgment-moments were held
fast as moments of form.” Notwithstanding this implication, however,
Husserl also notes that “in Aristotle the variability of the terms is not com-
pletely free, and consequently the idea of form is not quite pure” (43). Aris-
totle’s logic is not pure because, as we saw above, on Husserl’s view he related
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
436
————————
tain the radical distinction at stake here between the fundamentally different “formalities” of
Aristotelian and modern logic conceals the important historical aspect of this problem, which
is tacitly recognized in Husserl’s account of this distinction (without, to be sure, being pursued
by him either in Formal and Transcendental Logic or elsewhere). It is for this reason that we
cannot follow Sokolowski’s recent suggestion that “Aristotle carried out his formalization and
analytics” within the horizon of “the ‘real world,’” because, strictly speaking, Aristotle’s logic
did not carry out any formalization (see § 207 below). See Robert Sokolowski, “Review of Die -
ter Lohmar, Edmund Husserls ‘Formale und transzendentale Logik’,”Husserl Studies 18 (2002),
233–43, here 241.

his logic to categories of reality and, as such, “had a universal ontology of
realities only” (70).92 Moreover, on Husserl’s view “this was what he accepted
as ‘first philosophy.’”
§ 180. Modern Logic and Mathematics Are United by 
the Formalization of Their Relation to Reality
The problem that is taken up in Formal and Transcendental Logic—
the relationship and indeed unity between a) formal logic and b) mathe-
matics understood as formal ontology—is one that “could not confront the
ancients,” because neither their logic nor their mathematics was formal. The
problem of how to understand properly what the Logical Investigations char-
acterized as the relationship between signification intentions and their ful-
fillment in formal categories is what is at stake in this relationship. The
Investigations’ formulation of this relationship is a consequence of Husserl’s
critique of psychologism, and because of this he emphatically characterizes
it in a manner that is doubly non-psychological. Thus, in the Investigations
these categories can neither originate in inner sense perception nor depend
on any aspect of, or connection with, empirical psychological reality for their
logical meaning. We have seen that the fact that Husserl treats this problem
as unresolved in his logical works prior to Formal and Transcendental Logic93
supports our claim that these works do not resolve satisfactorily the ques-
tion of the relationship between symbolic presentations or thinking and the
formal mathematical categories to which they must be related in order to
circumvent—on his own terms—the critique of psychologism.
For Husserl the key to establishing the unity of formal logic (under-
stood as formal apophantics) and mathematics (understood as formal ontol-
ogy) lies in what he takes as the fact94 that both are related to the realm of the
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
437
————————
92. Having made this qualification of the degree to which Aristotle’s logic implied the
formalization and algebraization that makes modern analysis possible on his view, it is inter-
esting to note that Husserl does not similarly qualify the status of Aristotle’s logical employ-
ment of letters. Such a qualification appears to be called for, because once it is admitted that
the formalization that makes algebra possible was not accomplished by Aristotle, it would fol-
low that the function of the letters in his logic should no longer be characterized as ‘algebraic’.
93. In this connection, the fact that Formal and Transcendental Logic grew out of
what Husserl initially intended to be an introduction to the analyses presented in Experience
and Judgment is significant, because if the latter work was understood by him to have re-
solved this problem, it is more than likely that Husserl would have given some indication of
this in Formal and Transcendental Logic. 
94. In his introduction to Formal and Transcendental Logic, Husserl characterizes his
method as “presupposing the sciences, as well as logic itself, on the basis of the ‘experience’
that gives them to us beforehand” (8). While he immediately qualifies the nature of such ex-

empty ‘anything whatever’. Indeed, we shall show that it is because of this
conviction, and not because of any phenomenological analyses that he has per-
formed, that Husserl thinks that the objective unity of pluralities (sets) and
cardinal numbers has its foundation in formal logic. Husserl therefore thinks
that the mathematical unity of sets and cardinal numbers has its basis in their
relation to the objective unity belonging to the realm of the empty ‘anything
whatever’. He characterizes this relation as one that they have in common
with the logical unity of each level of what Formal and Transcendental Logic
identifies as a “threefold stratification of the fundamental concepts—and there-
fore the disciplines—of formal logic” (10).These concepts concern, respectively,
categorial forms, the principle of non-contradiction, and pure manifolds. The
disciplines devoted to each, again respectively, are the pure theory of catego-
rial form, including the pure logical grammar of meaningful and meaningless
propositions in apophantic logic, the pure logic of consequence or validity,
and pure analysis (otherwise referred to by Husserl as ‘pure mathesis univer-
salis’). Thus, rather than “appear as unquestionably separate sciences” (70), as
the ancients thought, logic and mathematics are united by the formalization
of their relation to reality. What is problematic for Husserl is not this for-
malization per se, since it is something that is unquestionably given before-
hand by the sciences of logic and mathematics, but how its meaning and sense
is to be properly understood by the mathesis universalis, the essentially new
science their unity makes possible. 
What distinguishes this new science from “[t]he earlier level of logic”
(79) is its theme. The earlier logic, by which Husserl presumably means tra-
ditionally developed non-(algebraically) formalized Aristotelian logic, “had
taken as its theme the pure forms of all significational formations that, as a
matter of a priori possibility, can occur within a science.” By contrast, what
“now becomes the theme” for the pure mathesis universalis is “the judgment
system in its entirety, which constitutes the unity of a possible deductive the-
ory” and which, as such, is “a possible ‘theory in the rigorous sense.’” It is this
theme, which Husserl also characterizes as the “idea of a formal theory of the-
ory forms or the formal theory of manifolds,” that he says he first caught sight
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
438
————————
perience as involving “cultural formations given to us beforehand and bearing within them-
selves their meaning, their sense,” it is clear that the characterization of the “realm of the empty
‘anything whatever’” as the object of logic and mathematics, or, in a formulation that makes no
difference at all to Husserl because it has essentially the same meaning, as the object of mod-
ern formal logic and formal mathematics, has its basis for him in its “pregiven” meaning and
sense. Sokolowski considers these to be “remarks on Husserl’s ‘hermeneutics’” (Husserlian
Meditations, 272 n. 2), because “Husserl says he intends to accept ‘intellectual formations’
from the tradition and radically investigate their sense by bringing them to original clarifica-
tion” (271).

of in the Prolegomena and that now, in Formal and Transcendental Logic, he
is attempting to develop. For our purposes, it will be sufficient to show that
Husserl’s discussions of the unity of the province of formal logic and formal
mathematical analysis are not only presented by Husserl himself as provi-
sional, but also that, in light of our guiding concern, they leave open more
questions than they resolve. Questions regarding the putative non-psycholog-
ical origin of the objective unities of sets and cardinal numbers, as well as the
objective unity of the formal category ‘anything whatever’, will be shown to
remain unanswered in Formal and Transcendental Logic. We shall also exam-
ine Husserl’s account of what he calls “‘[t]he most universal idea of a theory
of manifolds’” (80) and show that his attempt to establish a transcendental
phenomenological program of research to account for the origin of this idea’s
most basic concept, the formal category ‘anything whatever’, presupposesrather
than delineates (in either a programmatic or more developed fashion) the
formalization—which we are not disputing—that makes this concept possi-
ble. And, finally, we shall show that the origin of the objective unity of plu-
ralities (sets) and cardinal numbers likewise remains presupposed and that,
related to this, the precise nature of the relationship between the signification
intentions belonging to pure apophantic logic and their putative fulfillment
in the formal categories of formal ontology remains unresolved.95
§ 181. The Concept of a Sing ular Mathematical Manifold and
the Most Universal Idea of a Theor y of Manifolds
Husserl’s articulation of the most universal idea of a theory of manifolds be-
gins with an account of a singular mathematical manifold, characterized as
“‘[t]he objective correlate of the concept of a possible theory, determined
only in its form’” (79).96 As such, a manifold “‘is the concept of any possible
province of cognition that would be governed by a theory having such a form.’”
Because it is a province of cognition, Husserl understands objects to belong
to the manifold. Indeed, it is precisely the condition “‘that among the objects
belonging to the province, certain connections are possible,’” connections
that “‘come under certain fundamental laws having such and such a determi-
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
439
————————
95. This is to say, using Husserl’s earlier formulation of these issues, it is the relation-
ship between symbolic thinking in mathematics and the non-symbolic categories symbol-
ized by such thinking that remains unresolved.
96. Here and below, Husserl is quoting what he himself wrote on the topic at hand in
the Logical Investigations. Thus, Husserl’s conviction that the Investigations’ articulation of the
idea of a theory of pure manifolds cannot be improved upon is very much in evidence, for the
discussion of these issues in Formal and Transcendental Logic takes as its point of departure
the status of the problem established in the former text.

nate form,’” which Husserl characterizes as “‘the sole determining feature’” of
the condition that brings about a manifold. Being “‘uniquely and solely de-
termined by its falling under a theory of such a form,’” the composition of the
objects of a manifold are “‘neither determined directly as individual or spe-
cific singularities, nor indirectly through their material species or genera.’”
Rather, they are determined “‘exclusively through the form of the connec-
tions’” attributed to the manifold by the theory to which it is the objective
correlate. Husserl takes such form connections to pertain to the “‘objects be-
longing to the province’” proper to a manifold, connections that, like the ob-
jects they lawfully connect, have no determinate content and therefore
“‘remain completely indeterminate with regard to their matter.’” 
Husserl distinguishes the theory of manifolds from this account of a
singular mathematical manifold on the following grounds. Whereas the sin-
gular manifold is the objective correlate of the concept of a possible formal
theory, the theory of manifolds “‘develops in a determinate manner the es-
sential types of possible theories and correlative provinces and explores the
manners in which those types are lawfully related to each other’” (80). It is
able to do so, because the laws that determine a singular manifold, “‘as they
determine a province and its form, likewise determine the theory to be con-
structed, or, more correctly, the theory’s form.’” Therefore, “‘In the theory of
manifolds, e.g., ‘+’ is not the sign for numerical addition, but for any con-
nection for which the laws of the form a + b = b + a, etc., hold.’” That is,
while in a singular manifold ‘+’ may indeed function as a sign for numeri-
cal addition, in the theory of this singular theory form the plus sign signifies
merely the possibility for the lawful connection of the formal objects be-
longing to the manifold in question. And this means that their specific for-
mal determination—in the numerical example, their determination of
quantities—is of no account for the theory of manifolds. Specifically, “‘the
manifold is determined by the fact that its thought objects render possible
these and other ‘operations’ that can be shown to be compatible a priori with
them,’” and it is the task of the theory of manifolds to explore and establish
just such a priori compatibilities among theory forms. 
From the perspective of the most universal idea of a theory of mani-
folds, Husserl draws the following conclusion: “‘All actual theories, then, are
specializations or singularizations of corresponding theory forms, just as all
theoretically fashioned cognitive provinces are singular manifolds.’” More-
over, from this same perspective he also concludes, “‘If the formal theory in
question has been actually worked out within the theory of manifolds, then
all the deductive work for the construction of all actual theories having the
same form has been done.’” 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
440

§ 182. The Idea of a Theor y of Manifolds, as the Form of a
Deductive Theor y, Is “Naturally” Founded on the Categorial
Concepts Belonging to the Lower Level of Deductive Theories
In Formal and Transcendental LogicHusserl supplements these “‘elucidations’”
(81) by characterizing “[t]he new supreme concept of the discipline here in
question” (80), that is, the pure theory of manifolds, as a “form of a deductive
theory, or of a ‘deductive system.’” Especially important for our purposes is
Husserl’s understanding that this concept, “naturally,” is “founded on the cat-
egorial concepts belonging to the lower level” of deductive theories or systems,
and his view that, “in addition to the task of providing a formal definition for
the new supreme concept, there are infinite tasks” closely connected with pro-
viding such a definition. Husserl enumerates these tasks as follows:
not only of differentiating the forms subsumed under the new supreme con-
cept, of projecting, in their explicitly systematic developed state, possible
forms of deductive theories, but also of recognizing various deductive the-
ory forms of this sort as singularities subsumed under higher theoretical
form universalities, of differentiating in a systematic theory the particular
determinate forms subsumed under each of those higher form universali-
ties—and ultimately under the highest idea itself, that of any theory form,
and deductive theory, whatever.
Husserl thinks “the modern mathematical theory of manifolds and,
ultimately, the whole of modern formal analysis, is already a realization—
partial, to be sure, but in living development—of this idea of a science of
possible deductive systems” (80–81). Hence, he characterizes his account
of the theory of manifolds as “a necessary explication of the sense that Leib-
niz had in mind” (81) of a mathesis universalis. Husserl explicates this sense,
in conformity with his understanding of the non-logical status of the signs
and calculational operations employed by both the modern mathematical
theory of manifolds and modern analysis,97 as follows: 
In the definition of a manifold we must not define merely in terms of signs and
calculational operations—for example: “It shall be allowed to manipulate the
given signs in such a manner that the sign a + b can always be substituted for
b + a.” Rather we must say: “There shall obtain among the objects belonging
to the manifold (conceived at first as only empty anythings [leere Etwas], as
“objects of thinking”) a certain combination form with the law form a + b =
b + a—where equality has precisely the signification of actual equality, such
as belongs to the categorial logical forms. Which logical categories are to be
introduced by the definitions is a matter of choice, though the choice is re-
stricted by the requirement of non-contradiction; but in any case they must
be meant, and designated, as those entirely determinate categories. (88)
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
441
————————
97. See § 156 above.

Three things need to be highlighted here for our purposes. First, Husserl ex-
plicitly understands the referent of the signs that express the law form proper
to the combination form belonging to a manifold as the formal concept
Etwas, or, more precisely, as a plurality of such concepts, namely, ‘empty any-
things’. Second, he explicitly understands the form of the lawfulness charac-
teristic of their combination form to signify the “actual” equality of categorial
logical forms. And third, the logical categories introduced into the defini-
tion of a manifold are themselves non-contradictory determinate categorial
forms, and not merely the signs that, Husserl maintains, express the law forms
pertaining to such categories.
If we reformulate the three points we have just highlighted in the idiom
of the Logical Investigations, the first would have to be expressed as: the signs
‘a’, ‘and’,98 ‘b’ all belong to a signification intention that finds its fulfillment in
a conjunction, which is to say, in the categorial form that yields a lawfully
formed combination of materially empty formal concepts. The second as:
the signs a + b = b + a belong to a signification intention that finds its ful-
fillment in categorial logical forms that are presented as identical in categor-
ial intuition. And the third as: the non-contradictory determinate categories
introduced into the definition of a manifold bring about a singularization of
the manifold, that is, they bring about an actual theory whose form and cor-
responding province of determinate categorial objects belong to what is now
a manifold with formally determinate categories. 
§ 183. The Categorial Unity of the Collection Itself and the
Origination of the Form- Concept ‘Any Object Whatever’ Are
Relevant to the Task of Accounting for the Relationship 
between Formal Apophantics and Formal Ontolog y
On the basis of this reformulation, the following is apparent. First, Husserl’s
account of ‘empty anythings’ as the referents of the algebraic letter signs ‘a’,
‘b’, and the word ‘and’ means that he understands the theory form that com-
poses a manifold to establish the relationship among a plurality of objects to
which this theory form refers.99 These ‘empty anythings’ belong together in
the objective unity of a materially empty but nevertheless lawfully deter-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
442
————————
98. Note that ‘and’ is being considered here as the sign for the conjunction of that to
which the signs ‘a/b’ refer, namely, the combination form or collection of formal concepts be-
longing to the domain of ‘empty somethings’. 
99. On this point Sokolowski writes, “A theory form is correlated to a multiplicity
[i.e., manifold]. This a group of objects determined only by the characteristic of being governed
by that theory form” (Husserlian Meditations, 285).

mined collection of categories. This means, in turn, that the problem of ac-
counting for the ground of the logical unity of the theory form proper to
the relationship of these ‘empty anythings’ remains relevant to the investi-
gations in Formal and Transcendental Logic. In other words, the problem of
accounting for the objective unity of the collection itself, which Husserl
maintains in his investigations prior to the latter work is founded in neither
a state of affairs nor signification intentions,100 must remain relevant to the
stated problematic of that work.101
Second, the ‘empty anythings’ that comprise the objective content of
the manifold, and whose relationship (as a function of a combination form)
is defined by the laws composing the manifold’s theory form, must be—as
the elements that are unified by the laws of the manifold to which they be-
long—somehow already available to and therefore in some sense indepen -
dent of the laws that govern their unification into a manifold.102 That is
because the combination form responsible for this unification must signify
actual categories on Husserl’s view, in the sense that this form must pertain
to formal categories that are both determinate and non-contradictory. This
means for Husserl not only that the domain of the form-concept ‘any ob-
ject whatever’ is part of the concept of the pure manifold but also that, as
such, this domain’s origination is therefore tied to an actual manifold and its
origination. In other words, the origination of the objective unity of the
combination form that composes a given (singular) manifold, as well as of
the pure combination form as such that composes the pure form of any man-
ifold whatever, is somehow distinct from the origination of the domain of
the form-concept ‘any object whatever’ whose lawful combination is gov-
erned (immediately) by both the former combination form and (mediately)
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
443
————————
100. See § 170 above.
101. That is, it remains relevant if the investigations in Formal and Transcendental
Logic are to be consistent with what we have shown is ruled out in his earlier logical investi-
gations, i.e., either the “state of affairs” or signification intentions being the source of the ob-
jective (i.e., substrate) unity proper to the collection itself. 
102. On this point, Sokolowski writes in his “Review of Lohmar,” 241: “A theory form
is a systematic group of judgment forms, proof forms, etc., and a multiplicity [i.e., manifold]
is the set of objects to which the theory forms refer. The two, theory form and multiplicity, are
positioned over against one another. A multiplicity is a range of objects that are characterized
by being the domain to which a given theory form applies. A multiplicity is the set of objects,
formally considered, that a given theory governs.” Whether the theory form and manifold are
in fact “two,” and what exactly is involved in the formal consideration of a “set” of objects, is
precisely what we are emphasizing remains unresolved in Formal and Transcendental Logic,
and remains so when measured against Husserl’s own stipulated terms for their resolution. See
below (§§ 208–9), where we show that Husserl’s analyses fall short of his own criteria for meet-
ing adequately these terms, i.e., overcoming psychologism and providing a phenomenologically
genetic account of the origin of the formally empty concept ‘anything whatever’.

by the latter. The origination in question is distinct, notwithstanding the
inseparability of a) the principles of the combinational form’s unity and b)
the unitary form elements that compose any manifold whatever. 
The realization of the task of accounting for the relationship between
formal apophantics and formal ontology, which has as its goal the provision
of a phenomenological foundation for the development of the idea of a pure
mathesis universalis, therefore also involves the task of accounting for the
logical unity of the combination form that lawfully determines a multitude
of formal categories. That is because it is this form that is the referent of the
signs composing the symbolic calculus. The task of providing a phenome-
nological foundation for the formal objects that belong to the domain of
the ‘anything whatever’ is likewise inseparable from the development of the
idea of a pure mathesis universalis, as is the task of establishing this formally
objective domain as the unitary province of the two sciences that investi-
gate it, formal apophantics and formal ontology. In other words, the stated
goal of Formal and Transcendental Logic to develop the idea of a pure math-
esis universalis hinges upon 1) resolving the question of the origin of the log-
ical unity of a multitude, 2) accounting for the formalization that yields the
materially empty domain of ‘any objects whatever’, and 3) establishing that
these formal objects compose the unitary province of both formal logic and
formal mathematics. 
Regarding (1), Husserl’s account in Formal and Transcendental Logic
remains consistent with that in Experience and Judgment. He thus notes that
in the plural judgment, “the plural . . . is not the object in the precise sense,
it is not the object ‘about which’ judgment is made, and thus the plural is
not the substrate of determinations” (FTL, 69). The transformation of the
plural into the object about which judgment is made, as the substrate of de-
terminations, requires “operations” that are found “in the formal theory of
judgments, as a theory of pure forms.” Husserl maintains that in this theory
“operations are present by which the plural judgment form can be trans-
formed into the form of the singular predication about the collection.” His
term for these operations is ‘nominalization’. 
Considered in the context of our discussion of the account of the con-
stitution of the collection as an object as such, three things stand out in what
Husserl writes here about nominalization. First, neither plural judgments
nor singular predications about collections themselves are his concern.
Rather, at issue are the forms of such judgments and predications. Second,
the transformation Husserl characterizes here presupposes that the collection,
as the result of a plural judgment, has already been constituted. This is evi-
dent in his talk of “operations” that yield the (form of the) singular predi-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
444

cation about the collection. Hence, what is at issue in nominalization is not
the constitution of the objectivity of the collection, as a logical structure
whose unity is distinct from i) the objects that fall under its unity and ii)
the act of collecting in which this unity is presented. Third, Husserl does
not describe the operations that he credits with bringing about the trans-
formation of a plural judgment form into a singular judgment form about
the collection as such. Regarding the operations belonging to nominaliza-
tion, what he does discuss concerns the universal judgment form S is p. He
says that this form “can be converted, by ‘nominalization,’ into a judgment
about the state of affairs, S is p, or into the judgment about the quality p, in
the form p belongs to S” (69–70). But neither does he elaborate here (or else-
where) how this occurs.103
Later in Formal and Transcendental Logic, Husserl returns to the topic
of nominalization, and he again mentions how “the plural that makes its ap-
pearance in judging and, on being ‘nominalized,’ on being transformed into
the object in the preeminent sense (substrate, the ‘object about which’), yields
the set” (95). As in the earlier discussion, nominalization is characterized here
under the rubric of the ‘theory of the forms of judgments’, which again means
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
445
————————
103. In a footnote to this discussion, Husserl refers to passages in the Logical Investi-
gations and Ideas I that deal with what the former calls “nominal formations” (LI, 685/796)
and the latter the “law of ‘nominalization’” (Ideas I, 286). Those in the Investigations, how-
ever, do not deal with the question of transforming a judgment about plurality into a predi-
cation about a collection, while those in Ideas I assert but do not elaborate how “the plural
consciousness can be essentially transformed into a singular consciousness, a transformation that
draws from out of the plural consciousness the plurality as one object, as something single.”
The discussion of this in Ideas I follows Husserl’s articulation of the law of nominalization
as a law “evinced in logic” according to which “something nominal corresponds to every
proposition and to every component form distinguishable in the proposition.” This means
that just as “the nominal that-proposition corresponds to the proposition itself, let us say, to
‘S is P’” (Ideas I, 276), e.g., “in the subject-place of new propositions being-P corresponds to
‘is p’,”so too “plurality [corresponds] to the plural form” (277/287). How this occurs in any
of these cases, but especially the case that concerns us, namely, how from the plural con-
sciousness the plurality as a singular logical object is constituted, that is, the plural as a sin-
gular objectivity or what in the Investigations is referred to as the ‘collection as such’, Husserl
does not say. 
Bearing in mind that Formal and Transcendental Logic was originally intended to be
an introduction to Experience and Judgment, one could speculate that Husserl’s reticence here
regarding how nominalization occurs is explained by the fact that the latter text explicitly dis-
cusses the thematic apprehension of the collection as such. Indeed, Experience and Judgment’s
discussion of precisely this issue contains a reference to the second discussion (mentioned im-
mediately below) in Formal and Transcendental Logic of nominalization (EJ, 247 n. 1/201 n.
1). An Author’s note in the first discussion in Formal and Transcendental Logic of this topic
also contains a reference to the second (FTL, 70 n. 1). In connection with this, however, see
§ 174, where we have discussed in detail Experience and Judgment’s account and its short-
comings when measured against Husserl’s own standard of the critique of psychologism.

that the pre-predicative constitution of the objectivity of the collection is
something that is presupposed rather than accounted for in his talk of the plu-
ral being nominalized. This is particularly evident when Husserl acknowl-
edges “that one can collect and count without forthwith incorporating the
produced formations104 in actual predications.” This clearly implies that the
“plural,” in the guise of collections and cardinal numbers, has the status of
formations that are distinct from (the activities of) collecting and counting,
and are such priorto being nominalized (incorporated in actual predications).
In keeping with this, Husserl continues: “Collecting and counting are ‘ob-
jectivating’ (doxic) activities like the predicative activities” (95–96). That is
to say, “they have the same modalities of believing as predicative activities, as
they can be brought to bear on all conceivable substrates (anything whatever),
their formations consequently being modes of the same formal categories”
(96). Husserl does not mention how this happens, that is, how a collective
modality of belief can be objectifying in a manner that yields collections them-
selves as formal categories, but instead refers (in a footnote) to Philosophy of
Arithmetic,105 where “already essentially the same point was made.” Yet he
does point out that “the essential nature of these formations is such that all
of them can be incorporated into predicative judgments and given additional
forms in these.” And this again bears out the point that rather than account
for the constitution of the objectivity of the collection (and cardinal num-
bers) as a logical structure distinct from 1) the act of collecting (and count-
ing) and 2) the individual objects that compose the collection (or the cardinal
number), the logically formal operations of “nominalization” presuppose
both this objectivity and its constitution. 
Given our current concern, this point is absolutely crucial, of course,
since what is at stake is Husserl’s claim (and the possibility of establishing it),
that “all the forms belonging to doxic ‘positings’ and doxic posita—all the forms
that we ever call formal-ontological—must also occur in the course of that
universal treatment of all apophantic forms which is demanded for a formal
logic.” They must do so because
Ultimately all the forms of objects, all the derivative formations of anything-
whatever, do make their appearance in formal apophantics itself; since in-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
446
————————
104. That is, the “formations” brought about by collecting or counting, which are,
respectively, multitude and number.
105. Specifically, he refers to the discussion of the concept of ‘one and something’ in
Philosophy of Arithmetic (84–85), though this does not address collecting and counting as ob-
jectivating activities. Rather, what is addressed is the one, multiplicity, and cardinal number as
the “most general of all concepts, and most empty of content—as form concepts or categories”
(84), the “all-encompassing character” (85) of which Husserl explains “in the fact that they are
concepts of attributes which originate in reflexion directed toward psychical acts.”

deed, as a matter of essential necessity, determinations (properties and rel-
ative determinations), states of affairs, combinations, relationships, wholes
and parts, multitudes, cardinal numbers, and all the other modes of objec-
tivity, in concreto and explicated originaliter, have being for us—as truly ex-
istent or possibly existent modes—as only making their appearance in
judgments. (69) 
It must be added at once that what Husserl elsewhere refers to as the need
to “heed this belonging together” (96) of what “seem to be two different sci-
ences, separated by their provinces” (69), namely, traditional formal analy-
sis in mathematics and the traditional theory of judgments in logic, he sees
falls short of solving the problem of the unity of all apophantic forms with
all formal-ontological forms of objects. Thus, Husserl remarks, “With the
consideration of this,106 the problem of the unity or diversity of logical an-
alytics and formal mathematics can by no means be regarded as already
solved, although the thought of their unity does receive some force from
this quarter” (70).
§ 184. The Transition to the Critical Attitude in §§ 44–45 of
Formal and Transcendental Logic Does Not Account for the
Unity of Formal Ontolog y and Formal Apophantics
Husserl does not elaborate here on the reason or reasons why these consid-
erations fall short of resolving the problem of the unity of formal logic and
formal mathematics, a unity, it bears repeating, whose establishment is tan-
tamount to the realization of the idea of a pure mathesis universalis. Some
commentators have concluded that Husserl’s characterization of the emer-
gence of the “critical attitude” (111) in two closely related sections of Formal
and Transcendental Logic (§§ 44–45), the first of which is entitled “The Shift
from Formal Analytics as Formal Ontology to Analytics as Formal Apo-
phantics,” provides analyses that do resolve the problem.107 They base their
conclusion on an interpretation that equates the shift announced in the head-
ing with a change in the modality of the object of cognition’s existence, from
its naive acceptance as existing to its becoming questionable, such that it is
merely supposed to exist. The change in modality is characterized as entailing
a change in intentional focus, from an uncritical grasping of objectivities as
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
447
————————
106. Namely, 1) that all the forms of objects only make their appearance in judgments
and 2) that judgments, via “nominalization,” can be converted into judgments about “states
of affairs.”
107. See Sokolowski, Husserlian Meditations, 271–81, and “Review of Dieter Lohmar,”
237–39, as well as Wiegand, “Incompleteness,” 109–10. See also n. 118 below, which discusses
their interpretations of this section.

simply straightforwardly there to a critical treatment of them in which they
are posited in reflection as mere suppositions. The identification of formal
ontology with the straightforward focus and formal apophantics with the
critical focus is held to account for the unity of and the distinction between
formal analytics as formal ontology and as formal apophantics (apophantic
logic): they are united insofar as they both investigate the same objectivity;
they are distinct insofar as formal ontology investigates it with a straightfor-
ward focus and therefore as an actuality and formal apophantics investigates
it with a critical focus and therefore as a proposition. 
A close look at these sections, however, reveals that only the heading of
§ 44 makes explicit the problem of the relation between formal ontology and
formal apophantics, because in the analyses of both sections neither formal
ontology nor formalization is mentioned in relation to formal apophantics.108
Moreover, Husserl’s account of the critical focus (or attitude) of judging nei-
ther opposes it to a judging whose attitude is straightforward nor equates it
with a focus on objectivities in a manner that, by apprehending them as sup-
posed, brings about the judgment or proposition as such in a manner that
would account for the shift announced in the section heading. Rather,
Husserl’s account of the critical attitude is more complex, as it presents both
straightforward judging and the reflexion on meaning as components of a crit-
ical attitude that moves between these objective and propositional modes of
judging. Thus, in Husserl’s analyses, it is only when the pre-critical distinction
between “actual” and “supposed” objectivity is transcended that the critical
attitude and with it, the “supposed objectivity, as supposed” (the judgment in
the traditional Aristotelian sense), is secured. And, finally, Husserl articulates
“narrower” and “broader” concepts of “supposed categorial objectivity, as sup-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
448
————————
108. Both the preceding section in Formal and Transcendental Logic (§ 43), entitled
“Analytics, as Formal Theory of Science, Is Formal Ontology and, as Ontology, Is Directed to
Objects” (106), and § 44a make explicit mention of formal ontology and (in the case of § 43)
of formalization. However, the remainder of § 44 mentions only “categorial intuition” (108),
“categorial formations” (or “categorial form”), “categorial objectivity” (112), and “formable
categorialia,” with no further mention of formalization or whether the “objects” (and the in-
tuition of them) being discussed have undergone formalizing abstraction. One consequence
of this is that it is not clear whether the “objectivity” and “states of affairs” to which Husserl is
referring in connection with the “critical attitude” (111), and the “transition through” (112)
it that he maintains is “necessary” for scientific cognition and scientific judgment (see our dis-
cussion below) have been formalized. The absence of such clarity, we want to emphasize, means
that Husserl’s discussion of the change in “thematizing focus” in § 44 sheds no light on the
topic announced by this section’s heading. And while the closely related § 45 does distinguish
the “narrower” concept of judgment in “apophantic [and presumably formalized] logic” from
the “broader” one of “traditional logic,” it does so without addressing how formalizing ab-
straction is related to or otherwise connected with the apophantic concept of judgment under
discussion. 

posed,” in a manner that appeals—at most—only indirectly to the distinction
between the incompletely formalized logic of the tradition and the alge-
braically formalized logic proper to the mathesis universalis. Because of this, the
problem of the relationship between analytics as formal ontology and analyt-
ics as formal apophantics is not addressed in these sections, notwithstanding
the title of § 44.109
§ 185. The Analyses in §§ 44–45 of the Transition to the
Critical Attitude and the Emergence of the Broader and 
Narrower Concepts of Judgment
For Husserl, “That which comes into being and has come into being as
judged in the judicative accomplishment, that which then, as an ideal ob-
jectivity, is always reidentifiable” (107), can be focused on in one of two
ways: either as “the actuality existing” (112) for the judger “in his straight-
forward judging” or as “a supposed objectivity as supposed.” In the straight-
forward judging, “judging is always believing something, having something
‘before one’ as existent, whether one has it there intuitively or non-intu-
itively” (108). By contrast, “the categorial formations which previously were
simply existing objectivities for the judger” (108) can be focused on as some-
thing that “must be verified by going over to the evidence, the ‘categorial in-
tuition,’ in which they would be given originaliter as they themselves,
verified, cognized as truly and actually existing.” That which is focused on as
being in need of verification has for Husserl the status of “a supposed objec-
tivity as supposed” (112), and is characterized by him as “the mere correlate
of the ‘supposing’ or ‘opining’ (often spoken of as the opinion, δόξα).”
Husserl characterizes the “continual alternation” (112) between the ac-
tuality existing for the judger in straightforward judging and the supposed
objectivity as supposed as “the transition through the critical attitude.” He
maintains that this is “a transition necessary to every scientific cognition and
therefore one that every scientific judgment must undergo.” It is within the
context of this transition that he characterizes both “the broadest concept of
a ‘supposed categorial objectivity as supposed,’” the judgment as it functions
in the sciences—“disregarding logic itself”110—and the “narrower concept,”
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
449
————————
109. According to Lohmar, “there is no doubt that they [the section headings of For-
mal and Transcendental Logic] are done by Husserl alone. At least I know nothing that points
in another direction” (private correspondence).
110. This is an example of a reference to ‘logic’ wherein Husserl’s failure to distinguish
terminologically between Aristotelian (traditional) and modern, completely formalized logic
(see n. 91 above) creates significant challenges for the reader. Indeed, this whole passage (see 

in which “apophantic logic” prefers to “frame” its “theme,” namely, its theme
of “what is called the judgment (apophansis) in traditional logic.”111 Husserl
maintains that the narrower concept “completely includes” the broader one,
“though of course not as a specific particularization.” Rather than one of par-
ticularization, the relationship between the broader concept of the judgment
operative in the sciences (which is also understood by Husserl to be what tra-
ditional logic calls the judgment) and this very concept of judgment as it is
made the theme of apophantic logic, is one of modalization.112 In the (nar-
rower) concept of judgment proper to apophantic logic, the “supposed cate-
gorial objectivity as supposed,” which characterizes the judgment in the sense
of traditional logic, is itself “supposed” (and hence modalized). Or, more pre-
cisely, “the predicative judgment (the apophansis as a self-contained unity of
determination),” which, according to Husserl, is “constantly privileged” by
scientific judging, because it “is directed to the specific scientific region it is
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
450
————————
also the following note) is illustrative of this. We surmise that the logic Husserl is “disregard-
ing” here is both its traditional and modern formalized versions. We base this on the distinc-
tions Husserl makes in this section (FTL, § 45) between 1) the broadest concept of judgment
operative in the sciences, which is “called the judgment” (112) in traditional logic, 2) the “pred-
icative judgment,” which treats (1) “as a self-contained unity of determination” in a manner that
is “constantly privileged” in scientific judging, and 3) the judgment “in the sense proper to
apophantic logic,” which treats the supposed predicative states of affairs in (2) as something
that is, in turn, supposed. Thus, the “logic” we take Husserl to be “disregarding” in his discus-
sion here of judgment as it functions in the sciences is both traditional and modern (apo-
phantic) logic. We should also mention that the full context of this discussion (which is
discussed below) is Husserl’s claim that it belongs to the status of “all formable categorialia” to
be “component parts within these [i.e., scientific, in the broadest sense] judgments.”
111. The distinction that Husserl is drawing here, between judgment as it is charac-
terized by traditional logic and this very same judgment as the theme of apophantic logic, is
obscured by his inclusion of the Greek word apophansis to designate the traditional concept,
which no doubt invites a denominative association with the adjective ‘apophantic’ used by
him to designate the non-traditional logic in whose judgment the “empty concept anything”
(FTL, 98) makes “its appearance.” Apart from Husserl’s discussion that characterizes the nar-
rower concept of judgment in the sense of apophantic logic as the higher-order modaliza-
tion of the broader concept of judgment in traditional logic, Husserl’s recognition that
traditional (Aristotelian) logic lacks the completely formalized (and therefore empty) con-
cept of the ‘anything’ (see § 180 above), together with his understanding of the material de-
termination of the concepts of most sciences, presents strong evidence that he is indeed
making a distinction here between two concepts of logical judgment. Namely, he is distin-
guishing—or, better, appealing to the distinction—between the incompletely formalized
logic proper to the Aristotelian tradition and the algebraically formalized logic proper to
modern logic (see also n. 91 above).
112. Albeit, the modalization belonging to the apophantic judgment for Husserl is of
a higher order than that which belongs to the existent’s modalization on the basis of its given-
ness in straightforward judging. This is because, as we shall see below, in the former modal-
ization what is modalized is the existent, while in the latter what is modalized is the “intention
aimed at verification” (FTL, 109).

able to determine cognitively,” is what is thematized by apophantic judgment.
The consequence of this, for Husserl, is “all [the] formable categorialia,”
which as parts of the broader concept of judgment “are called on to function
within predicative judgments” and which, therefore, in turn, “present them-
selves as component parts within these judgments,” are now parts of the nar-
rower concept of judgment. Husserl thus writes: “In other words, judgments,
in the sense proper to apophantic logic, are supposed predicative states of af-
fairs113 as supposed; and, more particularly, they are self-sufficiently complete
ones. All other categorial suppositions function as parts within such ‘judg-
ments.’” The higher-order modalization involved here for Husserl—no doubt
like all modalization for him—“expresses a modification of meaning” (109),
whereby the predicative judgment of traditional logic, namely, “a supposed
objectivity as supposed,” is itself treated as a supposition. Thus, while in the
case of the predicative judgment of traditional logic it is theobjectivitythat be-
longs to the traditional scientific judgment that is supposed, in the case of
the higher-order modalization proper to apophantic judgment it is precisely
this state of affairs itself, as predicatively supposed, that is (in turn) supposed.
This is why Husserl says that all the categorial suppositions of the former now
function as parts of the latter. And it is also why he considers the apophantic
concept of judgment to be narrower than the traditional concept thereof,
since what its higher-order modalization “frames” is the predicative judgment
that is “constantly privileged” by the traditional, broader concept of judgment. 
§ 186. Critical Elaboration of §§ 44–45: The Absence of a
Simple Opposition between Straightfor ward and Critical 
Foci Precludes Phenomenological Clarification of 
the Shift from Formal Ontolog y to Formal Apophantics 
What section heading § 44b announces as the “Phenomenological clarifica-
tion of this change of focus” (108), namely, “the change of thematizing focus
from object-provinces to judgments as logic intends them” (107) announced
in § 44a’s heading, is something that § 44 as a whole addresses only in terms
of the broader sense of the concept of judgment, the traditional sense of apo-
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
451
————————
113. To capture in English Husserl’s distinction between the traditionally broader
and the apophantically narrower concepts of judgment, a distinction that he formulates on
the basis of the latter treating the predication of the ‘supposed objectivity as supposed’ of the
former as itself supposed, we have used a variation of Cairns’s sometimes maligned English
rendering of Sachverhalt as ‘predicatively formed affair-complex’. We have done so because
this is the only way to preserve in English the fact that what is being supposed in apophan-
tic logic is, according to Husserl, already itself a predicative supposition.

phansis. This becomes apparent when we consider precisely what Husserl
clarifies under this section’s various subheadings. He begins (§ 44ba) by de-
scribing how, in the course of straightforward judging, the object (substrate
objects and categorial objectivities) of such judging “‘modalizes itself.’” Specif-
ically, the “existent” (Seiendes) that is there (either intuitively or non-intu-
itively) for the straightforward judging as something that it “accepts in its
being” (108) undergoes a modification: it no longer “stands firm” in the judg-
ing, and consequently becomes modalized “in the doubtful, the question-
able, the possible, the supposed, or even in the null.” However, “so long as
nothing like that happens and the accepted objectivities remain for the time
being in straightforward acceptance of their being, they simply are for the
judging.” Husserl calls this “judgment continuity” “harmonious” because, in
the absence of the existent modalizing itself, “For the style of the further ac-
tivities of judging . . . each one of these objectivities is posited over and over
again in connecting identifications as ‘one and the same’ throughout all of
its further syntactical changes.”
Husserl does not consider this “passing through modalizations” of the
existent in the course of straightforward judging to be tantamount to the
emergence of a new focus on the part of the judging.114 Instead, he considers
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
452
————————
114. Sokolowski writes that when “one of the states of affairs that we have categorially
constituted in the world may become questionable to us . . . it takes on a new sense; it becomes,
as Husserl says, taken as ‘merely proposed’; we now deal, as Husserl puts it in the plural, with
vermeinte Gegenständlichkeiten als vermeinte” (“Review of Lohmar,” 237). From this Sokolowski
infers: “It is at this point, also, that a concern with the truth of what we are asserting comes into
play; until this point, we were just naively directed toward things and the question of truth, of
criticism, simply did not arise.” We shall show below, however, that Husserl’s phenomenologi-
cal clarification of the change of focus from objects to logical judgments traces the emergence
of the state of affairs as “previously merely supposed” (FTL, 109) to a modification of the “in-
tention aimed at verification,” not to a modification of the modality of the state of affairs’ exis-
tence. Moreover, we shall see that Husserl does not exclusively identify the modification of this
(just-mentioned) intention with either the scientist’s attitude or the critical change of focus (or
attitude) that makes the scientist’s attitude possible. (It can also occur “even in everyday judg-
ing” [108].) Finally, Husserl’s distinctions (discussed below) between a “supposed objectivity,”
“a supposed objectivity as supposed” (112), and (as we have already suggested) the broader and nar-
rower concepts of the latter, are passed over by Sokolowski. 
What Sokolowski writes here seems to represent a modification of his earlier views on
these matters, when he maintained not only that “such disturbances [i.e., modalizations] need
not change our focus” (Husserlian Meditations, 277) but also that on the basis of such distur-
bances, “a new mode of consciousness is possible in which we become concerned with verifi-
cation” (278). However, these earlier views, like the later, do not appear to distinguish between
a ‘supposed objectivity’ and a ‘supposed objectivity as supposed’; rather, he seems to treat as in-
terchangeable 1) the “focus on some objects . . . as supposed” and 2) the becoming “aware of
what we supposed as supposed.” And, significantly, Husserl’s discussion of the broader and
narrower concepts of judgment is passed over in these earlier discussions as well. 

this passage to provide only “a motivation” (110) for the eventual emergence
of such a focus, a focus that will be characterized as “critical” because it is di-
rected to the alternation between the actually existing objectivity character-
istic of straightforward judging and the supposed objectivity as supposed
correlated to supposing. Before the critical focus is able to emerge, however,
Husserl says that the following has to occur: 1) the “intention aimed at veri-
fication” (109) belonging to the everyday, occasional interest in positive ver-
ification is disappointed, such that what this intention was aiming at is not
fulfilled as such, which results in the judger’s realization that “‘the state-of-af-
fairs is not as I supposed’”; 2) a theoretically interested, vocational way of life
emerges which, instead of occasionally taking prior judgments as provisional
(i.e., those that have been disappointed), “takes all prior judgments as only
provisional” (111); and 3) the distinction between “supposed and genuine ev-
idence” is recognized. Only subsequent to the realization of these three con-
ditions does Husserl talk about “a peculiar judging procedure on the scientist’s
part,” one he characterizes as “a zigzag judging, so to speak: first making
straight for the givenness of something itself, but then going back critically to
the provisional results already obtained—whereupon his criticism must also
be subjected to criticism, and for like reasons.” 
Husserl says that the disappointment of the intention aimed at verifi-
cation belonging to everyday judging occurs when “‘what is actually there’”
(109) does not fulfill all aspects of this intention. Thus, judging is disap-
pointed when only certain of its “component positings” are fulfilled. By con-
trast, where “judging goes right ahead naturally,” and the judger, “even while
he is being guided by his need to verify,” is able to say, “when he ends up with
the evidently seen object ‘itself,’” that “‘[t]he object is actual, is actually qual-
ified thus, stands actually in these relationships,’” judging is “harmonious.”
In the disappointment of judging, then, the harmonious “transition” from
the continued acceptance of the straightforwardly accepted objectivity, as
this acceptance is guided by the everyday judger’s (occasional) need for ver-
ifying its acceptance, is disrupted. This means that what Husserl refers to as
“an identifying coincidence between the objective affair (and ultimately the
complete judgment complex, the state of affairs) that formerly was already
believed-in, and the believing that is now given in the evidence of the ful-
filling of the cognitive intention,” does not come about. With this, Husserl
holds that partial fulfillments of the original, now disappointed intention
aimed at verification “supplement themselves in the direction of the things
themselves, toward the positing whole of a categorial objectivity that ‘con-
flicts’ with what was believed in previously, a conflict that originally makes
its cancellation necessary.” In other words, the fulfilled partial positings be-
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
453

longing to the intention as a whole115 begin to yield, on the ground116 of
their partial fulfillment, a new categorial whole wherein the disruption of
the identifying coincidence emerges; and it is precisely the emergence of this
disruption that makes necessary the cancellation of the belief in the whole
of the initial intention. When this occurs, Husserl maintains, “the judger
now says, for example, ‘the state of affairs is not as I supposed.’” 
Even though Husserl maintains that what the judger now says is some-
thing that “expresses a modification of meaning,” he nevertheless does not char-
acterize the need to cancel the initial belief as a whole or the “added phrase,
‘as I supposed,’” as a shift in “focus” or the emergence of a new, “critical” atti-
tude in contrast to the straightforward judging that underlies the harmonious
judgment complex. In fact, he qualifies this by saying that “our reference to
‘verification’ proper (which leads to trueness derived from an evidence that
gives the object itself)” is “like every preference of an ideal case,” namely, “a
simplification.” Moreover, he states that this simplification is “one that is in-
deed privileged for the sake of our future exposition but not absolutely neces-
sary, as though it were the only case in which there is a motive for distinguish-
ing between something supposed, as supposed, and something actual.” The
other cases Husserl mentions either refer to such “verification proper” as “the
ideal case, that of perfection” (110), or “adjust the concept of verification
proper in a different direction,” namely, as “an adaequatio,” which is “perhaps
an imperfect one.” The “motive” in question in this passage, even in its sim-
plified form, is therefore not presented by Husserl as being a sufficient phe-
nomenological condition for arriving at the distinction “between something
supposed, as supposed, and something actual.”117 Rather, as the beginning of
§ 44bg makes clear, “with the differentiation between something supposed and
something actual, the differentiation between the sphere of mere judgments (in
the broadened sense) and the sphere of objects is likewise prepared for.” 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
454
————————
115. It is important to note that what has not been fulfilled is precisely this intention
as a whole, which is why Husserl can speak of parts belonging to it as nevertheless finding ful-
fillment.
116. Here the ground of the contrast between the aspects belonging to the intention
as a whole that have not and those that have been fulfilled is precisely the partially fulfilled as-
pects of the original intention.
117. Husserl does not present the “motive” in question in this passage, even in its sim-
plified form, as being a sufficient phenomenological condition for arriving at the distinction at
issue. This will become even more apparent below, when we elaborate his account of both the
scientist’s vocational focusing on cognition—in contrast to the everyday judger’s occasional fo-
cusing being described here—and the existence of the distinction between supposed and gen-
uine evidence, both of which Husserl maintains are required to bring about the scientist’s
judging procedure and, therewith, the distinction in question.

By writing here that the latter differentiation, which involves not sim-
ply the differentiation between something supposed and something actual
but rather the differentiation between something supposed, as supposed, and
something actual, is “prepared for,” Husserl is clearly indicating that he does
not consider the modification of meaning that occurs with the disappoint-
ment in the everyday (and, therefore, occasional) intention aimed at verifi-
cation to be what it is that brings about the judgment in the sense of
traditional logic. Indeed, in connection with precisely this issue, he writes
that “to advance further, we direct our regard to the sciences.” More precisely,
Husserl directs his regard to the scientist’s “vocational judging,” because it is
this—in contrast to everyday occasional judging—that “is always ruled com-
pletely by intentions aimed at cognition,” and therefore it is this judging that
eventually brings about the sphere of mere judgments—in the broadest sense.
The scientist’s living a “‘theoretically interested life,’ with vocational consistency”
means “nothing else but accepting no judgments as scientific except those
that have shown their ‘correctness,’ their ‘truth,’ by an adequation to the things
themselves and [that] can be originally produced again, at any time, with this
correctness” (111). This does not mean, however, “that the scientist does not
judge at all before such a having of the ‘things,’ of the objectivities ‘themselves’
belonging to the respective categorial level.” Rather, it means that “he takes all
prior judgments as only provisional; the categorial objectivities in them, as
only provisionally accepted, as merely supposed objectivities.” Moreover, even
as the scientist takes the categorial objectivities as merely supposed, “The cog-
nitive intention passes clear through them, as supposed, and aims at the things
themselves, at their self-givenness or evidence.” 
Taking all prior judgments as only provisional, and doing so while the
cognitive intention is directed to either the self-givenness of things them-
selves or the evidence for this, is nevertheless not the exclusive difference that
“distinguishes the cognitive striving of the scientist from the naive cognitive
striving of the non-scientific thinker.” This is the case for Husserl because the
scientist, unlike the non-scientific thinker who “‘merely looks and sees’”
whether his cognitive striving has been satisfied, “has long been apprised not
only that evidence has degrees of clarity but also that it may be deceptive ev-
idence.” Hence, for the scientist “there exists the further distinction between
supposed and genuine evidence.” And it is precisely this distinction that Husserl
credits with being what “brings about a peculiar judging procedure on the sci-
entist’s part, a zigzag judging, so to speak,” which he characterizes as “the tran-
sition through the critical attitude” (112), and which he maintains is what
initially yields “a supposed objectivity as supposed.” 
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
455

Husserl characterizes the “zig” aspect of the critical attitude as “first
making straight for the givenness of something itself” (111), while the “zag”
aspect is characterized as “then going back critically to the provisional re-
sults already obtained.” This “criticism must also be subjected to criticism,
and for like reasons,” which means that “the scientist is guided by the idea of
an evidence that is perfect or perfectible by systematic stages, and attainable
by means of criticism, an evidence having as its correlate an attainable, or
approachable, true being.” Husserl adds that the critical attitude “concerns
all judging activities with respect likewise to the modalizations occurring in
them and the distinctions between evidence and non-evidence that are pe-
culiar to such modalizations themselves; but the cognitive intention aims
through these modalizations, through the questionabilities, possibilities,
probabilities, negations, toward evident certainties.” Consequently, in “every
scientific cognition” (112), and, therefore, in “every scientific judgment,”
what “the scientist has before him, in continual alternation,” is, on the one
hand, “an objectivity simpliciter (as the actuality existing for him in his
straightforward judging or else aimed at by him as a cognitive subject) and,
on the other hand, a supposed objectivity as supposed.” Husserl includes among
the latter “a supposed consequence, a supposed determination, a supposed
multiplicity, cardinal number as such, and so on.”
Because the cognitive intention of the critical attitude aims through
the modalizations occurring in all judging activities, Husserl is not identify-
ing the critical attitude with a focus whose exclusive concern is the supposi-
tional character of these modalizations. Indeed, his account of the “zigzag”
nature of this attitude’s judging and the alternation between straightfor-
wardly judged objectivities and supposed objectivities as supposed confirms
this, for it is precisely within the continual alternation between these two
modes of giving objectivities that Husserl locates the critical transition necessary
for scientific cognition and judgment.118 Moreover, it is important to note
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
456
————————
118. Husserl’s articulation of the critical attitude (in §§ 44–45), and the transition
through it necessary for scientific cognition and judgment, is therefore made on the ground
of a distinction that occurs within judicative accomplishments, i.e., the distinction between
judgments that yield, in “continual alternation,” 1) straightforward objectivities and 2) sup-
posed objectivities, as supposed. Husserl does not scruple to refer to the straightforward atti-
tude of the “judging” of the “judger,” and he also explicitly refers to the judging involved in this
attitude as “always believing in something.” Hence, it is surprising to read Sokolowski’s claim
that, for Husserl, “in our original and naive focus on things and states of affairs, judgments
have not yet arisen. In this original focus there are only objects, states of affairs, groups, and
other things and structures in the world. Judgments arise only when the intended states of af-
fairs become taken as proposed, as supposed” (Sokolowski, “Review of Lohmar,” 237–38).
Having drawn this sharp distinction between objects and judgments, Sokolowski goes on to
criticize the characterization of “the judgment, as well as the entire apophantic domain, as al-
ready therefore beforehand” (238), in the sense that “they are already there waiting to be re-

e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
457
————————
flected on” (239). In contrast to this view of the judgment, Sokolowski claims “that judgments
are not there until we reflect on a state of affairs and take it as proposed.” This claim is con-
sistent with his overall interpretation of these passages in Husserlian Meditations, where he
maintains that “Through § 44 Husserl makes us aware of how we focus on judgments. He dis-
closes the origins and the primitive presence of the apophantic domain” (279). Moreover, it
is consistent with Sokolowski’s claim that in accordance with Husserl’s distinction between ob-
jects and judgments, “In its origins and in its finality, the domain of meaning is derivative from
the domain of objects.” And, finally, with this radical distinction between the apophantic do-
main and the domain of objects, Sokolowski believes that Husserl has resolved the issue of the
relationship between formal logic, as apophantic logic, and formal ontology, because “formal
ontology is the sheer absorption in given categorial objectivities themselves, without explicit
concern with the critical apophantic domain” (288).
On our view, Drummond’s account of what goes on, according to Husserl, when we
“reflectively direct our attention to the judged as such, to the judged state of affairs precisely
as supposed” (Drummond, “Paving the Way to a Transcendental Logic,” 39) captures the ju-
dicative context within which Husserl articulates the critical attitude. Drummond writes, “In
the straightforward focus on objects, we apprehend the categorial objectivity or state of af-
fairs as such; in the critical focus on the state of affairs as supposed, i.e., on the supposition it-
self, we apprehend the judgment or proposition.” Rather than signal that Husserl is involved
in a “genetic analysis, one that shows how the judgment (and the apophantic domain) is
founded upon and motivated by the ontological state of affairs (and the ontological domain)”
(Sokolowski, “Review of Lohmar,” 239), Drummond holds that in this shift in attitude or
focus, “the judgment takes on for us a double character, that of the categorially formed, judged
state of affairs and that of the judgment merely as such, the supposition as supposed, the propo-
sition, the judgment in the logical sense” (Drummond, “Paving the Way to a Transcendental
Logic,” 39). Drummond’s characterization of the “double character” of the judgment allows
us to see that rather than account for the distinction between objects and judgments (as well
as the origin of the latter in the former), as Sokolowski argues, Husserl’s “differentiation be-
tween something supposed and something actual” (FTL, 110) is one in which “the distinction
between the sphere of mere judgments (in the widest sense) and that of objects is also prepared
for.” (It is interesting to note in this connection that Sokolowski modifies the translation of this
passage in a manner that elides Husserl’s preparatory characterization of the relationship of
the modal difference between “supposed” and “actual” and the ontological difference between
‘mere judgments’ and ‘objects’. Namely, “‘with the distinction between the proposed and the
actual, we have also worked out the distinction between the sphere of mere judgments . . . and
that of objects’” [Sokolowski, “Review of Lohmar,” 238; his ellipsis and emphasis].) 
As we have just seen, Husserl’s reason for qualifying as preparatory the relationship be-
tween the modal and ontological differences involved here is connected with his view that
what is required for the latter distinction—as a theoretical distinction—to emerge is the “vo-
cational judging” (FTL, 110), the “scientific judging,” which marks “the cognitional striving
of the scientist” (111). The distinction between “mere judgments” and “objects,” between,
more precisely, “mere” judgments as apophantic and judgments “that have shown their ‘cor-
rectness,’ their ‘truth,’ by an adequation to the things themselves,” therefore involves for Husserl
something more than the modal distinction between the ‘supposed’ and the ‘actual’. What is
important to emphasize here is that Husserl not only characterizes scientific judging as a
“zigzag judging” (111), namely as a judging that involves the “confrontation” with both
straightforward objectivity and supposed objectivity as such, but also that it is precisely within
the “alternation” from the one objectivity to the other that Husserl identifies the scientist’s
“critical attitude.” Thus, strictly speaking, Husserl’s account of the judgment in the sense proper
to logic (in either its broader or narrower concepts) does not oppose a straightforward judg-
ing or attitude to a critical judging or attitude; rather, he characterizes the critical attitude it-

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
458
————————
self in terms of its confrontation with the alternation between objectivities that are modalized
either as actually existing, straightforward objectivities or as supposed objectivities, as sup-
posed. Therefore he does not maintain that the supposed objectivity, as supposed—and, with
it, the proposition—is something that originates (per Sokolowski) or otherwise is “properly
distinguished” (Drummond, “Paving the Way to a Transcendental Logic,” 39) by “a difference
in the way we focus the meant objectivity,” a difference in focus that is “critical” in contrast to
another—straightforward—way we focus the meant objectivity. On the contrary, it is pre-
cisely the encounter with the modalized differences in the meant objectivities themselves—as
1) straightforwardly judged or 2) supposed—that characterizes for Husserl the critical atti-
tude. The zigzag judging belonging to the critical attitude’s awareness of the constant alterna-
tion between straightforward objectivities and supposed objectivities, as supposed, therefore
does not arise on the basis of a putative change in the way the critical attitude focuses on the
meant objectivity, specifically a change in focus from the straightforward attitude’s appre-
hending it “as such” to the critical attitude taking it as “supposed.” Rather, the different modes
of meant objectivity themselves emerge on the basis of the modalization of both 1) the in-
tention aimed at cognition and 2) the evidence in which the objectivities so aimed at are given.
The former modalization, as we have seen, is brought about by the scientist’s vocational con-
sistency, which, in contrast to the transformation by everyday judging of some prior judg-
ments (i.e., those that have been disappointed) into only provisional ones, transforms all prior
judgments into only provisional ones. (Hence, Husserl traces the motivation for this modal-
ization to pre-scientific judging and the modalization of existent objectivities—not attitudes—
that occurs in such judging.) The modalization of existent objectivities, then, gives rise to the
distinction between objectivities as “supposed” and objectivities as “actual”—but not, as we
have stressed, to the distinction between supposed objectivities as supposed, and straightfor-
wardly existent ones. This latter distinction, as we have also seen, arises on the ground of the
existence of the scientist’s distinction between “supposed and genuine evidence,” which Husserl
credits with initiating the zigzag movement of judgment from the evidence in which straight-
forwardly existent objectivities are given, to the provisional judgment about the objectivities
already obtained, and then back again to the straightforward evidence, etc. It is precisely this
movement, between two different modalities of objectivity, and not any change between two
different attitudes or foci, that Husserl characterizes as the “critical attitude.” The crucial ques-
tion of how the scientist’s distinction between supposed and genuine evidence comes into ex-
istence, we want to emphasize, is not raised by Husserl. (As we have seen, Husserl introduces
the distinction by crediting the scientist with having “long been apprised” of it.) However,
from what has been said here, it should be apparent that its coming into existence cannot be
properly characterized, or otherwise accounted for, on the basis of the modalization of objec-
tivities judged to be existent by everyday, non-scientific straightforward judging. Again, this
is because the everyday modal distinction involves the opposition between ‘merely supposed’
and ‘actual’ objectivities; and this means that the possibility of the modalization of the puta-
tive evidence that yields the latter in terms of the distinction between “supposed and genuine
evidence” is patently not a factor at this level of Husserl’s analysis. 
That Husserl himself does not consider his account in §§ 44–45 of the modal dis-
tinction between 1) the objectivity simpliciter manifest to straightforward judging and 2) the
supposed objectivity as supposed manifest to supposing, to be equivalent to an account of the
distinction between straightforward and critical attitudes and their respective differences in
focusing on meant objectivity, can also be seen by a brief consideration of § 48 of Formal and
Transcendental Logic, which provides “a more penetrating phenomenological clarification”
(FTL, 116) of what has already been partly attained by the analysis in Chapter 4”—and, there-
fore, in these earlier sections. In § 48, Husserl distinguishes “a judging at a second level, in which
what was judged straightforwardly, and was therefore an existing objectivity for the judger, is
no longer posited, but rather the judged as such is posited in a reflexion” (117). Husserl charac-

e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
459
————————
terizes the distinction involved here as “the transition from a judgment (a supposed objectiv-
ity simpliciter) to a judicial meaning” (my emphasis) just as he does in § 45. And again, as in
§§ 44–45, he does not identify “the going over” (118), from the “straightforward asserting-
judging attitude” “into the reflected, in the attitude in which the corresponding object mean-
ings, state of affairs meanings, become apprehended or posited” (118), as a transition involving
the critical attitude. In fact, he explicitly rules out that his account of this transition says any-
thing “about whether or not the straightforward (unreflected) judgments and the reflexive
meaning judgments are evident, whether or not they bear within themselves cognitive inten-
tions, which eventually proceed to their fulfillment.” He does so on the ground that “in both
judgment foci,” i.e., “in the ‘straightforward’ and in the reflexion on meaning [Sinnesreflex-
ion],” the “modes of modification” involved here, “the evidential having of something itself
and the merely having it in belief,” are modes that “obviously can occur.” This means for Husserl
that in the case of either judicative focus, straightforward or reflexion on meaning, “there is the
difference between” fulfilled and unfulfilled cognitive intentions. In other words, in both
modes of judicative focusing, “there is modalization, in particular, eventually cancellation, ver-
ification, evident refutation (as negative verification), and so forth.” Finally, “criticism [Kri-
tik]”—as in §§ 44–45—is not identified exclusively with the reflexive focus on meaning, but
rather is explicitly identified with what occurs “as a result of going back,” after the modaliza-
tion of either mode of judicative focusing, “to the higher level meaning.” In other words,
Husserl distinguishes between Kritik and Sinnesreflexion, such that while to all criticism there
belongs reflexion on meaning, the converse does not necessarily hold, i.e. reflexion on mean-
ing is not necessarily critical.
As a result of these considerations, we cannot follow Wiegand’s account of this issue,
which claims that for Husserl “the critical attitude of the logician is tantamount to an act of re-
flection, which is the necessary condition for encountering a judgment as judgment” (Wiegand,
“Incompleteness,” 106). We cannot do so because even though, as we have just seen, the judged
as such is indeed posited in a reflexion, Husserl does notposit criticism as tantamount to the re-
flexion (or, an act of reflection) that yields the judgment as such, but rather characterizes it as
the zigzag movement between the reflexive apprehension of the judged as such and the non-re-
flexive straightforward judgment, a movement whose zig andzag are both informed by the cog-
nitive intention and, intrinsic to this intention, the difference between its fulfilled and
unfulfilled modalities. Again, what we are taking issue with is not whether Husserl, in Formal
and Transcendental Logic, comes “to speak of logic treated in two attitudes” (133) but whether
he characterizes these attitudes in terms of an opposition between the critical focus on judg-
ments and the un- (or pre-) critical focus on objectivities. Husserl’s summarizing statements on
this topic, which are taken as definitive by Sokolowski and those who follow or otherwise take
Sokolowski’s interpretation as their point of departure, do indeed articulate “two correlative
senses of formal logic” (131), one of which is characterized as “starting with traditional focusing
on judgments as apophantic meanings or opinions—that is to say, giving preference to the atti-
tude of criticism,” through which “we acquire an apophantic logic.” The other of which is said
to “give preference to the focusing on possible categorial objectivities themselves or their forms,”
whereby what is pursued from the very beginning is “a formal-ontological logic.” Nevertheless, on
our view, the interpretation of this as meaning that the critical attitude is essentially character-
ized by the reflective focus on judgments while the objective attitude is focused on objects
misses Husserl’s crucial account of the movement between judgments and objectivities that is
essentially characteristic of both attitudes. Hence, he writes of “the formal logic of possible truth”
(129), which “has (so we explained) a critical attitude,” that “we regard judgments as our exclu-
sive theme—even though we bring in the corresponding possible objectivities that they might
fit, thus taking on predicates of ‘correctness,’ of truth.” This bringing in “corresponding possi-
ble objectivities,” we stress, is expressive of what Husserl calls the “zig” modality of the critical
attitude, which, as this quote makes plain, is directed to the possible objectivities that corre-

that the “merely supposed objectivities” that follow from the scientist’s tak-
ing as provisional all prior judgments do not yet have the status of “merely
supposed objectivities as supposed.” That is because in the absence of the fur-
ther distinction between supposed and genuine evidence, and the criticism
of evidence that follows from this distinction in the form of the zigzag judg-
ing back and forth between 1) the givenness of something itself, 2) the pro-
visional results already obtained regarding its givenness, then back again to
(1), and so on, the “merely supposed objectivities” remain just that. This is to
say, for Husserl a “merely supposed objectivity” becomes something that is
“supposed as such” (112), namely, “a supposed objectivity as supposed,” only
on the basis of the continual alternation between the givenness of something
and the provisional results already obtained by which he characterizes the
“transition” through the critical attitude. Therefore, merely supposed objec-
tivities, and the cognitive intention passing through them, as supposed, to
the givenness of the things themselves is not sufficient to bring about this at-
titude—though it is obviously, on Husserl’s view, an essential component of
it. It is not sufficient, Husserl points out, because the distinction between
“merely supposed” objectivities and the givenness of the things themselves is
something that characterizes the cognitional striving of the non-scientific
thinker as well. Hence, it is Husserl’s identification of the existence of the fur-
ther distinction between supposed and genuine evidence, a distinction that
is proper to the cognitive striving of the scientist but not to that of the non-
scientist, that is bound up with the critical movement back and forth between
straightforward and merely supposed objectivities. And it is precisely from
out of this movement that the “supposed objectivity, as supposed” is held by
him to emerge, and to emerge as the “mere correlate of the ‘supposing’ or ‘opin-
ing,’” which he maintains is “often spoken of as the opinion, δόξα.” It is the
“mere” correlate and not simply the correlate of supposing or opining, because
unlike the status of the distinction between the supposed objectivity and the
actual objectivity that emerges in everyday judging, the supposed objectivity,
as supposed, emerges in response to the further scientific distinction between
supposed and genuine evidence in relation to the putative givenness charac-
teristic of actual objectivity. It is this distinction that engages the critical at-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
460
————————
spond to judgments. Likewise, he writes of the “[c]ategorially formed objectivity,” which is “not
an apophantical concept” but “an ontological concept,” that “the essence of such an objectivity
consists precisely in its being a fulfilled judgment having a corresponding sense-form.” As a ful-
filled judgment, what Husserl calls the “zag” movement of the critical attitude is thus also a fac-
tor for “a formal ontological logic” (131), which he explicitly affirms “will be forced, for reasons
of method, to make judgment senses into objects—though only as a means, whereas its final pur-
pose concerns the objects.”

titude’s zigzag judging back and forth between the supposed objectivity and
the actual objectivity, such that the former, as supposed, emerges for the sci-
entist by subjecting criticism to criticism; subjecting, that is, the provisional,
merely supposed objectivities to criticism by going back to the putative given-
ness of something itself, then back to the supposed objectivities, in a manner
guided by the idea of a perfect evidence, an idea wherein the merely supposed
objectivity, as supposed, finds its fulfillment in the true—as opposed to sup-
posed—givenness of the actual objectivity itself.
With the “supposed objectivity, as supposed,” we have, according to
Husserl, “laid hold of what is called the judgment (apophansis) in traditional
logic and is the theme of apophantic logic.” We have already discussed above
the distinction Husserl makes between the broader concept of judgment con-
nected with the judgment in traditional logic and the narrower concept con-
nected with the modalization of this concept, a higher-level modalization
that occurs with its thematization (and presumably formalization) by apo-
phantic logic. And although he does not say it explicitly anywhere in § 45, we
want to stress that objects in the sense of formal ontology must be among
those “categorial formations” (108) that show up in the “zig” of the scientist’s
judging.119 That is, they must show up in the making straightaway for the pu-
tative givenness of objects that, Husserl maintains, characterizes one of the
two foci whose continual alternation marks the transition belonging to the
critical attitude, a transition that “every scientific cognition and therefore
every scientific judgment must make” (112). 
§ 187. The Unitar y Province of Formal Logic and Formal
Mathematics and Their Epistemological Distinction 
Is Not Resolved by the Account of the Alternation 
between the Attitude of Straightfor ward Judging 
and That of Supposed Judging as Supposed
Examined closely, the account of the transition through the critical attitude
that is necessary for scientific cognition and judging, a transition that in-
volves the alternation between 1) objectivities manifest as actual to the at-
titude of straightforward judging and 2) supposed objectivities, manifest as
supposed in correlation to what the tradition calls supposing or opining
(δόξα), resolves neither the nature of the overlapping conceptual province
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
461
————————
119. At the start of § 44’s discussion of what its heading refers to as “The Shift from An-
alytics as Formal Ontology to Analytics as Formal Apophantic,” Husserl does explicitly say just
this when, in connection with “[a]ll the objectivities with which we ever busy ourselves or ever
have busied ourselves” (FTL, 107), he mentions “their formal-ontological configurations.”

that unifies formal logic and formal mathematics nor their disciplinary, epis-
temological distinction. To begin with, no mention is made here of the dif-
ferent formal statuses of 1) the objective collective unity proper to pluralities
(sets) and 2) the (non-collective) categorial unity proper to states of affairs,
nor of their different originations or geneses. Indeed, even though Husserl
apparently restricts the proper meaning of the narrower concept of judg-
ment belonging to apophantic logic to “supposed predicative states of af-
fairs, as supposed,” he also includes “a supposed plurality, a supposed cardinal
number” (112) among the supposed objectivities that he maintains belong,
as supposed, to the concept of judgment in the broadest (traditional logical)
sense. This means, moreover, that Husserl’s account of judgment in §§ 44–
45 proceeds as if the question of the overarching unity of the objective col-
lective (formal) unity of pluralities (sets, including cardinal numbers) and
the objective (formal) categorial unity belonging to states of affairs has al-
ready been resolved, because he holds there that all the categorial supposi-
tions belonging to the broadest concept of judgment function as parts of
the narrower concept.120 In other words, while Husserl’s analyses in Formal
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
462
————————
120. Sokolowski argues that §§ 44–45 represent a “new formulation” (Husserlian Med-
itations, 280) of the “first approach to the problem of formal ontology and formal apophan-
tics” in Formal and Transcendental Logic, one that overcomes the first, which “merely accepts
both from the tradition and places them over against each other.” Sokolowski characterizes
this acceptance as one in which “facts”—Sokolowski’s translation of Sachverhalte—“are rele-
gated exclusively to the objective sphere while judgments are in the apophantic sphere.” Our
statement of Husserl’s account of the relationship between formal ontology and apophantic
logic in Formal and Transcendental Logic (§ 176 above), which articulates it in terms of pre-
cisely how the inseparability of the formal ontological apriori and the apophantic apriori should
be understood, no doubt falls under the heading of Sokolowski’s notion of a first approach.
This is because in our development of this account (in §§ 205 and 207 above), what we high-
light as unresolved for Husserl is the fulfillment of 1) the symbolic signification intention
proper to collections in 2) the categorial form of the collection itself. No doubt, on Sokolow -
ski’s view, this way of formulating the problem would be interpreted as relegating categorial
states of affairs to the objective sphere and judgments to the apophantic sphere. And for him
it is, again, no doubt precisely this opposition—between symbolic judgments and non-sym-
bolic categorial forms—that Husserl overcomes when, in § 45, Sokolowski maintains, “we are
told that judgments are facts—as supposed.” Continuing with Sokolowski’s line of thought on
this matter, this opposition is overcome because, rather than attempt to solve the problem of
the unity between the judgment and object by beginning from his first characterization’s posit-
ing of their opposition, Husserl’s second formulation begins with the object and shows that the
judgment is nothing other than the object itself, albeit modalized as supposed by a change in
the cognitive intention’s focus.
Granting for the moment Sokolowski’s line of thought here that formal logic and for-
mal ontology are distinguished solely by an attitudinally induced modalization and therefore
that the unity between the “empty” intentions of judgments and the objectivities they intend
is (at least, ideally) insured, the problem of accounting for the relationship between the onto-
logical apriori and the apophantic apriori in the case of the categorial form of the collection
itself and the signitive intention proper to it would still not be resolved. As we have seen, not 

e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
463
————————
only does Husserl consistently distinguish collective unity from non-collective categorial unity,
and therefore the objective character of the unity that belongs to the collection from the ob-
jective unity that belongs to the state of affairs, but he also distinguishes the mode of synthetic
linkage that 1) yields the preconstitution of the plurality as such that founds the objective
unity of the set and 2) the mode of synthetic linkage that yields the preconstitution of the
substrate and its explicates that founds the objective unity of the state of affairs. Moreover, he
distinguishes the level of the acts that render thematic the objective (logical) substrate unity
of the plurality (set) and the acts that render thematic the state of affairs. Thus, not only does
the “copulative” unity posited on the basis of the synthesized partial coincidence between an
object and its properties differ from the “conjunctive” unity posited on the basis of synthesized
partial apprehension of a plurality, but also collective unity as such, as a logically objective sub-
strate, is constituted by a higher-level act than the acts that are constitutive of the states of af-
fairs as a substrate, specifically by the “retrospective grasping” of the noetically preconstituted
collective unity yielded by the plural explication proper to colligation. Sokolowski’s account
of the genesis of the apophantic judgment, and with it the proposition, on the ground of a
change in the modality of an object or state of affairs from simply (straightforwardly) asserted
to merely supposed, even if granted, would not be able to account for the logical unity of the
plurality (set) as such. For in the instance of the logical unity of the collection itself, i.e., of the
formal unity belonging to the collection as something whose content is irreducible to the activ-
ity of synthetically collecting objects, this very unity is not something that is initially straight-
forwardly asserted, in a manner analogous to the state of affairs, such that it would lend itself
to being modalized as ‘merely supposed’ by a change in attitudinal focus. Rather, instead of a
straightforward assertion directed to the object there is colligation, which for Husserl is patently
not something that is logically objective. Hence, to talk of the collection as something capa-
ble of being modalized like a state of affairs, which is what would have to be done in order to
follow Sokolowski’s account, can make no sense. Indeed, if we follow Husserl and consider
collecting as a form of “predicatively productive spontaneity,” the “predicative judgment” in the
case of the formal categorial unity of the collection itself is clearly not something that is
founded in the (straightforward) assertion of the objectivity of the collection. Rather, this
predicative judgment must be constitutively prior to the assertion (positing) of the collection’s
objectivity, because it is precisely the collective synthesis produced by this predicative spon-
taneity that yields the noetic preconstitution of the collection itself, the noema of which is—
somehow, in a manner, we must emphasize, unaccounted for by Husserl—accessed in the
retrospective apprehension of the judgment, and clearly not in any modalization of an object.
The predicative judgment belonging to the collecting must therefore constitutively precede
the objectivity of the collection itself, because, on Husserl’s view, the collective, as a categorial,
i.e., logical, objectivity is not constituted prior to this retrospective apprehension. 
With respect to our main concerns, two important conclusions can be drawn from
this: 
1) Husserl’s articulation of the judgment in the sense of apophantic logic—in either
Sokolowski’s or our interpretation of it—accounts for neither the unity nor the distinction be-
tween the apriori of formal ontology and that of apophantic logic. It fails to do so on the terms
Husserl himself sets for resolving these problems, i.e., the issue he lays out (in FTL, § 24) of es-
tablishing the unitary objective province of the forms of multiplicities that defines non-apo-
phantic mathematics, i.e., the traditional formal analysis of mathematicians, and that of
predicative propositions, judgments in traditional logic’s sense of the term. Failing to establish
this unity, the objective provinces of mathematics and logic remain distinct, or, in an equiva-
lent formulation, the most universal concept that would delimit the collective objectivities
treated by mathematics and the judgment unities treated by logic remains (in the sections of
Formal and Transcendental Logic currently under consideration) elusive.
2) The phenomenological nature and phenomenological conditions of possibility of 

and Transcendental Logic recognize, on the one hand, that the unity of apo-
phantic formal logic and formal mathematics (understood as formal ontol-
ogy) hinges upon establishing what these analyses have not yet established,
namely, the identity of the most universal concept that would delimit the
unitary province of these disciplines, the analyses in §§ 44 and 46, on the
other hand, treat the objective concepts of apophantic formal logic (e.g.,
predicative states of affairs) and mathematics (e.g., plurality, cardinal num-
bers) as if this unity had already been established. However, in the absence of
having provided a phenomenological account of what Husserl himself rec-
ognizes is necessary in order to establish the formal logical unity of indeter-
minate and determinate multitudes, an account, that is, of the objective
forms that compose collections as such as well as the collections proper to
specific cardinal numbers, the following conclusion has to be drawn: “the
universal concept that should delimit the unitary province” (68) of the dis-
cipline that deals with the “forms of sets” (67)—what he calls “the tradi-
tional formal ‘analysis’ of mathematicians”—and the discipline that deals
with “predicative propositions, ‘judgments’ in traditional logic’s sense of the
word,” has not been established. That is because Husserl himself has ruled
out accounting for the objective unity of the collection as such on the basis
of the logical unity presented by states of affairs. The appeal to the critical
attitude, and the transition through it to scientific cognition and judgment,
certainly provides an account of neither the objective unity of a collection
as such (a plurality as such, i.e., a set) nor a universal concept whose unity
would embrace formal ontology and formal logic. Finally, the direction to-
ward which Husserl points regarding such a concept, to the formal concept
of the ‘anything whatever’ that he maintains characterizes the common a
priori object of both formal ontology and formal logic, is not even men-
tioned in his account121 of the broadest and narrower concepts of logical
judgments—nor does he mention in this account the formalization that pu-
tatively yields or otherwise generates it.
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
464
————————
the relationship between the empty intention of the symbolic presentation belonging to the
signitive, i.e., the “apophantic” apriori of mathematical judgments, and the formalized cate-
gorial objectivities to which they refer, and must refer according to Husserl if merely sym-
bolic mathematical thinking is to establish a relationship to mathematical objectivity without
succumbing to psychologism, is not established. In other words, the inseparability of, as well
as the distinction between, apophantic logic and formal ontology remains (so far in FTL, at
least) unaccounted for. 
121. Here, in §§ 44–45, and, as we shall see, elsewhere in Formal and Transcendental
Logic.

§188. Logical Psychologism, Husserl’s Logical and 
Phenomenological Idealism, and His Failure in Formal 
and Transcendental Logic to Address the Distinction 
between the Ontic Meaning Proper to the Irrealities of 
Collective and Non-collective Categorial Unity
Husserl’s discussion of psychologism in Formal and Transcendental Logic
takes as its point of departure the logical critique of cognition advanced in the
Prolegomena, expands this critique to formulate a more general (epistemo-
logical) sense of psychologism, and then, finally, identifies the non-analytic
province of a “transcendental criticism of cognition” (152–53). For our pur-
poses, it will be sufficient to show that neither the summary of his initial cri-
tique of logical psychologism nor his subsequent critique of what he
characterizes as the more general concept of psychologism addresses the dis-
tinction between collective and non-collective categorial unity that is our
main concern. Rather, even though Husserl’s analyses acknowledge that the
difference in the kinds of categorial objects given (to experience) in a manner
that refutes both logical and the more general psychologism requires the
“constitutional clarification” (147) of each such object’s “ontic meaning
[Seinssinn],” he does not address this difference in the case of the non-col-
lective objectivities of apophantic logic and the collective objectivities of tra-
ditional mathematics. Indeed, Husserl’s analysis (within the context of his
discussion of psychologism) of what he calls “irreale Geistesgebilde” (138)—
conceptual forms that appear to the mind and that therefore exist, even
though they are neither sensible nor individuated in space and time—treats
indiscriminately the ideality of the logical species, the judgment, and that of
a symphony (147).122
Husserl summarizes the “highly plausible conception” (138) of logi-
cal psychologism as “the equating of the formations produced by judging (and
then, naturally, of all similar formations produced by rational acts of any
other sort) with phenomena appearing in internal experience.” Logical psy-
chologism is highly plausible because these formations do indeed make
“their appearance ‘internally,’ in the act-consciousness itself,” and hence it
seems to follow that they “would be psychic occurrences, and that logic
would be . . . a ‘part, or branch, of psychology.’” However, Husserl counters
that conception by saying that 
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
465
————————
122. Our point is not that Husserl believes or otherwise asserts that the “irreality” of
these objects shares the same ontic meaning but only that the critique of psychologism artic-
ulated in Formal and Transcendental Logic—which can aptly be termed Husserl’s “mature”
critique—does not address the issue of the differences in ontic meaning between the different
irreal objects appealed to in its “refutation” of psychologism.

there is an original evidence that, in repeated acts, which are quite alike or
else similar, the formed judgments, arguments, and so forth, are not merely
quite alike or similar but numerically, identically, the same judgments, argu-
ments, and the like. Their “making an appearance” in the domain of con-
sciousness is multiple. The particular formative processes of thinking are
temporally outside of one another (viewed as real psychic processes in real
human beings, they are outside one another in an objective temporal sense);
they are individually different and separated. But not so, the thoughts that
are thought in thinking. To be sure, the thoughts do not make their ap-
pearance in consciousness as something “external.” They are not real objects,
not spatial objects, but irreal conceptual formations, whose peculiar essence
excludes spatial extension, original locality, and mobility. (138)
The mistake of logical psychologism is that it does not respect what Husserl
describes here as the “essential separation between the real and the irreal.”
This distinction can be maintained only on the basis of the realization that
“Perception alone is never a full objectivating accomplishment, if we under-
stand such an accomplishment to be indeed seizing upon an object itself ”
(140). Hence, so-called inner or internal perception cannot yield, any more
than external perception can, “by itself alone” what Husserl characterizes as
“the ‘transcendence’ belonging to all species of objectivities over against the con-
sciousness of them” (148), including, of course, “the genuine idealities of the
amplified Platonic sphere” (152).
Husserl characterizes “the battle against logical psychologism” as in-
tending “to serve no other end than the supremely important one of mak-
ing the specific province of analytic logic visible in its purity and ideal
peculiarity, freeing it from the psychologizing confusions and misinterpre-
tations in which it had been enmeshed from the beginning” (154). We have
shown that Husserl ascribed the Prolegomena’s successful realization of this
end to its embrace of Platonism.123 The manifest logical idealism in this
manner of securing the purity of ideal being, however, leaves unresolved the
all-important question which psychologism was initially intended to answer,
namely, how is it that thinking is related to logical objectivities at all. It is one
thing to maintain (as Husserl does in the Prolegomena, the Logical Investi-
gations proper, and Formal and Transcendental Logic) that there is a funda-
mental separation between the real and the ideal. It is quite another, however,
to provide an account of how thinking is nevertheless related to and involved
with what Formal and Transcendental Logic formulates as the ideality of the
irreal. In the latter, Husserl identifies two senses of the criticism of cognition
that address and presumably provide his mature phenomenology’s answer to
this question. Both senses are treated under the heading of “phenomenolog-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
466
————————
123. See §§ 160–61 above.

ical idealism” (152), which he claims “gets its fundamentally different [i.e.,
from traditional idealism] and novel sense precisely by radical criticism of . . .
psychologism,” a criticism whose ground is “a phenomenological clarification
of evidence.”
Husserl designates the first sense of the criticism of cognition as “an-
alytic,” and he characterizes it as having two sides that are related to the two
sides of the possible experience belonging to every science. One side is re-
lated to the objective side of the “self-contained realm of possible ‘experi-
ence’” belonging to every science, that is, to “the ideal cognitional results
(those belonging to the ‘theory’)” of each science. The other is related to
“the subjective side of such possible experiences, relating to what is ideal in
a correlative sense, namely, the acting (concluding, proving) that corre-
sponds to these idealities.” Husserl characterizes either side of the analytic
criticism of cognition as “a secondary thematic sphere” of each science, with
the first thematic sphere being that of each science’s “province” (in the sense
of its self-contained realm of possible experience). The province of each sci-
ence, like that of every “‘seeing’ and, correlatively, everything identified in ‘ev-
idence,’” has on Husserl’s view its “proper right.” Finally, Husserl maintains
that “Through this criticism [of the primary thematic sphere], . . . each sci-
ence gets its relation to analytics as a universal science of theory conceived
with formal universality,” that is, to “the universal and not merely analytic,
theory of science” (154).124
On top of this, Husserl articulates a “third thematic sphere” belonging
to every science, which is “likewise a sphere of criticism, but of a criticism
turned in a different direction.” This direction is characterized in contrast to
analytic criticism’s directedness to “the prior data, the actions, and the re-
sults, that make their appearance openly in the field of consciousness.” In
the third thematic sphere, criticism is directed instead to “the effective per-
formances and accomplishments that remain hidden during the inquiring and
theorizing directed straightforwardly to the province” of any given science.
Husserl designates such criticism the “transcendental criticism of cognition”
(152–53) and says that it is “criticism of the constitutive sources from which
the positional sense and legitimacy of cognition originate.” 
For our purposes, three things need to be singled out in Husserl’s ac-
count of the criticism of the cognition in which “every sort of irreality” (138)
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
467
————————
124. Husserl has in mind here the transcendental project, sketched in the last part of
Formal and Transcendental Logic, “for developing the idea of formal ontology [i.e., the ana-
lytic theory of science] into the idea of an ontology of realities and, ultimately, into that of
absolute ontology” (156). We shall deal with this project only insofar as it is directly related
to our main concern.

makes its appearance as a numerically identical object. First, he maintains
that “By studying and paralleling the evidence of the real and irreal we shall
gain an understanding of the universal homogeneity of objectivities—as ob-
jectivities.” Second, “that in every evidential consciousness of an object an in-
tentional reference to a synthesis of recognition is included” (143). Finally,
third, the mark proper to the peculiar transcendence of an object’s “psychic
irreality” (148) is its status as “an object experienced many times or, as we
may also say, as an object that ‘makes its appearance’ many times (as a matter
of ideal possibility, infinitely many times) in the domain of consciousness.”
And it should be stressed that for Husserl this means that “the sequence and
synthesis of different experiences of the same [wherein the recognition men-
tioned directly above occurs]” (145) is a process that makes “evidentially vis-
ible something that is indeed numerically identical (and not merely things that
are quite alike), namely the object.” 
The very crux of Husserl’s statement in Formal and Transcendental
Logic about how phenomenology overcomes psychologism appeals to, in
his words, “an original evidence” (138) of something that is “numerically
identical.” The difference between the ideal and the real125 is for Husserl an
“essential or principled separation.” It is grounded in “a fundamental law of
intentionality” (143), which states the following:
Absolutely any consciousness of anything whatever belongs a priori to an
openly endless manifold of possible modes of consciousness, which can al-
ways be connected synthetically in a unity-form of conjoint acceptance (con-
posito) to make one consciousness, as a consciousness of “the Same.” To this
manifold belong essentially the modes of a manifold evidential conscious-
ness, which fits in correspondingly as an evidential having, either of the Same
itself or of an Other itself that evidently annuls it.
The mark of the evidence that confirms ‘the Same itself ’ as something that
is had with evidence in the synthetic unity-form of the one consciousness is
precisely its—the Same’s—status as something that appears as numerically
identical in the manifold of different modes of consciousness united by this
form. The manifold of these modes of consciousness “are individually dif-
ferent and separated” (138), in the sense that they are “temporally outside
one another” in “objective time,” when “viewed as real psychic processes in
real human beings.” Not so, however, the “irreal objective formations”
yielded by these processes: their characteristic essence excludes both spatial
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
468
————————
125. Husserl’s discussion of psychologism in Formal and Transcendental Logic, in con-
nection with “the distinction between the real and the irreal” (FTL, 138), refers to this dis-
cussion in Experience and Judgment as containing “an exposition that substantiates this
distinction” (138 n.1) and notes that this exposition was not yet made in the Prolegomena.

and temporal individuation. Husserl therefore refers—in the case of logical
judgment—to the “supertemporality” (EJ, 313/261) of the temporal man-
ifold that constitutes the unity “of the identical as the correlate of an iden-
tification” (316/263). The “concatenation” (310/259) of acts of judgment,
each one temporally discrete, “enter[s] into the unity of an inclusive total
identification: they are composed of manifold acts, but in all of them there
is an identical judicative proposition.” 
The objectivities of the understanding are therefore “objectivities of a
higher level” (310/258) than the objectivities either belonging to, or char-
acteristic of, the temporally discrete acts that belong to a “lower level” in re-
lation to them. In contrast to the localized spatiotemporality of the lower-
level acts in which they are constituted, the higher-level objectivities are
“‘everywhere and nowhere,’” and, in this sense, they are characterized by the
“timelessness” (313/261) of “a privileged form of temporality, a form that dis-
tinguishes these objectivities fundamentally and essentially from individual
objectivities.” For Husserl, then, the total identity of the irreal objectivities,
which is essentially characterized by the ability of such objectivities to appear
in many spatiotemporal positions as “numerically identical as the same”
(312/260), is the consequence of a “supertemporal unity.” He maintains that
this supertemporal unity “pervades the temporal manifold within which it
[i.e., the object of the understanding] is situated.” Because “this supertem-
porality implies omnitemporality,” in the sense that “The same unity is pres-
ent in each such manifold, and it is such that it is present in time essentially,”
Husserl stresses that the implied omnitemporality is not something that is
outside of time. Omnitemporality is in time, as “a privileged form of tempo-
rality,” in the sense that “the what of the judgment, the judicative proposi-
tion, is present to consciousness in the mode of the now.” As present to
consciousness, however, “it is not at a point in time and is not presented in
any such point by an individual moment, an individual singularization.” In
Formal and Transcendental Logic, the What of the judgment is called “a psy-
chic irreality” (FTL, 148), because it “consists in the ‘transcendence’ belong-
ing to all species of objectivities over against the consciousness of them.” Husserl
characterizes the consciousness of these objectivities as involving “the repe-
tition of the subjective life-processes, with the sequence and synthesis of dif-
ferent experiences of the Same” (145). As such, these processes “make
evidently visible something that is indeed numerically identical (and not
merely things that are quite alike), namely, the object, which is thus an object
experienced many times or, as we may also say, one that ‘makes its appear-
ance’ many times (as a matter of ideal possibility, infinitely many times) in the
domain of consciousness.”
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
469

In light of our reconsideration of Husserl’s psychologism in Philosophy
of Arithmetic, and his subsequent critique of this psychologism, his mature
statement in Formal and Transcendental Logic on the phenomenological
refutation of psychologism invites closer scrutiny. As we mentioned at the
outset, this statement identifies three kinds of psychologism. The first kind,
“logical psychologism,” is characterized as maintaining—on the basis of
“their making their appearance ‘internally,’ in the act-consciousness itself”—
that logical concepts, judgments, etc., are “psychic occurrences” (138). This
kind of psychologism is supposed to be disposed of by the “omnitemporal”
substantiation of the distinction between the real and irreal, which estab-
lishes—on the basis of the numerical identity of every sort of irreality, we
want to emphasize—that “the possible participation in reality” of the irreal
“in no way alters the essential or principled separation between the real and
the irreal.” 
The second, “epistemological” kind of psychologism Husserl charac-
terizes as “an extreme generalization of the idea of psychologism” (151), in the
sense that it represents “[t]he extraordinary broadening and, at the same
time, radicalizing of the refutation of logical psychologism.” He succinctly
sums up this type of psychologism as “any interpretation which converts ob-
jectivities into something psychological in the proper sense,” and provides
the following rationale for it: because “evident objectivities, . . . as is obvious,
are constituted in the manner peculiar to consciousness,” psychologism in
this sense denies “their sense as a species of objects having a peculiar essence,”
such that “they [i.e., the evident objectivities] are ‘psychologized.’” More-
over, Husserl remarks that “the exact sense of psychologism should be de-
fined accordingly.” The cure for this type of psychologism, which is
“conceived so universally and (purposely) in hybrid fashion” and which
therefore “is the fundamental characteristic of every bad ‘idealism’ (lucus a
non lucendo!) like Berkeley’s or Hume’s” (151–52), is “phenomenological
idealism.” Crucial to Husserl’s characterization of phenomenological idealism
is the “novel sense” (152) it gets, “precisely by radical criticism of the afore-
said [epistemological] psychologism,” a criticism whose basis is “a phenom-
enological clarification of evidence.” The crux of this clarification resides in
the “proper right” of “[e]very ‘seeing’ and, correlatively, everything identified
in evidence.” 
Finally, there is “transcendental psychologism,” which is born of the
understandable but nevertheless “falsifying dislocation” (224), which “mis-
takes . . . psychological internal experience for the internal experience relied
on transcendentally as an evidential experiencing of ego cogito.” This mis-
take is understandable, because “it is a falsification that could not become
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
470

noticeable before the rise of transcendental phenomenology.” Its basis is a
“dislocation,” because it fails to realize the truth that transcendental phe-
nomenology establishes, namely, that “Neither a world nor any other exis-
tent of any conceivable sort comes ‘from outdoors’ [θύραθεν] into my ego,
my life of consciousness” (221). That is because “Everything outside is what
it is in this inside, and gets its true being from the givings of it itself, and from
the verifications, within this inside—its true being, which for that very rea-
son is something that itself belongs to this inside: as a pole of identity in my
(and then, intersubjectively, in our) actual and possible manifolds, with their
possibilities as my (and our) abilities: as ‘I can go there,’ ‘I could perform
syntactical operations,’ and so forth.”
Conspicuously absent in each of these accounts of psychologism is
any response to the problem to which the psychologism of Philosophy of
Arithmetic was a response: the irreducibility of the logical concept of the
multitudinous unity of a multitude to the singular unity characteristic of
the individual items that compose it. On the other hand, what is conspicu-
ously present in each of these accounts of the phenomenological refutation
of psychologism is the thought that from a manifold a “numerical” unity is
“constituted,” and in fact constituted in a manner that is irreducible to the
manifold’s individuated contents. The “mode of being” of the irreal objec-
tivity that refutes once and for all the logical bogy of psychologism is there-
fore characterized by Husserl as numerical, in the precise sense of a whole
that is characterized by a structural unity that encompasses the items of the
multiplicity to which it is irreducible and from which it is, simultaneously,
inseparable. 
Neither Husserl nor his commentators address either the phenome-
nological character or the “constitution” of the numerical mode of being of
the identity proper to the meaning of the higher-level objects of the under-
standing to which he appeals in his mature refutation of psychologism. No
doubt Husserl thought the “proper right” belonging to every seeing and its
corresponding evidence is sufficient to establish (in the transcendental re-
flection directed toward the evidence in which this identity is given) the phe-
nomenological warrant of its essential transcendence of psychic reality. In
the case at hand, this “proper right” would belong to the seeing that grasps the
numerical identity of the total meaning that—as the correlate of the tempo-
rally manifold acts in concatenated syntheses—constitutes the omnitempo-
rality characteristic of an object of the understanding. Dieter Lohmar, in his
instructive study of Husserl’s account of the omnitemporality of mathematic
objects, rightly stresses that “The claim of the omnitemporal identity of ob-
jects of the understanding is not connected with the idea of a separate realm
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
471

of being in which these objects exist,”126 but he does not mention or investi-
gate Husserl’s characterization of this identity as numerical.
Husserl’s appeal to the numerical character of the omnitemporality
that defines the transcendence belonging to psychically irreal objects brings
into relief the “one over many” unity of their meaning. Lohmar has shown
that Husserl’s mature account of the categorial intuition of such meaning de-
parts from his earlier, comparative account of generically universal meaning.
That earlier account sought to establish the constitution of higher-level ob-
jects of the understanding on the basis of an overlapping coincidence of the
partial objectivities given to individual acts.127 Such an account proves lim-
ited, however, since it is only able to account for generic universality, for the
“eidetic intuition” of the identity presented as an overlapping coincidence of
meaning is founded in, and therefore presupposes, the partial objectivities
apprehended in individual acts. By contrast, Husserl’s mature account in-
volves no such presupposition, because the omnitemporality characteristic
of the objects of the understanding’s unification “rests on the possibility of
total coincidence with their respective meanings.” In Husserl’s words: “But
the proposition itself is, for all these acts and act modalities, identical as the
correlate of an identification and not general as the correlate of a comparative co-
incidence” (EJ, 316/263).
As we have seen, in Experience and Judgment Husserl characterizes
this total coincidence as being founded in the “supertemporal” unity that
pervades temporally manifold acts of judgment that constitute the same ob-
ject of the understanding. What are “many” here are not individual acts that
intend a comparative unity but temporally discrete acts that intend a syn-
thetic unity; what is “one” is not a generic unity that is “instantiated” in the
individual objects of many acts but the non-individuated unity of a mean-
ing that is “numerically” the same in the many acts in which it occurs. We
suggested above that the numerical character of the omnitemporal unity of
meaning here concerns its structure as a whole, which is both irreducible to
and yet inseparable from the many acts that found it. 
We now want to make two additional suggestions. First, this structure is
isomorphic with the aspect of the logical structure of authentic cardinal num-
bers that Husserl, in Philosophy of Arithmetic, attempted to account for by ap-
pealing to the abstractive apprehension of presentations that originate in acts
of collective combination. That is, Husserl’s account of the omnitemporal unity
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
472
————————
126. Dieter Lohmar, “On the Relation of Mathematical Objects to Time: Are Math-
ematical Objects Timeless, Overtemporal or Omnitemporal?” Journal of Indian Council of
Philosophical Research X (1993), 73–87, here 83.
127. See § 165 above.

of meaning exhibits a logical structure that is “arithmological”128 in the pre-
cise sense of a whole that manifests a unity whose content has absolutely no
basis in the content of the unity proper to each of the individual contents it
unifies into a manifold. By calling attention to the isomorphism between the
logical structure of the numerical character of the meaning of omnitemporal
unity and authentic cardinal numbers, we are not suggesting that this om-
nitemporal structure is itself “arithmetical” in the precise sense of a whole that
unifies an exactly delimited multiplicity of generically arbitrary units. For the
contents of the multiplicity unified by the omnitemporal unity of the meaning
of an object of the understanding are, of course, in no way isomorphic with the
contents of the multiplicity unified by arithmetical (cardinal) numbers. The
contents of the acts composing the multiplicity that is “pervaded” by the su-
pertemporal unity that “implies” omnitemporality are intentional, while the
contents composing the multiplicity unified by authentic cardinal numbers are
generically arbitrary units. However, because neither the content of the units
unified by a cardinal number nor the content of the acts that are united in their
constitution of an object of the understanding can either ground or be predi-
cated of the content of the respective unities that unite them, the structures
(that we have designated as ‘arithmological’) manifested by these “higher-level”
unities are clearly isomorphic. Our second suggestion is that it is precisely what
we are here calling the “arithmological” structure of this unity to which Husserl
is appealing when he characterizes the meaning of the omnitemporal objects of
the understanding as a unity that is “numerically identical” in the manifold acts
in which such meaning occurs. Thus, despite the “participation” of such acts in
the constitution of the meaning of omnitemporal objects, neither these acts
nor their temporally individuated contents form any part of the supertempo-
ral meaning that “pervades” them. And it is precisely this characteristic that re-
flects the structure of cardinal number, namely, its unification of the multitude
of units that compose it in a manner that precludes the content of this multi-
tude from informing the content of its unity. In other words, just as the content
of the unity proper to the meaning of an object of the understanding is not in-
dividuated in time while the content of the acts that intend this unity is so in-
dividuated, likewise the unity of a cardinal number is not a multitude (more
than one) while the units that compose this unity are a multitude. 
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
473
————————
128. Jacob Klein, “The Concept of Number in Greek Mathematics and Philosophy,”
in Lectures and Essays, 51. Klein uses the term ‘arithmological’ to refer to the “one over many”
structure of the unity that makes possible arithmetical numbers and every kind of “ideal”
concept. We shall claim below that the proper philosophical context to understand Husserl’s
appeal to precisely this structure in his confrontation with psychologism is the reconstruc-
tion of Plato’s “unwritten doctrine” of eidetic numbers (ἀριθμοὶεἰδητικοί). 

We have shown that Husserl’s logical investigations of (indeterminate
and determinate) collective unity after Philosophy of Arithmetic do not mea -
sure up to the standard set by his own critique of psychologism. These later ac-
counts retain the appeal to a “higher-level” apprehension of acts of unification
(whether collecting or counting) to establish the “constitution” of the objec-
tive unity of the whole of a collection. In making this appeal, they thus fall
short of Husserl’s stipulation that the meaning of logical objectivity is some-
thing that is “pure,” in the precise sense that the content of its meaning—“in
itself”—excludes all reference to an origin in or genesis from psychological
acts. Husserl no doubt thinks that his account of the omnitemporality of
meaning in Experience and Judgment satisfies this criterion, because rather
than appeal to the origination of such meaning on the basis of an object that
is presented as the intentional correlate of individual acts, he maintains that
this meaning originates as the intentional correlate of manifold acts. Being es-
sentially founded on the possible syntheses of more than one act, the meaning
at issue here is necessarily apprehended in terms of an object whose “level” is
higher than that of the objectivities apprehended by individual, or singular,
acts. And with this, Husserl’s stipulation that the content of logically pure
meaning—“in itself”—must exclude all reference to contents that originate in
individual acts or their objects is apparently satisfied. We have shown, however,
that Husserl’s recognition of the logical purity of the meaning of omnitem-
poral objects is tied to his appeal to its “numerical identity,” the phenomeno-
logical status of which Husserl and his commentators do not address.
In light of this last point, we wish to make three more suggestions.
First, Husserl’s appeal to the numerical identity of the meaning of the om-
nitemporal objects of the understanding does not address the constitution
of its “mode of being” as numerical, but, rather, the appeal to its numerical
“mode of being” as something that is already constituted is made in order to
justify the ascription of omnitemporality to such objects. Second, owing to
what we have characterized as the “arithmological” structure of the numer-
ical identity that is at issue, an account of its constitution would face the
same problem that Husserl originally confronted in Philosophy of Arithmetic:
how to account for the logical unity of a collective whole that is composed
of a plurality of parts that, either individually or in relation to one another,
manifest unities that can neither ground nor be predicated of the collectiv-
ity proper to the unity of the whole to which they nevertheless belong. And
third, that rather than signal the failure to resolve the problem of psycholo-
gism, Husserl’s recognition of the “numerical” structure of the meaning of
the objects of understanding signals the only way out of it. This way out re-
quires that the supposition of the numerical mode of being proper to the
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
474

structure of the meaning of the omnitemporal objects of the understanding
be recognized for what it is, namely, the realization that the logical unity
presupposed by all cognition is something that manifests an “arithmologi-
cal” structure that has priority over the unity that belongs to all individual
objects and to the temporally located acts of the living being (psyche) that
both experiences and cognizes them. Like Plato before him, Husserl’s radi-
cal account of the conditions of possibility for logical unity exposed the need
to suppose its “arithmological” structure. The reconstruction of Plato’s “un-
written doctrine”129 devoted to both making manifest and articulating this
structure can be shown to point to the omnitemporal existence of “num-
bers” (ἀριθμοί) whose structure is not mathematical but eidetic (ἀριθμοὶ
εἰδητικοί), in the precise sense that is under consideration in Husserl’s appeal
to the numerical mode of being of the psychically irreal ideality proper to ob-
jects of the understanding. The last part of our study will demonstrate that
the supposition of such numbers entails neither their metaphysical hypo-
statization nor “Platonism,” as it is traditionally understood.
§ 189. The Formal- Ontological Validity of Formalized 
Meaning Categories Leads Back to a Possible 
Individual Whatever or a Possible Experience
We turn now to Husserl’s account of formalization in Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic and therewith to his account of the origination of the for-
mal concept ‘anything whatever’. His account distinguishes between two
types of “essential universalizations, as brought about, on the one hand, in
conformity with the material apriori and, on the other hand, in conformity
with the formal apriori” (FTL, 189). The former is drawn “from the indi-
vidual exemplar” in a manner that “secures, on the basis of its own essential
contents, the material essences of its genera and species and their materially
essential laws.” The latter, by contrast, is simply characterized as coming
about “in formalizing universalization,” whereby “each individual must be
emptied to become anything whatever.” Husserl does not say how this occurs,
by precisely what presumably logically cognitive process “every syntactical
fashioning of an object out of individuals, and likewise every categorial for-
mation made out of antecedently present categorial objectivities, must be
considered as a mode of the mere anything whatever.”130 What he does talk
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
475
————————
129. Klein’s reconstruction of this doctrine in Origin of Algebra is elaborated above
in Chapter 19. 
130. In Experience and Judgment, Husserl characterizes formalization as an “operation
[Leistung]” “by which two concepts are apprehended under the formal category of the ‘any-

about, however, is the contrast between the material apriori’s and the ana-
lytical apriori’s relationship to the intuition of individual objects. Every ma-
terial apriori, “in the interest of the production of genuine evidence,
demands the return to the exemplary intuition of individuals, thus the re-
turn to ‘possible’ experience,” while “The evidence of laws pertaining to the an-
alytic apriori” (189–90) lacks such a demand, as it “needs no such intuitions
of determinate individuals” (190). Thus, even though “categories having in-
determinately universal cores (as when propositions about numbers serve
as examples) may indeed point back intentionally to individuals,” it does not
follow from this for Husserl that they “need to be further examined and ex-
plicated in this regard.” 
The contrast in the relationship to the intuition of individuals be-
tween the material and analytic (formal) apriori is not the whole story, how-
ever. Husserl also maintains that “nevertheless, the meaning-relation of all
categorial meanings to something individual, which considered noetically is
directed to individual evidences, to experiences—a relation springing from
the genesis of the meaning in question and one that therefore characterizes
every possible kind of example used by formal analytics—surely cannot be in-
significant for the meaning and the possible evidence of the laws of analytics,
including the highest ones, the principles of logic.” The meaning-relation
of categorial meanings involved in the laws of analytics to something indi-
vidual and thus to individual experiences cannot be insignificant, because
“Otherwise, how could those laws claim formal-ontological validity, a valid-
ity in concert with every possible predicative truth, with everything con-
ceivably existing?” The conceivability at issue here is something that, for
Husserl, “surely signifies a possibility of evidence, which leads back ulti-
mately, even though with formal universality, to a possible individual what-
ever or a possible experience.”
On Husserl’s view not only do the meanings of the formal categories
that compose the logical principles of formal logic derive their formal on-
tological validity from possible individuals and their possible experience,
but he also maintains that what these “principles presuppose as truth and
falsity” can be uncovered only by “a critical determination of their genuine
meaning, starting from the sources of the formation of this meaning.” In
other words, the logician does not critically examine but rather presupposes
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
476
————————
thing whatever’” (435/359). Significantly, on our view, Husserl pointedly distinguishes for-
malization from variation. He writes: “It [i.e., formalization] does not consist in imagining that
the determinations of the variants are changed into others; rather, it is a disregarding, and emp-
tying of all objective, material determinations.” A footnote to this passage contains a reference
to Ideas Iregarding “this difference between generalization and formalization”—see n. 77 above. 

the “truth and falsity” of the principles employed by formal logic, and does
so because the examples of judgments that provide the basis of these princi-
ples “stand before him as finished products of a genesis that, generally speak-
ing, was none of his doing.” Specifically, “The logician has before his view his
logical principles, which have been drawn originally and evidently from
whatever judgments (categories) have served as examples.” These exemplary
judgments provide the basis for “forming the consciousness of “‘any judg-
ments’ whatever,” insofar as the logician “varies them in the consciousness of
free arbitrariness.” Yet this process is “naive,” according to Husserl, because
“there is no question of an uncovering of this genesis,” that is, the genesis of
the examples of judgments that stand before the logician as finished prod-
ucts. Likewise, there is no question of uncovering “its essential structure—
to say nothing of bringing the essential content of the constitution of the
meaning belonging to any judgment whatever into its essential connection
with what the principles presuppose as truth and falsity and what they de-
termine concerning these.” 
§ 190. The Meaning Relation of Formal (Analytical) Categories
to Individuals Is Based Not on Phenomenological Analysis 
But on an Ontological Arg ument
Three remarks can be made here regarding Husserl’s discussion of formal-
ization and the origination of the formal category ‘anything whatever’. First,
he treats propositions about numbers as categories having indeterminate
universal cores, and these cores themselves as pointing back to individuals.
He does so without mentioning anything about the categorial status of the
syntactical form that unifies these cores into a determinate multiplicity,
which he would have to discuss in order to account for the logical status of
the form proper to the numerical collection as such. This is crucial for our
concerns, of course, because (as we have shown) Husserl’s own analyses of
this form have established that it cannot be accounted for on the basis of
the non-collective unity of that which it collectively unifies, the arbitrary
objects that fall under the materially empty category belonging to the formal
province of the ‘anything whatever’. Second, he contends that what he calls
‘evidence of formal universalization’ extends beyond the arbitrary variation
in consciousness of exemplary judgments or categories, wherein the con-
sciousness of ‘any judgments whatever’ or ‘any categories whatever’ is formed.
He now maintains that it extends ultimately to individuals and their expe-
rience, albeit to both treated in accord with formal universality and thus to
individuals and experiences that are possible. Third, the conclusion Husserl
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
477

draws from this, “that, even in the evidence of formal universalization, the
[intuitively given] cores are not wholly irrelevant” (191), is established not
by an appeal to phenomenological analysis but by an ontological argument. 
The meaning-relation of formal (analytic) categories to individuals is
maintained on the basis of Husserl’s phenomenologically unsupported claim
that formal ontological validity is inseparable from individuals and the ex-
periences of individuals. Implicit in this is the claim that the logical princi-
ples that govern these categories contain presuppositions about truth and
falsity that likewise lead back to individuals and their experience. From this
claim it follows that the genesis of the categorial meanings in question is
likewise inseparable from individuals and their experience. But Husserl has
not established this claim “phenomenologically.” To do so, he would have to
show that the meaning proper to formal categories points back to possible in-
dividual objects, and that the judgment proper to formal judgments like-
wise points back to the possible experience of such objects. Moreover, he
would have to show that not only is the meaning in question itself charac-
terized by formal universality but so is the evidence leading back to the pos-
sible individual objects and their possible individual experiences. In other
words, to establish the truth of his claim that individual objects and their
experience somehow lend ontological validity to the formally functioning
ontological validity proper to the possible meaning and laws of analytics,
Husserl must provide phenomenological analyses that show how the for-
malization in which the formal categories and formal laws of truth and fal-
sity originate has its basis in these objects and their experience. However, as
we shall see, Husserl’s phenomenological analyses of the genesis of the ulti-
mate judgment meanings and ultimate judgments proper to formal analyt-
ics do not extend to the genesis of the process of formalization that is
presupposed in the genesis of both these meanings and judgments.
§ 191. The Extension of Formal Analytics’ Epistemological
Investigations to Evidence and Experience and 
Therefore to Transcendental Logic 
Husserl’s claims regarding the “reduction” of all formal meaning, formal
judgment, and formal truth “back to” individuals occur within the context
of his investigation of “a transitional link” (FTL, 179) between pure logic
and what he calls ‘truth logic’. As we have seen, for Husserl, pure logic is an-
alytic, in the sense that its cognitive concern is with the forms of meanings,
of judgments, and, ultimately, of objects. By contrast, truth logic is con-
cerned with original meanings, judgments, and objects that Husserl main-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
478

tains are not formal, notwithstanding their being presupposed by formal
logic. In accordance with the very meaning of formal analytics, its “‘epistmo-
critical’ investigations” (188) must nevertheless eventually investigate the
material content of these original meanings, judgments, and objects. In
Husserl’s words:
Now, in accordance with its meaning, formal logic—and therefore all form-
ing of formal-analytic universalities, as a function of the theory of science—is
intended to serve the ends of sciences that have material content. With all its
freedom in the reiterative forming of forms, and with all its reflexive related-
ness to its own scientific character, formal logic still intends—and even in
these reiterations and this reflexiveness—not to remain a playing with empty
thoughts, but to become an aid to cognition that has material content. (182)
The methodical path to the investigation of such material content leads
through the evidence of both judgment meanings and the processes of judg-
ing itself to experience that is “pre-predicative,” in the sense that as the
“founding experience” (188) of formal analytics, “its style of syntactical per-
formances . . . are still free from all the conceptual and grammatical formings
that characterize the categorial as exemplified in the predicative judgment
and the proposition.” However, because “no such thing as evidence and ex-
perience is to be found in its [i.e., formal analytics’] province or theory,”
Husserl characterizes the extension of formal analytics’ epistemo-critical in-
vestigations to evidence and experience, and therefore to “the subjective,” as
‘transcendental logic’. 
Husserl seeks to establish the link from pure logic, including formal
mathematics proper (formal ontology), to transcendental logic and there-
with to truth logic on the basis of explicitly phenomenological considerations
that link the distinction between the different concepts of judgment made
earlier131 with “the hidden intentional implications included in judging and the
judgment itself as the product of judging” (184). As we have seen, these dif-
ferent concepts differentiated the general theory of categorial form (includ-
ing pure logical grammar), the logic of consequence, and the logic of truth.
Husserl maintains that, when investigated phenomenologically, “The hier-
archy of evidence goes with that of the judgments and their meanings” (182)
belonging to each one of these concepts. His analyses establish this hierarchy
by maintaining that: 1) any actual or possible judgment leads back to ulti-
mate judgment substrates; 2) to the reduction of judgments to ultimate judg-
ments and ultimate judgment meanings there corresponds a reduction of
truths that relate directly to truths and evidences that are individual; 3) hid-
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
479
————————
131. See § 189 above.

den in the judgment meanings is their essentially necessary meaning-history
(Sinnesgeschichte), “pointing back” to ultimate, non-syntactical “cores,” cores
that point, in turn, to their origination from experiences; and 4) the experi-
ences in which the ultimate meaning cores of judgment meanings originate
are pre-predicative judgments about individuals.
Husserl’s understanding of “the formalization which analytics carries
out, and which determines its peculiar character” (179) is that it “consists in
thinking the syntactical stuffs, or ‘cores,’ of judgments as a mere anything
whatever.” Thus, “only the syntactical form, the specifically judicial . . . , be-
comes determinate for the conceptual essences that, as ‘judgment-forms,’
enter into the logical laws of analytics.” The indeterminate universality of
these cores is relative, in the sense that the judgment forms say “nothing
about whether the subject or the predicate of the judgment already contains
a syntactical form in the core itself ” (179–80). However, Husserl maintains
that “it can be seen a priori that any actual or possible judgment leads back to
ultimate cores when we follow up its syntaxes” (180), and therefore that judg-
ment “is a syntactical structure built ultimately, though perhaps far from im-
mediately, out of elementary cores, which no longer contain syntaxes.” Thus,
“always it is clear that, by reduction, we reach a corresponding ultimate, that
is: ultimate substrates—from the standpoint of formal logic, absolute subjects
. . . , ultimate predicates . . . ultimate universalities, ultimate relations.” For
Husserl, “the reduction signifies that, purely by following up the meanings,
we reach ultimate anything-meanings,” initially “supposed absolute objects-
about-which,” and then, “in the ultimate judgments, the ones on which the
other judgments at different levels are built, we get back to the primitive cat-
egorial variants of the meaning, absolute anything: absolute properties, rela-
tions, and so forth, as meanings.”
§ 192. The Extension of Both Material and Formal Logical
Universalities Bears a Relation to Individuals; 
the Priority of Individual Judgment
On Husserl’s view the “ultimate substrate-objects are individuals,” and even
though “very much can be said” about them in formal truth, the mathesis uni-
versalis, as formal mathematics, has “no particular interest” in them. In fact,
the claim that the formal truth of pure analytics has something to say about
individuals and, indeed, the claim that “all truth ultimately relates” back to in-
dividuals “is by no means an ‘analytical’ proposition” (181). Insight into the
evidence necessary to establish this proposition requires that “one must bring
ultimate cores to intuition,” and that this evidence must issue from “the ‘things’
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
480

corresponding to them.” Husserl’s attempt to provide the evidence needed
to establish this proposition is based on the thesis “that every conceivable judg-
ment ultimately (and either definitely or indefinitely) has a relation to indi-
vidual objects (in an extremely broad sense, real individuals)” (181). In order
“to ground” this “thesis more rigorously,” he points out “that universal judg-
ments say nothing with definiteness about individuals, but that in their ex-
tension, according to their meaning, they bear an immediate or a mediate
relation ultimately to individual particulars” (181–82). Husserl maintains
that this is clear both in the case of universalities with a material content and
in the case of formal-analytic universalities, which, according to their mean-
ing, “also involves their possible application to arbitrarily selectable objects
with material content” (182). In each case, “However much, as upper-level
universalities, they may relate in their extension to other universalities, they
evidentially must lead back by a finite number of steps to particulars with a
material content that are themselves not universalities but individuals.”132
According to Husserl, “The ultimate applicability of formal analytics
to individuals” means that it is characterized by “a teleological relatedness to
all possible spheres of individuals” and that “these spheres are, for logic, what
is first in itself.” The significance of this for truth and “the evidence by which
it becomes one’s own originarily” is the correlation of the hierarchy of evi-
dences with judgments and judgment meanings. And for Husserl this means
that “the truths and evidences that are first in themselves must be the indi-
vidual ones.” Indeed, he maintains that “A priori, the judgments made sub-
jectively in the form belonging to the evidence that is actually most original,
the evidence that seizes upon its substrates and states of affairs originally
and quite directly, must be individual judgments.” 
Husserl’s conviction here, that the ultimate meaning substrates com-
posing the elementary cores of formal analytics are individuals and that the
ultimate judgments to which all higher-level judgments may be reduced (in
the interest of truth) are related to individual objects, gives “us access to an
understanding of the proper task of judgment-theory” (183). On Husserl’s
view, this discipline has “remained rather fruitless,” because “it has lacked all
understanding of the specific character of the investigations directed to the
subjective that are necessary in the case of judgments, in the logical sense,
and in the case of the fundamental concepts relating to these.” That is, it has
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
481
————————
132. Evident here is Husserl’s view of the subordination of extensional to intensional
logic, which he first articulated in his Schröder review (see § 150 above) and therefore prior
to the phenomenological phase of his thought. As we shall stress below, rather than attempt
to substantiate this view by means of phenomenological investigations, Husserl simply assumes
its truth here.

lacked all understanding of phenomenology. The phenomenological theory
of judgment takes care of the “general confusion” typical of non-phenome-
nological theories of judgment by 1) distinguishing the ideal formation and
stated proposition belonging to the “judgment itself ” from the judging, 2)
understanding judging as an intentional performance in which all ideal judg-
ment formations and ideal truth-formations are “‘constituted’ unities” (185),
and 3) investigating the meaning-genesis and judgment genesis belonging,
respectively, to these constituted unities.
§ 193. Phenomenological Backward Reference to the Genesis
of Judgment Meanings and Judgments
According to Husserl, (1) and (2) are the result of “overcoming the psychol-
ogistic confounding” of judging and the judgment itself; (3), however, stems
from the realization that the a priori reducibility of all judgments (which for-
mal logic treats as objects) to ultimate judgments with an ultimate meaning,
and the reducibility of the evidence for all truths to pre-predicative judg-
ments about individual particular objects signify “the phenomenological
backward reference” to the genesis of judgment meanings and judgments. This
“backward reference” for Husserl “is not inferred from an inductive empeiria
on the part of the psychological observer” (187) but “is an essential compo-
nent of the intentionality, a component uncoverable among the intentional
contents thereof in the corresponding productions of fulfillment.” This
means, on the one hand, that judgment meanings, “as the finished products
of a ‘constitution’ or ‘genesis,’ can and must be asked about this genesis” (184).
Thus, “they are meanings that bear within them, as a meaning-implicate of
their genesis, a sort of historicalness,” in which, “level by level, meaning refers
backwards to original meaning and to the corresponding noetic intentional-
ity.” On the other hand, this means that every judgment, including “the non-
evident judgment, even the countersensical judgment, refers backwards to an
origin from experiential judgments” (187).
Husserl illustrates the backwards reference of judgment meanings to
their genesis with an example of a “nominalized predicate” (184). He main-
tains that the “phenomenological backwards reference” is something that “a
nominalized predicate (as expressible by such nouns as ‘red’ and ‘the red’)
bears, in that it points back to a nominalizing activity, on the noetic side, and
to the original predicate (as expressible by such predicates as ‘red’) on the noe-
matic side.”133 This reference backwards holds, on Husserl’s view, for every
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
482
————————
133. Regarding ‘nominalization’, see § 183 above.

nominalized meaning formation, the theory of forms, and any “procedure in
an analytics of consequence-relationships.” It provides for all of them “a princi-
ple of genetic order, which at the same time determines the specifically logical
aim conferred on analytics with the concepts of laws of truth.” Moreover, “with
respect to the subjective,” this “signifies that the predelineated order of judg-
ment-forms involves a predelineated order in the process of making materially
evident and in the different levels of true materialities themselves.” In other
words, the predelineated meaning formations composing analytics contain
“hidden meaning-moments” (185) referring backwards to the evidence that
gives the true materialities themselves from which these moments ultimately
originate, and this evidence itself is something that points back to the original
judgments in which “the process of making logical principles evident” becomes
“eidetically apprehensible” as “the essential form of this genesis.” And, more-
over, this process of making evident “applies not only to the syntactical impli-
cations but also to the deeper-lying genesis pertaining to the ultimate ‘cores,’”
the latter “referring backwards to their origination in experience.” 
§ 194. The Phenomenological Priority of Objectivities Giving
Themselves over All Other Modes of Consciousness; 
Genetically Secondar y Empty Consciousness
Husserl also utilizes “a proposition from the general theory of conscious-
ness—more particularly, from the phenomenology of universal genesis in
consciousness”—to establish the priority of objectivities “giving themselves”
in “non-predicative evidence called experience” (186), an experience that, as
we have seen, he emphasizes “gives individual objects” (189). All other modes
belonging to the consciousness of objects are therefore “genetically second-
ary” (186), in the precise sense that every consciousness that does not possess
the primary mode of giving objectivities themselves is an “empty conscious-
ness,” such that “Consciousness that gives us something is indeed always pass-
ing over, by way of retention and protention, into consciousness that does
not give us something itself”—and therefore is “empty.” Thus, for Husserl,
“Even recollection, though it can be intuitive, is the awakening of an empty
consciousness and points back to earlier original consciousness.” In systematic
judgment theory, then, “one must ascend from the experience that gives in-
dividual objects . . . , to the possible universalizations built on that experi-
ence, and ask how the underlying experience functions for the evidence of
them” (189). It is at this point in his investigations that Husserl distinguishes
between the material and formal apriori134 and stresses that “the syntactical
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
483
————————
134. See § 189 above.

cores, which seem to be functionless from the formal point of view” (194), are
in fact “not wholly irrelevant” (191) for either “criticism of the principles of
logic” or “even in the evidence of formal universalization.”
§ 195. Husserl’s Analyses Do Not Present the Phenomenolog y
of the Constitution of the Ideal Existence of the Judgment
Content as a Formal Universality
Our concern, of course, lies with formal universalization. Our claim is that
Husserl does not show phenomenologically just how formal universalization
has its genesis from the experience of individuals. In place of the critical-
reflective exhibition of the evidence proper to formal universalization, Hus -
serl in fact presents the following argument. The universalities that compose
the formal apriori belonging to formal analytics and the material apriori be-
longing to the material sciences have an extension that applies to individuals.
Therefore, for each apriori, albeit mediately in the case of the formal and im-
mediately in the case of the material, individuals have a foundational role in
the genesis of the judgments that yield the universal structures of either apri-
ori. What exactly this role is in the case of the formal apriori belonging to
formal analytics, however, Husserl does not specify. That is, Husserl’s analyses
do not elaborate precisely how, from experiential judgments about individ-
uals, formalized meaning formations arise with the status of “ideal ‘existence,’”
which, as the content of judgment, “is a presupposition for, and enters into, the
ideal ‘existence’ of the judgment (in the widest sense, that of a supposed cate-
gorial objectivity as supposed)” (193). Husserl himself is aware that the “ac-
complishment” (197) of “our investigation” “is no more than the exhibition
of the necessity of preliminary ‘epistemological’ work that does justice to the
essentially necessary relatedness of all judicative evidence to the spheres of
experience.” Indeed, he quite explicitly characterizes the results of his inves-
tigation as being “comprehended in principle, but not actually grounded in
detail,” and therefore not “actually shown.” 
Thus in the case of the formalization that, according to Husserl’s pre-
liminary epistemological work, should lead from the experience of individ-
uals to the ideal existence of the judgment content as a formal universality, the
details of the “evidence” that would support his claims made “in principle”
(and thus without evidence) about this are not shown. Husserl does remark
that the inquiry into the “‘origin’” (193) of the “evidence” that gives the ideal
existence of the judgment content refers “to the syntactical cores, which seem
to be functionless from the formal point of view.” And he also holds that they
are not, because “the possibility of properly effectuating the possibility of
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
484

judgment (as meaning) is rooted not only in the syntactical forms but also in
the syntactical stuffs” (194). Moreover, he maintains that this fact is missed
by the formal logician, whose interest, on Husserl’s view, is “one-sidedly di-
rected to the syntactical—the manifold forms of which are all that enters into
logical theory”—and who has algebraized “the cores as theoretical irrelevan-
cies, as an empty anything that needs only be kept identical.” However, Hus -
serl’s investigations neither present (nor purport to present) the evidence that
would show how the formalizing “algebraization” mentioned here comes
about nor show how the syntactical cores are relevant for the origin of the
“formalized” ideal existence of the judgment content.
§ 196. Husserl’s Phenomenological Theor y of Judgment Does
Not Address the Origin of the Process of Formalization 
Responsible for the “Algebraization” of the Cores of 
Formal Logical Judgment Meanings
Husserl’s reference to the “algebraization” of the cores provides no more evi-
dence of how formalization occurs than does his references to “formalizing
universalization” as an emptying of individuals, such that they “become” any-
thing whatever. This is to say, he does not provide any evidence that is capa-
ble of providing insight into the origin of the process of formalization
responsible for the formalized meanings whose ideal existence is prior to and
a condition for the ideal existence of the judgment itself. In accordance with
his preliminary epistemological considerations, the clarification of the ori-
gin of these meaning formations should be sought in their intentional gene-
sis, to which these formations would then be supposed to refer. But Husserl
does not pursue the phenomenological inquiry into the genesis of formal-
ized syntactical meaning, especially in connection with the “letter symbols”
(195) that somehow function in connection with such meaning. What he
does do is to claim, with respect to the objective focus of “[f ]ormal-logical
considerations and theory,” that “every one of their logical forms, with their S’s
and p’s, with all the letter symbols occurring in the unity of a formal nexus,
tacitly presuppose that, in this nexus, S, p, and so forth, have ‘something to do
with each other’ materially.” Support for this claim—or rather, its clarifica-
tion—“is to be found in the intentional genesis” (194) of the judgment, which
Husserl maintains is something that amounts to “its essentially necessary mo-
tivational foundations.” The latter “include the necessity that the syntactical
stuffs occurring in the unity of a judgment have something to do with one an-
other.” This necessity, in turn, “arises from the fact that the genetically most
original manner of judging . . . is evidential judging and, at the lowest level,
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
485

judging on the basis of experience.” The experiential basis “is always presup-
posed as a harmonious unity of possible experience,” the harmony of which—
because of the “community of essence”—exceeds even “a unity of experience”
that has “become discordant” and is therefore composed of “conflicting parts.”
That is, the experience presupposed by all judging “is still coherent,” in the
sense that “even in the mode of conflict” experience remains “a coherent ex-
perience,” wherein “everything has ‘to do’ materially with everything else.”
The conclusion Husserl draws from these considerations is remarkable, con-
sidering that his investigations in Formal and Transcendental Logic do not
ground or explore them in any detail: “Thus, in respect of its content, every
original judging that proceeds coherently, has coherence by virtue of the coher-
ence of the matters in the synthetic unity of the experience.”
§ 197. Husserl’s Thesis of the Independence of Formal 
Judgment and Ultimate Formal Structures from 
Algebraization and the Symbolic Indication of 
the Ultimate Members of Different Propositions
From the perspective of our concern with Husserl’s account of formalization,
what is most striking about his conclusion here is its “reduction” of formal log-
ical and therefore “analytical” coherence to the coherence proper to the “syn-
thetic” unity belonging to the things composing experience. This reduction,
of course, does not imply the identity of formal and material coherence, but
it does entail (phenomenologically) that they are genetically linked. We have
already pointed out that Husserl’s overall methodological aim is to extend the
epistemological-critical scope of pure analytics beyond its quite proper disci-
plinary restriction to the formal universality of judgment-meanings and judg-
ments, that is, to extend logic’s scope from the formal to the transcendental
treatment of judgment. To be consistent with this aim in the case of formal-
ization, he would have to provide an evidential account of the genesis of the
origin proper to the very process of formalization. That is because the pre-
supposition behind Husserl’s conviction that formal analytics can be “reduced”
to its foundation in experience is that there is an evidential trail leading from
1) the experience of individuals and the synthetic unity belonging to the
“things” composing them to 2) the ideal existence “in itself” of the formalized
objectivity that is a necessary condition for analytic judgment. 
Husserl’s first appendix135 to Formal and Transcendental Logic provides
important clues as to why he does not recognize “in principle” the epistemo-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
486
————————
135. Gethmann (“Hermeneutic Phenomenology and Logical Intuitionism,” 150) spec-

logical-critical need to provide a phenomenology of the genesis proper to the
process of formalization and why he in fact does not investigate the evidence
belonging to its origin. In his account of the articulation of predicative judg-
ments, he holds that both the predicate and subject-members of the predica-
tion are “not detachable as something self-sufficient” (FTL, 259) and that
therefore different propositions cannot have an identical member. This means
that the letters employed in the symbolic indication of the ultimate members
of different propositions are not, strictly speaking, what establishes the iden-
tity of the members of two different propositions, but that it is rather a non-
symbolic judgment form that is responsible for this. Because with the
“algebraization” of the members of the predication and therefore of the propo-
sition itself the logician’s focus is directed toward the letter symbols, Husserl’s
elision of the origin of the process (algebraization) that yields this symbolism
becomes understandable. That is, it is understandable in light of his thesis of
the independence of formal judgment (and, of course, all judgment) from the
sense-perceptible signs and rules for their combination that compose the sym-
bolic calculus that is brought into being with algebraization. 
Husserl’s thesis of the independence of formal judgment from its al-
gebraization extends beyond the letters indicating the members of the
proposition to the syntactical forms of the proposition itself, because he
maintains that the “ultimate formal structures” (272) of analytic judgments
possess forms that do not belong “to the syntax of the proposition itself ”
(271). These forms present “syntactical stuffs” (272) that are “‘stuffs’ in the
most ultimate sense of all” (273), in that they “have no significational forms
of any sort and underlie all formings of different sorts and at different lev-
els.” Yet they do have “forms,” according to Husserl, because when different
pure or ultimate syntactical stuffs are compared, “an essentially universal
moment comes to the fore for us—in formalizing universality” (271). Hus -
serl thus maintains that it is precisely this universal moment, which he des-
ignates the ‘core formation’, that enables penetration to the ultimate formal
structures. This occurs with the comparison of the core formations them-
selves, such that what they have in common becomes apparent as an identity,
which Husserl calls the “core-stuff of the particular core-formation or . . . the
core-stuff of the syntactical stuff ” (272). The correlate to the identical mo-
ment of the formal core-stuff—or “the core, for short—is the core-form.”
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
487
————————
ulates that the appendices to Formal and Transcendental Logic contain Husserl’s responses to
problems in the main text regarding its lack of specificity about the phenomenological foun-
dation of formal logic, especially the foundation of “the instruments that precisely enable com-
bination according to a calculus, namely propositional connectors and quantifiers.”

Husserl uses the example of a comparison of “the core formations, similar-
ity and similar, or redness and the adjectival red.” He says, “we see that, in
every such pair, core-formations belonging to different categories are contrasted,”
and also that “they have, in the stuff-aspects, an essential moment in com-
mon.” Husserl concludes from this that “Redness and adjectival red have a
community of ‘content’ within the different forms belonging to them re-
spectively as core-formations, the forms that define the categories of sub-
stantivity and adjectivity.” 
According to Husserl the symbolic expression of the traditional judg-
ment forms of formal logic disregards “the differences among the core-forms”
(274) and thus designate “the core-stuff, which remains identical when the
core-form changes.” Moreover, analytics, “which, in respect of its theme, aims
at the system of laws governing formal consequence-relationships and con-
sistency, does not seek out ultimate cores.” By disregarding the core-forms
that belong to the judgment forms of traditional logic, their symbolic ex-
pression, Husserl maintains, is cut off from the ultimate formal structures of
analytics. And because of the limitation of its theme to “formal consequence-
relationships,” analytics—whether it employs the symbolic calculus or not—
is in principle incapable of investigating the ultimate formal structure
belonging to and characteristic of the formal judgment-meanings and judg-
ments that are presupposed by its theme. 
§ 198. The Non-self-sufficiency of the Ultimate Members of 
a Proposition. The Non-algebraic Ground of 
the Identity of Propositional Contents
Husserl’s articulation of the parts and formal structures of the predicative judg-
ment, however, does not establish their judicative independence from the let-
ter symbols employed in the proposition’s symbolic expression but rather is
guided by the very assumption of this independence. This is readily apparent
in his attribution of non-self-sufficiency to the “ultimate members” that com-
pose the whole of any proposition. Husserl illustrates the non-detachability
of both the subject and predicate members of the proposition by considering
these members as “indicated symbolically” (260), such as by the letters in the
two propositions ‘A is b’ and ‘A is c’. He maintains that “the two propositions
do not have an identical member” because even though the “same object A is
meant twice,” it is “meant in a different How.” The How concerns the opin-
ion, in the sense of the proposition’s characterization as “the meant as meant,”
and, according to Husserl, in each proposition “we have different things, each
with a content, A, that is quite like that of the other.” These contents are
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
488

“formed differently,” however, which means that the identity relation between
them is established notby the “identity” of the letter symbol ‘A’ in each propo-
sition but by the unexpressed “form, ‘the same,’” which occurs in the second
proposition. Thus, on Husserl’s view, “we have here the unity of an unstated
total proposition: A is b, and the same A is c,” and this means: “The twice-oc-
curring A-that-is-meant has a relational form in each clause,” such that “The
second A has identity-relatedness to the first,” and thereby “the first receives a
correlative identity-relatedness to the second.” 
Husserl’s illustration here of the non-independence of the members of
the proposition clearly supposes that the symbolic expression of these mem-
bers is not what establishes the identity of the ‘A’ as ‘same’ in each proposi-
tion. It is also clear that he does not discuss the symbolizing or algebraizing
process that presumably yields, for instance, the letter ‘A’ as the symbolic in-
dication of an ultimate member of each different predicative judgment.
Husserl simply says that these members are, at first, to be “indicated symboli-
cally” by the letters in his example, which suggests that these members and the
letters that indicate them “symbolically” are different. That is, he distinguishes
the ultimate members of predicative judgments, which he articulates as the
core stuffs and the core forms, from the letters that indicate them symboli-
cally. However, in the same illustrating example, Husserl refers to the ‘A’ as
the non-self-sufficient “content” of the two different propositions, in the sense
that “The same object A is meant twice, but in a different how” (260). The
conclusion that this way of speaking about the ‘A’ collapses it into the con-
tent of the proposition that Husserl originally characterized as indicating sym-
bolically, in the sense that it is precisely the ‘A’ that he is now treating as a
member of the proposition, is neither difficult to avoid nor surprising. 
This conclusion is not difficult to avoid because Husserl’s way of
speaking here leaves little room for doubting that by the letter sign ‘A’ he
understands anything other than the “representative” for any arbitrary sub-
strate-member whatever, about which something is predicated. That is,
Husserl understands the ‘A’ here as the “symbol” for the materially empty
and therefore formally universal category of ‘anything whatever’.
On the other hand, this conclusion is not surprising because, as we
have seen, neither Husserl’s pre-phenomenological nor his phenomenolog-
ical studies clarify the phenomenological “origin” of the symbol in the sig-
nitive sense in evidence here. Rather, he assumes that the “surrogate” logical
significance of the “symbol” as a sense-perceptible sign, which is established
by the “calculative rules of the game,” is not, properly speaking, conceptual
but merely “signitive.” According to Husserl, only when the game’s symbols
are regarded as signs for “actual” objects of thinking, and the rules of the
e Unitary Domain of Formal Logic and Formal Ontology
489

game are regarded as “law-forms” applying to these objects, does the sym-
bolic calculus acquire “actual” theoretical significance. 
We want to stress, however, that Husserl nowhere provides—nor does
he claim to provide—phenomenological justification for the symbolic way
of understanding the letter ‘A’ in evidence here: he investigates neither the
genesis of the symbolization or algebraization that yields the sense-percep-
tible letter sign ‘A’ as a representative of the formal category ‘anything what-
ever’ nor the genesis of the formalization itself that originally “constitutes”
the unity of this category as a materially empty meaning structure. Nowhere,
then, can we find in Formal and Transcendental Logic or elsewhere in
Husserl’s writings a phenomenology of judgment that unfolds the hierarchy
of evidences that—according to his “preliminary ‘epistemological’ work”—
lead, in a finite number of evidential steps, from the universality proper to
formalized judgment meanings “to particulars with a material content that
are themselves not universalities but individual.” Moreover, as we have just
seen, Husserl claims, in the absence of such a “theory of judgment,” that the
symbolic expression of the syntactical forms of analytic judgments cannot,
in principle, express the ultimate formal structures of judgments, the non-
syntactical “core forms,” but can designate only the “core stuff,” which main-
tains an identity despite the change in core-forms. Thus, at the very least,
we are justified in saying that Husserl’s analysis of formalization and sym-
bolization in his most mature work on logic is incomplete. 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
490

Chapter irty-ﬁve
Klein and Husserl on the Origination of the
Logic of Symbolic Numbers
§ 199. Over view 
The results of the preceding discussion enable us to interpret Husserl’s and
Klein’s accounts of the origin and mode of being of symbolic numbers in
the light of their accounts of the origin and mode of being of non-symbolic
numbers. This approach promises to clarify their thought on the origina-
tion of the logic of symbolic mathematics, because for both thinkers the
origination of this logic is inseparable from the origin and mode of being of
symbolic numbers. 
By ‘logic of symbolic mathematics’ both thinkers understand the rule-
governed method of designating and manipulating sense-perceptible signs to
perform “calculations” with general mathematical objects. They agree that
because the mere perceptual content of the signs involved in symbolic math-
ematics is insufficient to establish their mathematical significance, this sig-
nificance must somehow be stipulated by the calculative method employed,
only after which the sense-perceptible signs can become known as “symbols.”
The question about the origin of the logic of symbolic mathematics for both
Husserl and Klein therefore involves the question about the origination of
the stipulation of the significance proper to the symbols employed in this
mathematics. Because chief among such symbols are the symbols for gen-
eral magnitude, both thinkers regard the origination of the logic of symbolic
mathematics as inseparable from the origin of the “concept” of symbolic
number.136
Husserl’s and Klein’s investigations of the origin of the concept of sym-
bolic numbers situate this origin in its relation to the non-symbolic concept
of number. Notwithstanding this similarity, their accounts differ with regard
————————
136. For Husserl’s account of this, see Part III, § 42; for Klein’s, see §§ 97–122.

to the precise nature of this relation and to the precise mode of being of both
symbolic and non-symbolic numbers. Our discussion of Husserl’s account of
these issues in Philosophy of Arithmetic and his subsequent critique of Philos-
ophy of Arithmetic’s psychologism (and psychologism in general), together
with his mature thought on the constitution of collections (and sets) and on
the relationship between formal logic and formal mathematics, has shown
that Philosophy of Arithmetic’s final formulation of the logical status of the
symbolic calculus operative in universal arithmetic provides the framework
for all his subsequent treatments of the mathematical and logical method of
symbolic calculation. Thus, in Husserl’s mature works, the signs belonging
to the symbolic calculus are understood to refer neither to the same logical
object as the authentic concept of cardinal number—namely, determinate
pluralities of units—nor to the indirect ideal representation of this logical
object accomplished by inauthentic systematic number concepts. Rather, the
signs of the symbolic calculus are understood as the non-conceptual game’s
symbols, which are manipulated in accordance with the “rules of the game”
of a conceptless calculational technique that acts as a surrogate for an actual
theory of multiplicities. Moreover, we have seen that his mature account of
the constitution of collections (and sets), together with that of the authentic
cardinal number concepts, is quite close to the accounts in Philosophy of
Arithmetic. This fact alone calls attention to several significant issues, chief
among them being the distinction Husserl draws between the constitution of
the categorial unity proper to formal logic and the collective unity proper to
mathematics. We have seen that this distinction, while hitherto little appre-
ciated, has important implications for both Husserl’s formulation of the
(modern) idea of the pure mathesis universalis as the rubric for the unification
of formal logic and formal mathematics, and for the prospects of its realiza-
tion along the lines delineated by his mature statement of the phenomeno-
logical project.137 This statement projects the foundation for formal (or what
he will come to call ‘apophantic’) logic and formal mathematics (understood
as “formal ontology”) to have its locus in the experience of individual objects.
Klein’s account of the origin of symbolic number concepts articulates
four strands belonging to their origination, each of which is documented in
his successive reactivations and desedimentations of these concepts in the
works of Vieta, Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis. Klein calibrates each of these
strands in relation to the main features of the Greek ἀριθμός-concept: the
delimitation of a definite amount of monads, whose mode of being is de-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
492
————————
137. Husserl attributes the modern idea to Leibniz, which, as Klein notes (see Part I,
§ 21), oddly passes over Descartes’s role in its formulation. See Part III, § 100, where Klein
desediments the origination of this idea itself.

cidedly non-conceptual. Using this calibration as his point of departure,
Klein tracks the progressive emergence of symbolic number concepts by
desedimenting and reactivating 1) Vieta’s invention of the method of calcu-
lating with the species of magnitudes, 2) Stevin’s reconfiguration of the con-
cept of number on the basis of de facto numerical operations with the
ciphers and positional system of the Arabs, 3) Descartes’s algebraic refor-
mulation of geometry as the mathesis universalis, and 4) Wallis’s subordina-
tion of geometry to symbolic arithmetic in the mathesis universalis.
§ 200. Klein on Vieta’s Identification of the Species of 
Number with Quantity in General
Vieta’s calculation with the species (or εἶδος) of magnitudes, his logistice spe-
ciosa (understood as the ‘general analytic’ or ‘analytical art’), designates these
species with sense-perceptible letter signs that (once they are so designated)
are perceived to have a numerical significance, albeit one that—in contrast to
the ἀριθμός-concepts—is indeterminate. Precisely these characteristics, the
apprehension of a sense-perceptible letter as having a numerical significance
and the lack of this significance’s reference to a determinate amount of things
or units (monads), exhibit the salient qualities that define the modern con-
cept of symbolic number—and that therefore justify crediting Vieta with
its invention. By immediately meaning the general amount character that
belongs to each definite amount (ἀριθμός) and only mediately meaning the
items (things or units) that may be present in a given ἀριθμός, the “being” of
the letters belonging to Vieta’s calculational method have to be understood
as symbolic. These letters, notwithstanding their lack of reference to definite
things or units, assume a “numerical” significance because Vieta reinterprets
the Greek ἀριθμός from the conceptual level of his logistice speciosa: the signs
used for ἀριθμοίare identified with the numerical character of each number
in general; the numerical sign ‘2’, for example, no longer means a definite
amount of things or units but rather the general concept of ‘twoness’ in gen-
eral. The replacement of the numeral ‘2’ with the letter ‘A’ is therefore only
“logically required,” for the relationship between the sign and what it des-
ignates has become “symbolic” in Vieta; in both cases, what the sign “desig-
nates” (respectively, the general numerical character of this one number or
the general numerical character of each and every number) literally coalesces
in the sign. The symbolic “being” of Vieta’s numerals or letters therefore can
be understood in neither the Platonic sense of the being of number as a
generic unity that is independent of a delimited multitude of intelligible
units (which are themselves independent of somatic units) nor in the Aris-
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
493

totelian sense, as the abstracted “being one” of the measure that delimits a
likewise abstracted multitude of intelligible units. Rather, the being of Vieta’s
numerically significant signs is inseparable from the general concepts that
they are stipulated as designating.138 
Vieta’s invention of the symbolic concept of number (and therefore
this concept’s origin) is made possible by three factors: 1) the transference
of the “possible givenness” that belongs to the manner of treating as given the
magnitudes that are sought (i.e., unknown) in traditional (pre-modern) geo-
metrical analysis to the way in which ἀριθμοίare treated as known in arith-
metical analysis, 2) the appropriation of the Diophantine εἶδος-concept (i.e.,
the representation of unknown definite amounts of units and their powers
with signs), and 3) the understanding of “pure algebra” as simultaneously a
general theory of equations and a general theory of proportions. The first
factor led to a much sharper distinction between the calculation with de-
terminate (known) and indeterminate (unknown) ἀριθμοίthan heretofore
had been possible in traditional (namely, Diophantine) arithmetical analy-
sis; the second factor led to the “numerical” interpretation of the letter signs
for known and unknown ἀριθμοί and their powers; and the third factor led
to the “purity” of the equations belonging to the “analytical art” (in the sense
that the magnitudes with which they deal are not identified with either geo-
metrical figures or definite amounts of units). 
Vieta’s understanding of the “parallel” between analysis in traditional
geometry and analysis in Diophantus’s Arithmeticenables the separation of the
latter’s procedure of calculating with unknown (indeterminate) definite
amounts (ἀριθμοί) from its procedure of computing “true” (determinate) def-
inite amounts. The significant consequence of this separation is that for Vieta
the locus of “analysis” shifts exclusively to the calculation with the unknown
definite amounts—that is, to the indefinite “solution” of a given problem. 
Traditional geometrical “analysis” distinguished a properly analytic
aspect of its procedure, which treated the unknown magnitude as if it were
known, from a synthetic aspect, which applied the results of the “analysis”
either to the discovery of a theorem or to the solution (construction) of a
“problem.” In the case of a theorem, the analysis involved the search for truth,
and was characterized as “theoretical,” whereas in the case of the solution to
a problem, the analysis supplied what was needed for the construction of a
figure, and was called “problematical.” The application of the analysis to ei-
ther the theorem or problem, the “conversion” or “synthesis,” is what led to
the ἀπόδειξις, the “proof ” or “demonstration” of the theorem or problem.
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
494
————————
138. See Part III, §§ 98 and 106.

In the application of the analysis to a theorem, the ἀπόδειξις directly fol-
lowed the synthetic derivation of the theorem from the “given” relations be-
tween the “given” magnitudes; in the application to (the solution of ) a
problem, the ἀπόδειξις was indirect, as the synthesis involved an additional
step, the construction of the figure from precisely the dimensions granted as
known in the analysis, only after which the ἀπόδειξις was complete.139
Analysis in Diophantus’s Arithmetic also deals with the unknown
(what is sought) as if it were something already given, albeit in a manner
that reflects the difference between the objects of arithmetic and geometry.
In either the theoretical or problematical analysis of geometry, the magni-
tudes of the unknown that are treated as something already given neverthe-
less remain determinate in a certain sense because even though they are not,
properly speaking, determinate—that is, actually derived or constructed syn-
thetically—they are still determinate in the equivocal sense of having the
character of being (granted as) given with just these dimensions. In Dio-
phantine analysis, the construction of an equation using signs for the species
and powers of ἀριθμοίpermits one to ignore the distinction between known
and unknown ἀριθμοίwhile nevertheless dealing with them as with some-
thing already given. In both traditional geometry and Diophantine analysis,
the analytical treatment is “general” because the object sought (the un-
known) is treated in a manner that is not unequivocally determinate. How-
ever, owing to the differences in the determinate nature of the arithmetical
and geometrical objects referred to in each type of analysis, the generality of
their procedures is also different. In arithmetical analysis, it is already known
in advance what the unknown (and therefore sought-for) object is, namely,
a determinate amount of monads. In geometrical analysis, on the other hand,
what the unknown is is something that cannot be known in a manner sim-
ilar to this, because it must be either derived or constructed synthetically on
the basis of both the magnitudes given from the beginning and those
brought to light in the derivation or construction. 
By treating geometrical and arithmetical analysis as completely paral-
lel procedures, Vieta therefore disregards the difference in the generality of
their objects. This enables him to identify the second aspect of Diophantine
analysis, the computation of the “true” (that is, determinate) amounts of
monads, with the synthetic construction (solution) in problematical geo-
metrical analysis, and thereby to separate the arithmetically analytical calcu-
lation with unknown (indeterminate) ἀριθμοίfrom this computation. Instead
of the calculation with the εἴδη (species) of the unknown and its powers re-
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
495
————————
139. See Part III, § 105, on the positions summarized in this and the following section.

maining only provisionally indeterminate (pending the “test proof” with de-
terminate amounts of monads), as in Diophantus’s Arithmetic, in Vieta such
calculation becomes identified with the “analytical art.” That is, calculation
is now transferred entirely into the domain of the indeterminate. However,
in addition to the species of the unknown and its powers that for Diophantus
exhaust the units of calculation, for Vieta these units include as well the species
of all known ἀριθμοί. This understanding is made possible by Vieta’s trans-
ference of the “character of being given” that characterizes the “generality” of
geometrical magnitudes, that is, the granting of the sought-after (and there-
fore unknown) dimensions as having a particular magnitude, to the definite
amount that composes every ἀριθμός. Owing to the difference between geo-
metrical and arithmetical objects, the transference cannot be totally isomor-
phic: that which has the character of being given in the case of geometrical
objects is the magnitude of certain geometrical dimensions, which, after a
successful demonstration, have the same mode of being as the dimensions
themselves that were (initially unknown and therefore) sought after; in the
case of determinate amounts of monads, the granting of every ἀριθμός as hav-
ing the character of being given, which is responsible for their having the sta-
tus of general magnitudes, does not lead to each resultant species of the known
having the same mode of being as the determinate ἀριθμός itself that was ini-
tially sought after. That is because the mode of being of the ἀριθμός is com-
posed of a multitude of units, while the character of the mode of being of the
species consists in the “granting” that so many units have been given, or in
the “possibility” of so many units being given. 
When measured against the traditional distinction in geometry be-
tween theoretical and problematical analysis, that is, the distinction between
analysis as a procedure that searches for truth and one that supplies what is
needed for the construction (solution) of a problem, Vieta’s procedure no
longer distinguishes between the objects of these different procedures, the-
orems and problems. This is because he understands theorems to be prob-
lems whose solution is not so much the truths themselves about mathematical
objects but the “art of finding or the finding of the finding” of the general so-
lution to all mathematical problems.140 Moreover, by understanding the equa-
tions comprising this “general art” to be proportions, in the traditional
(Eudoxian) sense of theorems that are not limited to either geometrical or
arithmetical objects,141 Vieta extends the scope of the universality of the Dio-
phantine species such that the generality of the indeterminate magnitudes
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
496
————————
140. See Part III, § 103, regarding this last point and the position summarized in the
preceding paragraph.
141. See Part III, § 104.

calculated with in the logistice speciosa enter a dimension that is identical with
granting as given neither “unknown” geometrical nor arithmetical objects.142
For Klein, Vieta’s interpretation of his logistice speciosa as an auxiliary
method, one that remains in the service of arithmetic (logistice numerosa)
and geometry, means that its symbolic number concepts nevertheless re-
main tied to the determinate beings that comprise the subject matters of
these traditional disciplines. In the case of arithmetic, this means that the
ultimate referent of Vieta’s species signs—within the context of his method-
ology—remains that of the delimited amounts of units proper to the tradi-
tional ἀριθμός. In the case of geometry, it means that the species signs’
ultimate referents remain the constructed figures that belong to traditional
geometry. The link between Vieta’s method and the determinate beings of
traditional mathematics is reinforced, moreover, by the fact that the rules
for its calculation with species are derived from the calculation with deter-
minate amounts of monads. On the one hand, it is the reinterpretation of
such numbers from the symbolic level of the logistice speciosa that permits the
arrogation of numerical characteristics to the intrinsically non-numerical
species concepts. On the other hand, it is Vieta’s “law of homogeneity” that
insures that the calculation with (arithmetically and geometrically indeter-
minate) species will solve problems in the realm of determinate mathemat-
ical objects. This law does do so because what it stipulates—that only
magnitudes with a like “genus” can be added or subtracted in the calcula-
tion with species—has its basis in the results of calculations with determinate
numbers and demonstrations with “traditional” geometrical magnitudes.143
§ 201. Klein on Stevin’s Identification of the Mode of Being
of Number with the Concept of Number
Stevin’s assimilation of the concept of number to long-established operations
on numbers using the ciphers and positional system of the Arabs gives rise
to the understanding of the ‘one’ (or ‘unit’) as a number, ‘0’ (the nought) as
the principium (ἀρχή) of arithmetical numbers, number (no less than geo-
metrical magnitude) as continuous quantity, and thus to the establishment
of the ordinary understanding of the nature of number once and for all, ac-
cording to which counting is equivalent to knowing how to deal with the ten
Arabic ciphers (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). 
Whereas the symbolic number concepts invented by Vieta—the letter
signs for the species of magnitudes—are still understood (within the context
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
497
————————
142. See Part III, § 105.
143. See Part III, § 106.

of his methodology) to have as their ultimate reference definite amounts of
units, Stevin identifies the mode of being of these units with the concept that
is related to them. He arrives at this identification by, on the one hand, ac-
cepting the classical definition of number (numerus) as “a multitude consist-
ing of units,” while, on the other hand, interpreting the parts of this multitude
as a whole—the units—as being “of the same material” as the whole. (Stevin,
in fact, compares the material of number with the material of bread and water:
just as a piece of bread is still bread or a drop of water is still water, likewise the
unit, as part of number, is still number.) Because the “material” of the multi-
tude as a whole is “number,” it follows for Stevin that the unit, as a part of this
whole, is “number,” too. Moreover, Stevin identifies this material—number—
with the ciphers that represent quantities, which means that he no longer takes
numbers (together with the concept of number) to relate to definite amounts
of units; instead, the unit is now understood, together with all other numbers,
to have the mode of being of the “material” of number.144
Therefore Stevin understands the material of number to consist not in
an actual multitude consisting of units but in the very definition of number
as a multitude consisting of units; consequently, number—including ‘one’—
is now identified with its conceptual determination. The mode of being of
the actual objectivity of multitudes of units is posited as identical to the con-
cept (established by the classical definition of number) of a multitude of units.
With this, both the ‘multitude’ and the ‘units’ (the ‘one’) assume the mode of
being of a concept, which is to say, of a “general object,” albeit one that is in-
separable from the ciphers that express it. This understanding of numbers,
which no longer knows definite amounts of units but only “numbers” ex-
pressed in ciphers, is a symbolic understanding, and in fact one that is a nec-
essary condition for Stevin’s characterization of arithmetic as the unlimited
possibility of compounding such ciphers (symbols) in accordance with def-
inite rules of calculation.145
Stevin’s understanding of the material of number as akin to that of
bread and water, together with his regard for the sign notation in his con-
ception of quantity, are what is responsible for both the transfer of the ἀρχή
of number from the unit to the nought and the assimilation of numbers to
geometrical formations. With this transfer and assimilation, numbers—in
contrast to the traditional understanding of the discreteness of ἀριθμοί—are
understood to be both continuous and virtually identical with geometrical
magnitude. The true interpretation of the sign that is called a ‘point’ (‘.’) is not
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
498
————————
144. See Part III, § 108.
145. See Part III, § 109.

a unit, as the Greeks had thought, but the nought, which Stevin maintained
is identical to the sign ‘0’. The nought’s status as the true principle of number
is further attested by its similarity to the geometrical point: just as the addi-
tion of a point does not increase the length to a line, likewise the addition of
the nought does not increase the quantity of a number; moreover, neither the
point nor the nought is a part of (respectively) a line or a number, and infi-
nitely many of either will not form (respectively) a line or a number. The con-
tinuity of geometrical magnitude, exhibited by the continuous extension of
a line, is matched by the continuous increase of number, by lining up ciphers
(e.g., the number ‘6’ increases to the number ‘60’ by the juxtaposition of ‘0’).
And, finally, the unit is a part of number just as a smaller line is part of a larger
one, and the parts of the unit are also numbers, namely, “fractional numbers,”
which decrease infinitely. Stevin illustrates the breakdown of the ancient view
of the discreteness of the definite amounts of objects that compose “num-
bers,” and therewith the complete correspondence of geometrical magnitude
and numbers, by comparing a continuous body of water and its correspon-
ding continuous wetness with a continuous magnitude and its corresponding
continuous number: as the continuous wetness of the body of water is sub-
ject to the same division and separation as the water, likewise the continuous
number is subject to the same division and separation as its magnitude.146
§ 202. Klein on Descartes’s Algebraic Reformulation of
Geometr y as the Mathesis Universalis
Descartes’s algebraic reformulation of geometry as the mathesis universalis
identifies the “general object” of this science with the substance of the cor-
poreal world conceived of as “extension.” As an indeterminate magnitude,
the object of Descartes’s mathesis universalis is not only something that must
be symbolically represented and conceived but also something that, as a con-
tinuous magnitude, can be immediately understood as algebraic numbers.
Descartes’s reformulation of geometry and identification of its mathemati-
cal object with the “true” object of physics is attentive to the problem of how
to reconcile 1) the indeterminacy belonging to the mind’s concepts that
compose the mathesis universalis and 2) the determinacy of their “real” ref-
erents, and it attempts to resolve this problem both mathematically and
philosophically.
The “figures” in his mathesis universalis, being abstracted from both
the figures with which geometers deal and every other determinate subject
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
499
————————
146. See Part III, § 110.

matter, do not represent the extended figure of a real body. The rectilinear
and rectangular plane surfaces (or straight lines) employed in his geometry
are nevertheless called figures because he conceives of them as representing
the “figurality” itself that is common to the figures belonging to the real ex-
tension of bodies. Descartes understands the proportions and equations with
which these figures deal as a multitude—in the sense of the numbers with
which algebra deals in setting up proportions between ‘A’, ‘B’, and ‘C’—on
the condition that the particular “unit” (the “common measure”) in the com-
parison of the continuous and undivided magnitudes (lines and planes) of
the figures in his geometry is known. Once that condition is met, these con-
tinuous magnitudes are immediately understood as the algebraic numbers
that set up proportions (and thus equations), and therefore as numbers that
no longer refer to the common measure of the lines and planes formed by
the figures in Cartesian geometry. He grasps them in this way because what
is now of concern in the algebraically conceived geometrical proportion is
the “arrangement” (ordo) of the figures of Descartes’s mathesis universalis, not
the “measure” (mensura) of these lines’ and planes’ continuous magnitude. 
His plane or linear figures therefore represent equally and identically
“multitude or number” (multitudinem sive numerum) and continuous mag-
nitude, which means that each figure does not represent a determinate
amount of units of measurement (like Euclid’s straight lines). Rather, it is the
proper function of these figures “to image” the “true idea” (vera idea) of num-
ber (numerus), which, because it is an indeterminate multitude (algebraic
quantity), might upon its encounter otherwise result in our being led astray
by the pure intellect to misunderstand such a quantity as a “mere multitude”
(sola multitudo). Such a formation, separated from all “enumerated things”
(res numeratae), is precisely what the indeterminate multitude is not accord-
ing to Descartes’s mathesis universalis, because “methodical” considerations
have led him to posit the identity of what it represents—extension with fig-
ure—with the substance of the corporeality belonging to things. Even though
Descartes’s figures, as figures, represent neither the determinate figures of tra-
ditional geometry nor the determinate extension with figure belonging to
enumerated things, they are nevertheless able to image the true idea of num-
ber, because as “marks” (notae) they are graphic and therefore share with enu-
merated things measurability by many units. By presenting “some subject
measurable by many units” (subjectum aliquod per multas uniates mensura-
bile), the figure prevents us from erroneously understanding the indetermi-
nate multitude that it represents to be a “mere” multitude. It is precisely this
representation (by determinate marks) of something that is indeterminate
and yet nevertheless not separated from determinate things that permits the
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
500

characterization of Descartes’s figures as “symbols” in exactly the same sense
as the letter signs that occur in algebra, and especially in Vieta’s general ana-
lytic. The originality of Descartes’s achievement, however, is to accomplish
the same reinterpretation of the traditional concept of ἀριθμός effected by
Vieta and Stevin in the realm of traditional γεομετρία. 
The reliance of Descartes’s mathematics on the “mediating unit” (me-
diante unitate), understood as a unit of measurement, is a mathematical at-
tempt to resolve the problem of the relation between the indeterminacy
proper to algebraically numerical figures and the determinacy of the enu-
merated things to which these numbers must somehow—“in truth”—be re-
lated. Even though Descartes’s application of the measure is limited to the
symbolic formations of his mathesis universalis, his mathematical under-
standing of the measure remains basically that of the Aristotelian ἕν, a com-
mon measure (μέτρον). This is evident from his stipulations that 1) in the
instance of the comparison of continuous and undivided magnitudes the
“particular unit” must be known in order for their proportions to be un-
derstood as numbers, and 2) a subject measurable by many units must be
employed to represent indeterminate magnitude, lest one err by conceiving
of this magnitude as something that is separated from things.147
In Descartes’s philosophy, however, the unit has a different status, that
of a “simple thing” (res simplex), which is intuited by the “naked” or “pure” in-
tellect when it beholds one of the ideas it has separated from existent things,
an idea to which nothing truly in existence corresponds. The “unit” (unitas),
as a “simple intellectual thing” (res simplex intellectualis), is therefore “not a
quantity” (non est quantitas). However, because, as a simple thing, it has the
distinction of “belonging” to both the spiritual and the bodily realms, it is a
“simple common thing” (res simplex communis).148 The question of how the
unit, as a simple intellectual thing and therefore as an indeterminate concept
to which nothing determinate corresponds, is nevertheless able to “belong”
to the bodily realm touches on the insoluble problem of Cartesian philoso-
phy, namely, how the relation between body and soul is to be conceived. Be-
cause Descartes encounters this problem originally in the mathematical
realm—in the problem of reconciling the indeterminacy of the algebraic
quantities with the traditional determinateness of number—the difficulty it
poses for him is not crucial.149 Indeed, Descartes’s account of the pure intel-
lect’s use of the “power” of the imagination in the service of reconciling the
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
501
————————
147. See Part III, § 114, regarding the positions summarized in this and the previous
two paragraphs.
148. See Part III, § 113.
149. See Part III, § 114.

mathematical problem of the relationship between determinate and inde-
terminate quantity remains the first and to this day only philosophical at-
tempt to fix the exact meaning of the abstraction that yields the new, algebraic
number concepts that are employed by the mathesis universalis, which is to
say, by the new “symbolic” mathematics.150
Descartes’s account of the role of the imagination in addressing this
problem focuses on the “pure” intellect’s use of the imagination’s power to
make visible what otherwise would remain unvisualizable to the intellect,
namely, the indeterminate “simple intellectual things” that it has separated
from determinate things. The separation of these “pure” things occurs when
the intellect refers only to itself and its own conceiving, which is “pure” in the
precise sense that its “cognitive power” (vis cognoscens) “acts alone” (sola agit)
in a manner that is entirely “divorced from the aid of any bodily image” (ab-
sque ullius imaginis corporeae adjumento). Referring solely to itself, the “pure”
intellect is not only “bare” of any immediate reference to the world, but it is
also unable to get hold of what it has abstracted by using the images the imag-
ination offers it, because any connection between the determinacy of these
images and indeterminacy of the “pure intellectual things” leads necessarily to
contradictions. In the imagination, the “idea” of extension cannot be separated
from the “idea” of body, nor the “idea” of number from the “idea” of the thing
enumerated, or the “idea” of unity from the “idea” of quantity.151
To visualize and thus be able to grasp as “abstract beings” (entia ab-
stracta) the “simple intellectual things” it has abstracted from these very same
determinate “ideas,” the pure intellect must make use of the alien imagina-
tive power—but not its determinate images—to represent to itself the inde-
terminate and therefore unvisualizable content of what it has separated. The
pure intellect is able to do this because even within the realm of the “alien”
imaginative power, it retains the ability proper to it and foreign to this power,
namely, that of separating indeterminate “simple intellectual things” from
determinate images. So, for example, when the “pure” intellect separates ‘five-
ness’ from five enumerated things and apprehends it as a “mere multitude”—
and therefore as something that is separated from that to which it “in truth”
belongs without being identical with it (i.e., the enumerated things)—the
imaginative power, which ordinarily makes visible five units (perhaps as points),
now makes visible something graphic, for instance (in the case at hand), the
marks (notae) that compose an algebraic letter sign. The “pure” intellect,
notwithstanding its involvement with the visible letter sign, retains its ca-
pacity to separate indeterminate “ideas” from determinate ones, which means
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
502
————————
150. See Part III, § 112.
151. See Part III, § 113.

that it keeps distinct the determinacy of the letter sign from the indetermi-
nacy of its “idea” of “mere multitude.” This enables the visible letter sign to
“represent” to the “pure” intellect the invisibility of some one of its “simple in-
tellectual things,” in the precise sense that the “pure” intellect is able to get
hold of the thing separated through the sign’s visibility, which it nevertheless
keeps distinct from the “abstract being” of the “simple intellectual thing.” Be-
cause what the letter sign represents is not the determinate thing (units in
the case at hand) from which the indeterminate “idea” (“mere multitude” in
the case at hand) has been separated, but this very “idea” itself, Klein charac-
terizes its representative function as ‘symbolic’.152 It is precisely the “service”
that the imagination’s power provides to the “pure” intellect by making the
determinate algebraic marks and geometrical figures visible to it as a sym-
bolic representation of the indeterminate content separated by the intellect
that Klein calls ‘symbolic abstraction’, in recognition of 1) its distinction from
Aristotelian ἀφαίρεσις and 2) its role in generating the symbols of the math-
esis universalis. 
Descartes’s account of abstraction, however, does not reconcile the in-
determinacy of the quantity treated by the mathesis universalis and the de-
terminacy of the quantity proper to both enumerated things and the real
figure of extended bodies. He characterizes both kinds of quantity as that
kind of thing that “accepts the more or less” and that can therefore be called
‘magnitude’. The fact that Descartes stresses the non-identity of the indeter-
minacy of the “idea” of magnitude that is abstracted by the “pure” intellect
and the determinacy of the “idea” of magnitude that is in the imagination
raises the question of how he thinks “that nothing can be said of magnitudes
in general which cannot also be ascribed to some specific form or other.”
Descartes’s answer to this question appeals to both the “figurality” of the real
extension of the magnitudes presented in the imagination and the fact that
it is the same imagination that serves the “pure” intellect in its treatment of
general magnitudes. He conceives of the “image-making organ itself, with
the ideas existing in it,” “as being nothing but a true body, really extended and
having figure.” Its extension and figure are received—literally—by the “im-
pressions” it receives from the part of the world that makes them, and it is
precisely the fact that the same corporeal nature of the world belongs to the
imagination and all its ideas that allows the mathesis universalis to grasp the
“true world.” The mathesis universalis can do this because the “figurality” of
the magnitude that is depicted in the imagination is the real extension of a
body that has been abstracted from everything except that it has figure, and
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
503
————————
152. See Part III, § 115.

it is precisely to this “figurality” that the mathesis universalis transfers what the
“intellect allows us to say about magnitudes in general.” The conclusion that
Klein draws from Descartes’s philosophical reconciliation of the indetermi-
nacy of general quantity (magnitude) with that of the determinacy of spe-
cific quantity (magnitude) is that extension has a twofold character in
Descartes’s thought: as the object of “general algebra,” it is “symbolic”; as the
substance of the corporeal world, it is real.153
§ 203. Klein on Wallis’s Subordination of Geometr y to 
Symbolic Arithmetic in the Mathesis Universalis
Wallis’s subordination of geometry to arithmetic in the mathesis universalis
follows Stevin in characterizing ‘one’ as a number and the nought as the prin-
ciple of number, but goes beyond Stevin (as well as beyond Vieta and
Descartes) in his understanding of the “analytical art” as confined entirely
within the bounds of symbolic arithmetic. Wallis’s reflections on number 1)
make apparent the difference between ‘thinking’ (cogitare) and ‘saying’ (dicere)
that comes to the fore in the conceptuality of the modern (symbolic) under-
standing of number, 2) establish the identity of the universality of the sym-
bols (or species) with which the logistice speciosa calculates as both general
magnitudes and thus precisely also numbers, and 3) formulate the object of
the algebraic expansion of logistic and arithmetic as number, symbolically
conceived as ratio. This means that the conception of the object of arithmetic
and logistic is now completely in accord with algebra as a general theory of
proportions and ratios, and that the “material” of the universal and funda-
mental science of algebra is no longer connected in any way to the pure units
of the ancient tradition, as it had been for both Vieta and Descartes. The
“material” of the analytical art for Wallis is numbers, conceived of in a man-
ner that equates their “being” with their symbolic character, in the precise
sense that the inseparability of 1) the composition of this material as signs
(that represent general magnitudes) together with 2) the status of these signs
as mathematical objects permits their mode of being to be grasped in an im-
mediate (and therefore non-problematic) manner in the notation.
Wallis establishes the ‘one’ as a number by drawing a distinction be-
tween it and the ‘unit’. What makes this distinction possible is the difference
that emerges when he formulates what is meant when a number is thought
and when it is spoken. For example, when Wallis thinks that ‘four’ has “the
same force” as ‘four units’, units for him are neither a number nor its parts, but
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
504
————————
153. See Part III, § 113.

either its denomination or the numbered thing. However, when he says ‘four’
in answer to the question ‘How many units are there?’, ‘four’ is precisely their
number. It is the same in the case of ‘one’: when thought, ‘one’ has the “same
force” as one unit (unam unitatem), one monad (μίαν μονάδα), and the unit
is either the denomination of the number or thing numbered; when ‘one’ is
said, however, it is a number, since it articulates precisely how many of some-
thing there are, namely, a single one. Thus, even though what is meant by
‘four’ or ‘one’ are four or one units, what is expressed and addressed is the
number, understood without the counted things, and therefore conceived of
in this sense as something that is “objectless.” “Saying” number in this sense
is possible only if number (and therefore ‘one’) is understood as a “symbol,”
and not as a definite amount of units.154
Wallis’s account of the nought as the principle of number permits him
to establish the priority of arithmetic over geometry, on the basis of the higher
and more abstract nature of its objects in comparison with geometry, aprior-
icity that results in his characterization of “universal algebra” as being in truth
arithmetic, not geometry. He establishes the nought as the principle of num-
ber (following Stevin) on the basis of its analogy with the point in geometry,
and observes that by overlooking this, the ancients’ “algebra” was limited to
heterogeneous geometrical magnitudes, such as lines and planes compared
with solids.155 Wallis goes beyond Stevin, however, by interpreting the mean-
ing of the ratio (λόγος) in Euclid’s general theory of proportions as arithmeti-
cal (rather than geometrical), albeit arithmetical in the sense of symbolic
arithmetic.156 What enables Wallis to do so is his understanding of the various
“algebraic powers” as being nothing but mutually homogeneous quantities in
continuous proportion, an understanding that is possible because he regards
numbers not as mere reference signs but as symbols that not only “represent”
but also are mathematical objects. By contrast, homogeneity for Vieta was a
requisite condition for operating with algebraic magnitudes because he still
understood such magnitudes, notwithstanding their universality, in terms of
their relation to operations on multitudes of units. As a consequence of this re-
lation, Vieta’s law of homogeneity stipulated that only algebraic magnitudes
with a like “genus” (i.e., “degree” or “rung designation”) could be added or sub-
tracted in calculations with species. For Wallis, this requirement is no longer
necessary because numbers, as “indices” of ratios, no longer mean a definite
amount of objects (or units), but rather a homogeneous magnitude, the ho-
mogeneity of which is identical with their dimensionlessness.
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
505
————————
154. See Part III, § 118.
155. See Part III, § 119.
156. See Part III, § 121.

Wallis explicitly states that in arithmetic equations are frequently made
among various powers that are not of the same degree (e.g., 2a2 = 6a and 2a3
= 6a2), but that these equations nevertheless are homogeneous, because he
conceives of the “arithmetic degrees” (Gradus Arithmetici) themselves as
being “numbers in continuous proportion” (numeri continue proportionales).
For Vieta these degrees precisely are not numbers, because as the genera of
the “powers” of the magnitude of unknown numbers they are not, strictly
speaking, themselves numerical in the sense that the ultimate reference of the
unknown numbers are for him numerical; that is, these genera are not com-
posed of multitudes of units. For Wallis, by contrast, the genera are precisely
numbers, because for him numbers no longer consist in multitudes of units
but, in effect, in the “number genus,” that is, in the commonality of having the
character of signs. Both “ordinary” and “algebraic” numbers are therefore es-
sentially homogeneous and for this reason “universal,” where these qualities
are identical to their intrinsic symbolic character. Moreover, because all sym-
bolic numbers are now understood to belong to the same genus, the genus of
algebraic magnitudes no longer changes with changes in their “height” or “al-
titude,” which eliminates the need for Vieta’s special “rung” (or “degree”) des-
ignations for each algebraic number.157
Wallis’s characterization of the essential homogeneity of numbers is
grounded in his understanding that the numbers of arithmetic are “nothing
but the ‘indices’ of all the possible ratios whose common consequent is 1, the
unit.”158 He understands the ratios, in turn, as “fragments of the unit” (Uni-
tatis fragmenta), which are in between the ‘one’ and the ‘nought’. The ‘unit’
presupposed by Wallis here, as “something continuous and divisible into as
many (equal) parts as you please,” he explicitly identifies as that of the “mod-
erns,” because he was acutely aware of its indivisible status for the ancients. In
addition, he conceives the “fraction” as being “not so much a number as an
index or ratio numbers have to one another,” which means, however, that “frac -
tions,” too, are “numbers,” because they have “numbers” as their terms. Wallis
grasps the ratio indicated by number (and between numbers) as a compari-
son between two magnitudes in which it is determined how many times one
magnitude is contained in another. Because the ratio is the result of division,
it can be established directly (without further comparisons) from the “quo-
tient” resulting from the division. If the magnitudes of the dividend and di-
visor are homogeneous (have the same dimensions), the quotient indicates
how many times one magnitude is contained in another, with the quotient it-
self being a “number” that has no dimensions, that is, a dimensionless quan-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
506
————————
157. Ibid.
158. Ibid.

tity. If the dividend and divisor are heterogeneous, it follows that they do not
have the same amount of dimensions and that, strictly speaking, division is
not involved, because one magnitude is not contained in the other. Instead
of division, Wallis considers what is involved in this case to be an “application”
(applicatio), although he nevertheless understands the quantities involved in
it also to produce quotients that are a dimensionless number. On the basis of
these considerations, Wallis concludes that because the quotients that result
from the comparison (and therefore relation) between any kind of magnitude
are dimensionless, they are of the same kind (homogeneous) and therefore
such as to be comparable to one another. In other words, the dimensionless-
ness of these numbers is identical with their role as the indices of ratios, and,
because of this, all ratios of whatever quantities are homogeneous with one
another and therefore can be compared with one another. 
The dimensionlessness of numbers for Wallis is identical with their
symbolic character; their role as “indices of ratios” is immediately visible in
the notation, which is what leads Wallis to call the ‘one’ or ‘unit’ a denomi-
nator and to “assert that the whole theory of ratios belongs more to arith-
metical than to geometrical investigations.” Wallis therefore represents “the
final act” in the symbolic reinterpretation of the ancient ἀριθμός insofar as
his understanding of the universality of arithmetic as a general theory of ra-
tios permits the objects of the algebraic expansion of arithmetic and logistic
to be determined as a symbolically determined ratio. This conception of
number both accords with that of algebra as a general theory of ratios and
proportions and does away with the ancient controversy over the proper “ma-
terial” of the numbers themselves. This “material” is now immediately grasp -
able in the notation, thereby eliminating the problem of whether the mode
of being proper to numbers should be conceived in terms of formations that
are independent of somatic beings or obtained from them by abstraction.159
§ 204. Klein’s Account of the Origination of the Logic of
Symbolic Mathematics
Klein’s account of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics em-
ploys the Scholastic distinction between first and second intentions, or, more
properly, the distinction between the objects of first intentions and those of
second intentions, to “express” the origin of symbolic numbers. Because for
Klein the origin of such numbers is inseparable from the origination of the
logic proper to symbolic mathematics, an account of their origin is the sine
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
507
————————
159. See Part III, § 122, regarding the position summarized in this and the previous
paragraph.

qua non for an account of the origination of this logic. He uses this Scholas-
tic language to 1) describe both the shift from ancient to modern numbers
that becomes evident in his desedimentation and reactivation of the status of
the number concepts in Vieta, Stevin, Descartes, and Wallis, and 2) delineate
the corresponding shift in the paradigm characteristic of the ancient and the
modern “concepts” of number, the latter shift being characterized by Klein as
the transformation of the ancient concept’s “conceptuality.” 
First intentions concern the existence and quiddity of an object, its
being in its own right; second intentions concern an object insofar as it has
being in being known, in apprehension. Hence, the state of being of an object
in cognition is second, while the state of being of an object in itself is first. Be-
cause the Greek ἀριθμός is inseparable from the direct reference to a multi-
tude of definite things, the status of its referents lends itself to being designated
as first intentional. Because the concept of ‘indeterminate or general quantity’
concerns an object insofar as it is known, the status of its referent lends itself
to being designated as second intentional. The sense-perceptible mark that
belongs to the symbolic number is, like any other sense-perceptible thing, the
object of a first intention, and, because of this, Klein maintains that the “con-
ceptuality” characteristic of the mode of being belonging to the modern con-
cept of number is tantamount to the apprehension of the object of a second
intention as having the being of the object of a first intention. Moreover, he
maintains that the modern “conceptuality” of number is only manifest in its
contrast with the ancient Greek “conceptuality,” which is characterized by the
first intentional status of the objects to which it refers and is therefore related.
Klein also appeals to the distinction between first and second inten-
tions to clarify Descartes’s attempt to understand the origin of the novel mode
of being that belongs to the “true idea” of number as “mere multitude” (sola
multitudo)—an idea that, being separated from all “enumerated things” (re
numeratate), can be grasped only by the “pure” intellect with the assistance of
the “power” of the imagination. Descartes’s appeal to the power of the imag-
ination to assist the pure intellect in making visible to itself the indeterminate
object that it has already abstracted from its own power of knowing determi-
nate numbers is an attempt to characterize the peculiar mode of being be-
longing to the symbolic numbers with which algebra deals. Abstraction in
Aristotle presupposes definite beings that are intelligible in terms of common
qualities, the latter being “lifted off” the former in accordance with a process
that is more logical than psychological;160 abstraction in Descartes presup-
poses definite beings but not their intelligibility—in the case at hand, their
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
508
————————
160. See Part III, §§ 86–87.

“intelligibility” as so many beings. Rather, his abstraction works on the mind’s
act of knowing a multitude of units, separating out the mind’s own conceiving
of that multitude, which it immediately makes objective. The mind turns and
reflects on its own knowing when it is directed to the idea of number as a mul-
titude of units,161 and in so doing, it no longer apprehends the multitude of
units directly, in the “performed act” (actus exercitus) and thus as an object of
its first intention, but rather indirectly, in the “signified act” (actus signatus),
as an object of its second intention. Thus, notwithstanding the fact that what
the intellect is conceiving is a multitude of units, the intellect’s immediate ap-
prehension of its own conceiving of this multitude, an apprehension that
grasps it as something, as one, and therefore as a being, has the effect of trans-
forming the apprehension of the multitude belonging to the number into a
seemingly independent being, albeit a being that is only a “rational being” (ens
rationis).162 This “rational being,” therefore, is the result of the intellect, which,
secondarily (in reflection) intends a thing already conceived before, and in-
tends it insofar as it has been conceived. When the rational being is then
“grasped with the aid of the imagination in such a way that the intellect can, in
turn, take it up as an object in the mode of a ‘first intention,’ we are dealing with
a symbol, either with an ‘algebraic’ letter-sign or with a ‘geometric’ figure as
understood by Descartes” (GMTOA, 222/208).
Klein therefore characterizes abstraction for Descartes as symbolic be-
cause the concept it yields is manifestly not something that is lifted off the in-
telligible qualities of things but rather something whose very mode of being
is inseparable from: 1) the intellect’s pure—by ‘pure’ is meant completely sep-
arate from the things it apprehends—grasping of its own power to appre-
hend these qualities themselves, and 2) this power’s being apprehended as
itself an object whose mode of being is nevertheless akin to the very things
from which its mode of being separates itself. Klein stresses that the “kinship”
between the power of apprehension proper to the “pure” intellect and that
which is effectively foreign to it (i.e., the things possessing the intelligible
qualities that are apprehended by the “pure” intellect’s power) is established
by making this power “visible.” The algebraic letter “signs” of Vieta or the
“geometric” figures of Descartes are what accomplish this. They are what—
in the language of the Schools—allow the object of a second intention to be
apprehended as the object of a first intention, and are therefore “symbols.”
The indeterminate or general object yielded in “symbolic abstraction” is nei-
ther purely a concept nor purely a “sign,” but precisely the unimaginable and
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
509
————————
161. That is, to the idea of either just so many units (e.g., ‘fiveness’), or the idea of
each and every number, of number (quantity) in general.
162. See Part III, § 115.

unintelligible identification of the object of a second intention with the ob-
ject of a first. This identification is “unimaginable” because “images” prop-
erly—both for the ancient Greeks and for Descartes—refer either to
particular objects of first intentions or to their particular “common quali-
ties.”163 The identification of second and first intentional objects is “unintel-
ligible” because, for “natural” predication, to say that a concept is both general
and particular “at the same time” is nonsensical. 
The origination of the logic proper to symbolic mathematics comes
about for Klein when the “analytic art” is understood to be coextensive with
symbolic arithmetic. This occurs when the symbolic numbers constitutive
of “algebraic magnitudes” lose 1) their sense of being representatives of the
genera of the “powers” of quantities of units and 2) the geometrical “ratio”
(λόγος) in Euclid’s general theory of proportions (which refers to heteroge-
neous geometrical magnitudes) is interpreted as a ratio in the sense of sym-
bolic arithmetic. Algebraic numbers lose their function of representing the
genera of the powers of known and unknown quantities when the “homo-
geneity” of these genera ceases to be a “condition” for the analytical art’s lo-
gistical operation with algebraic magnitudes. The Euclidian sense of ratio
gives way to that of symbolic arithmetic’s when the meaning of ratio is for-
mulated as a dimensionless “index” that results from the comparison be-
tween two magnitudes—a comparison that determines how many times one
magnitude is contained in another whose “quotient” is directly determined.
The loss of the algebraic number’s reference to the genera of the powers of
quantities of units is tied to the symbolic formulation of the meaning proper
to ratio, because this formulation understands numbers to be precisely the
indices of all possible ratios with a common consequent of 1, the unit. In
this formulation, algebraic numbers are symbolically determined ratios, in
the exact sense that the comparison of any genus of magnitude is understood
to yield a number (quotient) that has no dimensions. With this, algebraic
magnitudes are characterized by their essential homogeneity as dimension-
less quantities, and hence the generic homogeneity of the powers proper to
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
510
————————
163. Indeed, it is for this reason that Descartes, on Klein’s view, stresses that the “power”
of imagination, and not the imagination’s “images,” assists the pure intellect in grasping the
completely indeterminate concepts it has separated from the ideas that the imagination offers
it, because these ideas are precisely “determinate images”—and therefore intrinsically unsuit-
able for representing to the intellect its indeterminate concepts. However, being indeterminate
insofar as it is not limited to any particular one of its images, the imagination’s power is able
to use its own indeterminacy to enter into the “service” of the pure intellect and make visible
a “symbolic representation” of what is otherwise invisible to the intellect by facilitating, so to
speak, the identification of the objects of first and second intentions in the symbol’s peculiar
mode of being. Here the imagination’s facilitation involves, as it were, a bestowal of its “power”
of visibility on the concept’s invisibility.

quantities of units is no longer a requirement for the logistice speciosa. The
genera of the powers of algebraic magnitudes no longer relate (even indi-
rectly) to multitudes of units because such “arithmetical degrees” are them-
selves taken to be homogeneous “numbers in continuous proportion.” 
When numbers no longer consist in multitudes of units but in the
“number genus,” that is, in the commonality of a signitive character that
makes visible in the notation their role as “indices of ratios,” both “ordinary”
and “algebraic” numbers become “universal” by virtue of their essential di-
mensionlessness. So understood, numbers become identical with their in-
trinsic symbolic character, and the ancient controversy over whether their
proper mode of being and therefore the logic of numbers is something that is
independent of somatic beings or abstracted from them is eliminated once
and for all. What numbers are is now immediately graspable in their sym-
bolic notation, whose “universality” is tied not to multitudes of units but to
the notion of the unit as a ‘1’. When it is understood as a symbol that “ex-
presses” a res simplex communis and therefore a res simplex intellectus, the ‘1’
is grasped in a manner that renders it independent of the ancient logical con-
troversy about the proper mode of being of numbers. Apprehended in this
way, the ‘1’ is what permits the “analytical art” to be understood as coexten-
sive with symbolic arithmetic. No longer a “unit” of measure, the ‘1’ to which
the dimensionless numbers of symbolic arithmetic are the indices as possi-
ble ratios with a common consequent is, together with the numbers it makes
possible, the sine qua non of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathe-
matics. In Klein’s words, “The object of arithmetic and logistic in their alge-
braic expansion is now defined as ‘number,’ and this means as a symbolically
conceived ratio—a conception consonant with that of algebra as a general
theory of proportions and ratios” (235/223). 
§ 205. Husserl’s Account of the Origination of the Logic of
Symbolic Mathematics
Husserl’s account of the origination of the logic of symbolic mathematics
cannot be separated from a historical account of the development of his think-
ing. His early, pre-phenomenological research (in Philosophy of Arithmetic)
into the logic of symbolic mathematics and the symbolic calculus generally
is, in an important respect, definitive for his later, explicitly phenomenolog-
ical research into the experiential basis of both formal mathematics (formal
ontology) and the mathematization of the life-world. Important here is his
characterization of the non-conceptual nature of the symbolic algorithms em-
ployed by “formal” mathematics. This view of the matter initially emerged
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
511

in the wake of his recognition of the need to abandon both Weierstrass’s
thesis regarding the foundational role of the concept of cardinal number for
universal analysis (arithmetica universalis) and, in connection with this,
Brentano’s thesis regarding the logical equivalence of the conceptual con-
tents proper to authentic and symbolic presentations.164 As a consequence,
Husserl came to understand the symbolic algorithms operative in formal
mathematics as a calculational technique, composed of the signs and “rules
of the game” that act as surrogates for genuine deductive thinking. As he
puts it in his Schröder review, “calculation is no deduction. Rather, it is an
external surrogate for deduction.”165
Husserl initially (1890) defined formal logic itself “as a symbolic tech-
nique”166 and understood the symbolic calculus determinative of universal
analysis to be part of formal logic so defined. However, he eventually came to
regard formal logic as a theoretical discipline directed toward conceptual con-
tents that are more fundamental than the symbolism associated with any log-
ical or arithmetical calculus. He characterizes formal logic in this sense as
“pure” logic and as having as its conceptual content materially empty “man-
ifolds” conceived as the correlates of the pure theory forms “constructed” by
formal deductive systems. Husserl therefore comes to understand universal
analysis as part of pure logic, as an instance of manifold theory, and, as such,
he no longer strictly identifies it with a symbolic algorithm. The symbolic
calculus that composes the algebra of universal analysis thus remains identi-
fied with a concept-less calculational technique in Husserl’s mature work.
And, on his view, this also holds for the symbolic calculus associated with the
pure (completely formalized) mathesis universalis. Guided by Leibniz’s idea
of the mathesis universalis as a universal and formal science that has rational
priority over any “material” mathematical discipline and any “material” logic,
Husserl distinguishes the mathematical investigation of the theory forms of
“determinate manifolds” from the essentially correlated but nevertheless dis-
tinct formal logical “theory of the theories” of manifolds.167
First developed in the last part of Philosophy of Arithmetic, Husserl’s
characterization of the symbolic calculus as a “mere” calculational technique
informs his critique of Hilbert’s program in § 33 of Formal and Transcenden-
tal Logic. There he distinguishes “an actual theory of manifolds” from “a dis-
cipline comprising deductive games with symbols.” The sine qua non for the
latter’s becoming the former is clearly set forth as regarding “the game-symbols
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
512
————————
164. See Part III, §§ 45 and 50.
165. See § 147 above.
166. Stumpf Letter, 161/17.
167. See § 181 above.

as signs for actual objects of thinking—units, sets, multiplicities”—together
with the bestowal “on the rules of the game the significance of law-forms ap-
plying to these multiplicities.” Likewise, in the Crisis, Husserl expresses the
same view in his critique of the logically derivative status of the “symbolic cal-
culating technique” responsible for the “completely universal formalization”
of meaning in mathematized natural science. Thus, in connection with the
calculative method operative in the “‘theory of manifolds’ in the special sense”
of “the universal science of the definite manifolds,” he writes: “Here the origi-
nal thinking that genuinely gives meaning to this technical process and truth
to the correct results (even the ‘formal truth’ peculiar to the formal mathesis
universalis) is excluded.” Moreover, Husserl also maintains that “in this man-
ner it is also excluded in the formal theory of manifolds itself.” 
Above all, what is noteworthy in Husserl’s discussions of the logically
derivative status of the symbolic calculus in his mature work is the absence of
phenomenologically descriptive analyses in support of their underlying claim,
namely, that the original thinking and “actual” or “true” concepts proper to
the pure mathesis universalis are excluded by its technical method of sym-
bolic calculation. It is likely that this absence is due to the fact that Husserl
considered his pre-phenomenological analysis of the claim’s substance suffi-
ciently definitive to obviate the need for proper phenomenological substan-
tiation.168 Whatever its source, however, the absence of such analyses raises
the question of the phenomenological status of the “formalization” of knowl-
edge accomplished by the mathesis universalis: does it owe its origination to
the technical method of symbolic calculation, or to the original thinking and
concepts that are putatively excluded by this method, or somehow to their
“relationship”?
Husserl’s phenomenological analyses, from the Logical Investigations
onward, do address the origin of the formal object “constituted” by formal-
ization, the Etwas-überhaupt, attributing it to a “formalizing abstraction” that
is distinguished from both the “generalizing abstraction” that places “em-
phasis on a non-independent ‘moment’ of a content” and “the corresponding
ideation under the title of ‘ideating abstraction’” that brings the generalized
universal itself to givenness.169 Moreover, he terminologically fixes the dis-
tinction between general and formal essences in Ideas I, where the relation-
ships between “generalization” and “formalization” are characterized as
“essentially heterogeneous.”170 However, Husserl’s analyses in Ideas I do not
address the phenomenological origination of these processes, but instead ap-
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
513
————————
168. See § 155 above.
169. See § 165 above.
170. See n. 77.

peal to “eidetic intuition” as the legitimating source of their essential differ-
ence, and one will search Husserl’s works in vain for analyses that provide a
precise account of the phenomenological origin of either the formal concept
‘anything whatever’ or the formalizing abstraction (formalization) in which
it putatively originates. In the Logical Investigations, he says that “purely cat-
egorial” thinking is substituted for material thinking in formalization, together
with the replacement of “indefinite” expressions for names with content.171
In Experience and Judgment, formalization is characterized as an “emptying”
of the objective material content of categories, while in Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic it is “each individual” that is said to be “emptied.”172 And, it
bears repeating, none of Husserl’s major works subsequent to Philosophy of
Arithmetic discuss the origination of the symbolic calculus in relation to ei-
ther the logical structure of the formal category of ‘anything whatever’ or the
genesis of the process of formalization itself. 
Husserl’s analyses of formalization, therefore, are not in accord with
his own requirements in Formal and Transcendental Logic for a proper (phe-
nomenological) theory of judgment. There he sees such a theory as charged
with the task of providing an account of the hierarchical, finite, step-by-step
evidential “genesis” from the experience of individuals to which the formal
category of the ‘anything whatever’, as the elemental judgment meaning of
pure analytics (i.e., of the pure mathesis universalis), “refers backwards.” Be-
cause Husserl characterizes this evidence as two-sided and he includes in its
hierarchy both judgment meanings and the judging process itself, the lack of
a proper phenomenological theory of judgment informing his analyses also
means that they do not address the “origin” of the formalizing process itself.173
In the absence of the presentation and descriptive analysis of such evidence,
Husserl’s answer to the question of the relationship of the method of sym-
bolic calculation to the “true” nature of formal objectivity, as well as to the
logical formalization he maintains yields this objectivity, necessarily remains
phenomenologically unclarified. 
Indeed, even if one were to grant Husserl’s guiding thesis, that the
method of symbolic calculation is a non-conceptual technique that excludes
both genuine formal logical thinking and its actual conceptual objects, his
phenomenology would nevertheless have not addressed the origin of the
surrogate “logical” function accomplished by the signs and rules of its cal-
culus. That is to say, it is one thing to claim, as Husserl does in his most ma-
ture discussion of logical judgment, that neither genuine logical deduction
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
514
————————
171. See § 167 above.
172. See §§ 176 and 189 above.
173. See § 196 above.

nor the ultimate formal structures of the “syntactical stuffs” presupposed by
formal logical syntax are expressed by the algebraic signs and the rules for
their combination that characterize the mathesis universalis’s method of sym-
bolic algebraization.174 It is quite another to provide phenomenologically
descriptive analyses that demonstrate the truth of this claim. 
Because Husserl’s early phenomenological investigations of formal-
ization do not explore what his mature investigation (in Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic) characterizes as its “genesis,” and because the programmatic
nature of the latter investigation marks, at best, only a “methodological” ad-
vance over the imprecision of the earlier investigations, the distinction he
makes between 1) the formally derivative status of the method of the sym-
bolic calculus and 2) the conceptual formality proper to the “pure” logic
that this method somehow serves has not been established phenomenolog-
ically. This means, among other things, that the guiding problem of Husserl’s
first philosophical work, the origin of the logic of symbolic mathematics,
remains strangely unresolved in his mature phenomenological works. In
place of its resolution in a completed phenomenological theory of judgment
that would present the “foundation” of the logic constitutive of the pure
mathesis universalis, Husserl’s penultimate statement (found in Formal and
Transcendental Logic) on the origination of the formalization coincident
with this foundation characterizes it as follows: 1) the fundamental concep-
tual element of formalized (apophantic) logic and formalized mathematics
(formal ontology) is the materially empty category ‘anything whatever’; 2)
because of this, each of these disciplines is part of the highest formalized
discipline, the pure (because completely formalized) mathesis universalis; 3)
actual (i.e., conceptual) formal logical relations do not originate in the sym-
bolically algebraized syntax of the mathesis universalis’s method, and its let-
ter symbols generally do not express the ultimate formal elements of the
syntactical cores proper to the logical judgment; 4) all logical form tacitly
presupposes ultimate individual contents that have something to do with each
other materially; and, finally, 5) only the as yet unrealized phenomenologi-
cal program of “transcendental logic,” which is devoted to the evidential expli-
cation of the peculiarly sedimented individual and material sense implica-
tions of formalized meaning elements and syntactical connections, is capable
of providing an account of the origination of the formalized concepts and
truth values of the mathesis universalis.
Husserl’s final statement, in the Crisis, on symbolic mathematics char-
acterizes “[m]athematics and mathematical science, as a {well-fitting} garb
e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Numbers
515
————————
174. See §§ 197–98 above.

of ideas, or the garb of symbols of the symbolic mathematical theories” (Cri-
sis, 52/51), which “encompasses everything which, for scientists and the ed-
ucated generally, represents the life-world, dresses it up as ‘objectively actual
and true’ nature.” Husserl maintains the “garb of ideas” is recognized nei-
ther by its innovators nor by contemporary thinkers for what it is, namely,
“a displaced ‘symbolic’ meaning” (44/51) wherein “what is actually a method”
(52/51) is taken “for true being.” The consequence of this, he contends, is
that “the true meaning of the method, the formulae, the ‘theories,’ remained
unintelligible” (52/52) for its innovators and remains such also for us. What
“was lacking” for them and “what is still lacking” for us 
is the actual self-evidence through which he who knows and accomplishes
can give himself an account, not only of what he does that is new and what
he works with, but also of the implications of meaning which are closed off
through sedimentation or traditionalization, i.e., of the constant presuppo-
sitions of his constructions, concepts, propositions, theories.
The fragmentary investigations in the Crisis do not provide or other-
wise investigate the self-evidence lacking in the case of symbolic mathemat-
ics, and its discussion of the mathesis universalis contains a footnote
referring, “for a more exact exposition” (45/46), to the accounts of it in the
Logical Investigations and Formal and Transcendental Logic, which we have
shown to fall short of providing the evidence proper to the origination of the
basic concept of the mathesis universalis or the formalization in which it
originates. Husserl’s phenomenological answer to the question of the origin
of the logic of symbolic mathematics in his final work remains, as in his oth-
ers, general and therefore incomplete. Succinctly stated, his answer reads:
sedimented in the symbolic formulae and theories of “the universal, self-en-
closed idea of a highest form of algebraic thinking, a mathesis universalis”
(44–45/45), is a reference back to the individual objects of the life-world, to-
gether with the indication of “ascending orders of intuitions” originating in
the life-world indicated by these formulae, which mark the progressive for-
malization that makes possible the life-world’s mathematization.175 The logic
of symbolic mathematics therefore owes its origin to the individual objects
of the perceptual life-world, which, in the terminology of Formal and Tran-
scendental Logic, have something to do with each other materially.
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
516
————————
175. See Part II, § 34.

Chapter irty-six
Conclusion
§ 206. Klein’s de facto Completion of Husserl’s Crisis
By situating the historical-epistemological project of recovering the origin of
the mathematical sciences proposed in Husserl’s Crisis within his own re-
covery of its origin in Origin of Algebra, Klein makes the strong case that
Husserl’s phenomenology nevertheless does indeed possess the method-
ological resources for investigating the guiding “presupposition” of its account
of the origin of the logic of symbolic mathematics. Husserl’s presupposition,
of course, is that the true object of the formal mathesis universalis—the for-
malized concept of the ‘anything whatever’—is irreducible to its method of
calculating symbolically. These resources are found both in Husserl’s pro-
grammatic articulation of the phenomenological task of investigating the
genesis of formalized meaning in Formal and Transcendental Logic and in his
fragmentary de-sedimentation of the formalizing mathematization of the
life-world in the Crisis. We have shown that, as a result of the programmatic
nature of the former and the fragmentary character of the latter, Husserl’s
own employment of these resources does not sufficiently address the pre-
supposition in question. His analyses in Formal and Transcendental Logic
do not take up the phenomenological problem of the genesis of the method
of symbolic calculating, and those in the Crisis do not desediment the phe-
nomenological meaning of the historical origin of this method in François
Vieta’s establishment of algebra. 
In what follows, we shall show that Klein’s account of the origin of al-
gebra resolves the issue of the constitution proper to the fundamental concept
of the formal mathesis universalis, the Etwas-überhaupt. We shall do so by trac-
ing “the genuine discovery of the formal”(FTL, 84), which Klein and Husserl
agree “was first made, at the beginning of the modern age, by way of Vieta’s es-
tablishment of algebra,” back to its “intentional-historical” roots in the life-
world. In concert with this, we shall reactivate the intentional “anticipation”
and “accomplishment” that yielded the origin of what is now the pregiven tra-

dition of symbolic calculation. The “historical” dimension of what we want to
show requires that Vieta’s establishment of algebra be situated in terms of its
relationship to the traditional “pre-formalized” mathematical treatment of
geometrical and arithmetical “objects” that are pregiven in the pre-scientific
life-world. Crucial for this is Klein’s account of Vieta’s transformation of the
Diophantine method of calculating with the species (εἶδος) Diophantus ap-
plied to unknown numbers and their powers, which documents his (Vieta’s)
application of the ancient geometrical method of analysis and synthesis
(found, e.g., in Pappus) to the arithmetic of Diophantus. 
The “genuine discovery of the formal,” for Husserl as for Klein, coin-
cides with the anticipation and accomplishment of the equations composing
Vieta’s “pure algebra,” which initiates the process of “formalization” in math-
ematics and logic and which, in Husserl’s words, is “the process whereby ma-
terial mathematics is put into formal-logical form, where expanded formal
logic is made self-sufficient as pure analysis or theory of manifolds” (Crisis,
46/47). The reactivation of the “primal establishment” of this process in Vieta
will provide the basis for the investigation of the answer to Husserl’s phe-
nomenological question of the origin and therefore true locus of the foun-
dation of the process of formalization that eventually yields the object of the
pure mathesis universalis. In this way, we shall explore the warrant for Husserl’s
pre-phenomenological presupposition that this object has a conceptual sta-
tus that is more fundamental and therefore, in some sense, independent of the
symbolic calculus. In short, we shall pursue the answer to the question of
whether the formalization that yields the Etwas-überhaupt is a non-symbolic
or symbolic process, and therefore the answer to the question of whether this
“concept” is itself symbolic or whether it is independent of the signs and syn-
tax belonging to the algebra proper to the symbolic calculus, in view of the
results of Klein’s research. In advance of our considerations, however, we note
that the answers to these questions will hinge on whether the formalization
that is coincident with the genuine discovery of the formal is dependent on
the representation by algebraic letter signs of the indeterminate object proper
to pure algebra.
§ 207. Desedimentation of the Formalization Constitutive of
the Formal Concept ‘Magnitude in General’
Klein shows Vieta’s “discovery” of the formal to be grounded in the transfor-
mation of the concept of magnitude from a concept that is necessarily deter-
minate—in the precise sense that its meaning is inseparable from a reference
to either multitudes of units or geometrical figures—into a concept that is
“general,” in the exact sense that its meaning does not necessarily refer to either
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
518

multitudes of units or geometrical figures. What makes this discovery possi-
ble is, on the one hand, Vieta’s innovation in how mathematical science deals
with the unknown in the case of numbers and, on the other, his identification
of the letter signs that he uses to represent both unknown and known multi-
tudes of units with the general concept of multitude itself. Vieta’s innovation
was to attribute to known amounts of multitudes of units, that is, to known
numbers, the status of being “granted as given” that, until then, had been re-
served (in Diophantine analysis) for unknown amounts of units (numbers)
alone. This innovation permitted Vieta 1) to use the letter signs representing
the species of numbers and their powers for both known and unknown
amounts of units and 2) to shift the solution to the operations with these let-
ters signs entirely into the domain of the indeterminate (the granted as given).
Because this shift yields for the first time concepts that are indeterminate—
namely, the general concepts of numbers (i.e., twoness, threeness, etc.), the
concept of number in general (i.e., any quantity whatever), and the concept of
magnitude in general (i.e., magnitude that is identical with neither multitudes
of units nor geometrical figures)—it is coincident with the origination of the
process of formalization and, therewith, of the formalized concept. 
By using the results of Klein’s research to reactivate the intentional an-
ticipation that led to Vieta’s accomplishment of the origin of what now has
the status of something pregiven in the tradition of symbolic calculation,
namely, the sense-perceptible letter sign as the universal symbol for the ma-
terially empty formal category of any object whatever, we will be able to “test”
the truth of Husserl’s pre-phenomenological presupposition that this cate-
gory and therefore the object of the pure mathesis universalis is a concept that
is more fundamental than, and hence logically independent of, the symbolic
calculus. The intentional anticipation behind Vieta’s accomplishment in-
volves the transformation of the objectivity of the ideal objects proper to the
general (theoretical) mathematical treatment, and the generality of this treat-
ment itself, that characterizes an already existing mathematical tradition. Prior
to this transformation, the objectivity of the ideal objects of mathematics was
divided along the lines of discrete multitudes or continuous magnitudes; the
“generality” of mathematics characterized the method with which these fun-
damentally different ideal objects were treated, but not the method’s object.
The constitution of the object of mathematics as a general object that is iden-
tical with neither multitudes of discrete units nor continuous magnitudes is
initially anticipated on the basis of Vieta’s “noetic” intention,176 which disre-
gards the difference in the determinacy of the modes of givenness proper to
Conclusion
519
————————
176. By ‘noetic’ here is meant the manner and direction of the cognitive regard, as dis-
tinct from the related object toward which it is directed.

the unknown continuous (geometrical) magnitudes and unknown discrete
(arithmetical) multitudes that are treated as known by the (necessarily “pre-
formalized”) method of mathematical analysis.
According to the traditional method of geometrical “analysis,” the mode
of givenness belonging to the “granting as given” and therefore granting as
“known” of an unknown continuous (geometrical) magnitude is equivalent to
the mode of givenness proper to a continuous magnitude that is actually
known: in both modes, manifestations of magnitudes with determinate geo-
metrical dimensions are given. In the case of the mode of givenness proper to
the granting as given and therefore as known of an unknown discrete (arith-
metical) multitude, however, its mode of givenness is not equivalent to that of
a discrete multitude that is actually known: the mode of givenness of a known
discrete multitude manifests a determinate multitude of units, whereas the
mode of givenness of the unknown discrete multitude that has been granted,
qua its “species,” as given, manifests not a determinate multitude of units but
only the “supposition” that so many units have been given.
By disregarding this difference and therefore treating as analogous the
modes of givenness of unknown discrete multitudes and unknown continu-
ous magnitudes, Vieta is able to anticipate an entirely “analytic” and there-
fore general treatment of arithmetical “problems.” He is able to do so,
because once the mode of givenness of the unknown discrete multitude is as-
sumed—contrary to what, in “fact,” is the case—to be equivalent to that of
the unknown discrete multitude itself, the “synthetic” necessity of perform-
ing determinate calculations in order to solve arithmetical “problems” is
eliminated. In a manner akin to theoretical “analysis” (of “problems”) in
geometry, the analytical treatment of the unknown in Vieta’s logistice spe-
ciosa is able to terminate its derivation of the “truth” directly on the basis of
what is granted as known, without the additional step of the synthetic con-
struction, which heretofore (in Diophantus’s logistical arithmetic) had been
necessary in order to demonstrate—by producing a determinate multi-
tude—that the problem had been actually resolved. 
Hence the transformation of the object of arithmetical-mathematical
analysis that enables Vieta’s anticipation of a “pure” analysis is tied to his
“noetic” transformation of the cognitive intention characteristic of mathe-
matical analysis in general. This transformation may be characterized as 1)
a turning away from the distinct modes of givenness proper to both deter-
minate multitudes and continuous magnitudes that 2) simultaneously grasps
the granted as given unknown discrete multitudes as “something” whose
mode of givenness is equivalent to, what, in fact, it is not equivalent to,
namely, to that of unknown continuous magnitudes granted as given. That
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
520

is because unknown continuous magnitudes, unlike unknown discrete mul-
titudes, have a mode of givenness that is similar to the givenness of the math-
ematical object in question when it is known: each presents a geometrical
figure with determinate dimensions. With discrete multitudes, matters are
otherwise, for while the mode of givenness of the known discrete multitude
presents a determinate amount of units, the mode of givenness of the un-
known discrete multitude does not present anything determinate. In other
words, the transformation initiated by Vieta in the cognitive regard proper
to mathematical analysis involves the grasping of the unknown and therefore
“possible” multitude of a determinate amount of discrete units in terms of
the mode of being given of a granted as known unknown magnitude—the
continuous magnitude of a geometrical figure—whose mode of being given
“actually” differs from the mode of being given of the discrete units that nec-
essarily compose any known or unknown discrete multitude.
What makes this accomplishment possible is Vieta’s redirection of his
cognitive regard, from the direct apprehension of the determinate multitude
of units that composes an actually given discrete multitude to the direct ap-
prehension of its own apprehension of this multitude. The apprehension by
Vieta’s cognitive regard of its own apprehension of a given discrete multitude
1) not only turns away from the discrete units that belong to its apprehension
of this multitude but 2) also treats the “unity,” in the sense of the being “one”
of its apprehension of its own apprehension, as something whose mode of
givenness is akin to the discrete units that it has turned away from (in order
to grasp its own apprehension of the units). In other words, the entirely “an-
alytical” treatment of arithmetical problems is made possible by the cogni-
tive intention’s directedness to its own apprehension of determinate amounts
of units in a manner that yields this apprehension itself as a mathematical
“object.” And because this object is at once indeterminate (i.e., it does not
refer to a known amount of discrete units) and unitary (i.e., its mode of being
is nevertheless treated as something, as “one”), it represents a “general” object
or, equivalently, a “formalized” concept.
The phenomenological question of what it is that makes this inde-
terminate and therefore general concept itself possible is, of course, what is
driving our investigation. More precisely, the question is whether such a con-
cept can be thought apart from its connection with the letter signs that
Vieta’s “analytic art” uses to represent the species of known and unknown
magnitudes, or whether letters signs, however arbitrary, are a necessary con-
dition for the constitution of a formalized concept and thus for the “ana-
lytic” cognitive intention to be directed to such a concept. At issue, then, is
the phenomenological status of the novel mode of being that belongs to
Conclusion
521

what, for Vieta and modern mathematics, is the “true concept” of number,
namely, number “formalized” as “mere multitude” (sola multitudo), rather
than a definite amount of definite units. As an object of the analyst’s cogni-
tive intention, this concept is separated from all “enumerated things” (re nu-
meratate). How, then, can this intention grasp it, given the fundamental
phenomenological correlation between the regard of intentionality and the
intentional object to which this regard must, with “eidetic” necessity, be di-
rected? How, in other words, does the “abstract,” formalized concept of a
general mathematical object appear as an intentional object? 
Arithmetical abstraction (ἀφαίρεσις) in Aristotle presupposes definite
beings that are intelligible in terms of common qualities, the latter being “lifted
off” the former in accordance with a process that is more logical than psy-
chological. Its logical dimension is determined by the fact that his account of
arithmetical abstraction and abstraction generally represents an answer to the
question of the origin of the unity and indivisibility supposed by Greek math-
ematics to characterize the noetic beings investigated by arithmetic and geom-
etry. In the case of arithmetic, abstraction addresses the true mode of being of
the unity of a determinate amount of determinate items that are intelligible
and indivisible, that is, the true mode of being proper to a noetic (“pure”) ἀριθ -
μός. Aristotle’s rejection of the Platonic claim that what is responsible for the
being “one” (ἕν) of a “pure” ἀριθμός is a γένος that is “outside” or “alongside” of
the multitude of intelligible and indivisible units that compose it provides the
indispensable context for his claim that this being “one” arises ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως
(from abstraction). Aristotle’s account of arithmetical abstraction therefore
presupposes both an already established traditional mathematical under-
standing of the being of a noetic ἀριθμόςand a philosophical controversy about
the “unity” of this being—namely, whether or not it has a mode of being that
is properly characterized in “separation” (χωρισμός) from the being of the items
that compose an arithmetical multitude. 
Aristotle’s answer, of course, is that it does not have such a mode, but
that the unity of an ἀριθμός arises from abstraction and is therefore an insep-
arable “piece” of the sensuously perceivable beings (αἰσθητά) that compose an
ἀριθμός. He characterizes abstraction as the mathematician’s isolation, from
among all the sensible qualities belonging to the bodily items in a multitude,
of the common quality that permits the answer to the question ‘how many?’
to be given with respect to these items. This isolation occurs on the basis of the
mathematician’s “positing” of what is not separate in the perception of sensi-
ble bodies as separate insofar as all their sensuously perceivable aspects are dis-
regarded, save for the quality that permits them to be just so many. Initially, this
quality is their species (εἶδος) (e.g., apple, soldier, body, etc.), which, even
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
522

though it is incapable of existing in separation from the being proper to the
items of which it is the kind, is nevertheless treated “as if” it were separable,
thereby permitting their mathematical investigation. The “unity” of the “heap”
(σωρός) of sensible beings that compose an ἀριθμός177 is therefore their species,
Conclusion
523
————————
177. Aristotle’s references to a “heap” in connection with the question of the being of
number are embedded in discussions that do not explicitly claim that number is like a heap.
Rather, in each case number being “like a heap” is presented as the conclusion that follows if
number is “not one” (Metaph. 1044a 5), or not “a whole that is something over and above the
parts” (a 10), or “not some one thing (ἕν τι)” (1084b 21). Aristotle, however, is clearly intent
on establishing that the manner of being of numbers, as a mathematical thing, is “derivative”
(1077a 19–20) in the sense that its being does not “take precedence over sensible things” (a 17–
18), and, therefore, that “they are not capable of being somewhere as separate” (1077b 14–15).
That from numbers’ incapacity to have being in this regard it follows for Aristotle that “each
is not one but is like a heap” (1044a 4) can be seen as the positive result of his polemic against
those people who speak of numbers as being one in the sense that thinghood (οὐσία) is one.
Thinghood is not one “in the way they say it is, as though it were a unit or point, but each in-
dependent thing (οὐσία) is a complete being-at-work-staying-itself (ἐντελέχεια), and a partic-
ular nature (φύσις)” (a 7–9); and number for Aristotle is manifestly not one in this sense of an
independent thing. Thus, when Aristotle asserts that “it is necessary to a number that there be
something by means of which it is one” (a 2–3), he immediately qualifies this assertion (fol-
lowing Ross’s and not Jaeger’s text of the Metaphysics) by adding, “that is, if it is one” (a 4);
and he goes on to claim that those who make the claim that number is one are unable to say
by what means it is so. Aristotle’s point, then, is that those (Plato and other members of the
Academy) who claim that number is one 1) are wrong because their claim is based on the mis-
taken supposition that number is one as thinghood is one and that therefore the unity of num-
ber is capable of being separate from sensible things, 2) deserve criticism because they cannot
say by what means number is one, and then 3), because of (1) and (2), number is not some one
thing but rather is like a heap.
A syllable is the opposite of a heap according to Aristotle, in that a syllable is something
else than the letters (elements) out of which it is composed, the implication clearly being that
the heap is not something else than the elements that compose it. In both the case of a heap
and a syllable, Aristotle maintains that “the whole is one” (Metaph. 1041b 11–12), although the
something else than the elements in the instance of a syllable is likened to “the thinghood (οὐσία)
of each thing (for that is what is primarily responsible for the being of it)” (1041a 27–28), which
is “not an element but a source (ἀρχή)” (a 31) of its being an independent thing. In the case of
the heap, Aristotle’s point is that the whole is not one in this sense. Thus he argues that “if num-
ber is separate” (1084b 2–3), and, therefore, “insofar as a number is composite” (b 4), “the one
is prior,” but “insofar as the universal and form are prior, the number is; for each of the units is
part of the number as its material, but number is in the manner of εἶδος.” Because the εἶδος is
indivisible, the Platonists say that it is also one, so that both the units, as the parts that compose
the material (ὕλη), and the εἶδος and thinghood (οὐσία) of number are one, and, as such, are
sources (ἀρχαί). Aristotle holds, however, that “this is impossible” (b 19): “for if the number is
some one thing and not like a heap,” then its εἶδος and material are not only one in different
senses, but “in truth each unit has being as a potency (δύναμις)” (b 21) and “not as fully at-work
(ἐντελέχεια)” (b 22–23). Number, then, cannot be separate as the Platonists say, that is, in ac-
cord with the two sources of its being one thing that they identify, the indivisibility of the εἶδος
and the units proper to the material. Not being separate, it follows that number is not some
one thing, but like a heap, that is, like a whole whose being one and therefore thinghood is de-
rived, in this case, from the multitude of units as such that compose the whole’s elements, in the
precise sense of the “how many” indicated by this non-independent whole. 

which, in its isolation from the other qualities of these beings, is “abstracted
from,” “lifted off” of these beings in a manner that allows it to function as
their common “measure.” Moreover, even though the sensible beings that are
unified in their ἀριθμός are subject to partition, their natural kind, in its func-
tion as a measure, is not subject to partition and thus is indivisible. 
From among the “abstracted” “species” that, in their function as mea -
sures, provide the unity of ἀριθμοί of apples, soldiers, bodies, etc., the math-
ematician can further abstract their common quality of being one and being
indivisible. This he accomplishes by disregarding the different natures of
the species, which isolates their common quality as measures—namely, being
“one” and “indivisible”—and then treating this “as if” it were separable from
what it, in truth, is not: both the natural species and the multitude of so-
matic beings to which these species inseparably belong. In this manner, the
mathematical μονάς (unit) originates as something whose mode of being is
nothing other than the character of being a measure, that is, “one” and “in-
divisible,” which has been “lifted off ” somatic beings, even though, in truth,
its mode of being remains that of “pieces” of sensibly perceived bodies that
have been transformed into “species-neutral” monads by abstraction. 
Does the formalizing abstraction in modern mathematics that origi-
nates with Vieta’s “analytic art” function similarly? Even on the basis of our
incomplete account of it so far, it should be clear that it does not. This needs
to be stressed in the strongest possible terms. Aristotelian abstraction yields
“units” that are species-neutral but hardly indeterminate in the sense in
which Vieta’s letter signs representing the species (εἶδος) of known and un-
known numeri are indeterminate. The mode of being of Aristotelian ab-
stracted units remains wholly determinate because of their status as “pieces”
of sensuously perceivable beings. They are, to be sure, no longer subject to
the senses—that is, as “abstracted beings,” they are apprehended by thought
and given “in advance” of mathematical science—but this does not mean
that they achieve any independent being “alongside” of αἰσθητά: the mode
of being of a species-neutral unit remains entirely dependent on the “par-
ticular” being of sensuously perceivable bodies. 
To call an Aristotelian unit—or any unit whose mode of being is char-
acterized as arising “from abstraction” in the Aristotelian manner—‘formal’
is, subsequent to Vieta’s invention of the formalized concept, to risk equivoca-
tion:178 The “conceptuality” of the “formal” in Aristotle’s sense is inseparable
from, and therefore presupposes, the being of determinate, sensuously per-
ceivable bodes; the “conceptuality” of the “formal” in Vieta’s sense not only
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
524
————————
178. See n. 91 above, where Husserl’s equivocal use of the term “formal” is noted along
precisely these lines.

makes no such presupposition, but neither can it be properly grasped insofar
as its “formality” is conceived as relating to any determinate being—whether
bodily or intelligible. The conceptuality of the formalized concept invented by
Vieta not only is not dependent on any such beings, but this independence is
inseparable from its very meaning. The concepts composing Vieta’s “analyti-
cal art” (logistice speciosa) mean precisely any arbitrary (possible) number (in
the case of the formal concepts of numbers in general, e.g., twoness, threeness,
etc.), any arbitrary quantity (in the case of the formal concept of number in
general), and any arbitrary magnitude (in the case of the formal concept of
magnitude in general). Husserl clearly saw this distinction in the conceptual-
ity of the formal when he remarked, in Formal and Transcendental Logic, that
Aristotle “lacked formal ontology, and therefore lacked also the cognition that
formal ontology is intrinsically prior to the ontology of realities” (FTL, 70),
because “Aristotle relates his analytics to the real world and, in so doing, has
not yet excluded from his analytics the categories of reality.” 
However, Husserl’s insight into the logical limits of Aristotelian con-
ceptuality does not extend to his insight into the “abstraction” to which Aris-
totle appealed so as to account for the mode of being of the unity of intelligible
beings. From his earliest to his final works, Husserl clearly characterizes the
cognitive origination of the generically empty formalized concepts of the ‘any-
thing’ or ‘anything whatever’ and the ‘one’ in the manner of Aristotelian “ab-
straction.” This is most obvious in Philosophy of Arithmetic, where Husserl
accounts for the origin of both of these concepts on the basis of “inattention”
to individual contents “as contents determined thus and so,” from which he
maintains the abstractive passage to the general concept follows, because these
contents “are considered and attended to only as some contents in general,
each one a certain something, a certain one” (PA, 79). Frege’s critique of the in-
ability of Husserl’s appeal to “inattention” to yield the general (formalized)
concept of number is therefore on the mark insofar as it highlights the limits
of Aristotelian abstraction to account for the origin of formalized concepts.179
And while Husserl’s later works do not appeal to inattention in order to ac-
count for the abstractive origin of formalized universality, they nevertheless ap-
Conclusion
525
————————
179. In reference to Husserl’s account of the abstraction, Frege writes ironically: “Inat-
tention is an exceedingly effective logical power; whence, presumably, the absentmindedness
of scholars.” He goes on to say, however, in a manner that is quite to the point with respect to
the inability of abstraction in the Aristotelian manner to generate a formalized concept: “For
example, let us suppose that in front of us there are sitting side by side a black and a white cat.
We disregard their color: they become colorless but are still sitting side by side. We disregard
their posture: they are no longer sitting, without, however, having assumed a different pos-
ture; but each one is still at its place. We disregard their location: they are without location, but
still remain quite distinct. Thus from each one we have perhaps derived a general concept of
a cat” (Frege, 319).

peal to an “abstractive emptying” of material contents as its formalizing origin,
and they do so in a manner that we have shown not only to lack precision but
also to fall short of his own most mature stipulation regarding the evidence of
a concept’s genesis necessary to account most fully for its origin.
The inappropriateness of Husserl’s appeal to Aristotelian abstraction to
account for the origin of formalized concepts can be highlighted most force-
fully by way of a consideration of the difference between the manner of uni-
versal applicability of an Aristotelian species-neutral monad and Husserl’s
own account of the concept of the ‘anything whatever’. The “universality” of
an Aristotelian monad is grounded in its indivisibility as a measure, which
renders it as a “completely exact” (ἀκριβέστατον) measure and allows the
arithmetician, having posited it as detached, to apply its unity as a measure (its
“being one”) to the species that function as the indivisible arithmetical mea -
sure of any determinate beings whatever. The universality of the Aristotelian
“one,” in other words, presupposes both individual beings and their “intelli-
gibility” as species. By contrast, in Husserl’s account of the “universality” of
the ‘anything whatever’, it does not function as the exact measure of the par-
ticular species of beings, does not, in its “unity,” measure their “being one,” but
rather means precisely any arbitrary thing that happens to “fall” under the
“unity” of its “materially” indeterminate (i.e., species-independent) concept.
In other words, on Husserl’s view, the “universality” of the ‘anything what-
ever’ presupposes neither the “intelligibility” as a species nor the measur abil-
ity as an individual “one” of that which “falls under” its concept.
Returning to Vieta’s method, Klein has shown that while it presup-
poses definite beings, it most definitely does not presuppose their “intelligi-
bility” as species or species-neutral monads, which permits their measurement
by one and therefore enumeration. Rather, Vieta’s formalizing abstraction
works on the cognitive intention’s “act” of knowing a multitude of units, sep-
arating out its own conceiving of that multitude, which it immediately makes
objective. The cognitive intention turns and “reflects” on its own knowing
when it is directed to the concept of number as a multitude of units,180 and
in so doing, it no longer apprehends the multitude of units directly (in its
straightforward intention and thus as the straightforward object of this in-
tention) but rather indirectly (in the apprehension of its own knowing in-
tention) as the intentional object of this intention. Thus, notwithstanding
the fact that what is being presented to the cognitive intention is a multitude
of units, its immediate apprehension of its own conceiving of this multitude,
an apprehension that grasps it as something, as one, and therefore as an in-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
526
————————
180. That is, to the concept of either just so many units (e.g., ‘fiveness’), or the concept
of each and every number, of number (quantity) in general.

tentional object, transforms the apprehension of the multitude belonging to
the “number” into a seemingly independent object, albeit an object that is
only an “intentional” object. This “intentional object,” therefore, is the “con-
stitutive” result of an act of intentionality, which, secondarily, intends a thing
already conceived before, and intends it insofar as it has been conceived.
In order to grasp the intentional unity of the formalized “intentional
object” constituted in formalizing abstraction as a “concept” that is distinct
from the determinate content of the same “concept” (in this case, multi-
tudes of units), the cognitive regard’s “pure” intention must somehow make
it “visible.” That is because the indeterminacy of the formalized intentional
object renders it “invisible” to the pure intentional regard that has separated
it from the determinate modes of givenness of (in the case at hand) discrete
units. It is invisible because notwithstanding its status as an intentional “ob-
ject,” the very mode of its givenness as indeterminate does not present an ob-
ject with the mode of givenness belonging to that of straightforwardly
intended mathematical objects, that is, discrete or continuous magnitudes.
Properly speaking, the formalized intentional object does not present an ob-
ject at all but rather the apprehension of the apprehension of a multitude of
objects. Neither this secondary apprehension nor the initial apprehension of
a multitude of objects has itself an objective mode of givenness; objects, to be
sure, are given to the initial straightforward intentional regard, but neither
its noetic intentional directedness nor its secondary apprehension is itself
given as an object. Not being “objectively” given, the apprehension of ap-
prehension that composes the indeterminacy of the formalized “concept” is
invisible to the formalizing (and therefore “pure”) intention that constitutes
it as a “concept” that is separate from the concepts that render intelligible the
straightforwardly apprehended mathematical objects. 
In order to grasp its formalized concept, then, the formalizing regard
of the pure cognitive intention must somehow render it visible. Reflection
on the manner it does so reveals that this is accomplished by the pure cog-
nitive intention’s use of the “imagination,” specifically of the impure “mod-
ification” of consciousness that is inseparable from the presentation of
images—but not these determinate images themselves. In this manner, the
pure cognitive intention is able to represent to itself the indeterminate and
therefore unvisualizable content of what it has constituted.181 The pure cog-
nitive intention characteristic of Vieta’s “analytic art” is able to do this, be-
Conclusion
527
————————
181. Phenomenological reflection on the essential correlation between the modifica-
tion of consciousness that intends imagistic phenomena and these phenomena themselves un-
covers 1) the “impurity” of this modification and 2) its non-coincidence with the essentially
determinate character of any one of the images that appear as the “object” of its intention. The 

cause even within the realm of the imaginative modification, which is “alien”
to the purity of its intention, it retains the ability proper to it and foreign to
this modification, namely, of separating—and therefore “constituting”—in-
determinate “formalized concepts” from the determinate images presented
by the imagination. Thus, for example, when the “pure” intention of the
cognitive regard separates ‘fiveness’ from ‘five’ enumerated things and ap-
prehends it as a “mere multitude” (and therefore as something that is sepa-
rated from that which it “in truth” belongs to without being identical with,
that is, the enumerated things), the imaginative modification, which ordi-
narily would make visible five units (perhaps as points), now makes visible
something graphic—such as, in this case, the mark (nota) that comprises an
algebraic letter sign. The cognitive regard of the “pure” intention, notwith-
standing its involvement with the visible letter sign, retains its capacity to
separate indeterminate “concepts” from determinate ones, which means that
it keeps distinct the determinacy of the letter sign from the indeterminacy
of its concept of ‘mere multitude’. This enables the visible letter sign to “rep-
resent” to the “pure” intention’s cognitive regard the invisibility of a “general
concept,” in the precise sense that its “pure” regard is able to get hold of the
thing separated through the sign’s visibility, which it nevertheless keeps dis-
tinct from the “intentional unity” of the “formalized concept.” Because what
the letter sign represents is not the determinate thing (units in the case at
hand) from which the indeterminate “concept” (‘mere multitude’ in this
case) has been separated but this very “concept” itself, its representative func-
tion is “symbolic.” It is precisely the “service” that the imaginative modifica-
tion provides to the “pure” intention proper to the cognitive regard involved
in formalizing abstraction—by making determinate algebraic marks visible
to it as a symbolic representation—that renders the genuine discovery of the
formal dependent on the representation by letter signs of the indeterminate
object of pure algebra.
In addition to the necessity of a visible mark’s being made available to
the cognitive regard in order for it to represent to itself the formalized con-
cept that it has constituted via its apprehension of its own apprehension of a
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
528
————————
modification’s “impurity” is a consequence of the non-conceptual essence of the image-
phenomenon itself and of the essential possibility proper to the imaginative modification of
consciousness to exceed the scope of any given manifold of image-phenomena. It is precisely
the difference manifest in the said non-coincidence of the modification, between the imagi-
native modification of consciousness and the essentially determinate images that are presented
in this modification, that permits the pure intentionality operative in formalizing abstraction
to enlist the modification of consciousness characteristic of the “imagination” into the service
of rendering visible the indeterminate concepts that are yielded in this abstraction.

multitude, there are two other characteristics of Vieta’s method of formal-
ization that distinguish it decisively from Husserlian “categorial intuition.” 
First, the cognitive regard’s “apprehension of its own apprehension”—
namely, its granting as given an unknown multitude of units and treating the
“possibility” coincident with this mode of “supposed” givenness as an actual
“object” and therefore as a “conceptual unity” in its own right—does not con-
cern its cognition of the qualities belonging to an individual object. What
concerns the granting as given of the unknown that is objectified in Vieta’s
“analytical art” are not the unknown qualities of a substrate object that are
“cognitively” related to this object via the copula, the doxic thematization of
which manifests for Husserl the intuition of categoriality. Rather, the un-
known that is granted as given in Vieta’s analytic treatment of the unknown
as known is a determinate amount of determinate units, that is, the determi-
nate unity of a multitude. 
Secondly, the proper mode of being of this determinate unity—which,
for the ancients, is in dispute because of the recognition that it differs from
the mode of being of the “units” that compose it—ceases to be an issue and
therefore matter of dispute for the “analytic art” because the art understands
this mode of being to be “conceptual.” That is, the practitioners of the ana-
lytical art understand the mode of being of the unity of a multitude to be pre-
cisely the concept of a multitude. As we have shown, Husserl’s thought
originates in the unsuccessful attempt to provide an account of psychologi-
cal genesis of the content of this concept. Also, from the Logical Investigations
on, he consistently distinguishes the unity of its collective whole–part “cate-
gorial” structure from the unity of the “categorial” whole–part structure of in-
dividual objects, and he distinguishes their corresponding judgment forms
as well. Moreover, as we have also shown, Husserl himself does not under-
stand the paradigm that governs the categoriality of intuition with respect
to logical substrates—namely, “empty intentions” being fulfilled in doxic acts
that “posit” “pregiven” and “pre-predicative” categorial “states of affairs”—to
be applicable in the case of the “retrospective apprehension,” as a “set,” of the
“noetic unity” that pre-predicatively apprehends a plurality. 
These distinctions prevent either the formalized unity of the concept
of a multitude or the unity of its content (i.e., its “extension” in a multitude
of objects) from being characterized as the unity apprehended in the “cate-
gorial intuition” of the whole–part structure of a logical substrate. Husserl’s
account of the retrospective grasping of the noetic apprehension of a plu-
rality as a set must also be distinguished from Vieta’s formalization of a mul-
titude, because, as we have shown, in this case Husserl articulates the unity
as being that of a “concrete” plurality. That is, he understands the “object”
Conclusion
529

constituted in this manner to be that of the collection itself, namely, the
“unity,” which, as a “whole,” encompasses the straightforwardly apprehended
individual objects that compose a plurality and that, as its “parts,” do not
enter into the content of their collective unity as such. In other words, at
issue here is not the formalized concept of multitude but what, in Philoso-
phy of Arithmetic, is termed the content of the concept of multiplicity. 
These same two characteristics that prevent the formalization accom-
plished by Vieta’s “analytical art” from being subsumed under the meaning
structures and judgment process articulated by Husserlian “categorial” intu-
ition also prevent that formalization from being subsumed under the heading
of what Husserl characterized as ‘nominalization’. We have shown that Husserl
understands nominalization to be a law “evinced in logic,” according to which
something nominal corresponds to every proposition and propositional con-
tent. In the case at hand, the plural that appears in judging, upon being “nom-
inalized,” is said to be transformed into a singular substrate object, the “set,”
which becomes an “object about which” additional judgments can be made.
Given the nominalized object’s status as a “form of judgment” for Husserl, we
have also shown that, rather than accounting for the non-psychological and
therefore logically objective collective unity of a multitude, his account pre-
supposes the prior availability of “formations” that possess just such unity.
Moreover, precisely its status as a “form of judgment” presupposes that the
formalizing abstraction that came into being with Vieta’s “analytical art” has
already occurred. Thus, rather than being a phenomenological account of the
genesis of either the collective logical unity of a multitude or its formalization,
Husserl’s exposition of the logical law of “nominalization” presupposes—with-
out accounting for this presupposition—the already constituted phenomena
of collective logical unity and its formalization. 
The answer, then, to the phenomenological question of whether the
formalization that is coincident with the genuine discovery of the formal is
dependent upon the representation by letter signs of the indeterminate object
proper to pure algebra is ‘yes’. The intentional structure of this dependency, as
it functions in a symbolic calculus, is most aptly formulated as follows: the al-
gebraic letter sign’s representation of the formalized concept (or, object—it
makes no difference) that is inseparable from this concept’s intentional con-
tent is, qua its sense-perceptible status, grasped by the regard of the cognitive
intention operative in symbolic calculation in accordance with its straight-
forward mode of givenness. That is, in symbolic calculation, the formalized
concept/object is grasped not according to its intentional genesis in formal-
ization as a secondarily intended intentional unity but as a “unity” whose
mode of being is akin to the unity of straightforwardly intended objects. 
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
530

As we have seen, Klein distinguishes the new mode of abstraction
made possible by Vieta’s “analytical art” from Aristotelian ἀφαίρεσις, and
terms it ‘symbolic abstraction’. We have used Klein’s account of its “primal in-
stitution” in Vieta’s invention of the “analytical art” (the logistice speciosa) as
the guiding clue for fulfilling a decisive aspect of the project that Husserl
announced in his Crisis. Specifically, Klein’s account of Vieta’s transforma-
tion of the ancient ἀριθμός into the modern symbolic concept of number
has been used to desediment the origin of the algebra and its “anticipation”
of the process of formalization in mathematics and logic that culminates in
both the idea and the “reality” of a completely formalized science, a “pure”
mathesis universalis. With this, we conclude, the phenomenological condi-
tion of possibility proper to the constitution of a symbolic mathematical
object is accounted for, namely, of an indeterminate and therefore general
object that possesses a “possible” mode of being that becomes, via its visible
“expression” in signs, an “actual” mathematical object.
§ 208. Desedimentation of the Historicity of the Origin of
Formalization from the Pregiven Life-world
In light of the preceding discussion, Husserl’s “presupposition” that formal-
ization has already occurred, even as he investigates the origination of the
formalized logic belonging to the “pure” mathesis universalis, may be un-
packed by revisiting his account of the logical independence of the propo-
sition’s content from the non-syntactical employment of algebraic signs in
apophantic logic. 
On the one hand, Husserl maintains that the propositional content in-
dicated by the “symbolic letter” is independent of the letter itself that func-
tions to indicate it. Thus, the content of the proposition members indicated
by the “symbol” ‘A’ in the propositions ‘A is b’ and ‘A is c’ are independent
of the “identity” of the letter ‘A’ that appears in both propositions, because,
according to Husserl, the proposition, the opinion that forms the “meant as
meant,” is formed differently in each proposition. Husserl takes this to il-
lustrate that the “ultimate members” that compose the whole of any propo-
sition are “non-self-sufficient” and thus that the subject and predicate
members of a proposition are “non-detachable.” In these two propositions,
the same ‘A’ is meant twice, but it is “meant in a different How.” Husserl
maintains that the identity relation between these two propositions is es-
tablished by something other than the “As’”—i.e., plurality of the letter ‘A’
in the propositions—“symbolic” (algebraic) function in these propositions,
namely, by an “unstated total proposition” that is composed of the “unex-
Conclusion
531

pressed” propositional form ‘the same’ in the second proposition that re-
lates back to the first occurring ‘A’: that is, A is b, and the same A is c. 
On the other hand, it is clear that what Husserl understands by the
letter sign ‘A’, in its function to indicate symbolically a content belonging to
these two propositions, is not literally the letter ‘A’ itself, as a sense-percep-
tible mark, but, rather, the concept of any arbitrary propositional content
whatever, with absolutely no individual or material restrictions. The ‘A’ let-
ters in this example thus signify, for Husserl—at the same time—1) the non-
detachable “ultimate members” of the whole of two different propositions,
each of which is propositionally different due to its givenness in different
Hows, and 2) the formalized identity proper to concept of the ‘anything
whatever’, which, because of its function to “indicate” propositional con-
tents that are individually and materially indeterminate, is inseparable from
the letter sign ‘A’ appearing in both propositions. 
What Husserl understands “at the same time” here is, at once, a de-
terminate letter with an indeterminate conceptual meaning and a proposi-
tional content that is not identical with the indeterminate meaning that is
inseparable from this letter. In other words, Husserl understands the letter
as a symbol that stands for the universal concept of being a proposition just
as he understands the “actual” contents of any proposition to be determi-
nate propositional members. The object of Husserl’s understanding here,
therefore, is isomorphic with precisely what is meant by a symbol in Vieta’s
logistice speciosa, because the latter means, at once, the universal concept of
quantity and the actual contents of any quantity, a multitude of units. How-
ever, Husserl’s way of speaking about the ‘A’ as ‘the same object A’, as if the
‘A’ itself were the ultimate propositional member itself, even after having
previously “conceptually” distinguished the ‘A’ (as an algebraic letter sym-
bol) from the non-algebraic ultimate members of a proposition that it in-
dicates, highlights the fact that the structure of the ‘A’ as a symbol is not
transparent in his thinking. Husserl’s manner of talking about the object of
the proposition member as if it were the ‘A’ itself, in the sense that the ‘A’ rep-
resents its indeterminate logical content, just as he talks in a manner that dis-
tinguishes the ‘A’ from this logical content as an object, indicates, moreover,
that the formalized structure of the symbol is “sedimented” in his thinking.
As a consequence, the symbolic abstraction instituted by Vieta’s logistice spe-
ciosa is likewise “sedimented” in Husserl’s articulation of the algebraic sign’s
function (in the apophantic proposition) to indicate non-syntactically ulti-
mate propositional members that are not algebraic. 
This way of talking has its basis in Husserl’s conviction, which we have
shown to be unfounded, that the symbolic calculus is logically independent
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
532

of the actual concepts of formalized logic. Thus Husserl’s investigations of
formalization seek to establish its foundation in the experience of the de-
terminate (individual) objects that he posits as the source of the actual con-
cepts of formalized logic—despite his acute awareness that the meaning of
the indeterminate concept of the ‘anything whatever’, because it is insepara-
ble from any arbitrary object whatever, is therefore “analytically” irreducible
to precisely the experience of individual objects. Husserl, of course, is aware
of this irreducibility, but, as we have also demonstrated, because his under-
standing of abstraction is basically Aristotelian, his theory of judgment is, in
principle, incapable of accounting for the origin of a materially indetermi-
nate concept. Husserl’s basis for distinguishing between the formalized
structure of the ‘anything’ and the ‘one’ is instructive in this regard. The
‘one’ belongs, he contends, to the concept of ‘multiplicity’, while the ‘any-
thing’ does not belong to it, and, consequently, the content of the concept
of multiplicity is a concrete multitude of ‘ones’ or ‘units’, whereas the “con-
tent” of the concept of ‘anything’ is decidedly not multitudinous in this or
any other respect. Yet this difference does not mean that the ‘anything’ or
‘anything whatever’ is “singular,” if by this is meant that it is ‘one’ in the sense
of the ‘ones’ belonging to a multitude. We have seen that, as an “indetermi-
nate” concept, the meaning of the ‘anything whatever’ belongs to a funda-
mentally different conceptual dimension than that of the arbitrary objects
that “fall under it.” It is meaningful to say of the latter that they are “singu-
lar,” since each member of the multitude to which they necessarily belong is
precisely “one”; but it is not meaningful to say of the ‘anything whatever’
that it is “one” in this sense: its meaning, as a formalized “unity,” is beyond the
opposition of “one and many.”
Because its meaning is “beyond” that opposition, it both makes the
“mode of being” of Vieta’s symbol possible and is also responsible for the
sedimentation—in the symbolic calculation made possible by the symbol—
of the problem of the mode of being belonging to the “unity” of a multitude.
The problem of what, subsequent to Vieta’s invention of the symbol, is now
properly the “pre-formal” (in the sense of formalization) “mode of being” of
the unity of both limited and unlimited multitudes, drops totally out of the
picture with Vieta and the formalized science his “analytical art” anticipates.
That is, the problem that informs the two ancient Greek paradigms for the
conceptuality of concepts—the Platonic thesis of a “separate” γένος as being
responsible for such unity and the Aristotelian thesis of an abstracted species-
neutral monad—is seemingly eliminated by the formalization of unity en-
gendered by the symbolic calculus. As in Galileo’s geometrical mathematiza-
tion of the life-world, wherein the “true” being of the “empirical” shapes of
Conclusion
533

sensuously perceived objects is posited as having the mode of being of the
ideal objects investigated by “pure” geometry, Vieta’s numerical formulation
of the ideal species of the determinate amounts of determinate units like-
wise leads to the thesis that the “true” being of objects that belong to the life-
word have a being that properly belongs to the concepts of a mathematical
science. Only, in the case of the mathematization that is initiated by the “an-
alytical art,” instead of sensuously perceived objects belonging to the “pre-sci-
entific” life-world being “mathematized,” it is the unities of the determinate
multitudes of “empirical” and “intelligible” objects that “order” these ob-
jects (i.e., “numbers”) that are posited (with their mathematization) as hav-
ing the mode of being belonging to a mathematical science. In this case, of
course, the science at issue is the incipiently formalized mathematical sci-
ence of the logistice speciosa, and it is the mode of being of its indeterminate
concepts that is posited as the “true” being of the order—or, more precisely,
the “laws” governing the order—of the objects in the life-world. The prob-
lem of the proper mode of being belonging to the unity of determinate mul-
titudes of determinate units is therefore eliminated, and, consequently, the
problem of the “unity” of the “one and the many” is also eliminated, for this
“unity” is now conceived in terms of the mode of being belonging to the al-
gebraic concept of ‘number’, that is, the general concepts of twoness, three-
ness, etc., which, because they are identified with their “signs,” become what
to this day are self-evidently identified with the “true being” of “natural”
numbers.
Because Vieta’s anticipation of a formalized science originates not
from a transformation of the perceptual life-world but from the transfor-
mation of a pre-existent mathematical science, we must look for the ulti-
mate sources of the origin of this anticipation elsewhere than in Husserl’s
attempt to desediment the origin of the formalizing impulse in mathemat-
ics from the perceptually oriented praxis of measurement and its transfor-
mation of the life-world. The apprehension of the apprehension of the
granted-as-given unknown and known determinate multitudes of determi-
nate units, in which originates the symbolic abstraction that yields the for-
malized concepts of both numbers and number itself in general, manifestly
does not involve the perception of individual objects in the life-world. This
is to say, the grasping of the “possible” mode of being that is characteristic of
the “supposition” that so and so many units are given, as an “actual” mode of
being that is brought about in symbolic abstraction, does not involve what
Husserl calls a ‘modalization’ of the straightforward sense perception of ob-
jects. Again, to use Husserl’s terminology, the apprehension of the “supposed
meaning, as supposed,” that is characteristic of the formalized “proposition”
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
534

coincident with Vieta’s symbols, does not arise on the ultimate basis of the
disappointment of a cognitive intention previously directed toward indi-
vidual objects. The perception of the sense-perceptible signs that “symbol-
ize” the indeterminate concepts of multitude generated by symbolic
abstraction that occurs in the symbolic cognition of Vieta’s “analytical art”
owes its origin to the transformation of a pre-existing scientific “logistic.” 
The pre-existing “logistic” that Vieta transforms likewise does not owe
its origin to any kind of “modalization” based in the straightforward per-
ception of individual objects. Indeed, as Klein has definitively shown, the
“logistic” that Vieta transforms is a method of exact mathematical calcula-
tion that discovers, in advance of the perceptual acquaintance with deter-
minate amounts of things and their relations, both their amounts and
relations on the basis of “concepts” whose unity is irreducible to the “being
one” of sensuously perceived individual objects. The originating impulse of
the formalization instituted in Vieta’s “analytical art” therefore ultimately
leads back to Plato’s distinction between ‘arithmetic’ and ‘logistic’ and his de-
mand for a theoretical logistic. 
Klein’s account of this original impulse traces it back, as it were, to the
“life-world”182 praxis of dealing with determinate amounts of determinate
items, that is, with delimited multitudes and their relations and the praxis of
arriving at their delimitations and relations. In Plato’s numerous references
to the τέχνη of dealing with ἀριθμοίthat characterize it indiscriminately as
‘arithmetic’ or ‘logistic’, Klein finds evidence of an original, pre-theoretical
praxis of counting and calculating that does not discriminate between the
delimitation of the things in the life-world into determinate amounts by
counting them and the relating of these amounts to one another by parti-
tioning and multiplying them. That is, because partitioning and multiplying
determinate things have their ultimate basis in addition and subtraction,
that is, in counting, Klein takes the distinction between disciplines that are
devoted to counting and calculating to be a “theoretical” distinction. He
finds evidence for this in Plato’s strangely involved “definitions” of arith-
metic and logistic, which characterize the former as studying the “odd” and
the “even” with respect to the multitude they make in relation to themselves
and each other, and the latter as studying “what” multitude the “odd” and the
“even” make, again in relation to themselves and each other. 
Conclusion
535
————————
182. Klein, of course, uses the terminology of the “life-world” retrospectively in his
“Phenomenology and the History of Science,” and therefore subsequent to his own investi-
gations of the origin of algebra, to describe, following Husserl, the source of “the original
arithmetical evidences” and the “original ‘evidence’ and the original experience of things”
concealed by the natural science made possible by “the method of symbolic abstraction.”

The significance of these definitions for locating the life-world origin of
the impulse toward the formalization that Vieta realizes is threefold, according
to Klein. First, the avoidance of any mention of ἀριθμός indicates that arith-
metic is not originally “number theory” but rather the τέχνη of correct count-
ing. Second, the τέχνη of “logistic” is originally subordinate to “arithmetic”
because, in order to establish the relations between multitudes in all calcula-
tions involving multitudes, knowledge is required beforehand of both how dif-
ferent determinate amounts of multitudes are related to each other and the
characteristics of these determinate multitudes themselves. And, third, knowl-
edge of “numbers,” of their undeniable character of uniting many in one and
one in many, is of no directconcern to the arts of counting and calculating. This
“gift of the gods” is not the subject of study proper to the mathematical arts,
and, insofar as these arts arise on the basis of a praxis that is part of the percep-
tual life-world, the original impulse toward mathematical formalization can-
not, properly speaking, be located either in them or in this life-world. 
Rather, Klein locates the original impulse toward mathematical for-
malization that transcends the perceptual life-world in the question that asks
about the availability to the soul of the ἀριθμοί employed by the τέχνη of arith-
metic before an actual count of sensuously perceivable things is undertaken.
Plato’s answer to this question—the positing of noetic ἀριθμοίwith a mode of
being that is separate from and therefore irreducible to the perceptual objects
of the life-world—not only inaugurates theoretical arithmetic, as the episteme
of the “pure” (non-sensuously perceived) principles responsible for the de-
limitation of multitudes of likewise “pure” units, but also leads to the idea of
an equally theoretical logistic. Hence, Klein’s provocative thesis that the Neo-
platonic articulation of the difference between arithmetic and logistic on the
basis of the opposition between arithmetic’s theoretical nature and logistic’s
practical nature is a distortion of their original status in Plato. Thus, in addi-
tion to the theoretical study of “pure” principles responsible for the delimi-
tation of multitudes of “pure” units, Plato also envisions a theoretical logistic
devoted to the study of the “pure” relations between delimited multitudes
that are available to the soul before it undertakes an actual calculation. Given
the subordinate role of the art of logistic to the art of arithmetic, theoretical
logistic Plato likewise holds to be subordinate to theoretical arithmetic. 
His ontological doctrine of the χωρισμός of the ἀρχήresponsible for the
indivisibility of the ‘one’, of course, prevented the realization of the vision of a
theoretical logistic in strictly Platonic terms, because it is irreconcilable with
the need to partition the “unit” of calculation that occurs in order to execute
many calculative operations. Aristotle’s account of the one’s mode of being
arising “from abstraction,” and thus its function as a measure, enabled the par-
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
536

tial realization of the Platonic vision of a theoretical logistic in Diophantus’s
Arithmetic insofar as part of the latter’s method involved the calculation with
the species of ἀριθμοίwhose units were routinely partitioned as a matter of
course. However, the fact that the divisibility of the Aristotelian unit, as a prin-
ciple, is ultimately tied to the divisibility of the sensuously perceivable beings
that are inseparable from the being of the species violates the Platonic stipu-
lation that a theoretically “pure” logistic be capable of executing exact calcu-
lations independent of sensible beings. Thus, it is Vieta’s transformation of the
Diophantine method, the crucial moment of which is the “conceptualization”
of the apprehension of the apprehension that grants as given both unknown
and known determinate multitudes of units, that brings about the methodi-
cal realization of the Platonic vision of a “pure” theoretical logistic, though in
conceptual terms that are completely un-Platonic.
It must be noted, however, that even Vieta’s invention of the formalized
concept does not fully realize the Platonic ideal of a purely noetic science.
While the species calculation of Vieta’s “analytic art” does indeed permit exact
calculations to be made without any recourse to either individual objects or
the (Aristotelian) species that renders such objects intelligible, the auxiliary
function of these calculations for the solving of problems raised by traditional
arithmetic and geometry limits the “purity” of his art, because its ultimate
goal lies in its “deformalization” in order to solve problems rooted in tradi-
tional mathematical objects, that is, discrete and continuous magnitudes. As a
result, the “analytical art” as a whole in Vieta remains distinct from the inno-
vative method of symbolic calculation realized in its logistice speciosa. Likewise,
even in Descartes’s elevation of the “analytical art” to the mathesis universalis,
the true science of the substance of the world understood as “extension,” its
realization of the status proper to the Platonic ideal of a theoretically “pure”
logistic remains elusive. The dual status of “unity” in Descartes’s “analytical
geometry,” as both a “simple idea” (and therefore a formalized concept) and
a common unit of measure (and therefore a determinate concept), together
with his twofold understanding of ‘extension’ as—again, both—a “simple
idea” (and therefore a formalized concept) and the “material” substance of
the world (and therefore a determinate being), prevent his vision of the math-
esis universalis from realizing the Platonic ideal.
In both Vieta and Descartes, the “analytical art” is not understood to
be identical with its method of symbolic calculation, because each operates
with the basic stipulation that the “true” referents of its calculus are homo-
geneous objects in the world. Vieta’s “law of homogeneity” makes this ex-
plicit, while it is implicit in Descartes’s equivocation regarding the nature
belonging to the mode of being of “unity.” It is thus only in Wallis’s mathesis
Conclusion
537

IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
538
universalis, which establishes the identity of the “analytical art” with “sym-
bolic calculation,” that Plato’s vision of a “theoretical” logistic that is “pure,”
that is to say, in which exact mathematical calculations are made without cog-
nitive recourse to sensuously perceived beings in the life-world, is realized.
Wallis’s symbolic reformulation of the “homogeneity” of the object of math-
ematics both establishes this identity and thereby “constitutes,” for the first
time, the realm of “abstract” mathematical objects whose mode of being is
transparently discernible in their sense-perceptible manifestation as symbols.
Klein’s tersely stated observation that the modern (symbolic) solution
to the traditional problem of the “one and many” being of “numbers” suffers
the same fate as Plato’s eidetically numerical solution to it—namely, that by
attributing a numerical being to concepts, it transcends the limits of intelli-
gibility established, for all time, by the logos—is, as we have tried to show, the
problem that drives Husserl’s investigations into the origin of the logic of
symbolic mathematics from the first to the last of his works. We have also
tried to show not only that Husserl’s noble attempt to account for this logic
on the basis of the being of objects whose unity is given in the perceptual life-
world is unsuccessful, and is so on purely systematic grounds, but also that the
purity of these grounds is conditioned by a strand of the historicity of the
conceptuality of the most basic concept of arithmetic, the number, which is
disclosed in one of the three greatest philosophical works of the twentieth
century (and which, nevertheless, remains to this day an all-but-unknown
and unstudied work): Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra.
Coda : Husserl’s “Platonism” in the Context of 
Plato’s Own Platonism
Philosophers of mathematics who attach the term ‘Platonism’ to the thesis
that ideal mathematical objects are independent of the mind are usually quick
to point out that no historical claim about Plato’s philosophy is “necessarily”
attached to this thesis, and with good reason. Husserl’s own embrace of the
term is connected with his “separation” from psychologism, and it is intended
to signal not the independence of the ideal, or, more properly, formalized
truths of “pure” logic from a metaphysical entity called the ‘mind’, but rather
the independence of the cognitive content of such truths from the “psycho-
logical” experience in which Husserl is convinced they must necessarily ap-
pear in order to be grasped. This independence is established on the basis of
the recollective representation of the “numerical” identity that composes the
unity proper to the irreality of the logical content of cognitive meaning as it
is accessed across manifold, psychologically individuated acts.

Both of these versions of “Platonism” depart radically from the “Pla-
tonism” of Plato himself that emerges through Klein’s 1) desedimentation of
the Greek mathematical context of Plato’s philosophy and 2) reactivation
of the “genuinely Platonic” doctrine of ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίdisclosed by Klein’s
location of Aristotle’s polemic against this doctrine within its proper non-
symbolic mathematical context. Plato’s own “Platonism” in this case stems
from neither a theory of mind and mind-independent “ideal” objects nor a
theory of the “constitution” of such objects in temporally discrete acts of a
“subject” (regardless of whether it is conceived of psychologically or tran-
scendentally). On the contrary, the “Platonism” of Plato concerns the mode
of being of the “one over many” unity characteristic of the mathematical
numbers—and all else—with which human thinking (διάνοια) is cognitively
concerned. The specifically “Platonic” concern is to provide an account of
that which is responsible for “delimiting” the unity of a given multitude.
The account is itself rooted in the “supposition” (ὐπόθεσις) that best ac-
counts for the undeniable characteristic of any such unity, namely, its being
“one” in a manner that excludes it from its being also its opposite—being
“many”—and its delimiting capacity, in the exact sense of rendering “deter-
minate” a given multitude from among the “indeterminate” multitude that
composes the condition of not being a unity. 
That the best account supposes a unity that is accessible only to
thought, and therefore is a “noetic” unity, follows from the unlimited divis-
ibility of the unity of sensuously perceived things. That such a unity is non-
mathematical follows from the “impurity” of the “one over many” unity that
is characteristic of numbers, a unity that includes its opposite insofar as it is
at once “one and many.” That this non-mathematical unity is therefore “ei-
detic,” and that it must be supposed in order to account for the unity of any
delimited multitude, follows from the recognition that delimited multi-
tudes, despite their being many, are also precisely “one” and that they are
such in a manner that exceeds their being many and therefore the “unity” for
which the mathematical “monad” (as a one among many ones) can account.
Viewed in the light of Klein’s reactivation of the “genuine Platonic doc-
trine” of unity, Husserl’s “Platonism” assumes a radically different character.
Its locus shifts from the recognition of the need to separate the unity of the
formal logical content of cognition from the unity of cognitive lived experi-
ence, which informs Husserl’s understanding of his own “Platonism,” to that
of the “numerical” mode of being that he posits as constituting the cognitive
re-presentation of the “psychically irreal” logical content of all cognition. As
we have shown, Husserl characterizes the mode of being of this logical con-
tent as “numerically one,” though without providing a constitutive analysis of 
Conclusion
539

its properly “arithmological” being as a unity. That is, he does not say how
the “unity” in question is able to encompass a manifold of temporally dis-
crete acts without its unity being “distributed” in the content of these acts;
rather, he simply asserts that the manifold of these acts “posits” the said unity
as “numerically identical” (i.e., as “one”). 
On the basis of these considerations, we conclude with the following
observations. Aristotle’s denial that, properly speaking, there is any “unity” in
a delimited multitude of things does not address the problem of concern to
both Plato’s and Husserl’s “Platonism”: the irreducibility of the “common
thing” (κοινὸν) responsible for the “collective unity” in such a multitude to
the logical content or relations of its “members.” That is because, for Aris-
totle, this unity is nothing other than the unit of measure that is the subject
of the counting that delimits a given multitude. Thus, for him, the “unity” of
three philosophers is ‘philosopher’. Plato’s eidetic solution to the problem of
unity that both he and Husserl address, namely, the philosophical need to
provide an account of the collective unity responsible for the delimitation of
given multitudes, does not resolve the “logical” problem of the formalized
unity that Husserl sought to separate from psychologism with his self-con-
scious appeal to “Platonic unity.” This problem—namely, the phenomeno-
logical condition of possibility of a concept that is indeterminate while also
being understood to refer, “at the same time,” to individual objects—was first
addressed in the psychological investigations in Philosophy of Arithmetic. That
work formulated the authentic concept of cardinal number as the collective
unity of a multiplicity of arbitrary objects that fall under the generically
empty (and, therefore, formalized) concept of the ‘anything’, and the non-
psychological and therefore “logical” nature of its unity remains, following
Husserl’s simultaneous self-critique of psychologism and embrace of “Pla-
tonism,” unresolved in his subsequent thought. Nor can Plato’s eidetic unity
solve this problem, for, insofar as it has not been formalized, its content is
unsuited to serve as the condition of possibility proper to formalized unity.
Whether modern set theory, which Klein noted in 1932 “first tries to sepa-
rate these two constituents”—namely, 1) the indeterminate and therefore
formalized concept and 2) individual objects—“to clarify what ‘at the same
time’ means,” has managed to resolve or to make “progress” in the direction
of a resolution of this problem is the subject matter for another study. Like-
wise, the subject matter for another study is whether Klein’s desedimenta-
tion of the Greek mathematical context of Plato’s “unwritten doctrine” of
ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοίand his subsequent reactivation of this doctrine itself can
contribute anything to this theory.
IV. e Origination of the Logic of Symbolic Mathematics
540

ἀριθμός, pl. ἀριθμοί: number (Klein
translates this word with the Ger-
man word Anzahl, which means a
number of things, rather than
with Zahl, which is the German
word for number in the modern
sense. See also Part I, n. 9.)
ἀριθμὸς αἰσθητός: sensible number
ἀριθμοὶ εἰδητικοί: eidetic numbers
ἀριθμὸς μαθηματικός: mathematical
number
αἴσθησις: sense perception
αἰσθητόν, pl. αἰσθητά: sensible object
ἀναλογία: proportion
αόριστος δυάς: indeterminate dyad
ἀπόδειξις: demonstration
ἀπορία: impasse (not perplexity)
ἀρχή, pl. ἀρχαί: ruling beginning,
source
ἁρμονία: harmony
ἀφαίρεσις: abstraction
γένος, pl. γένη: genus, family; often: the
highest εἴδη
διάνοια: reckoning, thinking something
through
δύναμις: power
ἕν: one
εἶδος, pl. εἴδη: kind
ἐπιστήμη: knowledge 
ἐξ ἀφαιρέσεως: from abstraction
θάτερον: the other
ἰδέα = εἶδος
καθ᾿αὑτό: by itself
καθόλου: over the whole, universal
κίνησις: motion, change
κοινόν: common thing
κοινωνία: community
κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν: community of εἴδη
λογιστική: logistical art
λογιστικὴ θεωρία: theoretical logistic
λόγος: speech
μέγιστα γένη: greatest kinds
μέθεξις: participation
μάθημα: learning matter
μέτρον: measure
μὴ ὄν: non-being
μέρη: parts
μὴ ὄντα: non-beings
μίμησις: imitation
μονάς, pl. μονάδας: monad, unit
νοητόν, pl. νοητά: intelligible object,
object of thought
ὄν: being
οὐσία: being (Plato), thinghood (Aris-
totle)
πάθη: characteristic, property
πλῆθος: multitude
ποσόν: answer to the question “how
many” 
Glossary of Greek and German Terms
Greek-English

πρὸς ἄλλο: in relation to another
πρός τι: in relation to 
πρώτη φιλοσοφία: first philosophy
σωρός: heap
στάσις: rest
τάξις: order
ταὐτόν: the same
τέχνη: art, skill
ὕλη: material
ὐπόθεσις: supposition
φύσις: nature
χωρισμός: separation
Glossary
542
German-English
Anzahl: cardinal number (defined as the
number used in simple counting
to indicate how many items there
are in an assemblage. See also Part
III, n. 2.)
Anzahlbegriff: cardinal number con-
cept
beliebiges Etwas: arbitrary anything
Einzelfall: instance
Etwas: anything
Etwas überhaupt: anything whatever
faktisch: factical, actual (see Part I, n. 19)
Gesamtheit: totality
Inbegriff: assemblage
irgendein: some or other
kollektive Verbindung: collective com-
bination
kollektives Zumsammengreifen: collec-
tive grasping together
Leistung: accomplishment
Mannigfaltigkeit: multiplicity 
Mannigfaltigkeitslehre: theory of mani-
folds
Mehrheit: plurality
Mehrheitserfassung: grasping of plurality
Mehrheitszeichen: sign(s) of plurality
Menge: multitude, set (after 1895; see
Part IV, n. 60)
Mengenvorstellung: presentation of
multitudes
real: real
Repräsentant: representative
rückgreifendes Erfassen: retrospective
grasping
sachliche: material
Sachverhalt: state of affairs
Sinn: meaning, sense
Sinngebilde: meaning formation, signif-
icant formation
Sinnesgeschichte: meaning-history 
Speilregeln: rules of the game
Vielheit: multiplicity
Vielheitsvorstellung: presentation of
multiplicity
Verbindung: combination
Vorstellung: presentation
wirklich: actual (see Part I, n. 19)
Zahl: number
Zuwendung: regard of advertence

accomplishment: Leistung
actual: faktisch, wirklich
anything whatever: Etwas überhaupt
anything: Etwas
arbitrary anything: beliebiges Etwas
assemblage: Inbegriff
cardinal number: Anzahl (see note
under Anzahl)
cardinal number concept: Anzahlbe-
griff
collective combination: kollektive Ver -
bindung
collective grasping together: kollektives
Zumsammengreifen
combination: Verbindung
factical: faktisch
grasping of plurality: Mehrheitserfas-
sung
instance: Einzelfall
material: sachliche
meaning formation: Sinngebilde (also:
significant formation)
meaning-history: Sinnesgeschichte
meaning: Sinn (also: sense)
multiplicity: Mannigfaltigkeit
multiplicity: Vielheit
multitude: Menge (also: set)
number: Zahl
plurality: Mehrheit
presentation of multiplicity: Vielheits -
vor stellung
presentation of multitudes: Mengen-
vor stellung
presentation: Vorstellung
real: real
regard of advertence: Zuwendung
representative: Repräsentant
retrospective grasping: rückgreifendes
Erfassen
rules of the game: Speilregeln
sense: Sinn (also: meaning)
set (after 1895): Menge (also: multitude;
see Part IV, n. 60)
sign(s) of plurality: Mehrheitszeichen
significant formation: Sinngebilde
(also: meaning formation)
some or other: irgendein
state of affairs: Sachverhalt
theory of manifolds: Mannigfaltigkeits -
lehre
totality: Gesamtheit
Glossary
543
English-German


Bibliography
Conventions of Citation
When a work is cited repeatedly and in uninterrupted succession within the body of
the text, its abbreviation is cited only in the first instance. Page numbers are given
without the abbreviation of the word ‘page’, except where confusion might occur. 
Wherever a work is cited in original and in translation, the page reference to the
text in the original language always precedes that to the work in translation; both page
references are separated by an oblique stroke. In those instances in which a transla-
tion includes the pagination of the original in its margins, only the latter is cited; such
exceptions are indicated in the relevant bibliographic references in the notes and
below. Series of in-text references are self-contained, as it were; footnotes that occur
in the course of those series are autonomous and thus do not require that the abbre-
viation of the text cited within the body of the text be provided again.
Abbreviations of frequently cited works are indicated both in the note in which
the work is first cited and in the list of abbreviations, which precedes the Introduction.
(For the sake of brevity and in keeping with practices in Husserl scholarship, volumes
from Husserl’s collected works in German, Husserliana, are cited, after the first full ref-
erence, as Hua following by roman volume number.)
Translations cited have been consulted but have been modified wherever it has
been deemed necessary and without notice. See the Glossary for key terms and their
translations. While the author’s interventions in quotations are given in square brack-
ets, those by Jacob Klein and Edmund Husserl, in their respective texts, are indicated
by braces. Eva Brann’s additions in her translation of Klein’s Greek Mathematical
Thought and the Origin of Algebra are enclosed in angle brackets, ‘〈〉’. 
Unless otherwise indicated, all cross-references are to the Part in which they
are made. Note numbers are specific to a given Part, whereas section numbers run
consecutively, from the beginning to the end of this study.
§ 1. Works by Edmund Husserl
Aufsätze und Rezensionen (1890–1910). Edited by Bernhard Rang. Husserliana
XXII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1979.
Cartesiansche Meditationen, in Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge. Ed-
ited by S. Strasser. Husserliana I. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1950. Eng-

lish translation: Cartesian Meditations, trans. Dorion Cairns (The Hague: Nijhoff,
1960).
“Das Imaginäre in der Mathematik” (1901), in Philosophie der Arithmetik, 432–52.
Edited by Lothar Eley. Husserliana XII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
1970. English translation: “Double Lecture: On the Transition Through the Im-
possible (‘Imaginary’) and the Completeness of an Axiom System” (Essay III), in The
Philosophy of Arithmetic, trans. Dallas Willard (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003), 409–73.
“Die Frage nach dem Ursprung der Geometrie als intentional-historisches Problem”
[The Question Concerning the Origin of Geometry as an Intentional-Historical
Problem], ed. Eugen Fink, Revue internationale de Philosophie I (1939), 203–25; re-
vised edition (of 1936 text) published as “Beilage III” in Die Krisis der europäischen
Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die
phänomenologische Philosophie, ed. Walter Biemel, Husserliana VI (The Hague: Nij -
hoff, 1954; 2d ed., 1976), 365–86. English translation (of the latter): “The Origin
of Geometry,” in The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology,
trans. David Carr (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1970), 353–78.
NB: Where the deviation between Fink’s edition and Biemel’s precludes reference to
Carr’s translation of the latter, reference will be exclusively to Fink’s text, in which case
all translations will be mine. Exclusive reference to Biemel’s edition and Carr’s trans-
lation of it will signal the absence of the relevant passage in Fink’s edition. To make
these differences more readily perspicuous to the reader, references to the pagination
of Fink’s edition will be immediately preceded by ‘F’, whereas those to the pagination
of Biemel’s edition will be preceded by ‘K’ (i.e. Krisis or Hua VI); the English trans-
lation will be preceded by ‘C’ whenever it is Carr’s. (Note that where at issue is the
main text of the Crisis, it is cited as Crisis with German and English page references,
respectively.) 
Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie.
Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie. Edited by Walter Biemel.
Husserliana VI. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1954; 2d ed., 1976. Eng-
lish translation: The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology,
trans. David Carr (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1970).
Die Krisis der europaischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale Phänomenologie.
Ergänzungsband. Texte aus dem Nachlass 1934–1937. Edited by Reinhold N. Smid.
Husserliana XXIX. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1992.
Early Writings in the Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics. Translated by Dallas
Willard. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
“Entwurf einer ‘Vorrede’ zu den Logischen Untersuchungen (1913).” Edited by Eugen
Fink. Tijdschrift voor Philosophie 1 (1939): 106–33 and 319–39. English translation:
Introduction to the Logical Investigations: A Draft of a Preface to the Logical Investiga-
tions (1913), trans. Philip J. Bossert and Curtis H. Peters (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1975).
Bibliography
546

Erfahrung und Urteil (1939). Revised and edited by Ludwig Landgrebe. Hamburg:
Felix Meiner, 1985. English translation: Experience and Judgment, trans. James S.
Churchill and Karl Ameriks (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1973).
“Ernst Schröder, Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik,” Göttingische gelehrte Anzei -
gen (1891), 243–78 (reprinted in Hua XXII, 3–43). English translation: “Review of
Ernst Schröder’s Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik,” trans. Dallas Willard, in
Early Writings, 52–91.
Formale und transzendentale Logik. Versuch einer Kritik der logischen Vernunft. Ed-
ited by Paul Janssen. Husserliana XVII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
1974. English translation: Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. Dorion Cairns
(The Hague: Nijhoff, 1969).
“Husserl an Stumpf, ca. Februar 1890.” Briefwechsel. Edited by Karl Schuhmann with
Elisabeth Schuhmann. 10 vols. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994. Vol.
I: 157–64. English translation: “Letter from Edmund Husserl to Carl Stumpf,” trans.
Dallas Willard, in Early Writings, 12–19.
Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie. Erstes
Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie. Edited by Karl Schuhmann.
Husserliana III/1–2. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1976. English trans-
lation: Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philos-
ophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology, trans. F. Kersten
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1982).
Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Band: Prolegomena zur reinen Logik. Edited by Elmar
Holenstein. Husserliana XVIII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1975. Eng-
lish translation: Logical Investigations, trans. J. N. Findlay, 2 vols. (New York: Hu-
manities Press, 1970), I: 41–247. 
Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band, Erster Teil: Untersuchungen zur Phänome-
nologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis. Edited by Ursula Panzer. Husserliana XIX/1. The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1984. English translation: Logical Investigations,
trans. J. N. Findlay, 2 vols. (New York: Humanities Press, 1970). NB: The investiga-
tions are referred to collectively as Logical Investigationsor simply Investigationsor in-
dividually by number; quotations are cited as LI followed by German and English
page references, respectively.
“Melchior Palágyi, Der Streit der Psychologisten und Formalisten in der modernen
Logik.” Zeitschrift für Psychologie und Physiologie der Sinnesorgane 31 (1903), 287–
94 (reprinted in HuaXXII, 152–61). English translation: “Review of Melchior Palá-
gyi’s Der Streit der Psychologisten und Formalisten in der modernen Logik,” trans. Dallas
Willard, in Early Writings, 197–206.
“Persönliche Aufzeichnungen.” Edited by Walter Biemel. Philosophy and Phenome-
nological Research 16, no. 3 (March 1956), 293–302. English translation: “Personal
Bibliography
547

Notes,” trans. Dallas Willard, in Early Writings, 490–500. See also “Personal Notes,”
trans. Marcus Brainard, New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Phi-
losophy I (2001): 319–29.
“Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft.” Logos I (1910–11), 289–341. English trans-
lation: “Philosophy as Rigorous Science,” trans. Marcus Brainard, New Yearbook for
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy II (2002), 249–95.
Philosophie der Arithmetik. Edited by Lothar Eley. Husserliana XII. The Hague: Mar-
tinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1970. English translation: The Philosophy of Arithmetic,
trans. Dallas Willard (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003).
Über den Begriff der Zahl. Psychologische Analysen [Habilitationsschrift] (Halle a. d.
Saale: Heynemann’sche Buckdruckerei, 1887), 64 pp. (reprinted in Philosophie der
Arithmetik [Hua XII], 289–338). English translation: On the Concept of Number:
Psychological Analysis, trans. Dallas Willard, in The Philosophy of Arithmetic, 305–56.
“Zur Lehre vom Inbegriff.” Supplemental text in Philosophie der Arithmetik (Hua
XII), 385–407. English translation: “On the Theory of the Totality,” trans. Dallas
Willard, in The Philosophy of Arithmetic, 359–84.
“Zur Logik der Zeichen (Semiotik).” Supplemental text in Philosophie der Arithmetik
(Hua XII), 340–71. English translation: “On the Logic of Signs (Semiotic),” trans.
Dallas Willard, in Early Writings, 20–51.
§ 2. Works by Jacob Klein
“Aristotle (I).” Edited by Burt C. Hopkins. New Yearbook for Phenomenology and
Phenomenological Philosophy III (2003): 295–313.
“Aristotle, an Introduction.” Lectures and Essays, 171–95.
“The Concept of Number in Greek Mathematics and Philosophy.” Lectures and Es-
says, 43–52.
Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Algebra. Translated by Eva Brann.
Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1969; reprint: New York: Dover, 1992. This work
was originally published in German as “Die griechische Logistik und die Entstehung
der Algebra” in Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und
Physik, Abteilung B: Studien, vol. 3, no. 1 (Berlin, 1934), 18–105 (Part I), and ibid.,
no. 2 (1936), 122–235 (Part II).
“Korrespondenz Leo Strauss – Jacob Klein.” In Leo Strauss,Gesammelte SchriftenIII:
Hobbes’ politische Wissenschaft und zugehörige Schriften – Briefe, 455–605. Edited by
Heinrich Meier. Stuttgart: Metzler, 2001.
Lectures and Essays. Edited by Robert B. Williamson and Elliott Zuckerman. An-
napolis, Md.: St. John’s Press, 1985.
Bibliography
548

“Phenomenology and the History of Science.” In Marvin Farber (ed.), Philosophical
Essays in Memory of Edmund Husserl, 143–163. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press, 1940. Reprinted in Klein, Lectures and Essays, 65–84. (All citations from
this text reflect the pagination of the reprinted version.)
“Selected Letters from Jacob Klein to Gerhard Krüger, 1929–1933.” Edited and trans-
lated by Emmanuel Patard. New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological
Philosophy VI (2006), 308–29 (German/English).
“Speech, Its Strength and Its Weaknesses.” Lectures and Essays, 361–74.
“The World of Physics and the ‘Natural’ World.” Translated by David R. Lachterman.
Lectures and Essays, 1–34.
§ 3. Works by Others
Adler, Pierre. “Prolegomena to Phenomenology: Intuition or Argument?” Graduate
Faculty Philosophy Journal 16 (1992): 3–76.
Bachelard, Suzanne. A Study of Husserl’s ‘Formal and Transcendental Logic’. Trans-
lated by Lester Embree (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1968).
Bell, David. Husserl. London: Routledge, 1991.
Bernet, Rudolf, Iso Kern, and Eduard Marbach. An Introduction to Husserlian Phe-
nomenology. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1993.
Biemel, Walter. “Die entscheidenden Phasen in Husserls Philosophie,” Zeitschrift für
philosophische Forschung 13 (1959): 187–213. English translation: “The De-
velopment of Husserl’s Phenomenology,” in R. O. Elveton (ed. and trans.),
The Phenomenology of Husserl: Selected Critical Readings (Seattle: Noesis
Press, 2d ed., 2000), 140–63.
Brainard, Marcus. Belief and its Neutralization: Husserl’s System of Phenomenology
in ‘Ideas I’. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 2002.
Carr, David. Phenomenology and the Problem of History. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern
University Press, 1974.
Caton, Hiram. The Origins of Subjectivity. New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press,
1973.
———. “Review of Jacob Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Al-
gebra.” Studi Internationali di Filosofia 3 (1971): 222–26.
Centrone, Stefania. Logic and the Philosophy of Mathematics in the Early Husserl.
Dordrecht: Springer, 2010.
Cosgrove, Joseph. “Husserl, Jacob Klein, and Symbolic Nature.” Graduate Faculty Jour-
nal 29, no. 1 (2008): 227–51.
Bibliography
549

Drummond, John. “The Logical Investigations: Paving the Way to a Transcendental
Logic.” In Dan Zahavi and Frederik Stjernfelt (eds.), One Hundred Years of
Phenomenology, 31–40. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
Frege, Gottlob. “Rezension von: E. G. Husserl, Philosophie der Arithmetik. I,” Zeit -
schrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik n.s. 103 (1894): 313–32
(reprinted in G. F., Kleine Schriften, ed. Ignacio Angelelli [Hildesheim: Olms,
2d ed., 1990], 179–92). English translation: “Review of Dr. E. Husserl’s Phi-
losophy of Arithmetic,” trans. E. W. Kluge, in Frederick A. Elliston and Peter
McCormick (eds.), Husserl: Expositions and Appraisals (Notre Dame, Ind.:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1977), 314–24.
Funke, Gerhard. “Phenomenology and History.” Translated by Roy O. Elveton. In
Maurice Natanson (ed.), Phenomenology and the Social Sciences, II: 3–101.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1973.
Gethmann, Carl-Friedrich. “Hermeneutische Phänomenologie und Logischer Intu-
itionismus.” In Annemarie Gethmann-Siefert and Jürgen Mittelstraß (eds.),
Die Philosophie und die Wissenschaften. Zum Werk Oskar Beckers, 109–28.
Munich: Fink, 2001. English translation: “Hermeneutical Phenomenology
and Logical Intuitionism: On Oskar Becker’s Mathematical Existence,” trans.
Marcus Brainard, New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological
Philosophy III (2003): 143–60.
Gibson, W. R. Boyce. “From Husserl to Heidegger: Excerpts from a 1928 Diary by
W. R. Boyce Gibson.” Edited by Herbert Spiegelberg. Journal of the British
Society for Phenomenology 2 (1971): 58–81.
Gonda, Joseph. “On Jacob Klein’s Greek Mathematical Thought and the Origin of Al-
gebra.” Interpretation 22, no. 1 (1994): 111–28.
Heath, Thomas. A History of Greek Mathematics (1921). 2 vols. New York: Dover,
1981.
Hopkins, Burt. “Crisis, History, and Husserl’s Phenomenological Project of Desedi-
menting the Formalization of Meaning: Jacob Klein’s Contribution.” Gradu-
ate Faculty Journal 24, no. 1 (2003): 75–102.
———. “The Husserlian Context of Klein’s Mathematical Work.” The St. John’s Re-
view 48 (2004): 43–71. 
———. “Klein and Derrida on the Historicity of Meaning and the Meaning of His-
toricity in Husserl’s Crisis-Texts.” Journal of the British Society for Phenome-
nology 36, no. 2 (2005): 179–87.
———. “Meaning and Truth in Klein’s Philosophico-Mathematical Writings.” The
St. John’s Review 48, no. 3 (2005): 57–87.
———. “Husserl’s Psychologism, and Critique of Psychologism, Revisited.” Husserl
Studies 22 (2006): 91–119.
Bibliography
550

———. “Eva Brann and the Philosophical Achievement of Jacob Klein.” In Eric
Salem and Peter Kalkavage (eds.), Essays in Honor of Eva Brann, 106–19.
Philadelphia: Paul Dry Books, 2007.
———. “On the Origin of the ‘Language’ of Formal Mathematics: An Intentional-
Historical Investigation of the Discovery of the Formal.” In Filip Mattens
(ed.), Meaning and Language: Phenomenological Perspectives, 149–68. Dor-
drecht: Springer, 2008.
———. “Jacob Klein on the Myth of Learning.” The St. John’s Review51 (2009): 5–39.
Ierna, Carlo. “The Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy, Part 1: From Über den Be-
griff der Zahl to Philosophie der Arithmetik.” New Yearbook for Phenomenology
and Phenomenological Philosophy V (2005): 1–56.
———. “The Beginnings of Husserl’s Philosophy. Part 2: Philosophical and Math-
ematical Background.” New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenolog-
ical Philosophy VI (2006): 33–81.
Kates, Joshua. “Modernity and Intentional History: Edmund Husserl, Jacob Klein,
and Jacques Derrida.” Philosophy Today 49, no. 5 (2005): 193–203.
———. “Two Versions of Husserl’s Late History: Jacob Klein and Jacques Derrida
and the Problems of Modernity.” New Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phe-
nomenological Philosophy V (2005): 245–75.
Kennington, Richard. Review of J. Klein, Lectures and Essays. Review of Metaphysics
41 (1987): 144–49.
Knorr, Wilbur Richard. The Evolution of the Euclidean Elements. Dordrecht: Rei-
del Publishing Company, 1975.
Lachterman, David. Rev. of Klein, Jacob, Plato’s Trilogy: Theaetetus, The Sophist,
and The Statesman. Nous 13 (1979): 106–12.
Landgrebe, Ludwig. “A Meditation on Husserl’s Statement: ‘History is the Grand
Fact of Absolute Being’.” Southern Journal of Philosophy 5 (1974): 111–25.
Lohmar, Dieter. “On the Relation of Mathematical Objects to Time: Are Mathe-
matical Objects Timeless, Overtemporal or Omnitemporal?” Journal of In-
dian Council of Philosophical Research X (1993): 73–87.
———. “Zu der Entstehung und den Ausgangsmaterialien von Edmund Husserls
Werk Erfahrung und Urteil.” Husserl Studies 13 (1996): 31–71.
———. Edmund Husserl’s ‘Formale und Transcendentale Logik’. Darmstadt: Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2000. 
———. “Husserl’s Concept of Categorial Intuition.” In Dan Zahavi and Frederik
Stjernfelt (eds.), One Hundred Years of Phenomenology, 125–45. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
Bibliography
551

Mahoney, Michael S. “The Beginnings of Algebraic Thought in the Seventeenth
Century.” In Stephen Gaukroger (ed.), Descartes: Philosophy, Mathematics
and Physics, 141–55. Brighton: Harvester, 1980.
Miller, J. Philip. Numbers in Presence and Absence: A Study of Husserl’s Philosophy of
Mathematics. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1982.
Mohanty, J. N. “Husserl and Frege: A New Look at their Relationship.” Research in
Phenomenology 4 (1974): 51–62.
Page, Carl. “Symbolic Mathematics and the Intellect Militant: On Modern Philoso-
phy’s Revolutionary Spirit.” Journal of the History of Ideas 57 (1996): 233–53.
O’Neill, John. Worlds without Content: Against Formalism. London: Routledge, 1991.
Orth, Ernst Wolfgang. Edmund Husserls ‘Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und
die transzendentale Phänomenologie’. Vernunft und Kultur. Darmstadt: Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2001.
Rosen, Stanley. Plato’s Sophist. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1983.
Smith, Barry. “Logic and Formal Ontology.” In J. N. Mohanty and William R.
McKenna (eds.), Husserl’s Phenomenology: A Textbook, 29–67. Washington
D.C.: Center for Advance Research in Phenomenology and University Press
of America, 1989.
Sokolowski, Robert. Husserlian Meditations. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern Univer-
sity Press, 1974.
———. “Review of Dieter Lohmar, Edmund Husserls ‘Formale und transzendentale
Logik’.” Husserl Studies 18 (2002): 233–43.
Stone, Abraham D. “Comments on Burt Hopkins’ Paper.” Paper presented at the
35th Annual Husserl Circle meeting, University College, Dublin, June 2005.
Strauss, Leo. “An Unspoken Prologue to a Public Lecture at St. John’s [In Honor of
Jacob Klein, 1899–1978].” Interpretation 7 (1978): 1–3.
Wiegand, Olav. “Phenomenological-Semantic Investigations into Incompleteness.” In
O. K. Wiegand et al. (eds.), Phenomenology on Kant, German Idealism, Her -
meneutics and Logic, 101–32. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000.
Willard, Dallas. “Husserl on a Logic that Failed.” Philosophical Review 89 (1980):
46–64.
———. Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge. Athens: Ohio University, 1984.
———. “Review of J. P. Miller, Numbers in Presence and Absence.” Husserl Studies 1
(1984): 124–30.
Bibliography
552

Aristotle  xii, n3, 28n25, 81–82, 97–98,
152–53, 176–77, 179–80, 183,
187–90, 198–99, 201, 203, 206–
7, 208n72, 208–10, 211n75,
213, 217n80, 218, 222, 225–38,
235 n85, 259–63, 338, 340–41,
342 n30, 348–52, 354–61, 435–
36 n91, 436, 437n92, 508, 522,
523 n177, 524–25, 539–40
Barocius, Franciscus  58, 264–65
Becker, Oskar  307n166
Bell, David  126n29, 135n33
Bernet, Rudolf  135n33
Brann, Eva  20, 80n7, 96n8, 312n172
Caton, Hiram  16, 16n6, 20–23, 22n17,
23n18, 63, 71, 285n146, 286–87
n147–48, 301n162
Cantor, Georg  368n60
Centrone, Stefania  427n88
Derrida, Jacques  15n2, 71n4 
Descartes, René  vii–viii, ix, x, xi, 6, 19–
21, 55, 57–60, 63, 69, 80, 93, 98,
108, 151n42, 238, 241, 252, 256
n106, 261, 264–67, 267n127, 268
n130, 278n138, 299n161, 301,
301n162, 302–12, 307n165, 313
n173, 314–16, 324–25n185, 326
n187, 331, 492, 492n137, 493,
499–504, 508–10, 510n163, 537
Diophantus  58–59, 76, 82, 95, 98, 152–
53, 157, 169, 174–76, 185, 227,
236–53, 256, 258, 260–61, 268–
70, 272–76, 279–81, 287, 287
n148, 289n150, 293, 295, 494–
96, 518, 520, 537
Domninus  162, 165–69, 165n53, 179,
235
Drummond, John  397–98n76, 457–58
n118
Euclid  ix–x, 58, 59n51, 82, 165, 173,
179, 235, 238, 243, 259, 263–65,
270–71, 271n134, 281–82, 309,
323–324, 326, 500, 505, 510
Eustachius a Sancto Paulo  21, 311–12
Farber, Marvin  61–62n53
Fink, Eugen  7, 13n1, 26n21, 63
Frege, Gottlob  106, 106n3, 107–8, 121,
126n29, 500, 500n179
Galileo  6, 19, 49, 55–57, 60, 80, 86, 90–
92, 239, 533
Gethmann, Carl-Friedrich  383n66, 486
n135
Gonda, Joseph  287n148
Heath, Thomas  245n92, 247n97
Husserl, Gerhart  62n53, 70n3
Ierna, Carlo  106n2, 139n34
Kates, Joshua  15n2
Kennington, Richard  77n6, 313n173
Klein, Else (Dodo)  62n53, 70n3
Knorr, Wilbur R.  96–97n9, 163n52
Index of Names

Krüger, Gerhard  77n6, 199n71, 207n72
Lachterman, David  218n81
Landgrebe, Ludwig  27n23, 45n39, 368
n59, 421n85
Leibniz, Gottfried  56, 144n39, 492n137,
330, 369–70, 390, 436, 441, 492
n137, 512
Lohmar, Dieter  368n59, 394n74, 421
n85, 423–24n86, 430n90, 536
n91, 443n102, 447n107, 449
n109, 452n114, 456–57n118,
471–72, 472n126 
Miller, J. Phillip  100, 100n11, 105n1, 106
n2, 107n7, 108n9, 109n10, 114
n15, 117–18n21, 124n26, 125
n28, 131–32n32 
Mohanty, J. N.  107–8, 107n7
Natorp, Paul  194, 389n70
Nicomachus of Gerasa  162–164, 166,
182, 235 
O’Neill, John  287n148, 290–92n153
Page, Carl  287n148
Pappus  59n51, 82, 168n55, 245, 264, 269
–73, 270n132, 277, 278n138, 518
Plato  vii, x, 10, 41n34, 151–53, 155,
155n46, 157–66, 168–71, 168
n55, 170n56, 173, 175–76, 178–
79, 181–86, 181n62, 183n64, 189–
93, 195–201, 199n71, 203–6,
207–8n72, 208–10, 210–12n75,
213, 215–17, 218n81, 220–21
n82, 221, 223–24, 228, 230–32,
237, 257, 261n122, 264, 266–
67, 270, 270n131, 271n134, 338,
340–43, 342n30, 346, 348–51,
354–58, 361, 389, 473n128, 475,
523n177, 535–36, 538–40 
Proclus  58, 155n46, 172n57, 259–65,
259n116, 269, 271, 281
Rodet, Léon  252, 252n101
Rosen, Stanley  210–12n75
Rosenberg, Elisabeth (née Husserl)  70n3
Smith, Barry  394n74, 409–10n83
Sokolowski, Robert  117n21, 394n74,
436n91, 438n94, 442n99, 443
n102, 447n107, 452n114, 456–
59n118, 462–63n120
Stenzel, Julius  307n166
Stevin, Simon  21, 56, 59–60, 80, 98, 238,
241, 252–53, 256n107, 293–301,
301n162, 303, 305, 310, 320, 330,
492–93, 497–99, 501, 504–5, 508
Stone, Abraham  415n85, 418–420n85
Strauss, Leo  16, 16n7, 62
Stumpf, Carl  106n2, 108n8, 112n12,
139n31, 143n38, 144n39
Theon of Smyrna  162–66, 162n50, 171–
72, 182, 188, 270, 277
Vieta, François  viii, ixn1, 5–6, 8, 69,
76–77, 92, 94–95, 98, 108, 151–
53, 174, 189, 237–38, 240–41,
247, 252–55, 255n106, 256n107,
258, 260, 260n119, 261–62, 264–
70, 272, 274–86, 282n140, 278
nn136–138, 282n140, 285–87
nn145–48, 288–90, 289n150,
290–92nn152–53, 292–94, 309–
10, 320–22, 322n184, 325nn185
–86, 331, 436, 492–97, 501, 504–
6, 508–9, 517–22, 524–37
Wallis, John  vii, 6, 59, 98, 316–326,
316nn175–76, 324–25n185, 326
n187, 492–93, 504–8, 538
Wiegand, Olav  435n91, 447n107, 459
n118
Willard, Dallas  105n1, 107, 107n6, 108,
108n8, 109n10, 110n11, 114n15,
125n28, 132n32, 135n33, 139–
40n35
Zuckerman, Elliot  62n53
Index of Names
554

abstraction  72; (in Husserl) 119, 121,
125, 131n32, 330, 339, 355, 357,
371, 391, 396–97, 399–400, 408,
508–9, 524, 525n179, 526–33 
ἀφαίρεσις (Aristotelian)  9, 61, 226,
228–229, 246, 307, 349, 351, 522,
524–25
symbolic  xi n3, xii, 19, 21, 57–63,
98, 241, 255, 302, 306–12, 306
n165, 323, 503, 509, 531–32,
534–35
algebra  92, 98, 332, 364–65, 373, 376,
379–80, 382–83, 431, 485, 87,
532; (origin of ), ix n1, 15, 75–
76, 436, 494, 500–11, 517–531
algebraization  485, 487, 489–90, 515 
analysis  ix n1, 59n51, 92, 153, 262, 264,
266, 269–81, 370, 380, 436, 438,
441, 494–96, 512, 519–21 
analytical art  ix n1, 254–55, 267, 277,
280, 284, 310, 494–95, 501, 504,
510–11, 514, 520–21, 524–27,
529–35, 537
anything (Etwas)  100, 110, 116, 339,
341, 354–59, 361, 361n52, 369,
406–7, 409, 426–27, 485, 525,
540
anything whatever (Etwas überhaupt)  86,
370–71, 377, 384–85, 389–90,
400, 428–30, 432, 434–35, 438–
39, 441–43, 450n111, 464, 475,
477, 480, 489–90, 515–17, 525–
26, 532–33 
arithmetic  300, 319; (Greek) 96, 154–
66, 170, 172–73, 175, 178, 181–
84, 186, 210, 221, 234, 242, 246,
252, 266–67, 269, 272; (in
Husserl) 111–15, 112n12
arithmos See ‘number’
assemblage  105n1, 109–10, 112, 119,
133, 181–84, 207–8, 213, 230,
338, 350–51, 356, 413–14, 419
n85
being, beings  187, 190, 192, 196–97,
203–6, 210, 214–17, 218n81,
263, 297, 304–5, 316, 491, 493,
498, 503–4, 509, 516, 522; 525,
533–34, 537–38; (of arithmos)
153, 176, 198–99, 201, 204, 228–
29, 231, 235, 242, 246, 331–32n5,
337, 341–44; 348; (of mathe-
matical objects) 154, 178, 185,
198, 226, 230, 255–56, 286, 297,
318, 326; (of monads) 153, 180,
234, 340, 343, 360–61, 491–92,
524, 526
cardinal number  See ‘number’
change (κίνησις)  205–6, 214–17, 224
collective combination  119–21, 124–25,
131–33n32, 338–39, 355, 360,
368, 407–8, 411, 414, 420n85,
429, 472
Index of Subjects

common thing (κοινὸν)  199–201, 205,
226, 231–33, 261n122, 309, 343–
44, 346–47, 350–51, 501, 540
community (κοινωνία)  199, 206–7, 213–
17, 219 
community of kinds (κοινωνία τῶν εἰδῶν)
199–200, 206, 207–8n72, 210–
12n75, 218n81, 220 
conceptuality  vii, viii, 4, 22, 80n7, 151–
52, 238, 240, 242, 258, 260, 269,
282, 312, 331, 504, 508, 524–25,
533, 538
constitution  30, 36n32, 37–40, 124n27;
(of historicity) 49; (of identical
object) 35; (of sedimented his-
tory) 33; (transcendental) 35, 46
desedimentation  viii, xii, 71, 71n4, 83, 90,
94, 97–98, 180, 198, 269, 329–
30, 492, 508, 539–40
eidos 31, 58; (εἶδος, εἴδη) xi, 156, 166–
67, 181n62, 182, 184, 189, 199,
207, 209, 213, 222, 231, 234, 242,
244, 250–53, 255–56, 269, 276–
77, 281–82, 286, 288, 351, 493–
94, 518, 522, 523n177, 524
equation  xi, ix n1, 113n12, 130n31, 144,
152, 241, 247, 250, 255n106,
266, 273–74, 277–79, 281–86,
308, 314–15, 321, 330, 494–96,
500, 506, 518
formalization  15n2, 19, 57, 60, 63, 69–
74, 86, 92–93, 100–1, 108, 115
n17, 329–31, 341, 371, 375, 380,
384, 391, 399, 401, 401n77, 428–
29, 432–33, 435–36n91, 436, 437
n92, 438, 448n108, 475–76n130,
480, 484–85, 490, 513–15, 518–
19, 530–36
formula  27, 58–60, 92–93, 130, 137,
140, 329, 374, 516 
fractions  112, 168, 171–72, 236, 246,
251, 293, 323, 331n5, 506
genos (γένος)  201, 207, 207–8n72, 214–
15, 223, 230, 343–47, 350–51,
406, 522, 533
geometry  ix, 6, 19, 89–92, 154, 202, 213
n78, 272, 274–75, 282, 301, 308–
10, 319–320, 326, 493–97, 499–
500, 504–5, 520, 534; (origin of)
46–50, 90–92
greatest kinds (μέγιστα γένη)  214, 267
heap (σωρός) (in Husserl) 124, 231–32,
351, 356, 359–60, 523n177
historical apriori  18, 24, 43, 51–54, 84–
85
history  viii, 7, 17, 24–25, 27, 29, 34–35,
38–39, 41, 51; (actual) 26–27,
42–47, 50, 53, 55, 60–61, 68, 85,
100, 331; (and epistemology)18,
27, 51, 69n1, 85; (intentional) ix,
7; 5, 25, 25n21, 26, 36–39, 41–
46, 51, 55, 68; (phenomenologi-
cal problem of ) 14, 15, 15n2, 20,
24–27 
historicity  7, 17, 42, 67–69, 331, 538
historicism  7, 14, 17, 24, 29, 38, 44, 53,
68, 83 
homogeneity  180–81, 212n75, 283–
84, 291n152, 321–22, 324–26,
345, 347, 351, 358, 395, 427, 497,
505–6, 510, 537–38
ideation  393, 396–97, 399–400, 408,
431, 513 
image  196, 201–3, 206, 216–17, 220–
21n82, 222–24, 223n83, 303,
306–7, 307–8n165, 315–16, 500,
502–3, 510, 510n163, 527–28,
527–28n181
imagination, xii, 303–8, 306–7n165,
311–15, 501–3, 508–9, 527–28,
527–28n181
imitation (μίμησις)  187, 198, 202, 212,
213n78, 223–24 
Index of Subjects
556

intelligible objects (νοητόν, νοητά)  154,
191–92, 194, 196–97, 204, 209,
213, 355, 534
indeterminate dyad (αόριστος δυάς)  201–
2, 217, 217n80, 218n81, 219–20 
intentionality  7, 20–21, 21n13, 25, 28
n25, 30, 32, 42, 117n21, 123, 127,
398n76, 403, 468, 482, 522, 527
first and second intentions  286, 286–
88n148, 297, 311–12, 313n173,
507–10, 510n163
intuition  18, 59, 109, 124–25, 129, 180,
307, 307n167, 403, 476, 480,
516; (of collection) 405, 409–10,
429, 431–32; (eidetic) 401n77,
472, 514
categorial  131–32n32, 363, 367–
68, 393–94, 393–94n74, 396–97,
397–98n76, 401, 423n86, 448
n108, 449, 529–30
knowledge  45, 50, 58; (ἐπιστήμη) 45,
160, 183, 196, 217, 229, 239, 259,
341–42, 344, 348–49, 352; (in-
tuitive) 89, 388–90, 423–24n86,
513, 536
life-world  86–87, 92, 93, 329, 511, 516–
517, 533–37; (prescientific) 10,
90–91, 518, 531, 534
logic  xii, 3, 8–9, 34, 36n32, 63, 108,
110, 119, 121–23, 127, 359, 363–
65; (formal) 86, 145, 364, 372,
374, 376, 390, 435–36n91, 438,
447, 491–92, 518; (pure) 367–
69, 383, 389–90, 399–400, 512;
(of symbolic mathematics) 69–71,
73–74, 99–102, 111–12, 113n12,
114n15, 118, 124, 128–29, 135
n33, 138–39, 139n35, 142, 146,
150, 280, 330, 332–33, 354, 366,
378–80, 382, 384, 435n9, 491,
510–16, 530, 533 
logistical art (λογιστική)  58, 151, 155–
58, 160, 166–67, 169, 173, 175,
183, 194n68, 221–22, 224, 241,
243, 252, 507, 535–36; (logistice
speciosa) 493, 497, 504, 511, 520,
525, 531–32, 534, 537; (theoret-
ical logistic, λογιστικὴ θεωρία) 98,
153, 160–62, 167–168, 170,
172, 178, 181, 184, 186, 191,
210, 236, 537–38
logos  See ‘speech’
manifold  134, 194, 370, 390n72, 391,
442, 469, 471, 512, 540; (theory
of ) 380, 438–39, 439n95, 440–
41, 442n99, 443, 443n102, 512–
13, 518 
material (ὕλη)  (of arithmoi) 156–17,
162, 175–76, 326, 523
mathesis universalis 56–60, 69, 74, 86–
87, 92–93, 254, 262, 264–66, 301
–2, 307–8, 310–11, 314–16, 330,
363, 369–70, 377, 385, 399, 434,
438, 441, 444, 492–93, 499, 501,
504, 512–13, 515, 517, 519, 531,
537–38 
mathematization  8, 91–93, 354, 511,
516–517, 533, 534
multitude  4, 99–100, 119, 122–24, 133,
142, 149, 155, 157–58, 169, 176–
77, 179, 195, 224, 235, 248, 251,
297, 304, 331n5, 334, 335n17,
338, 341, 343–48, 351–52, 387,
404, 422, 429, 471, 498, 500, 508,
519–20, 522, 533; (eidetic) 224,
360; (symbolization of) 127–29,
306, 309, 312, 318, 333, 500–3,
528
multiplicity  5, 100, 231, 338, 334, 336,
339, 355, 423–24n86, 442n99,
443n102, 456, 473, 477, 530,
533, 540
non-being (μὴ ὄν)  197, 201–4, 206, 214,
217
Index of Subjects
557

number, numbers  4, 19, 59; (sedimented
understanding of ) 56–57
Anzahl xii, 96n8, 105, 105n1, 331n5
ἀριθμός, ἀριθμοί  xi, xi n4, 5, 96n8
cardinal number  99, 105, 106n2,
110, 120, 121, 129, 131–32n32,
139, 142, 512, 540
eidetic number (ἀριθμὸς εἰδητικός)
198–99, 201, 204, 206–7, 209–
10, 210–12n75, 213–14, 219–20,
223–24, 230, 266, 346, 360, 539
mathematical number (ἀριθμὸς μαθη -
ματικός)  207–9, 213, 215, 219,
220n82, 356, 360, 539
sensible number (ἀριθμὸς αἰσθητός)
188, 190, 209, 212–13 
symbolic  xi, xii, 4, 60, 96n8, 99, 101,
109, 115, 127–28, 135n33, 138–
39, 139n34, 139–40n35, 149–
52, 215n79, 238, 254–56, 266
n124, 285, 288, 290, 296–97,
310, 317–18, 322, 324–26, 487,
491–94, 98, 506, 508–9, 511
Zahl xii, 96, 105n1, 331n5
one  120, 146, 182, 215, 219, 236, 309,
318, 335, 338–40, 343–44, 344
n35, 345–52, 354–61, 425–26,
445n103, 494, 497–48, 502–5,
509, 521–22, 523n177, 524–26,
326n187, 528, 533, 536, 535–40
eidetic  10, 347n41, 360
and many  4, 96, 177, 179, 182, 193,
195, 197, 200, 203, 206, 219,
222–23, 318, 343, 345–46, 350,
354, 356, 358–60, 472, 473n128,
533–34, 536, 538–39
mathematical  110, 119–20, 130n30,
347n41
monad (μονάς, μονάδας)  152–53,
176, 179, 181–85, 188, 190, 204,
207–8, 213–16, 224–27, 229–
33, 236, 242, 244, 251, 282–83,
296, 318, 340, 342–44, 346, 350–
51, 355, 361, 492–93, 495–97,
526, 533, 539
One Itself, 195, 204, 219–20, 221–
22n82, 347, 355–56
ontology  184–85, 297, 385, 436, 525;
(formal) 36n32, 73–74, 92–93,
369–70, 374n62, 377, 390, 434,
436–37, 439, 447–49, 461, 462–
64n120, 492, 515, 525
Other, the (θάτερον)  216–17, 219
participation (μέθεξις)  198, 199n71, 200,
206, 207–8n72, 212, 223–24,
470, 473
psychologism  10, 29, 31, 38, 42, 83,
362–63, 367–69, 388, 397–98
n76, 421, 426, 430, 433, 443n102,
465–68, 465n122, 470–71, 474,
538, 540 
reactivation  viii, 7, 18–19, 37–38, 44–
45, 51, 54, 57, 63, 180, 198, 209,
220, 237, 269, 330, 492, 508,
518, 539
ratio and proportion  (ἀναλογία) 19, 58,
61, 163n52, 323, 330, 494, 496,
500–1, 504–7, 510–11
reflection  (historical) 7, 15n2, 18, 55–
56, 68, 82, 95, 98, 237, 448, 459
n118, 471, 509
reflexion  121, 338–39, 355, 359, 385–
386, 395, 400, 402, 405–6, 423,
448, 458–59n108 
relation, (by itself, καθ᾿αὑτό) 162–64,
166–67, 169, 260, 278; (in rela-
tion to, πρός τι) 163, 177; (in re-
lation to another πρὸς ἄλλο) 162
–64, 166–67, 169
rest (στάσις)  205–6, 214–17, 224
Index of Subjects
558

ruling beginning, source (ἀρχή)  177,
180, 182, 202, 217, 298, 186, 340,
348, 497–98, 523n177, 536
Same, the (ταὐτόν)  216–17, 219
sedimentation  25, 28, 35, 43, 45, 48–49,
50n45, 51–52, 55–57, 61, 67–68,
90, 93, 257–58, 317–318, 330,
516, 533
separation (χωρισμός)  153, 225–26, 230,
232, 236, 350, 522–23 
set  363, 368, 368n60, 370, 380, 384,
386, 391, 412–15, 415–21n85,
422, 423–24n86, 438–39, 443
n102, 445, 462, 463n120, 464,
492, 513, 529–30, 540
species  200, 212, 320, 325, 526, 537
in Husserl  109–10, 128–29, 131–33
n32, 336, 338, 396, 397–98n76,
399, 406–9, 409–11n83, 432, 465
–66, 469–70 
in Vieta  58–59, 255–56, 261, 267,
275–78, 282–87, 289–90, 310,
493, 497, 504, 519–24, 534
speech (λόγος)  197, 201, 208, 214–16,
219, 223, 228, 256–57, 266–67,
538
synthesis  262, 264, 266, 269–81, 397,
404, 414, 415–20n85, 468–69,
494–95
symbol  xi, xi n3, 19, 138, 285–86, 312,
322, 509 
time  24, 29; (historical) 53, 53n47; (nat-
ural) 24, 26, 29–30, 34–35, 41–
42; (phenomenological) 30, 39,
42; (time-consciousness) 33n31
unity  6, 8–10, 33–35, 39, 41–42, 45,
96, 100–11, 118–19, 121, 125,
126n29, 131n32, 138, 177, 184,
200, 204, 206, 208, 213, 219–20,
223, 230–33, 235n85, 304, 322,
335, 337–38, 343–47, 350, 354–
60, 370, 386, 389, 391, 400, 402–
4, 492–93, 502, 521–30, 523
n177, 533–35, 537–40
Index of Subjects
559


