The Joy of Finite Mathematics
The Language and Art of Math

The Joy of Finite
Mathematics
The Language and Art of Math
Chris Tsokos
University of South Florida,
Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
Tampa, FL 33620
Rebecca Wooten
The Pedagogue, LLC,
Developing Educational Materials,
Tampa, FL
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON
NEW YORK • OXFORD • PARIS • SAN DIEGO
SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier

Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier
125 London Wall, London, EC2Y 5AS, UK
525 B Street, Suite 1800, San Diego, CA 92101–4495, USA
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford OX5 1GB, UK
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s
permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright
Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright
by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional
practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge
in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments
described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their
own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional
responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors,
or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a
matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of
any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
ISBN: 978-0-12-802967-1
For information on all Academic Press publications
visit our website at http://store.elsevier.com/

Dedications
“We think faster than we speak and speak faster than we write; therefore,
when creating great things we abbreviate everything. This abbreviated
language is called Math.”
RDW
This text is dedicated to my wife Debbie and my children Matthew,
Jonathan and Maria.
Chris P. Tsokos
This text is dedicated to my husband Dana Miller, and all my family.
Rebecca D. Wooten

About the Authors
Chris P. Tsokos is Distinguished University Professor of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of South Florida.
Dr. Tsokos received his B.S. in Engineering Sciences/Mathematics, his M.A. in Mathematics from the University of Rhode
Island, and his Ph.D. in Statistics and Probability from the University of Connecticut. Professor Tsokos has also served on the
faculties at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University and the University of Rhode Island.
Dr. Tsokos’ research has extended into a variety of areas, including stochastic systems, statistical models, reliability
analysis, ecological systems, operations research, time series, Bayesian analysis, and mathematical and statistical modeling
of global warming, both parametric and nonparametric survival analysis, among others. He is the author of more than 300
research publications in these areas.
For the past four years Professor Tsokos’ research efforts have been focused on developing probabilistic models, para-
metric and nonparametric statistical models for cancer and GLOBAL WARMING data. Specifically, his research aims are
data driven and are oriented toward understanding the behavior of breast, lung, brain, and colon cancers. Information on the
subject matter can be found on his website.
Professor Tsokos has more than 300 publications in his research areas of interest. He is the author of several research
monographs and books, including Random Integral Equations with Applications to Life Sciences and Engineering, Prob-
ability Distribution: An Introduction to Probability Theory with Applications, Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with
Applications, Probability with the Essential Analysis, Applied Probability Bayesian Statistical Methods with Applications
to Reliability, and Mathematical Statistics with Applications, among others.
Dr. Tsokos is the recipient of many distinguished awards and honors, including Fellow of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation, USF Distinguished Scholar Award, Sigma Xi Outstanding Research Award, USF Outstanding Undergraduate
Teaching Award, USF Professional Excellence Award, URI Alumni Excellence Award in Science and Technology, Pi
Mu Epsilon, election to the International Statistical Institute, Sigma Pi Sigma, USF Teaching Incentive Program, and several
humanitarian and philanthropic recognitions and awards.
Professor Tsokos is a member of several academic and professional societies. He is serving as Honorary Editor, Chief-
Editor, Editor or Associate Editor of more than twelve academic research journals.
Rebecca D. Wooten is Assistant Professor of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of South Florida. She received her
M.A./B.A. in Mathematics and her Ph.D. in Statistics from the University of South Florida. She has worked for 15 years in
teaching and has been recognized for her excellence in teaching; teaching courses such as Liberal Arts Math, Finite Math-
ematics, Basic Statistics, Introduction to Statistics, and Applied Statistics Methods.
Her research interests are concentrated in Applied Statistics with emphasis on Environmental Studies. Her research pub-
lications span a variety of areas such as Global Warming (carbon dioxide and temperature), Atmospheric Sciences and
Geography (hurricanes), Geology (volcanic ash fall), Marine Biology (red tide), among others.
Professor Wooten is extensively involved in activities to improve education not only in Mathematics and Statistics, but
Education in general. She is the Academic Coordinator for two free-educational assistance program which offer opportu-
nities for students to volunteer and the local community to get the assistance in their studies that they would otherwise be
unable to afford.
xi

Preface
This book has been written to present certain aspects of modern finite mathematics from an elementary point of view, with
emphasis on relevance to real-world problems. The objective is to create a positive attitude toward mathematics for the non-
science-orientated college student and to demonstrate its usefulness in solving problems that we frequently encounter in our
complex society.
Throughout the text, the aim has been to de-emphasize difficult theoretical concepts; thus, an intuitive treatment leads to
practical applications of the various subject area topics. We believe that with such an approach, the modern college student
will complete this course with the good feeling that mathematics is not only useful but enjoyable to work with.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics has several distinguishing features:
The text has been written for students with only high school mathematics.
Diagrams and graphs are used to illustrate mathematical concepts or thoughts.
Step-by-step directions are given for the implementation of mathematical methods to problem solving.
Emphasis has been placed on usefulness of mathematics to real-world problems.
To provide motivation to the reader, most chapters are preceded by a short biography of a scientist who made
important contributions to the subject area under consideration.
Mathematical concepts are introduced as clearly and as simply as possible, and they are followed by one or more
examples as an aid to thorough understanding.
Each chapter ends with a complete summary that includes the definitions, properties, and rules of the chapter, fol-
lowed by a Review Test.
Each chapter contains numerous critical thinking and basis exercises with problems that reflect on the mainstream of
the chapter.
The book has been designed to give the instructor wide flexibility in structuring a one or two-semester course, or a full-
year course. Although some chapters are dependent on other others, many options are allowed (see accompanying diagraph).
xiii

Chapter 1
Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 2
Logic
Chapter 3
Sets
Chapter 4
Counting
Chapter 5
Basic 
Probabilty
Chapter 6
Binomial 
Probabilty
Chapter 7
Normal 
Probabilty
Chapter 8
Statistics
Chapter 9
Geometry
Chapter 10
Arithmetic &  
Basic Algebra
Chapter 12
Game Theory
Chapter 11
Finance
xiv
Preface

Very Special Acknowledgment
We wish to express our appreciation to the following academic educators for having reviewed our book and expressed their
opinions.
An outstanding book for students to obtain basic knowledge of the usefulness of mathematics. Excellent motivation strategies
throughout the book. It will inspire the student to learn the importance of mathematics.
Dr. Ram Kafle, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Sam Houston University.
A very constructive and motivating book of finite mathematics. Special emphasis on the applications of math to real-world problems.
The interactive approach of presenting their material is excellent. The student will acquire a very good understanding of what math-
ematics is all about.
Dr. Bong-jin Choi, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
This book is a masterful treatment of finite mathematics for undergraduate students who are afraid of mathematics. It will enlighten
the student of the interdisciplinary use of mathematics at the very basic level. The book provides excellent illustrations of the use of
mathematics/statistics to solve important problems.
Dr. Yong Xu, Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Radford University.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics provides an excellent treatment of the subject. Unique emphasis on the importance of mathematical
sciences to our society. The non-mathematics-oriented undergraduate student will find the contents of the book easy to read and very
inspiring to learn more of the subject matter.
Dr. K. Pokhrel, Department of Mathematics & Computer Systems, Mercyhurst University.
This is an excellent book of finite mathematics. It offers a justifiable, useful, and motivating approach to what mathematics is all about
to the undergraduate student with minimum prior knowledge of the subject. The selection of the contents of the book, examples, and
exercises is outstanding.
Dr. N. Khanal, Department of Mathematics, University of Tampa.
xv

Several Options for a Semester Course
in Finite Mathematics
Five possible options in designing a basic course in finite mathematics are given below, along with some remarks for each
selection.
Options 1 and 2 offer a detailed coverage of specific topics in math, each spanning seven chapters:
Option 1:
Chapters Covered
Title
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 2
Logic
Chapter 3
Sets
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques
Chapter 5
Probability
Chapter 8
Statistics
Chapter 9
Geometry
Covering materials necessary for the CLAST (College Level Academic Skill Test) exam, excluding algebra, these six
topics are often taught collectively. In addition to the necessary high school algebra, these topics prepare a student well for
the CLAST exam.
Option 2:
Chapters Covered
Title
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 2
Logic
Chapter 3
Sets
Chapter 5
Probability
Chapter 6
Bernoulli Trials
Chapter 7
The Bell-shaped Curve
Chapter 8
Statistics
Option 2 provides the materials necessary for a comprehensive understanding of basic probability and statistics. This
option is a broad introduction, including the underlying probabilities necessary to compute basic descriptive statistics, as
well as inferential statistics in terms of interval estimates and tests of hypothesis.
xvii

Options 3-5 offer a more detailed coverage of specific topics in math, each spanning six chapters:
Option 3:
Chapters Covered
Title
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 3
Sets
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques
Chapter 5
Probability
Chapter 6
Bernoulli Trials
Chapter 7
The Bell-shaped Curve
These topics enhance the study of probability. Option 3 begins with the basic concepts of categorization into sets,
counting sets, and measuring basic probabilities empirically. It then continues with measuring basic probabilities hypo-
thetically using either the discrete binomial probability distribution, or the continuous normal probability distribution.
Option 4:
Chapters Covered
Title
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques
Chapter 5
Probability
Chapter 6
Bernoulli Trials
Chapter 7
The Bell-shaped Curve
Chapter 8
Statistics
Option 4 covers materials necessary for the study of the basic aspects of statistics. This option includes counting basic
empirical and hypothetical probabilities empirically. It also includes the basic necessities of statistics, descriptively and
inferentially, for means and proportions.
Option 5:
Chapters Covered
Title
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
Chapter 2
Logic
Chapter 3
Sets
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques
Chapter 9
Geometry
Chapter 11
Arithmetic and Algebra
Option 5 covers materials necessary to gain a basic understanding of the language of deterministic math. This option
provides a basic understanding of logic, sets, counting, geometry, and algebra.
Note: Game theory can be included in any scheme that includes the algebra and arithmetic.
xviii
Several Options for a Semester Course in Finite Mathematics

A SUMMARY OF THE PROPOSED OPTIONS
Depending on which option you choose (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5), the purple indicates which chapters should be included; the green
indicates optional chapters in each scheme.
Several Options for a Semester Course in Finite Mathematics
xix

Joy of Finite Mathematics
Special Features
Motivation
The usefulness of mathematics, especially those branches that constitute finite math, is illustrated both from a historical
perspective, and by the role it plays in our daily lives.
We emphasize an interactive approach to teaching finite mathematics.
The Language
Teaching any student basic finite mathematics requires a basic understanding of the underlying symbolic language.
Mathematics has many dialects: logic, set theory, combinatorics (counting), probability, statistics, geometry,
algebra, and finance, for example. Learning through relevance and interpretation of symbolism is vital.
The Relevant Questions
A complete introduction of mathematics in a finite world, the notation used, and the underlying interpretation is pre-
sented. Relevant and useful questions associated with each dialect are posed, which will be answered through the process
of learning finite mathematics.
The Review
Reviews of each basic concept are given at the end of each chapter. The reviews enhance the learning of the basic aspects
of each topic and their usefulness.
Step-by-Step
Clear and concise step-by-step procedures are used in the development of various methodologies. Procedures are easy to
follow, comprehend, and use to solve problems.
Highlights
Definitions, rules, methods and procedures are highlighted with boldface and their meanings and usefulness follow
with an abundance of relevant examples and applications.
Graphs and Tables
Throughout the book, emphasis is placed on the extensive use of tables, diagrams, and graphs to clearly illustrate
definitions, outlined methods, comparisons, etc. These visual aids invite clear interpretation of what they represent
and their relevance to the text.
Applications and Interpretation
We utilize a step-by-step approach in the illustrated examples (applications) that relate to the various dialects and their
interpretations that have been introduced. Emphasis is placed on properly denoting the problems symbolically, inter-
preting the argument, outlining the defined set, measuring the probability, or, in general, finding the solution. Then, we
encourage the student to clearly state any conclusions that can be drawn from the application.
xxi

Critical Reviews
Each chapter ends with a review of: the new mathematical vocabulary, the most important concepts and methods, an
abundance of review exercises, and a practice test that is based on the material from the preceding chapter.
Inspiration
Throughout the book, we utilize important historical facts and pose interesting and relevant questions. We also
include humorous events, pictures, graphs, tables, biographical sketches of famous scientists, popular and classical
quotes, and more. These are all tools to challenge, inspire and motivate students to learn the mathematical thinking and
to illustrate the absolute relevance of math to our society.
Challenging Problems
Throughout the book, there are sections and challenging problems that are somewhat more advanced for a basic course
in finite mathematics and are left to the discretion of the instructor.
xxii
Joy of Finite Mathematics

Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics
1.1
Introduction to Math
3
1.2
What Is Logic?
5
1.3
Usefulness of Sets
6
1.4
Counting Techniques
6
1.5
Probability
7
1.6
Bernoulli Trials
8
1.7
The Bell-Shaped Curve
8
1.8
Statistics
9
1.9
Geometry
10
1.10 Arithmetic and Algebra
10
1.11 Finance
11
1.12 Game Theory
12
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
12
Summary of Important Concepts
13
Number is the within of all things.
PYTHAGORAS
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1

Goals and Objectives
The main objective of this chapter is to give an overview and motivate the
non-mathematically oriented student about the usefulness of mathematics in
several important fields. We begin with a brief historical perspective of the
subject and proceed to discuss the importance and usefulness of all the areas
that we believe constitute a course in Finite Mathematics. The diagram
below illustrates the areas covered. Although not all the chapters of the
textbook need to be covered in a one semester or two quarter course, we
believe that the student can gain some basic knowledge by studying this
chapter.
Math
Logic
Sets
Counting
Probability
Bernuolli
Trials
Bell-shaped
Curve
Statistics
Geometry
Finance
Arithematic
& Algebra
Game
Theory
Thus, our goal here is to familiarize you with different areas and “dialects”
of Math and:
Learn about the history of Math
Learn about the Math that is the foundation of logic
Learn about the interplay of Math and sets
Learn about counting techniques
Learn about Math used to obtain probabilities of events
Learn about binomial trials that leads to the Bernoulli probabilities
Learn about the paramount importance of the Bell-Shaped Curve
Learn about using Math to develop useful statistical methods
If people do not believe that mathematics is simple,
it is only because they do not realize how
complicated life is.
John Louis von Neumann
The essence of mathematics is not to make simple
things complicated, but to make complicated things
simple.
S. Gudder
Go down deep enough into anything and you will
find mathematics.
Dean Schlicter
The man ignorant of mathematics will be
increasingly limited in his grasp of the main forces
of civilization.
John Kemeny
Pure mathematics is, in its way, the poetry of logical
ideas.
Albert Einstein
Mathematics is a more powerful instrument
of knowledge than any other that has
been bequeathed to us by human
agency.
Descartes
Mathematics is the Queen of the
Sciences.
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Mathematics is the science of definiteness,
the necessary vocabulary of those
who know.
W.J. White
Mathematics is the science which uses easy words
for hard ideas.
Edward Kasner and James R. Newman
Philosophy is a game with objectives and no rules.
Mathematics is a game with rules and no objectives.
2
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

Learn how Math is used to obtain measures of the earth or geometry
Learn the Math that is arithmetic and algebra
Learn how we use Math to answer basic financial questions
Learn how we use Math in Game Theory, solving systems of equations to
optimize strategies.
Pythagoras of Samos was the first to call himself a philosopher, Greek for “lover of wisdom.” Pythagorean ideas greatly
influenced western philosophy. Best known for the theorem which carries his name, Pythagoras was also a mathematician,
scientist, musician, and mystic.
He founded the religious movement called Pythagoreanism. The Pythagoreans first applied themselves to mathematics, a
science which they improved, and penetrated within; they fancied that the principles of mathematics were the principles of
all things. A younger contemporary, Eudemus, shrewdly remarked that “they changed geometry into a literal science; they
diverted arithmetics from the service of commerce”… Aristotle.
1.1
INTRODUCTION TO MATH
Mathematics played a very significant role in all our technological, scientific,
medical, educational and economic accomplishments in our global society.
However, just as important is the fact that mathematics indirectly interweaves
every aspect of our daily lives; mathematics is the most powerful interdisci-
plinary language in almost all fields of engineering, every aspect of health
sciences, education, social and physical sciences, economics, finance, envi-
ronmental sciences, Global Warming, and of course music and art, among
many other disciplines.
The word mathematics comes from the Greek word matheno which means
I learn. Historically mathematics has its origin in the Orient when the Baby-
lonians, in about 2000 BC, collected a lot of materials on the subject that we
identify as elementary algebra. However, the modern concept of mathematics
started in Greece around the fifth and fourth centuries BC. At this time, math-
ematics was subjected to philosophical discussion that was a unique priority in
the Greek city states. The Greek philosophers were quite aware of the math-
ematical difficulties involved in understanding continuity, infinity, motion and
the problems of making measurements of arbitrary quantities. Eudoxus’ theory
was very significant in geometrically understanding these concepts that were
later significantly improved by Euclid’s elements. Thus, the Greeks have an
enormous influence on the tremendous development of today’s mathematics.
Math is the language of thought. We think faster
than we speak and we speak faster than we write…
therefore, to convey our thoughts quickly,
Mathematicians abbreviate everything.
Rebecca D. Wooten
1.1 Introduction to Math
3

H. Weyl, one of the truly great mathematicians of the twentieth century, stated
“without the concepts, methods, and results found and developed by previous
generations right down to the Greek antiquity, one cannot understand either
the aim or the achievements of mathematics in the last 50 years” (American
Math Monthly, Vol. 102, 1995).
Historically mathematics was defined as the logical study of shape,
arrangement, and quantity. Furthermore, attempts have been made to think
of mathematics as two branches: Applied Mathematics and Pure or
Abstract Mathematics. The branches of applied mathematics are concerned
with the study of physical, biological, medical or sociological worlds. Pure or
Abstract Mathematics is concerned with the study and development of the
principles of mathematics as such and is not concerned with their immediate
usefulness.
In addition, we also had a divide of mathematics in the discrete and
the continuous. Herbert W. Turnbull, in his essay on the “World of Math-
ematics” states: To Pythagoras we owe the very word mathematics and its
double fold branches; that is,
Mathematics
The Discrete
The
absolute
Arithmetics
The
relative
Music
The Continued
The Stable
Geometry
The
Moving
Astronomy
This double fold of mathematics played a major role in the development
and usefulness of mathematics. In fact, Aristotle summarizes this historical
divide as follows:
“The Pythagoreans first applied themselves to mathematics, a science which
they improved; and, penetrated with it, they fancied that the principles of math-
ematics were the principles of all things.” And a younger contemporary,
Eudemus, shrewdly remarked that “they changed geometry into a literal science;
they diverted arithmetic from the service of commerce”.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics is written to show at a very basic level,
that mathematics is useful to virtually everyone, especially those students
Mathematics is the “brain” for
Engineering
Health Sciences
Education
Social Science
Physical Sciences
Economics
Finance
Environmental Sciences
Global Warming
Music
Art
Among others…
Discrete
Apart or detached from others; separate;
distinct
Absolute
Not mixed or adulterated; pure
Relative
Something having, or standing in, some
relation to something else
Continued
To go on with or persist in; to continue an
action
Stable
Not likely to fall or give way; firm, steady
Moving
To pass from one place or position to
another
4
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

who do not like mathematics as we approach mathematics as a language
used to describe simple and complex problems that we encounter in our
daily lives.
In the essay on “The Nature of Mathematics,” by Philip E B Jourdain, he
begins with “An eminent mathematician once remarked that he was never
satisfied with his knowledge of a mathematical theory until he could
explain it to the next man that he met in the street.” This is so very true
and we believe it is our responsibility in writing this text to explain to our
students the usefulness of mathematical methods and theories using real
world problems. Thus, the student has the right to ask “what is the usefulness
of mathematics?”
We have taken that aspect of the student asking such questions as our
responsibility in positively responding. We proceed to address this important
issue by raising several relative questions in the interdisciplinary structure of
mathematics that constitute the areas of the subject that we have identified as
“Finite Mathematics.” Thus, in what follows is the main thrust of the basic dia-
lects of mathematics for students whose primary interest is not the subject
matter, but how to enhance their understanding of the usefulness of mathe-
matics. For motivating the students we begin each branch of mathematics
by stating several real world questions, the answers to which will lead to
the importance and usefulness of mathematics. We believe that this interactive
approach will motivate the learning process and take our students on a very
“joyful ride” to learn finite mathematics.
1.2
WHAT IS LOGIC?
Logic is derived from the Greek λογικη meaning conforming to laws of rea-
soning. The branch of philosophy that treats forms of thinking, reasoning or
arguing is also referred to as Logic. Averroes defines logic as “the tool for
distinguishing between the true and the false.” Logic is divided into two
parts: inductive and deductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning draws con-
clusions based on specific examples whereas deductive reasoning draws
conclusions from definitions and axioms.
Thus, our goal in learning Logic is to be in a position to make logical deci-
sions regarding such questions as:
□
Politics: A politician claims “if you don’t vote for me, then you will not get
the tax cuts”—does this imply that if you do vote for him, that you will get
the tax cuts?
□
Health: If you work out more, then you will lose weight and tone your
muscles, and if you watch your calorie intake, you will lose weight. Does
this mean that if you lost weight that you must have both worked out and
watched your calorie intake?
□
Travel: If Athens is in Greece and Berlin is in Germany, then when I visit
Germany and not Athens, then does it follow that I went to Berlin?
□
Lottery: If Frank wins the lottery, then Frank will take you to dinner.
Frank did not win the lottery and did not take you to dinner. Did Frank lie?
□
Law: If you are 17, then you are a minor. Jordan is not 17; therefore, can
we conclude that Jordan is not a minor?
Intelligence is the ability to adapt to change.
Stephen Hawking
Archival Note
Averroes as he is known in Greek is Abu¯
’l-Walı¯d Muh˙ammad bin Ah˙mad bin Rushd,
and he defined logic and is the founder of
Algebra.
Debate between Averroes and Porphyry
Monfredo de Monte Imperiali Liber de herbis,
14th century
Number is the within of all things
Pythagoras
My goal is simple. It is a complete understanding of
the universe, why it is as it is and why it exists at all.
Stephen Hawking
1.2 What Is Logic?
5

It is the aim to teach logical reasoning to enable students to reason using
the art of deduction and to draw correct conclusions when confronted
with facts.
1.3
USEFULNESS OF SETS
The word “set” has more definitions than any other word in the English lan-
guage due to its many origins. One origin of the word set is from the Old
English settan meaning cause to sit, put in some place, fix firmly, and another
is from the Old French setta, meaning collection of things. The branch of
mathematics which deals with the study of sets is called Set Theory. The
modern study of Set Theory was begun by Georg Cantor and Richard
Dedekind in the 1870s. The language of sets can be used to define nearly
all mathematical “objects” such as functions.
Set Theory begins with a fundamental binary relationship (similar to logic)
between objects O and a set S, namely that of membership. Either an object
(element) belongs to a set, or it does not.
Usefulness of Sets: To present data, relevant information in a systematic
manner so that it will be visually attractive and easily understood and so that
it can be used effectively to address various questions of interest. Thus, our
goal in learning about sets is to be in a position to make categorical decisions
regarding such questions as:
□
Business: A store owner notes that more people like chocolate
muffins than blueberry muffins. With this information, how many
of each should be made? How many customers are expected to
purchase both?
□
Cancer: If survival is a function on the type of treatment(s) received,
then which treatment is better or is a combination of treatments better?
□
Meteorology: Given 20 readings of temperatures over a period of 14 days
taken at two relatively close stations, when comparing these temperatures;
do they appear to fall in the same temperature range?
It is our aim in learning Set Theory that students will be able to describe infor-
mation categorically as well as to be able to display information graphically in
Venn diagrams and use these graphics to support any inferences made
regarding relationships among the various sets.
1.4
COUNTING TECHNIQUES
Count is from the Old French counter meaning add up, but also tell a story.
Some of the first known use of counting was with shepherds who, when
tending their sheep, would tie knots in a rope as they sent their sheep out
to graze. In the evening, when the sheep returned to the fold for safety during
the night, the shepherd would untie a knot and if there were any knots in the
rope, they knew there were sheep that needed to be found. The branch of math-
ematics dealing with counting can extend from tally marks—making a mark
for each number and then tallying these marks, enumeration—counting aloud
Archival Note
Counting only involves the whole (counting)
numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3… It first started with the
natural counting numbers, and then we
introduced the number zero to represent
“nothing” or the number of elements in the
empty set. It was Jiu zhange suan-shu who first
used red rods to denote “positive” values and
black rods to denote “negative” values in his
writing Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art.
For a long period of time, negative solutions to
problems where considered “false.”
Diophantus, in the third century AD,
referred to the idea of “2x+1050” as absurd.
Archival Note
Georg Ferdinand Ludwig Philipp Cantor was
a German mathematician, the inventor of Set
Theory, and the first to establish the importance
of one-to-one correspondence between sets.
Archival Note
Julius Wilhelm Richard Dedekind was another
German mathematician who worked with Cantor
and is also well known for his work in abstract
algebra.
Categorical
Unambiguously explicit and direct
Data consisting of nominal information
Qualitative data organized in a
contingency table
Venn Diagram
A set diagram that shows all possible
relations between finite collections
6
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

or on your fingers to more complex counting techniques such as combinations
and permutations.
Thus, our goal in Counting Techniques is to be in a position to count and
discern the implication of such questions as:
□
Social: At a social get-together of ten individuals, how many introductions
will be needed to ensure everyone has met face-to-face?
□
Coding: When coding a confidential letter using only the letters in
the English alphabet, how many distinct codings are there? How many
are needed such that no letter is mapped to itself in the coding?
□
Civics: A board of directors consisting of ten women and 15 men need
to form a five member committee to oversee next year’s fund raiser.
How many possible committees consist of exactly three men and
two women?
□
Job Assignment: A real estate agency has ten realtors and only nine
new property listings. How many possible assignments of realtors to
a house?
□
Diet: There is a list of ten fruits you are willing to eat and your goal is to eat
four fruits a day. To mix it up each day you create a meal plan that covers
all possible combinations of four out of ten fruits. How many options are
there for fruits in this meal plan?
The purpose in learning various counting techniques is to enable the student
to determine the logistics necessary in such detailed coordination of a complex
operation. This ranges from counting people or supplies to organizing com-
mittees and daily life.
1.5
PROBABILITY
Probability is from the French probabilite’ meaning quality of being probable
or something likely to be true. Probability is the branch of mathematics which
is a way of expressing knowledge (or belief) that an event will or will not occur
numerically, a form of empirical inductive reasoning leading to statistical
inferences.
The idea of probability originated with games of chance in the seven-
teenth century. The earliest writings in the area were the result of the collab-
oration of the eminent mathematicians Blaise Pascal and Pierre Fermat, and a
gambler, Chevalier de Mere. To them, there seem to be contradictions
between mathematical calculations and the events of actual games of chance
involving throwing dice, tossing a coin, spinning a roulette wheel, or
playing cards.
Thus, our goal in learning about Probability is to be in a position to compute
and interpret the relevance of probabilities and address such questions as:
□
Breast Cancer: A patient goes to the doctor with a lump in her breast.
What is the probability that it is a tumor? What is the probability that it
is cancerous?
□
Finance: What is the probability that the value of the Dollar will be higher
than the Euro in 2015?
□
Sports: What is the probability that the USF quarterback will complete
half of his passes in a given game?
□
Engineering: What is the probability that a computer software package
will fail?
Combination
When r out of n objects are taken without
replacement and without distinction in
ordering
Permutation
When r out of n objects are taken without
replacement and with distinction in
ordering
Counting is the religion of this generation. It is its
hope and its salvation.
Gertrude Stein
It’s not the voting that’s democracy, it’s the
counting.
Alfred Emanuel Smith
Innumerable actions are going on through us all the
time. If we started counting them, we should never
come to an end.
Vinoba Bhave
Music is the pleasure the human mind experiences
from counting without being aware that it is
counting.
Gottfried Leibniz
Probability is the very guide to life.
Cicero
Probability is expectation founded upon partial
knowledge.
George Boole
1.5 Probability
7

□
Sociology: What is the probability that a disadvantaged child in an urban
area will pass the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)?
□
Meteorology: What is the probability that a hurricane will obtain hur-
ricane status category 3 or more?
□
Statistics: What is the probability that the mean number of accidents
during New Year’s Eve will exceed that of the previous year’s number
of accidents?
□
Physiology: What is the probability that an experimental animal
will convulse upon administration of a certain pharmacological agent?
□
Education: What is the probability that an individual’s score on an intel-
ligence test will show significant improvement following a refresher
course in verbal skills?
It is our aim to learn some of the very basic aspects of probability so that we not
only answer questions such as those given above, but also to understand the
role the subject plays in our daily lives. Learning probability is intended to
put the student in a position to apply probability to any area of study that they
are interested in: statistics, engineering, operations research, physics, med-
icine, business, economics, accounting, education, sociology, physiology,
agriculture, meteorology, linguistics and political science, among others,
and to use this information to make knowledgeable decisions.
1.6
BERNOULLI TRIALS
Trial is Anglo-French meaning act or process of testing. A Bernoulli trial is
an experiment whose outcome is random, but has one of only two possible out-
comes: success or failure. The discrete probability distribution that we use to
answer such questions, among others, is the binomial or Bernoulli proba-
bility distribution; a mathematical expression that generates the actual prob-
ability for specific inputs that relate to a given question. We encounter many
important situations that can be characterized by a discrete random variable
with this developed distribution.
It is our goal in studying Bernoulli trials to put ourselves in a position to
compute binomial probabilities and address such questions as:
□
Births: A baby born less than 36 weeks is consider premature. What is the
probability that a baby will be born premature?
□
Medicine: What is the probability that a given drug will be effective to
cure a specific disease?
□
Politics: What is the probability that Candidate A will be elected president
of the US?
□
Gambling: What is the probability that I will obtain an odd number in a
single roll of a fair die?
□
Computers: What is the probability that the computer you purchased
online will be operable (non-defective)?
We will learn how to use this very important probability distribution to answer
the above questions, among others.
1.7
THE BELL-SHAPED CURVE
The Bell-shaped Curve is commonly called the normal curve and
is mathematically referred to as the Gaussian probability distribution.
Discrete
A type of measure such that the outcomes
are separate and distinct
Random
Taken such that each individual is equally
likely to be selected
Variable
A distinct characteristic of an individual
to be observed or measured
How dare we speak of the laws of chance? Is not
chance the antithesis of all law?
Joseph Bertrand
8
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

Unlike Bernoulli trials which are based on discrete counts, the normal dis-
tribution is used to determine the probability of a continuous random
variable.
The normal or Gaussian probability distribution is the most popular
and important distribution because of its unique mathematical properties,
which facilitate its application to practically any physical problem in the
real world; if not for the data’s distribution directly, then in terms of the dis-
tribution associated with sampling. It constitutes the basis for the devel-
opment of many of the statistical methods that we will learn in the
following chapters.
Thus, our goal in studying the Bell-Shaped Curve is to put ourselves in a
position to compute and interpret probabilities associated with continuous
random variables and address such questions as:
□
Cancer: What is the probability that in a given group of lung cancer
patients, an individual selected at random is Asian?
□
Education: What is the probability that a student will have a final grade in
finite mathematics between 85 and 95?
□
Sports: What is the probability that a given lineman’s weight on the USF
football team will be between 275 and 325 pounds?
□
Rainfall: What is the probability that the average rainfall in the
State of Rhode Island in the year 2012 will be between 16 and 24
inches?
□
Chemistry: What is the probability that an acid solution made by a spe-
cific method will satisfactorily etch a tray?
The objective in learning the mathematical properties of the normal prob-
ability distribution is to realize its usefulness in characterizing the
behavior of continuous random variables that frequently occur in daily
experience.
1.8
STATISTICS
The branch of Statistics, meaning quantitative fact or statement, is becoming
more widely accepted as a necessity for understanding all aspects that
influence our daily lives. In almost every field of study, statistics is used to
estimate the unknown, a characteristic of the individual we would like to know
about in a given population. It is similar to the Scientific Method, in that we
must first understand and clearly state the problem, gather the relevant infor-
mation, formulate a hypothesis and test this hypotheses by recording and ana-
lyzing the data, before we can interpret the data and state our conclusion.
The basic idea behind descriptive statistics is to reduce a set of data down
to one piece of information that describes some aspect of the data—an estimate
of the population mean, or its central tendency, deviation, range, extremes, etc.
Thus, our goal in studying Statistics is to be able to analyze and interpret real
world data so that we will better understand the phenomenon that we are
studying and address such questions as:
□
Business: What is the mean profit made per hours of production time as a
function of employees on the floor?
□
Politics: What percentage of the people truly desire a tax increase given
only 40% of individuals vote?
□
Chemistry: What is the point of saturation for carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere?
□
Medicine: What is the mean tumor size in a patient with brain cancer?
Continuous
A type of measure such that the outcomes
are dense, that is, between any two
outcomes, other possible outcomes exist.
The graph of the normal probability
distribution is a “bell-shaped” curve, as shown
in the figure above. The constants μ and σ are the
parameters.
The area under the curve represents the
underlying probability of the situation.
Statistics
The art of decision making in the presence
of uncertainty
As opposed to statistic—
a numerical datum
Hypothesis
Greek meaning “to suppose”
A statistical analysis, properly conducted, is a
delicate dissection of uncertainties, a surgery of
suppositions.
M.J. Moroney
Statistics may be defined as “a body of methods for
making wise decisions in the face of uncertainty.”
W.A. Wallis
1.8 Statistics
9

□
Engineering: What is the mean maximum load (kN) for a fishing line?
What is the mean elongation?
□
Astronomy: What is the mean temperature fluctuation in the Sea of Tran-
quility on the moon?
□
Agriculture: What is the mean yield of corn per acre given the number of
acres planted?
□
Sociology: What is the mean number of texts sent by a cellular phone
user in a given month? Is there a difference in usage between teens
and adults?
The point in learning basic statistics is to be able to efficiently gather,
organize, analyze and interpret data in order to address questions that arise
from every field of study and that apply to everyday living in a growing global
society.
1.9
GEOMETRY
Geometry is from the Ancient Greek word γεωμετρια meaning measurement
of earth or land. This branch of mathematics is concerned with questions
regarding the shape, size, relative positions and properties of space.
Euclidean geometry is a mathematical system that assumes a small set of
axioms and deductive propositions and theorems that can be used to make
accurate measurement of unknown values based on their geometric relation
to known measures.
Thus, our goal in studying Geometry is to be able to accurately measure
the world around us, perform basic calculations that address such
questions as:
□
Agriculture: Using similar triangles, given the height of a stick and the
length of its shadow at 2:00 PM, measuring the shadow of the tree at
the same time, determine the height of the tree.
□
Carpentry: If two boards, mitered at a 60° angle, are reversed and
attached to create a frame, what is the angle formed by the joint?
□
Playground: How large should a sandbox be if only 5 ft of wood is
available and how much sand is needed if the wood is 6 in. tall?
□
Rubik Cube: How many squares are there on the surface of a Rubik Cube?
□
Business: If a showroom has 10,000 square feet of space to be converted
into offices, but must leave 5000 square feet for the showroom floor and
each office must be 200 square feet of space, how many offices can be
created at most?
□
Chemistry: What is the shape of a sugar molecule? How does this differ
between mono-dextrose and poly-dextrose sugars? What is the difference
in volume?
The intention behind learning Geometry is to enable the student to be pro-
ficient in both the art and science of geometry. Geometry is used in areas
ranging from graphic design to Einstein’s theory of general relativity; when
a surveyor plots land, a manufacturer determines the best packaging for a stack
of spherical oranges to be shipped or a car manufacturer redesigns a parabolic
headlight, for example.
1.10
ARITHMETIC AND ALGEBRA
Arithmetic means the art of counting, and Algebra means reunion of broken
pieces. Arithmetic is the oldest and most elementary branch of mathematics
and deals with the study of quantity such as those that result from combining
other quantities, which leads directly to Algebra. Algebra is a branch of
Euclid is the Father of Geometry best known
for his book Elements which consist of 13 books
covering Euclidian Geometry.
Title page of Sir Henry Billingsley’s first English
version of Euclid’s Elements, 1570
I’ve always been passionate about geometry and the
study of three-dimensional forms.
Erno Rubik
There is geometry in the humming of the strings;
there is music in the spacing of the spheres.
Pythagoras
Give me a lever long enough and a fulcrum on which
to place it and I shall move the world.
Archimedes
10
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

mathematics outlining arithmetics, the rules of operations such as addition,
subtraction, multiplication and division, but also relations such as equal-
ities, inequalities and functions.
Arithmetic and Algebra are the building blocks of most areas in math-
ematics, usually taught as part of the curriculum in primary and secondary
education. However, even at university level, these topics are extremely
useful allowing general formulations to be the first step in the systematic
exploration of more complex problems that can be solved using Math.
Thus, our goal in studying Arithmetic & Algebra is to be able answer such
questions as:
□
Health: Based on the nutritional information for three dog foods
based on three required nutrients, how much of each type of dog
food should be included in a single serving to optimize the nutritional
intake?
□
Farming: Given 100 feet of fencing, how should the length of a pen be
related to the width, if the fence is to create two adjacent pens sharing
a common size with maximum area?
□
Business: If you sell tickets for $20 each and you sell as many as you can,
which beforehand is an unknown quantity, x, how does your profit relate to
this unknown value x?
□
Social: If you know that you have x adults coming for dinner and one
child, and each adult eats three manicotti shells and the child eats one,
how many shells must be made, y, as a function of the number of adults
invited, x.
The aim of learning Arithmetic and Algebra is to refresh the student’s
understanding of the subject matter and to introduce more relevant uses
of this dialect of Math. Remember: we think faster than we speak and
we speak faster than we write. Therefore, to address large complex
problems such as building a bridge, we need a very short handed language.
This universal language is Math, and Arithmetic and Algebra are a large
part of this language.
1.11
FINANCE
Finance means to ransom, or to manage money. This science of funds man-
agement includes business finance, personal finance and public finance. Our
goal is to use mathematics to teach the student to have a better understanding of
basic personal finance; such finances will include savings and loans in terms
of time, money, risk and how they are interrelated in addition to spending and
budget.
Thus, our goal in studying the Basics of Finance is to be able to understand
and manage personal finances and address such questions as:
□
Personal Budget: How much do you spend each month on Rent, Elec-
tricity, Phone, Internet, Food, Gas, Insurance, etc.
□
Wedding: How much can I afford to spend? If I finance a wedding on
credit, how long will it take to pay off this debt and how much will it
eventually cost?
□
Transportation: What should be the maximum payment I should agree to
in order to ensure my vehicle is not repossessed.
□
Housing: Can you afford to move out of your apartment and into a house?
What is the expected down payment? Inspection fees? The expected
property taxes?
Diophantus is traditionally known as the Father
of Algebra, but this has recently put up to debate
in that Al-Jabr, the author of Arithmetic gives
the elementary algebra before Diophantus in
200-214 CE.
How does y relate to x?
In the business world, the rearview mirror is always
clearer than the windshield.
Warren Buffett
1.11 Finance
11

□
Home Repairs: How long would it take to save enough to replace an air
conditioning unit? How much can be saved be investing into a sinking
fund versus using credit?
□
Credit: If you make the minimum required payment and have a
minimum purchase each month, how long will you be indebted to the
creditor?
□
Christmas Funds: How much needs to be put into a sinking fund in order
for you to have saved up $1000 in a Christmas fund over a period of
11 months starting in January?
In is imperative in today’s economy that everyone has a basic under-
standing of finance. Many individuals are overwhelmed when confronted with
mounting bills or credit; however, it is important that they budget, even if the
final amount is negative. Once we are aware of the problem, we can begin to
work out the solution. Understanding the basic mathematics behind Basic
Finance, we will be in a position to make positive changes in our present
financial state and better plan for the future.
1.12
GAME THEORY
Game Theory is a study of strategic decision making between two rational
decision-makers. Here, we address two-person zero-sum games; games
designed such that one players gain equals the second player’s loss.
□
Strictly Determined Games: The Saddle Point
□
Games with Mixed Strategies
□
Reducing Matrix Games to a System of Linear Equations
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
1.1. Who was the first to call himself a philosopher?
1.2. What is Pythagoreanism?
1.3. What does the word “matheno” mean?
1.4. Mathematics can be divided into what two branches?
1.5. Who wrote “The Nature of Mathematics”?
1.6. What word is derived from the Greek meaning conforming to laws of reason?
1.7. Distinguish between the two types of reasoning.
1.8. In Logic, which type of reasoning is used to draw correct conclusions when confronted with facts?
1.9. What does the word “setta” mean?
1.10. The modern study of sets began with two mathematicians; name them and state where they are from.
1.11. Sets are used for what type of measure: numerical or categorical?
1.12. What diagram is used to graph categorical information and to support any inferences made regarding relationships
among the various sets?
1.13. What are some of the first known uses of counting?
1.14. Name three counting techniques.
1.15. Name the area of study that is a form of empirical inductive reasoning leading to statistical inferences.
1.16. In what area of study are Blaise Pascal, Pierre Fermat and Chevalier de Mere known to have collaborated?
1.17. Who said “Probability is expectation founded upon partial knowledge”?
1.18. A binomial experiment is also known by what other name?
1.19. In a Bernoulli trial, there are exactly how many possible outcomes?
1.20. The binomial probability distribution is characterized by what type of random variable? Continuous or Discrete.
1.21. The normal probability distribution is also known by what other name?
1.22. Outline the steps associated with the Scientific Method.
1.23. Distinguish between Descriptive and Inferential Statistics.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose, and, of that natural luck,
He beats thee ’gainst the odds.
Shakespeare
Budget
An estimate, often itemized, of expected
income and expense for a given period of
time in the future
A sum of money set aside for a specific
purpose
In the absence of the gold standard, there is no way
to protect savings from confiscation through
inflation. There is no safe store of value.
Alan Greenspan
12
Chapter 1
The Usefulness of Mathematics

1.24. List the points you need to learn in basic statistics to be an efficient researcher.
1.25. What branch of mathematics is concerned with questions regarding shape, size, relative positions and properties
of space?
1.26. Name the mathematical system that assumes a small set of axioms and deductive propositions and theorems that can
be used to make accurate measurement,
1.27. The art of counting is better known by what name?
1.28. Name the rules of operations in Algebra.
1.29. Why are Arithmetic and Algebra important?
1.30. Name the science of funds management.
1.31. Name the study of strategic decision making between two rational decision-makers.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
The first chapter, The Usefulness of Mathematics, introduces Mathematics and its history. This motivational chapter
answers the question “what is logic”; outlining the usefulness of Sets; the start of Counting Techniques and how counts
are the foundation of empirical probabilities. The first chapter also includes the usefulness of Mathematics in basic Prob-
ability and Statistics, Geometry, and Finance; an overview of basic Arithmetic and Algebra along with Game Theory.
The second chapter on Logic covers statements and their truth values; outlines the symbolisms used to express state-
ments in the short hand language of Math including logical operators: conjunction, disjunction, negation and implication;
how to construct truth tables and determine equivalent statements. This chapter helps the student understand logical
reasoning by interpreting logical symbolism by giving their English translation. Properties of Logic covered include
Tautologies, Self-Contradictions, Paradox, Equivalence, and Algebra of Statements; Variations on the Conditional
Statement; Quantified Statements; Testing the Validity of an Argument and Applications of Logic.
The third chapter on Sets gives an introduction to Set Theory, covers collections of objects, the symbolisms used to
express these collections (sets) in the short hand language of Math including set operators: intersection, union, complement
and subset; and how they relate to logical operators. This chapter covers the Algebra of Sets, some basic counting principles
applied to sets.
The fourth chapter on Counting Techniques introduces counting principles beyond that of simple sets to that of the
Multiplication Principle, Permutations and Combinations, Distinct Orderings, and other counting techniques such as the
Binomial Theorem, and Pascal’s Triangle.
The fifth chapter on Basic Probabilities gives an introduction to probability and various definitions: personal probability,
empirical and theoretical. This chapter covers the experimental probabilities using sample spaces, the basic laws of prob-
ability, conditional probability and Bayes rule.
The sixth chapter on Binomial Probability introduces discrete random variables, discrete probability distribution in
general including expected value and variance followed by the Binomial Probability Distribution and the expected value
and variance for the Binomial random variable.
The seventh chapter on Normal Probability introduces continuous random variables and the Normal probability distri-
bution. This chapter also ties back in with discrete random variables covering Normal Approximation to the Binomial.
The eighth chapter on Descriptive Statistics covers gathering and organizing data; graphical representations of quali-
tative information and quantitative information; and measuring central tendencies and deviations from the center.
The ninth chapter on Geometry covers rounding and types of measurement; properties of lines: linear, linear pairs, two
lines and three lines; properties of angles: categorization and additive principles; properties of triangles: categorization and
similar/equivalent triangles; and properties of quadrilaterals and polygons. This chapter also covers area, surface area and
volume.
The tenth chapter on Arithmetic and Basic Algebra covers the real number system, basic arithmetic: addition, sub-
traction, multiplication and division; pattern recognition: sequences and series; algebraic expressions and relationships;
equations: equalities and systems of equations; and functions: linear and quadratic equation.
The eleventh chapter on Finance covers basic financing including sinking funds and amortization: various savings sit-
uations and comparison shopping: credit versus cash, leasing versus purchasing, and renting versus owning. This chapter
also covers effective rates and uses them to compare CD versus credit and comparisons of credit cards. There is also a section
on personal finance: how to create a monthly budget; insurance: what every homeowner should know and your credit report.
The twelfth chapter on Game Theory covers two-person zero-sum games. This chapter covers the Matrix Game; strictly
determined games, games with mixed strategies and instructions on how to reduce Matrix Games to Systems of Equations.
Summary of Important Concepts
13

Chapter 2
Logic
2.1 Logic
16
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
17
2.3 Truth Tables
27
2.4 Properties of Logic
34
2.5 Variations of the Conditional Statement
41
2.6 Quantified Statement
44
2.7 Negating Statements
48
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
54
2.9 Applications of Logic
66
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
76
Summary of Important Concepts
78
Review Test
82
References
85
Number is the within of all things.
PYTHAGORAS
Truth
Belief
Knowledge
Propositions
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
15

In the field of mathematics, Aristotle is probably best noted for his contributions to the methods of proofs. He was the first to
provide clear distinctions between axioms, postulates, and definitions. In addition, he contributed theorems of geometry,
infinity, and continuity. He was considered to be a philosopher, but the philosophy of his time included what is now classified
as natural sciences. Among Aristotle’s writings on logic (called later the Organon) are Prior Analytics, Posterior Analytics,
and Sophisms. In these and in his other works, he systematized the formal rules of logic and introduced syllogism, a form of
deductive reasoning.
Aristotle was a student of Plato’s Academy and later became a teacher. When he was forty-one, he began to supervise the
education of Alexander the Great, for which he received the beginnings of his fortune. He later taught in the Lyceum in
Athens and began amassing a book and map collection for a museum of natural history. This arrangement eventually
led to a “school” after his death at the age of sixty-two.
Aristotle’s influence was so encompassing and pervasive that many of his contributions were not even questioned until
the middle of the nineteenth century even though many of his theories were incorrect. His writings, including accurate as
well as misdirected ideas, were accepted as the ultimate authority during the medieval period and were upheld by the Roman
Catholic Church beyond the time of Galileo (Aristotle had believed in the geocentric; i.e., earth-centered solar system,
which Galileo unsuccessfully argued against in the Inquisition). Although his dogmatic followers deterred further advances
for many centuries, Aristotle did much to advance science in his time. His many fields of study included biology (he devised
classifications for all kinds of plants and animals), metaphysics and logic, ethics and politics, rhetoric and poetics, weather,
and the other physical sciences.
2.1
LOGIC
Why should we have chosen to begin the study of finite mathematics with a
chapter on logic? The following argument is offered by way of illustration:
Mathematics must be based on logic. This is a basic course in mathematics
with emphasis on its usefulness. Therefore this course must be based on logic.
An argument of this form is known as a syllogism. A syllogism is a typical
Aristotelian argument. Aristotle gave the first systematic treatment of the
principles of logical reasoning which earlier Greeks had begun to formulate.
Aristotelian logic is the fundamental form of logical reasoning which is still
utilized today.
The assertion that mathematics must be based on logic is justifiable
because virtually all mathematical results are obtained by logical
deductions from other previously obtained results now generally accep-
ted as true, or from assertions which have been assumed without
proof. Sometimes, making logical deductions is not as straightforward
and simple as we might like; thus, it is true here as in many other situa-
tions that possession of a set of rather specific rules makes the task
much easier.
George Boole (1815-1864), an English mathematician, integrated
logic into algebra and essentially founded the field of mathematical logic.
He introduced the use of symbols to represent statements or assertions,
which greatly increases the ease and speed of manipulation of concepts
in deductive logic. Mathematical logic is also known as symbolic
logic for this reason. In this chapter some of the fundamental concepts of
mathematical logic will be discussed with a view toward enabling the
reader:
Logic

Derived from the Greek word logos
which means reason or discourse
Syllogism

An argument supported by two
premises; deductive reasoning

An extremely subtle, but sophisticated
argument
Aristotelian

Of, pertaining to, based on, or derived
from Aristotle or his theories.
1.
To be able to apply logic to analyze
problems, and
2.
To obtain proficiency in the correct
methods of logical reasoning.
16
Chapter 2
Logic

… no general method for the solution of questions in the theory of probabilities can
be established which does not explicitly recognize … those universal laws of
thought which are the basis of all reasoning …
George Boole
To this end, we must consider that we think faster than we speak,
we speak faster than we write, therefore to think quickly and communi-
cate these ideas, we must learn to abbreviate almost everything. A summary
of modern symbolic logic can be found in the summary, at the end of the
chapter.
2.2
STATEMENTS AND THEIR TRUTH VALUES
In this section we shall discuss one of the basic concepts of logic; namely, that
of a statement. We shall also introduce some other important terms and
symbols. We begin with a definition.
Definition 2.2.1 Statement
A statement is a declarative sentence which is either true or false, but not both. We shall
denote statements symbolically by lower case letters p, q, r…
We judge statements with respect to their truth value. That is,
Definition 2.2.2 Truth Value
The truth value of a statement is the truth or falsity of the statement. We shall denote
true by T and false by F.
Example 2.2.1 Classify Sentences
Consider the following sentences; classify each as statement, question or command:
(a)
London is in France
(b)
3 + 55 8
(c)
Who is here?
(d)
Put the book on the shelf.
(e)
Sometimes it rains.
Solution
Sentence (a) is a false statement, and sentences (b) and (e) are true statements. However,
sentences (c) and (d) are not statements because neither can be assigned a truth value of
true or false. Sentence (c) is a question and sentence (d) is a command.
True Statements:
▪
Monday is a day of the week
▪
5 is a natural number
False Statements:
▪
January is a day of the week
▪
5 is a negative integer
Facts:
(a)
London is, in fact, not in France
(b)
3 + 5 is equal to 8
(c)
Not a statement
(d)
Not a statement
(e)
Sometimes it does rain.
Simple Statements:
▪
Today is Monday
▪
Tomorrow is Christmas
▪
The sun is shining
▪
There are rain clouds in the sky
▪
I will study English
▪
I will study Math
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
17

The statements given in the preceding example are composed of terms in a
certain relation to each other.
Definition 2.2.3 Compound Statement
A statement consisting of a single such relationship is called a simple
statement.
However, consider the statement “The square root of thirty-six is six and
six is an even number.” This statement is a combination of two components;
namely, “The square root of thirty-six is six” and “six is an even number.”
Thus, we have a compound statement.
Definition 2.2.4 Compound Statement
A compound statement is a statement composed of two or more state-
ments connected by the logical connectives, “and,” “or,” “if then,” “not,” and “if
and only if.” A statement which is not compound is said to be a simple statement.
Example 2.2.2 Simple/Compound Statement
Consider the following statements:
(a)
“Deb is beautiful and Deb is smart.” This statement is a compound statement
composed of the simple statements “Deb is beautiful” and “Deb is smart” linked
by means of the logical connective “and.”
(b)
“If Matthew is here, then Washington is in the United States, or sugar
is sweet.” This is a compound statement composed of the compound
statement “If Matthew is here, then Washington is in the United
States” and the simple statement “Sugar is sweet” by means of the logical con-
nective “or.”
The truth value of a compound statement is completely determined by the
truth values of the simple statements that form the compound statement.
We shall now study some of the most important connectives and illustrate
their meanings by various examples. In logic, connectives are referred to as
operators.
Definition 2.2.5 Conjunction: p∧q
The conjunction of two statements p and q is the compound statement “p and q”;
written symbolically, p∧q, where the symbol ∧is read “and” or “but.”
Let b represent Deb is beautiful and s represent
Deb is smart.
(a)
b∧s
∧reads “and”
Let h represent Matthew is here, w represent
Washington is in the United States and s
represent Sugar is sweet.
(b)
h→w
ð
Þ∨s
→reads “implies”
∨reads “or”
Compound Statements:
▪
Today is Monday and it is the day before
Christmas
▪
The sun is not shining and there are rain
clouds in the sky.
▪
I will study English or Math
Note: iff reads “if and only if”
Good, too, Logic, of course; in itself, but not in fine
weather
A. H. Clough
English Poet (1848)
∧
reads
“and”
“and”
means
“both”
18
Chapter 2
Logic

The truth value of p∧q is determined using property 2.2.1.
Property 2.2.1 Conjunction: p∧q
If p is true and q is true, then p∧q is true; otherwise p∧q is false.
Columns 1 and 2 give all possible truth value combinations of the state-
ments p and q. Column 3 gives the truth value of the statement p∧q for each
of the four combinations of the individual truth values of p and q. We observe
that p and q is true only when p and q are both true; otherwise p∧q is false. This
table defines the truth value of the compound statement p∧q as determined by
the truth values of p and q separately. The representation shown by Table 2.1 is
called the truth table for the conjunction p∧q.
Example 2.2.3 Truth Values
Determine the truth value of each of the following conjunctions:
(a)
Athens is in Greece and Rhodes is an island.
(b)
Berlin is in Germany and Casablanca is in Williamsburg.
(c)
Roses are red and violets are blue.
Solution
By Property 1, “p∧q” is true only when p and q are both true. Thus, we have (a) true,
(b) false, and (c) true.
Definition 2.2.6 Disjunction: p ∨q
The disjunction of two statements p and q is the compound statement “p or q”; written
symbolically is, p∨q, where the symbol ∨is read “or.”
Example 2.2.4 Symbolism in Logic
Let p and q represent the statements “George teaches mathematics” and “George lives in
Greece”; then p∨q denotes the disjunction “George teaches mathematics or George
lives in Greece.”
TABLE 2.1 Truth Table for the conjunction p∧q
Column
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
Ÿ
Facts:
(a)
Athens is in Greece Rhodes is an island
(b)
Berlin is in Germany Casablanca is in
Morocco
(c)
Roses are red Violets are blue
∨
reads
“or”
Row 1: When both p and q are true, the
statement “p and q” is true.
Row 2: When p is true, but q is not true, the
statement “p and q” is false.
Row 3: When p is false, and only q is true, the
statement “p and q” is false.
Row 4: When both p and q are false, the
statement “p and q” is false.
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
19

The truth value of p∨q is determined by:
Property 2.2.2 Disjunction: p∨q (Inclusive)
When p is true or q is true, or if both p and q are true, then p∨q is true; otherwise p∨q is
false. Thus, the disjunction p∨q of the two statements p and q is false only when both p
and q are false.
That is, the standard disjunction ∨is the inclusive disjunction which is
true if at least one of the statements is true. The exclusive disjunctive, sym-
bolized ∨is only true if one or the other statements are true, but not both.
Thus the truth value of p∨q is determined by: p is true and q is false, or p
is false and q is true. In this text “or” will be inclusive. The truth value of
p∨q is determined from the truth values of p and q by the following truth
table (Table 2.2):
Column 3 tells us that the disjunction, p∨q, is false only when both p is
false and q is false; in other words, when p and q are both false.
Example 2.2.5 Disjunctions
Obtain the truth value of each of the following disjunctions:
(a)
3 + 55 9 or 4 + 10 5 14.
(b)
Atlanta is in Florida or Armstrong landed on the moon.
(c)
The earth is square or football is a gentle game.
Solution
By Property 2, “p∨q” is false only when p and q are both false. Thus, we have (a) true,
(b) true, and (c) false.
TABLE 2.2 Truth Table for the inclusive disjunction p∨q
Column
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
⁄
A mind all logic is like a knife all blade, it makes the
hand bleed that uses it’s
Tagore
A good decision is based on knowledge and not on
numbers.
Plato
Inclusive
“or”
means
“at least one”
Row 1: When both p and q are true, the
statement “p or q” is true.
Row 2: When p is true, but q is not true, the
statement “p or q” is true.
Row 3: When p is false, and only q is true, the
statement “p or q” is true.
Row 4: However, when both p and q are false,
the statement “p and q” is false.
20
Chapter 2
Logic

For the exclusive “or,” that is “p or q, but not both,” the truth value is deter-
mined by:
Property 2.2.3 Disjunction: p_q (Exclusive)
When p is true and q is false, or when p is false and q is true, then p∨q is true; otherwise
p∨q is false. Thus, this alternative disjunction p∨q of the two statements; p and q are
false only when both p and q are false and when both p and q are true.
In Table 2.3, Column 3 tells us that the exclusive disjunction p∨q is true
only when exactly one of the statements p and q are true. If p and q have the
same truth value then p∨q is false.
Many times it is necessary to negate a given statement, p, forming the
“negation of p.” This is accomplished by writing “It is false that” before p,
or, if possible, using the word “not” in the statement p.
Example 2.2.6 Negations
Following is the statement p, give its corresponding negation ∼p:
(a)
4 + 65 10.
(b)
London is in England.
(c)
Maria is pretty.
(d)
Jonathan is not here.
Solution
(a) ∼4 + 6510
ð
Þ is 4 + 6≠10, (b) It is not the case that London is in England or London
is not in England, (c) Maria is not pretty, (d) Jonathan is here.
Definition 2.2.7 Negation: ∼p
The negation of p is denoted by ∼p. The truth value is obtained from the property: If p
is true, then ∼p is false and if p is false, then ∼p is true. The symbol ∼is read as not;
that is, ∼p is the statement “not p.” Other common denotations of the negation of p are
p, ¬p or even 2p; however, we shall use the notation ∼p.
TABLE 2.3 Truth Table for the exclusive disjunction p∨q
Column
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
⁄
Exclusive
“or”
means
“exactly one”
Row 1: When both p and q are true, the
statement “p or q” is false.
Row 2: When p is true, but q is not true, the
statement “p or q” is true.
Row 3: When p is false, and only q is true, the
statement “p or q” is true.
Row 4: However, when both p and q are false,
the statement “p and q” is false.
Not true is false
Not false is true
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
21

The truth value of the negation ∼p is determined by the following property:
Property 2.2.4 Negation: ∼p
When p is true, then ∼p is false; if p is false, then ∼p is true.
We observe that the truth value of the negation of any statement is always
the opposite of the truth value of the original statement.
The following truth table defines the truth value of ∼p as it depends on the
truth values of p, Table 2.4.
It is clear that the first column in Table 2.4 gives the original statement
while Column 2 gives the corresponding negation.
Just as in English, a double negative statement is the positive statement;
that is, not “not p” is p; symbolically ∼∼p
ð
Þ is p.
Definition 2.2.8 Conditional Statement: p→q
Statements of the form “if p then q” are called conditional statements and are denoted
by p→q. The statement p is called the hypothesis (condition/antecedent) while
statement q is called the conclusion (consequence). The truth value of p→q is given
by the property: p→q is false only when p is true and q is false; otherwise p→q is true.
It is not the statements’ truth value we are concerned with, but whether the
implication “→” fails to be true. The key word here is “if,” this condition is often
misinterpreted. A mother say to the child, “if you misbehave, you will not get to
go outside and play” and the child is horrible but the mother says, “Just go and
play.” This teaches the child that either mom is lying or “if” has no meaning.
Unfortunately, children often assume the latter. However, this is not true, “if”
is a very powerful word; only “if” the premise is true does the implication have
to lead to the conclusion. Without the condition, the implication is vacuously
true. Given the statement “if I win the lottery, then I will buy you dinner”
and then this person does not win the lottery, but does buy me dinner, this does
not make the original statement a lie (false), it simply has not come to pass.
Example 2.2.7 Conditional Statements
Consider again the following statements:
p: I win the lottery.
q: I will buy you dinner.
TABLE 2.4 Truth Table for the negation ∼p
Column
1
2
p
~p
T
F
F
T
Statements:
▪
I like vanilla ice cream
▪
I am not a Leo
▪
My favorite color is green
Their Negations:
▪
I do not like vanilla ice cream
▪
I am a Leo
▪
My favorite color is not green
→
reads
“implies”
Hypothesis

From the Greek—basis or supposition

An assumption or concession made for
the sake of argument

A preceding event, condition or cause
Conclusion

The necessary consequence of a
preceding event, condition or cause

Something necessarily following from a
set of conditions
22
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.2.7 Conditional Statements—cont’d
Hence, p→q represents “If I win the lottery, then I will buy you dinner.” If I win the
lottery and I buy you dinner, then I have kept my word. Thus, p→q is true when p is true
and q is true. However, if I did not win the lottery and do not buy you dinner, or I did not
win the lottery but do take you to dinner, I did not break my word. Hence, p→q is true
when p is false whether q is true or false. Only when I win the lottery and do not take you
to dinner has my word been broken. Hence, the only time that p→q is false is when p is
true, but (and) q is false.
Under what conditions is this conditional statement p→q is true.
This example leads us to the following property for the conditional
statement p→q:
Property 2.2.5 Conditional Statement: p→q
The conditional statement p→q is false only when p is true and q is false; otherwise
p→q is true.
Table 2.5 defines the truth value of p→q, dependent on the truth values of p
and q.
Column 3 tells us that the conditional statement p→q is false only when p
is true and q is false; in other words, when the hypothesis is true and the con-
clusion is false.
Example 2.2.8 Conditional Truth Values
Determine the truth value of each of the following conditional statements:
(a)
If 2 + 355, then 6 + 95 15.
(b)
If 6 + 85 10, then 1 + 15 2.
(c)
If 2 + 15 4, then 2 + 35 6.
(d)
If 3 + 75 10, then 4 + 75 14.
Solution
We observe that (d) is the only conditional statement having the hypothesis
“3 + 75 10” true and the conclusion “4 + 75 14” false. Thus, (d) is a false statement.
Statements (a), (b), and (c) are all true. Note that even though the hypothesis in both (b)
and (c) is false, the resulting conditional statement is true because of Property 5.
TABLE 2.5 Truth Table for the conditional statement p ! q
Column
1
2
3
p
q
q
p Æ
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Row 1: When both p and q are true, the
statement “if p, then q” is true.
Row 2: When p is true, but q is not true, the
statement “if p, then q” is false.
Row 3: When p is false, and only q is true, the
statement “if p, then q” is not false;
that is, true.
Row 4: However, when both p and q are false,
the statement “if p, then q” is not
false; that is, true.
(a)
T→T is T
(b)
F→T is T
(c)
F→F is T
(d)
T→F is F
TRUE WHEN
T→T
F→T
F→F
If p true, it is suffice to say, then q is true.
However, q only needs to be true when p is true.
(a) 2 + 355
T
6 + 9515
T
(b) 6 + 8510
F
1 + 152
T
(c)
2 + 154
F
2 + 356
F
(d) 3 + 7510
T
4 + 7514
F
(a)
F→T is T
(b)
T→T is T
(c)
F→F is T
(d)
T→F is F
Common: Conditional Statement
There are four common ways in which the
conditional statement p→q can be expressed.
1.
p implies q (Direct statement)
2.
p only if q
3.
p is sufficient for q
4.
q is necessary for p
If science and logic chatters as fine and as fast as he
can; though I am no judge of such matters, I’m sure
he’s a talented man
W. M. Praed
Write of “The Talented Man” (1830)
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
23

The following example depicts the usage of the preceding expressions.
However, it should be noted that a frequent usage of “p implies q” is the
meaning that q is true whenever p is true. The conditional “p→q” is a
new statement compounded from two given statements, while the impli-
cation “p implies q” is a relation between two statements. The connection
is the following: “p implies q” means the conditional statement p→q is
always true.
Example 2.2.9 Necessary and Sufficient
Obtain the truth value of each of the following conditional statements:
(a)
3 + 7 5 11 is a sufficient condition for 4 + 85 12.
(b)
4 + 11 5 15 is a necessary condition that 3× 35 9.
(c)
Sugar is sour implies vinegar is sweet.
(d)
4 + 10 5 14 only if 5× 45 23.
Solution
Statement (a) can be expressed as “If 3 + 75 11, then 4 + 85 12,” which is
true because the hypothesis “3 + 75 11” is false and the conclusion “4 + 85 12” is
true. Statement (b) can be expressed as “If 3×359, then 4 + 115 15,” which is true.
Statement (c) can be restated in the form “If sugar is sour, then vinegar is sweet.” We
observe that since both hypotheses and the conclusion are false, the given conditional
statement is true. Statement (d) can be restated as “If 4 + 105 14, then 5×4523,”
which is false because the hypothesis “4 + 105 14” is true but the conclusion
“5×45 23” is false.
Definition 2.2.9 Bi-conditional Statement: p↔q
A statement of the form “p if and only if q” is called a bi-conditional statement, written
in shorthand, you will often write “p iff q,” symbolically, p↔q.
Its truth value is obtained from the property 2.2.6. If p and q are both true or
if p and q are both false, then p↔q is true; if p and q have opposite truth values,
then p↔q is false. This is due to the fact that the statement p↔q is equivalent
to the conjunction of conditional statements, p→q
ð
Þ∧q→p
ð
Þ, hence if both p
and q are both true then both p→q and q→p are true and if both p and q are
both false then both p→q and q→p are vacuously true; thus p→q
ð
Þ∧q→p
ð
Þ
is true.
A convenient way to analyze logically compound statements formed by the
connectives ∧, ∨, ∼, →and ↔is by structuring their truth tables. Truth
tables will be introduced in Section 2.4.
Example 2.2.10 Bi-Conditional Statement
Let p represent the statement “Maria is happy” and q “Maria looks beautiful”; then p↔q
denotes the bi-conditional statement “Maria is happy if and only if she looks beautiful.”
The following property is used to determine the truth value of the
bi-conditional statement:
Necessary

Being essential, indispensable,
or requisite

Existing by necessity
Sufficient

Adequate for the purpose; enough

Of a condition
p↔q
A bi-conditional statement
Bi
From the Latin “bis” meaning twice
p↔q
24
Chapter 2
Logic

Property 2.2.6 Bi-Conditional Statement: p↔q
If p and q are either both statements are true or both statements are false, then p↔q is
true; if p and q have opposite truth values, then p↔q is false.
The truth value of the biconditional statement p↔q is given in Table 2.6.
In Table 2.6, Column 3 tells us that the bi-conditional statement p↔q is
true only if p and q have the same truth value, as in the first and fourth lines
of the table.
Example 2.2.11 Bi-Conditional Statement Truth Value
Determine the truth value of each of the following bi-conditional statements:
(a)
4+8512 if and only if 3+7510.
(b)
London is in France if and only if “Sharks” live on the moon.
(c)
14+5520 if and only if 3+8515.
(d)
5+358 if and only if 6 is greater than 8.
Solution
WeobservethatonlyinStatements(a),(b),and(c)havepandqhavethesametruthvalue,
both being true in (a) and both false in (b) and (c). Thus, we can conclude that Statements
(a), (b), and (c) are true, whereas Statement (d) is false.
We should also mention here that a bi-conditional statement, p↔q, is often
stated in the form “p is necessary and sufficient for q.”
Example 2.2.12 Bi-Conditional Statement Truth Value
Obtain the truth value of each of the following bi-conditional statements:
(a)
4+559 is a necessary and sufficient condition for 8+7515.
(b)
Honey is sweet is necessary and sufficient for 8+10525.
Solution
We can rewrite Statement (a) as “4 + 55 9 if and only if 8 + 75 15,” which is true.
Statement (b) can be restated in the form “Honey is sweet if and only if
8 + 105 25,” which is a false bi-conditional statement since p and q have opposite truth
values.
TABLE 2.6 Truth Table for the bi-conditional statement p↔q
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
´
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
Column
1
2
3
Row 1: When both p and q are true, the
statement “p iff q” is true.
Row 2: When p is true, but q is not true, the
statement “p iff q” is false.
Row 3: When p is false, and only q is true, the
statement “p iff q” is false.
Row 4: However, when both p and q are false,
the statement “p iff q” is true.
(a)
T↔T is T
(b)
F↔F is T
(c)
F↔F is T
(d)
T↔F is F
Ifitwasso,itmightbe;andifitwereso,itwouldbe:
but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic
Lewis Carroll
Logician in Through the
Looking Glass (1872)
2.2 Statements and Their Truth Values
25

EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
Indicate which phrases are acceptable statements; and for those which are, indicate whether they are true or false.
2.2.1. Sparta is in Greece.
2.2.2. 11 + 15 10.
2.2.3. Who is coming?
2.2.4. Put the fish in the water.
2.2.5. Florida has a cold climate.
2.2.6. Tennis is fun.
2.2.7. 23 + 552.
2.2.8. Goodbye Columbus.
2.2.9. Put your shoes on.
2.2.10. Casablanca is in North Africa.
2.2.11. Tampa is the capital of Florida.
2.2.12. Answer the phone.
2.2.13. This statement is false.
Analyze the given statements and indicate the appropriate connectives and the simple statements.
2.2.14. 4 + 1 5 5 and Maria is pretty.
2.2.15. If you are swimming in the Gulf, then Washington is in England or 4+7¼10.
2.2.16. If Columbus was from Italy or Columbus was from Portugal, then 1492 was an Italian year.
2.2.17. If Jonathan is thirsty, then Maria needs water, but 1977 is a dry year.
2.2.18. If 4 2 1157, then 24 + 115 10 and 62 75 21.
2.2.19. Deb is athletic if Maria and Jonathan are, but Mathew is a basketball player.
2.2.20. It is not the case that it is raining and the sun is shining.
Basic Problems
Write each statement in symbolic form using the indicated letters to represent the corresponding simple statement.
2.2.21. Roses are red (r), Violets are blue (b)
2.2.22. I will travel by train (t), plane (p) or automobile (a).
2.2.23. I will study art (a) and music (m) as a minor.
2.2.24. You may go to the movies (m) if and only if you clean your room (r).
2.2.25. If I win the lottery (l), then I will buy you dinner (d).
2.2.26. Give a verbal translation of each compound statement given p represents “I love Lucy” and q represents “Lucy is a
research scientist.”
a. p∧q
b. p∨q
c. ∼p∧q
d. ∼p∧q
ð
Þ
e. ∼p∨∼q
f. p∧∼q
g. ∼p∨q
Write the negative of each statement.
2.2.27. Our coffee shop showed profit this year.
2.2.28. My cats name is Snowflake.
2.2.29. My cat is not a Siamese.
2.2.30. Peggy loves chocolate cake.
2.2.31. All positive integers are even
2.2.32. All rhombi are rectangles.
2.2.33. Some democrats are politicians.
2.2.34. The number 5 is a whole number.
26
Chapter 2
Logic

2.2.35. Everyone likes ice cream.
2.2.36. There are no absolutes; that is nothing is certain.
2.2.37. All circles are round.
Determine the truth value of the given statements or give the conditions that will make the statement true.
2.2.38. 4+16519 and Florida is in Canada.
2.2.39. Peter is a swimmer and Alex a boxer.
2.2.40. 42650 and 5+5510.
2.2.41. Sopoto is in Greece and Chris is from Sopoto.
2.2.42. 32350 or 9+158.
2.2.43. Miami is in Mississippi or Newport is in Rhode Island.
2.2.44. The earth is round or the moon is square.
2.2.45. If Houston is in Texas, then Boston is in New York.
2.2.46. If 6+358 then 62358.
2.2.47. If 5+3¼8, then 6+258.
2.2.48. If the sun is shining, then it is cold.
2.2.49. If 6211525, then Chris is Greek.
2.2.50. 6+6512 if and only if 3+659.
2.2.51. Chicago is in Michigan if Tampa is in Florida.
2.2.52. Patras is in the Corinthian Gulf if and only if Peter is from Sopoto.
2.2.53. 11+4515 if and only if 6211525.
2.2.54. 6+11517 is a sufficient condition for 6+8512.
2.2.55. Honey is sweet implies Jan is sour.
2.2.56. 6+14520 is a necessary condition for 3+8511.
2.2.57. 9+22531 only if 17+6521.
2.2.58. If 16+22538, then Alex is pretty.
2.2.59. San Francisco is in California.
2.3
TRUTH TABLES
Often, in logical reasoning, complex compound statements are formed by the
logical connectives such as conjunctive, disjunctive, negation, implication and
bi-implications written symbolically:
∧, ∨, ∼, →and↔
along with simple statements p, q, r… Our aim in this section is to learn how to
determine the truth value of such a compound statement when the truth values
of its components p, q, r… are known. An effective way of doing this is by
using truth tables.
Given n simple statements, then there are 2n different possible combina-
tions of true values. This can be seen in previous examples; when there is a
single statement as in Table 2.4 when the negation is considered, there are only
2152 possibilities, either p is true or p is false. When there are two simple state-
ments as in Table 2.1 when the conjunction of two simple statements is con-
sidered, there are 2254 possibilities: TT, TF, FT, and FF. Notice, half the first
are T and half are F; this is also true for the second, however they are “half”;
that is, half the T’s for the first statement are T for the second statement and
half for the second statement are F as well as half the F’s for the first statement
are T for the second statement and half for the second statement are F.
Extending this “halving” technique, for three simple statements, there are
2358 different possible combinations; for the first statement, four are T and
four are F; for the four T’s statements, two are T and two are F which is
∧

And
∨

Or
∼

Not
→

Implies, if …, then …
´

… if and only if … “iff”
2.3 Truth Tables
27

the same for the F’s. Then, for each of the given possibilities, the last statement
is either true or false (Table 2.7).
Example 2.3.1
Determine the truth table for ∼p→q.
Solution
First we observe that this statement is composed of the simple statements ∼p and q
along with the connectives ∼and →. Since there are just two simple statements, p
and q, involved, each one being either true or false, the truth table will have 4 rows,
giving all possible truth-value combinations of p and q. We present this procedure in
five steps, as illustrated below:
STEP 1: Construct the truth table for the given number of simple statements
p
q
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
STEP 2: We determine the truth values for ∼p by using Table 2.4
p
q
~p
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
STEP 3: Lastly, we determine the truth values for ∼p→q using statement builder
tables.
p
q
~p
~p Æ q
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
TABLE 2.7 Truth values for three simple statements
p  q  r  
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
Not true is false and not false is true:
(a)
∼T≡F
(b)
∼T≡F
(c)
∼F≡T
(d)
∼F≡T
p
q
r
T
TTT
T
F
TTF
T
T
TFT
F
F
TFF
T
FTT
T
F
FTF
F
T
FFT
F
F
FFF
If I do not have to work today, then I will go
to the store.
Fails only when premise is true and the
conclusion does not follow:
(a)
∼T→T is T
(b)
∼T→F is T
(c)
∼F→T is T
(d)
∼F→F is F
28
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
The last column was obtained by using the truth values of ∼p and q along with the
truth table in Property 2.2.5, defining the truth value of a conditional statement.
An alternative way of constructing the truth table is to reproduce this information as
in the chart below allowing a column for each connective.
STEP 4: Reproduce information need in final statement.
~p
Æ
q
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
STEP 5: Then use this information to construct the conditional statement ∼p→q
~p
q
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
Æ
The entire problem presented in a single table as follows:
1
2
3
4
6
5
p
q
~p
~p
q
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
Æ
Example 2.3.2
Construct a truth table for the p∨q
ð
Þ→p
Solution
p
q
q
p
p
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
⁄
⁄
Æ
Or, alternatively
1 
2 
3 
5 
4 
p
q
q
p
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
⁄
Æ
We note from the answer column indicates that p∨q
ð
Þ→p is false only when p is
false and q is true; otherwise p∨q
ð
Þ→p is true.
If you have pride or money, then you have
pride.
Hence, when you have pride and have
money, then you do have pride, this is true.
Then when you don’t have pride but you do
have money, then stating this implies pride is
fallacious.
When you have pride, but do not have
money, then you can conclude you have pride.
However, when you don’t have pride and you
don’t have money, then stating “If you have
pride or money, then you have pride” is not
false, and is therefore true.
If we may believe our logicians, man is
distinguished from all others creatures by the
faculty of laughter
The Spectator (1712)
2.3 Truth Tables
29

Example 2.3.3
Construct a truth table for the statement p→p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨∼p
Solution
p
q
q
p
q
p
p
p
q
p
p
~
~p
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
⁄
Æ
Æ
Or, alternatively
1 
2 
3 
5 
4 
7 
6 
p
q
p
[
]
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
~p
Ÿ
⁄
Æ
Step 5 is obtained from Steps 3 and 4, giving the truth value of p→p∧q
ð
Þ. We see that
p→p∧q
ð
Þ is false only when p is true and (p∧q) is false. Table 2.4 is used to complete
the column.
Step 7 is obtained by using the truth values in Steps 5 and 6 along with Table 2.2 for
the disjunction. Note that the disjunction p→p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨∼p is false only in the second
line, where both p→p∧q
ð
Þ and ∼p are false.
Example 2.3.4
Determine the truth table for
p∧q
ð
Þ∧r
½
→p∨q
ð
Þ
Solution
Since there are three simple statements forming this compound statement; namely, p, q,
and r, the truth table will have 2358 rows.
Following the indicated steps carefully, using Table 2.1 for the conjunction ∧,
Table 2.2 for the disjunction ∨and Table 2.5 for the conditional →, we have
p
q
r
q
p
r
q
p
q
p
q
p
r
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
⁄
⁄
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Æ
If you know Math, English and Science, then
you know Math or English.
Table 2.1
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
Table 2.2
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
Table 2.5
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
Ÿ
⁄
Æ
Regardless of the validity of each simple
statement, the statement is always true; hence, a
tautology.
30
Chapter 2
Logic

Alternatively,
1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
5 
8 
7 
p
q
r
q
p
[
]
r
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
Ÿ
Ÿ
⁄
Æ
An
analysis
of
Step
8
reveals
that
the
compound
statement
p∧q
ð
Þ∧r
½
→p∨q
ð
Þ is true, regardless of the truth values of p, q, and r. Step
8 was computed from Steps 6 and 7 by use of Table 2.5, which defines the
conditional.
Example 2.3.5
Construct a truth table for p∧∼q
ð
Þ↔r.
Solution
Following the indicated steps carefully, we can write
p
q
r
q
~
q
p ~
r
q
p ~
OR 
q
p
r
~
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
´
´
Alternatively,
1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
8 
7 
p
q
r
q
~
q
p
~
r
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F
Ÿ
´
Note that Step 7 was obtained from Steps 5 and 6, making use of Table 2.6 for the
bi-conditional statement.
Example 2.3.6
Construct a truth table for the statement p∨q


→p∧∼q
ð
Þ
There is rain and not sunshine if and only if
there are clouds in the sky.
Let p represent “there is rain,” q represent
“the sun is shining” and r represent “there are
clouds.”
This statement is not true when:
There is sunshine with the rain, regardless of
the clouds; or, there is no rain when there are
clouds.
Table 2.6
1
2
3
p
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
´
“You can have ice cream and not cake if and
only if you finish your dinner”
This statement is false when: I have cake or
ice cream without finishing my dinner; this
includes cake and ice cream; or I don’t have
cake and I don’t have ice cream when I do finish
my dinner.
“If you want to drink either chocolate milk
or soda, then you may have chocolate milk, but
not a soda.” This statement is false when: I have
the soda and not chocolate milk.
If there is either a cheaper guitar or a
payment plan r, then I will buy a cheaper guitar
and not take the payment plan. This statement is
false when: There is not a cheaper guitar and I
do take the payment plan.
2.3 Truth Tables
31

Solution
Following the indicated steps we have
p
q
q
p
q
~
q
p
~
q
p
q
p
~
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
Æ
Ÿ
⁄
⁄
Ÿ
Or, alternatively
1 
2 
3 
7 
4 
6 
5 
p
q
q
p
p
~ q
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
⁄
Ÿ
Æ
Example 2.3.7
Let the connective Δ be defined by the truth table,
p
q
q
p
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
D
Find the truth value for p→∼pΔ ∼q∧p
ð
Þ
½

p
p
p
~p
p
p
q
~q
~q
q
D
D
Ÿ
Ÿ
Æ
Ÿ
~q
~p
~p
~
Alternatively,
1 
2 
3 
9 
4 
8 
5 
7 
6 
p
q
p
p
[~
q
(~
)]
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
Ÿ
D
Æ
Step 7 giving the truth values of ∼q∧p was obtained from Steps 5 and 6,
making use of Table 2.1 for ∧. The truth values for ∼pΔ ∼q∧p
ð
Þ were obtained
from Steps 4 and 7 and the truth table for the connective ∧given at the
beginning of this problem. Finally, the answer in Step 9 was derived from Steps
3 and 8, making use of Table 2.5 for the conditional statement.
pΔq≡∼p→q
ð
Þ
Let p represent “John is smart,” q represent
“Leroy is tall” and r represent “Sherrie is
bashful.”
It is the logic of our times, no subject for immortal
verse – that we who lived by honest dreams. Defend
the bad against the worse
C. Day-Lewis
Anglo-Irish Poet (1943)
32
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.3.8
Determine the truth value of the following statement: “John is smart or Leroy is tall if
and only if Sherrie is bashful implies John is not smart.” Given that John is smart,
Leroy is not tall and Sherrie is bashful.
Solution
First, we note that “John is smart or Leroy is tall” can be written symbolically as
p∨q
Secondly, we can write the statement “Sherrie is bashful implies John is not smart”
as
r→∼p:
Thirdly, joining the two statements with the bi-conditional “if and only if,” we can
represent the entire statement as
p∨q
ð
Þ↔r→∼p
ð
Þ
Now, since (p∨q) is true when p is true and q is false and (r→∼p) is false when r is
true and p is true, we can write
T∨F
ð
Þ↔T→∼T
ð
Þ
T
ð Þ↔T→F
ð
Þ
This leads us to T↔F, which means that the given statement is false.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
2.3.1. How many rows are required in a truth table for a compound statement that contains four simple statements,
p, q, r, and s?
2.3.2. How many rows are required in a truth table for a compound statement that contains five simple statements,
p, q, r, s and t?
Basic Problems
Construct the truth table for the following statements:
2.3.3. ∼q∧p
2.3.4. ∼p∧q
ð
Þ
2.3.5. ∼∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ
2.3.6. p∧q∨p
ð
Þ
2.3.7.
p∨q
ð
Þ→p
2.3.8.
p∧q
ð
Þ→p
2.3.9.
p∨q
ð
Þ→p∧q
ð
Þ
2.3.10.
p→q
ð
Þ∨p
½

2.3.11.
p∧q
ð
Þ∨q
½
→p
2.3.12.
p→q
ð
Þ∨∼p
½
→q
2.3.13. p∨q∧r
ð
Þ
2.3.14.
p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨r
ð
Þ
2.3.15. pΔ∼q
2.3.16. ∼pΔq
Determine the truth value of the following statements given p is true, q is false and r is true.
2.3.17. p→q∨r
ð
Þ
2.3.18. p∧q∨r
ð
Þ
2.3.19. p∨∼p
2.3.20. p∧∼q→r
ð
Þ
Exercises
33

2.4
PROPERTIES OF LOGIC
In certain cases of logical reasoning we are concerned with statements that are
always true; for example, p∨∼p is always true. If p is true then we have T∨F,
which is true; however, if p is false then we have F∨T, which is true. More
specifically, consider the following definition:
Definition 2.4.1 Tautology
A compound statement, τ, is said to be a tautology or logically true if it is true for all
possible truth values of its components.
In other words a tautology, τ, is a compound statement which has only true,
T, in the last column of its truth table. Note that in Example 2.16 the
p∧q
ð
Þ∧r
½
→p∨q
ð
Þ is a tautology.
Example 2.4.1 Tautology
Show that the statement ∼p∧q
ð
Þ∨p is a tautology.
Solution
Constructing the truth table for the statement ∼p∧q
ð
Þ∨p, we have
p
q
q
p
q
p
~
p
q
p
~
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
Ÿ
Ÿ
⁄
Ÿ
Since the truth table for the statement ∼p∧q
ð
Þ∨p is true, T, for
all possible truth value combinations of p and q, the statement is a
tautology.
Analogous to tautologies, there are statements that are logically false; for
example, p∧∼p is always false. If p is true then we have T∧F, which is false;
however, if p is false then we have F∧T, which is false.
That is,
Definition 2.4.2 Contradiction
A compound statement, ϕ, is said to be a self-contradiction or logically false if it is
false for all possible truth values of its components.
This means that a self-contradiction, φ, is a compound statement that has
only false, F, in the last column of its truth table. Consider the following
example:
Tautology

From the Greek word ταυτολογία
meaning a formula which is
unconditional true, tautology was first
applied by Ludwig Wittgenstein to
redundancies of propositional logic in
1921.
If you do not have both p and q, then you are
missing at least one; hence, you either don’t have
p (or not q), or you do have p—this is always
true. With anything, you either you have it, or
your do not, this is an unconditional truth.
A tune is a kind of tautology … complete in itself
Wittgenstein
If you don’t know, then you know.
You must clean both your room and the
kitchen, but you don’t have to do at least
one of these.
34
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.4.2 Self-Contradiction
Show that the statement p∧q
ð
Þ∧∼p∨q
ð
Þ is a self-contradiction.
p
p
p
p
p
p
q
q
q
q
q
q
⁄
⁄
⁄
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ ~
~
1
2
3
4
5
6
Observe that Step 6 was obtained from Steps 3 and 5, making use of
Table 2.1 for the conjunction. Since only F appears in Step 6, we conclude that
the statement p∧q
ð
Þ∧∼p∨q
ð
Þ is a self-contradiction.
Definition 2.4.3 Paradox
A paradox is an apparently true statement or group of statements that leads to a
contradiction.
For example, the liars’ paradox: “this statement is false”; when this
statement is true, this implies it is false or vice versa.
In logical reasoning we often encounter statements that are the same or
equivalent.
That is,
Definition 2.4.4 Equivalent
Two statements r and s are said to be logically equivalent or simply equivalent if they
have identical truth tables; that is, if r↔s is a tautology. To symbolize two equivalent
statements r and s, we write r≡s or r¤s.
Similarly, we write pﬁq when the statement p→q is a tautology.
Example 2.4.3 Equivalent Statements
Show that the statement ∼p∨q is equivalent to the statement p→q.
Solution
We begin by constructing the truth table for ∼p∨q
ð
Þ↔p→q
ð
Þ.
p
q
~p
q
~p
q
p
q
p
q
~p
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
⁄
Æ
Æ
´
⁄
Since ∼p∨q
ð
Þ↔p→q
ð
Þ is a tautology, we see that ∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡p→q
ð
Þ.
When you do both, then you did not listen when
I stated you don’t have to do at least one, and
when you don’t do both, you did not listen to
the first statement which stated do both your
room and the kitchen.
Archival Note
The Epimenides paradox (circa 600 BCE), is a
liar’s paradox; what do you think form a man
from Crete when he states “Cretans are always
liars.”
Syntactically
r≡s
Semantically
r¤s
I will not win the lottery ticket or I will take you
to dinner is equivalent to stating if I win the
lottery, then I will take you to dinner.
Lottery

From the Italian lotteria meaning
arrangement for a distribution of
prizes by chance
If the sun is shining, then I will go
swimming is equivalent to stating if I
don’t go swimming, then the sun was
not shining.
If you are seventeen, then you are a
minor is equivalent to stating if you are
not
a
minor,
then
you
are
not
seventeen.
If you have an A in this course, then
you understand logic is equivalent to
stating if you do not know logic, then
you will not have an A in this course.
If you are seventeen, then you are a
minor is NOT equivalent to stating if
you are a minor, then you are sev-
enteen. There are many ways to be a
minor and not be seventeen.
Minor

A person under the age of full legal
responsibility
2.4 Properties of Logic
35

Example 2.4.4 Contrapositive: ∼q→∼p
Show that p→q
ð
Þ≡∼q→∼p
ð
Þ.
Solution
It suffices to show that the statement p→q
ð
Þ↔∼q→∼p
ð
Þ is a tautology. We can show
this by structuring the appropriate truth table.
That is,
~
~
~
~
~
~
T 
p
q
p
q
q
q
q
q
p
p
p
p
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
´
Example 2.4.5 Converse: q→p
Show that the statement p→q is not logically equivalent to the statement q→p.
Solution
We begin by constructing the truth table for the statement p→q
ð
Þ↔q→p
ð
Þ.
~
~
T 
p
p
p
p
p
q
q
q
q
q
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
´
It
is
clear
from
the
results
of
Step
5
that
the
statement
p→q
ð
Þ↔∼q→∼p
ð
Þ is not a tautology; thus
p→q
ð
Þ
=
≡∼q→∼p
ð
Þ,
where
=
≡is read “not equivalent.”
Example 2.4.6 Not Implied: ∼p→q
ð
Þ
Is the statement ∼p→q
ð
Þ is equivalent to the statement p∧∼q?
Solution
We begin by constructing the truth table for the statement ∼p→q
ð
Þ↔p∧∼q
ð
Þ.
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
~
~
~
~
~
T 
p 
q 
q 
p 
q 
p 
q 
p 
q 
p 
p 
q 
q 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
Æ
Æ
Æ
´
Ÿ
´
Ÿ
If the figure is a square, then the rectangle is
NOT equivalent to stating if the figure is a
rectangle, then the figure is a square. A rect-
angle has equal angles whereas a square has
both equal angles and equal sides.
Given it is not the case that if you are an adult,
then you do drive, this is equivalent to stating
there are adults out there that do not drive.
36
Chapter 2
Logic

We observe that the truth table for the statement ∼p→q
ð
Þ in Step 5 is the
same as the truth table for p∧∼q in Step 6. Thus, we conclude that
∼p→q
ð
Þ≡p∧∼q
ð
Þ. This means that the negation of the conditional
statement, p→q, is equivalent to p∧∼q. Moreover, using this equivalence
in
conjunction
with
the
equivalence
in
Example
2.4.3,
∼∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡p∧∼q
ð
Þ; this distributive property called De Morgan’s Laws.
Example 2.4.7 Equivalent Statements
Show that p∧q
ð
Þ∧r≡p∧q∧r
ð
Þ.
Solution
The equivalence relation of these two statements can be seen by constructing the fol-
lowing truth table:
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
p
q
r
q
p
r
q
p
r
q
r
q
p
r
q
p
r
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
´
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Since the truth table for p∧q
ð
Þ∧r in Step 5 is identical to that p∧q∧r
ð
Þ in
Step 7, we conclude that, indeed, the two statements are equivalent. This is
further seen in Step 8 which shows that p∧q
ð
Þ∧r↔p∧q∧r
ð
Þ is a tautology.
The statements that we have studied under the equivalence relation, ≡,
satisfy some very basic laws of algebra listed below. We shall state these laws
and illustrate their usefulness with some examples. In order to prove any of
these laws of algebra it is sufficient to construct a truth table to show that
the given equivalence statement is indeed true.
Let p, q, and r represent given statements.
Rule 2.4.1 Idempotent
p∨p≡p and p∧p≡p
Idempotent describes the property of operations, as in mathematics and
computer science, which yield the same result after the operation is applied
multiple times.
Given it is not the case that if you try to get
pregnant that you will get pregnant is equiv-
alent to stating there are those out there who
try to get pregnant and do not get pregnant.
Given it is not the case that having money
implies happiness is equivalent to stating
there are those who have money, but are
not happy.
Commutative

From Latin commutate to change

Involving the quality that quantities
connected by operators give the same
result when commuted
a×b5b×a
Tautology

From the Greek tautologia—the same
saying

A statement that is true by necessity or
by virtue of its logical form
Idempotence

Applied a multiple number of times
without change
Example:
f x
ð Þ5x
f f x
ð Þ
ð
Þ5f x
ð Þ5x
⋮
2.4 Properties of Logic
37

Rule 2.4.2 Associative
p∨q
ð
Þ∨r≡p∨q∨r
ð
Þ and p∧q
ð
Þ∧r≡p∧q∧r
ð
Þ
Associative describes the property of operations that enables statements to
re-associate while yielding the same result. The associative law in logic is com-
parable to the associative law of addition and multiplication in algebra; that is,
a + b
ð
Þ + c5a + b + c
ð
Þ and a×b
ð
Þ×c5a× b×c
ð
Þ.
Rule 2.4.3 Commutative
p∨q≡q∨p and p∧q≡q∧p
Commutative describes the property of operations that enables statements
to move or commute while yielding the same result. The commutative law in
logic is comparable to the commutative law of addition and multiplication in
algebra; that is, a + b5b + a and a×b5b×a.
Rule 2.4.4 Distributive
p∨q∧r
ð
Þ≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨r
ð
Þ and p∧q∨r
ð
Þ≡p∧q
ð
Þ∨p∧r
ð
Þ
Distributive describes the property of one operator to be expanded in a par-
ticular way which yield the same result; that is, an equivalent expression. The
distributive law in logic is more extensive than the distributive property in
algebra. In logic, the operator for “and” is distributive over the operator for
“or” and vise verse, whereas in algebra, this relation only works for “multipli-
cation” over “addition” but not “addition over multiplication.” However, the
idea of distribution of one operator over a second operator is comparable; for
multiplication over addition we have a b + c
ð
Þ5ab + ac and for power over
multiplication we have a×b
ð
Þn5an×bn.
Rule 2.4.5 Identity
If τ is a tautology and φ is any contradiction, then
p∨ϕ≡p, p∧τ≡p, p∧ϕ≡ϕ and p∨τ≡τ
Identity is the state or fact of remaining the same one or ones, as under
varying aspects or conditions, to identify. Hence, a contradiction in a dis-
junction identifies the truth value of the statement p, but in conjunction iden-
tifies the contradiction. A tautology in disjunction identifies the tautology,
whereas in conjunction identifies the true value of the statement p. The first
two are comparable to the identity property of addition and multiplication:
a + 05a and a×15a, where 0 is compared to the contradiction and 1 is com-
pared to the tautology; therefore, “or” is comparable to “addition” and “and” is
comparable to “multiplication.” The third is comparable to zero property,
a×050; however, the four as will the law of distribution is not exactly com-
parable to any given algebraic property or law. These comparisons will come
back into play in Chapter 3, which introduces the fundamental principle of
counting; basically “and” means “multiply” (when there are more than one
independent events) and “or” means “add” (minus overlap).
Comparable to Association in Addition and
Multiplication
a + b
ð
Þ + c5a + b + c
ð
Þ
a×b
ð
Þ×c5a× b×c
ð
Þ
Comparable to Commutative in Addition and
Multiplication
a + b5b + a
a×b5b×a
Not directly comparable to Distributive in
Addition and Multiplications multiplication
is distributive over addition, but not the
reverse.
Whereas in Logic, conjunction distribu-
tions over disjunction and disjunction distri-
butions over conjunction.
Not exactly comparable to the Identity in
Addition and Multiplication as the last
statement would not follow in addition
a + 0 = a
a + 1 = a
a ¥ 0 = 0
a ¥ 1 = a
Directly comparable to maximum of 0/1 versus
minimum 0/1; that is,
a50 (false) and a51 (true):
max{a, 0} = a
max{a, 1} = 1
or
and
multiply
addition
min{a, 0} = 0
min{a, 1} = a
38
Chapter 2
Logic

Rule 2.4.6 Complementary
If τ is a tautology and ϕ is any contradiction, then
p∨∼p≡τ, p∧∼p≡ϕ, ∼∼p
ð
Þ≡p, ∼τ≡ϕ and ∼ϕ≡τ
A complement is the part needed to make complete or perfect; in logic, this
is the relationship between true and false, an event and not the event, etc. In
logic, the statement is true or the statement is false and thus p∨∼p is a tau-
tology, τ; however, a statement cannot be both true and false; hence, p∧∼p is
a contradiction, ϕ. Furthermore, as in English, a double negative is the positive
statement; not “not p” then p. Finally, logically speaking, the negation of a tau-
tology is a contradiction and the negation of a contradiction is a tautology.
They complement each other, without tautologies, contradictions would
not exist.
Rule 2.4.7 De Morgan’s Rule
∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡∼p∧∼q and ∼p∧q
ð
Þ≡∼p∨∼q
De Morgan’s Rule illustrates the fact that “or” is the complement of “and”
and vice versa. In logic, “or” means at least one and “and” means both; hence,
when you do not have at least one, ∼p∨q
ð
Þ, this is equivalent to you do not
have either, or you are missing both, ∼p∧∼q; you do not have the first and
you do not have the second. Similarly, when you do not have both, ∼p∧q
ð
Þ,
this is equivalent to you are missing at least one, ∼p∨∼q; you do not have the
first or you do not have the second. The idea of “negation” will be discuss
further in Section 2.6.
It is left to the student as an exercise to construct the truth tables to show the
stated equivalence of the preceding laws of algebra. However, we use these
laws to simplify compound statements.
Example 2.4.8 Properties of Logic
Simplify each of the following statements by using the laws of statements and using t for
tautologies and ϕ for contradictions:
(a)
p∨q
ð
Þ∧∼p
(c)
∼p∨q
ð
Þ
½
∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
(b)
p∨p∧q
ð
Þ
(d)
∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
Solution
Statement (a)
Reason
1.
p∨q
ð
Þ∧∼p≡∼p∧p∨q
ð
Þ
Commutative Law
2.
≡∼p∧p
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
Distributive Law
3.
≡ϕ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
Complement Law
4.
≡∼p∧q
ð
Þ
Identity Law
I will do the dishes or wash the car, but I will not
do the dishes is equivalent to saying I will not do
the dishes and I will wash the car.
Directly comparable to maximum of 0/1 versus
minimum 0/1; that is, a50 (false) and
a51 (true); if p is a, then ∼p is 12a :
max a,12a
f
g51
min a,12a
f
g50
12150
12051
De Morgan was a British mathematician and
logician who formulated De Morgan’s laws and
introduced rigor to mathematical induction.
This will be similar in sets or events:
When you do not have at least one, then you
do not have the first and you do not have
the second.
When you do have both, you are missing at
least one; either the first one or the second
one (or you are missing both), you just do
not have both.
Let’s use the following laws:
Commutative
Distribution
Complement
Identity
De Morgan’s Law
2.4 Properties of Logic
39

Statement (b)
Reason
1.
p∨p∧q
ð
Þ≡p∨p
ð
Þ∧p∨q
ð
Þ
Distributive Law
2.
≡p∧p∨q
ð
Þ
Identity Law
Statement (c)
Reason
1.
∼p∨q
ð
Þ
½
∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
≡∼p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
De Morgan’s Law
2.
≡∼p∧∼q∨q
ð
Þ
Distributive Law
3.
≡∼p∧τ
Complement Law
4.
≡∼p
Identity Law
Statement (d)
Reason
1.
∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
≡∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
De Morgan’s Law
2.
≡∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨p
½
∧
∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨∼q
½

Distributive Law
3.
≡p∨∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ
½
∧
∼p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨∼q
½

Commutative Law
4.
≡p∨∼p
ð
Þ∨q
½
∧∼p∨∼q∨∼q
ð
Þ
½

Associative Law
5.
≡τ∨∼q
½
∧∼p∨∼q∨∼q
ð
Þ
½

Complement Law
6.
≡τ∨∼q
½
∧∼p∨∼q
½

Idempotent Law
7.
≡τ∧∼p∨∼q
½

Identity Law
8.
≡∼p∨∼q
Identity Law
9.
≡∼p∧q
ð
Þ
De Morgan’s Law
I have ice cream, or I have ice cream and cake is
equivalent to I have ice cream, and I have ice
cream or cake.
Either I don’t have at least one (p or q) or I am
missing the first (p) and have the second (q) is
equivalent to I don’t have the first (p). As for the
second, I either have it or I do not—it is
irrelevant.
Either I do not have both (p and q) or I have the
first (p) and not the second (q) is equivalent to
stating I do not have both the first and second.
I lost my pen and paper, or I have the pen
and not the paper is equivalent to stating I lost
either the pen or I lost the paper; that is, I do not
have both the pen and paper.
EXERCISES
Summary
Idempotent Law
p∧p5p
p∨p5p
Associative Law
p∧q∧r
ð
Þ5 p∧q
ð
Þ∧rp∧p5p
p∨q∨r
ð
Þ5 p∨q
ð
Þ∨rp∨p5p
Commutative Law
p∧q5q∧p
p∨q5q∨p
Distributive Laws
p∨q∧r
ð
Þ5 p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨q
ð
Þ
p∧q∨r
ð
Þ5 p∧q
ð
Þ∨p∧r
ð
Þ
Identity Law
p∨ϕ5p,
p∧τ5p,
p∧ϕ5ϕ,
p∨τ5τ
Complement Law
p∨∼p5τ,
p∧∼p5ϕ,
∼∼p
ð
Þ5p,
∼τ5ϕ,
∼ϕ5τ
De Morgan’s Laws
∼p∨q
ð
Þ5∼p∧∼q,
∼p∧q
ð
Þ5∼p∨∼q
Critical Thinking
2.4.1. Is the statement ∼p∨q
ð
Þ∧p a tautology?
2.4.2. Show that p∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ is a tautology.
2.4.3. Determine whether or not the statement ∼p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨p∨q
ð
Þ is a tautology.
2.4.4. Is the statement p∨q
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ a tautology?
2.4.5. Determine whether or not the statement p∨q
ð
Þ→∼p∧q
ð
Þ is a self-contradiction.
2.4.6. What can you say about the two statements q→p and ∼p→∼q
40
Chapter 2
Logic

2.4.7. Show that the statement p∧q
ð
Þ∨∼p∨q
ð
Þ is a self-contradiction.
2.4.8. Is the statement p→q logically equivalent to the statement q→∼p?
2.4.9. Prove that p∨q
ð
Þ∨r≡p∨q∨r
ð
Þ.
2.4.10. Show that p∨q
ð
Þ∧∼p≡∼p∧q.
2.4.11. Is the statement p∨q equivalent to ∼∼p∧∼q
ð
Þ?
2.4.12. Verify the associative law p∧q
ð
Þ∧r≡p∧q∧r
ð
Þ by constructing the appropriate truth table.
2.4.13. Prove the distributive law p∨q∧r
ð
Þ≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨r
ð
Þ.
Basic Problems
2.4.14. Show that ∼p∧q
ð
Þ≡∼p∨∼q.
2.4.15. What can you say about the statements ∼∼p
ð
Þ and p?
2.4.16. Simplify the statement p∧q
ð
Þ∧∼p.
2.4.17. Using the laws of algebra simplify the statement p∧p∧q
ð
Þ.
2.4.18. Simplify ∼p∧q
ð
Þ∧∼p∧q
ð
Þ.
2.4.19. Simplify ∼∼p∧q
ð
Þ.
Determine if the following statement is a tautology, self-contradiction and paradox.
2.4.20. There is an exception to every rule; except this rule.
2.4.21. To be or not to be.
2.4.22. You travel back in time and kill your grandfather before he meets your grandmother. Hence, you are never born and,
therefore, you couldn’t go back in time and kill your grandfather.
2.4.23. Yes and no, and I don’t mean maybe.
2.5
VARIATIONS OF THE CONDITIONAL
STATEMENT
We have seen that equivalent statements have identical truth tables and may be
thought of as different forms of the same statement. In this section we shall be
concerned with some of the different forms by which the conditional statement
p→q can be expressed. That is, given a conditional statement p→q, we shall
study three variations formed from statements p, q, and the logical connectives,
→and ∼.
Statement
Name
p→q
Conditional Statement
q→p
Converse of p→q
∼p→∼q
Inverse of p→q
∼q→∼p
Contra-positive of p→q
A comparison of the truth tables for these statements is given by Table 2.8.
TABLE 2.8 Conditional variations
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
p
q
~p
~q
q
p
p
q
~q
~p
~p
~q
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Conditional

Subject to one or more requirements

Sentences that discuss factual
implication
Example:
If you are seventeen then you are a minor.
If
you are
a minor, then you are
seventeen.
If you are not seventeen, then you are not
a minor.
If you are not a minor, then you are not
seventeen.
Given the conditional statement is true, the
inverse and the converse need not follow.
If the converse and the inverse do hold,
this would be a bi-conditional.
Common: Equivalent Statements
Analyzing Table 2.8 on the previous page we
observe that
1.
p→q is not equivalent to q→p because
Columns 5 and 6 are not identical.
2.
p→q is not equivalent to
∼p→∼q
because
Columns
5 and
7 are
not
identical.
3.
p→q is equivalent to ∼q→∼p because
Columns 5 and 8 are identical.
4.
q→p is equivalent to ∼p→∼q because
Columns 6 and 7 are identical.
2.5 Variations of the Conditional Statement
41

Therefore, there are two equivalences: p→q≡∼q→∼p and similarly
q→p≡∼p→∼q. Hence, a conditional statement is equivalent to the counter
of the positive statement, that is, the contra-positive.
Example 2.5.1 Contra-positive
Given the conditional statement “If you are seventeen, then you are a minor,” find the
converse, inverse, and the contra-positive of the statement.
Solution
Converse: If you are a minor, then you are seventeen.
Inverse: If you are not seventeen, then you are not minor.
Contra-positive: If you not a minor, then you are not seventeen.
By definition of a minor, both the original conditional statement and the
contra-positive statement both true (that is, equivalent statements) whereas,
the converse and inverse are not true. If you are a minor, you might be twelve
and not seventeen; and if you are not seventeen, then you might be sixteen
which is still a minor. Hence, in this case the conditional statement and the
contra-positive statement are true and the converse and the inverse are false;
however, this need not be the case. If all four statements are true, then the con-
ditional statement is actually a bi-conditional statement. However, in general,
→is not commutative; that is, p→q
=
≡q→p.
Example 2.5.2 Conditional Statements
Suppose that p is true and q is false. What is the truth value of the following statements?
(a)
p→q
(b)
The inverse of ∼q→p
(c)
The contra-positive of ∼q→∼p
(d)
q is sufficient for ∼p
(e)
∼p is necessary for ∼q
(f)
The converse of ∼q only if p
Solution
(a)
For p→q we have T→F, which is false by Table 2.8.
(b)
The inverse of ∼q→p is ∼∼q
ð
Þ→∼p or equivalently q→∼p. Thus, we have
F→∼T or F→F, which is vacuously true.
(c)
The contra-positive of ∼q→∼p is ∼∼q
ð
Þ→∼∼p
ð
Þ or equivalently q→p.
Hence, F→T, which is vacuously true.
(d)
The statement “q is sufficient for ∼p” is another way of saying “if q then ∼p” or,
symbolically q→∼p. Thus, we have F→∼T, which is equivalent to F→F,
which is vacuously true.
(e)
The statement “∼p is necessary for ∼q” is another way of saying “if you have ∼q,
then it was necessary that you had ∼p”; in other words, “if ∼q then ∼p” or written
symbolically ∼q→∼p. Hence, ∼F→∼T, which gives us T→F, which is false.
Alternatively, ∼q→∼p is the contra-positive of p→q which, by (a) is false.
(f)
“∼q only if p” can be written as ∼q→p and therefore the converse is p→∼q.
Since p is true and q is false, we have T→∼F, that is, T→T, which is true.
Conditional Statement
p→q
Converse
q→p
Inverse
∼p→∼q
Contrapositive
∼q→∼p
Original Statement:
A well supported figure.
Inverse Statement:
Not the same support
Converse Statement:
Not the same support as the original, but the
same as the inverse.
Contrapositive Statement:
Same support as the original figure.
If I win the lottery, then I will buy you dinner.
If I buy you dinner, then I will win the
lottery? This is not equivalent.
If I do not win the lottery, then I cannot
buy you dinner? This does not follow.
If I do not take you to dinner, then I have
not won the lottery. This is true.
Among the three different forms statements,
the first two are equivalent to each other.
42
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.5.3 Associative
Show that the associative rule does not hold for →; that is, p→q
ð
Þ→r
=
≡p→q→r
ð
Þ.
Solution
Here, to prove that p→q
ð
Þ→r is not equivalent to p→q→r
ð
Þ.
This is shown by structuring the following truth table:
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
p
q
r
q
p
r
q
r
q
p
r
q
p
r
q
p
r
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
´
Æ
Since Steps 6 and 7 do not yield identical truth tables for p→q
ð
Þ→r and
p→q→r
ð
Þ, we observe that these two statements are not equivalent; that is,
p→q
ð
Þ→r↔p→q→r
ð
Þ is not a tautology. Thus →is not associative.
Example 2.5.4 Equivalency
Show that the following statements are equivalent without the use of truth tables:
(a)
p→∼q and ∼q→p
(b)
p→q∨p
ð
Þ and ∼q∧∼r
ð
Þ→∼p
Solution
(a)
The contra-positive of p→∼q is ∼q→∼∼p
ð
Þ, which we know is equivalent to
∼q→p
(b)
The
contra-positive
of
p→q∨p
ð
Þ
is
∼q∨r
ð
Þ→∼p
and
since
by
De Morgan’s Law, ∼q∨r
ð
Þ≡∼q∧∼r; hence, p→q∨p
ð
Þ is equivalent to
∼q∧∼r
ð
Þ→∼p.
In logical reasoning it is often necessary to prove a statement of the form “p if and
only if q”; that is, p↔q. A truth table may be used to show that p↔q is equivalent to
p→q
ð
Þ∧q→p
ð
Þ; that is, p↔q≡p→q
ð
Þ∧q→p
ð
Þ.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
Given the logical statement, give the converse, inverse, and contra-positive.
2.5.1. “If John is blonde then Sandra is a brunette”
2.5.2. Given the logical statement “If Maria leaves for the moon then Liz will be going to Albuquerque”
p→q≡q∨∼p
&
q→r≡r∨∼q
are equivalent to
p→q
ð
Þ≡q∨∼p
ð
Þ→r
&
p→q→r
ð
Þ≡
p→r∨∼q
ð
Þ
therefore
LHS5r∨∼q∨∼p
ð
Þ
5r∨∼q∧p
and
RHS5 r∨∼q
ð
Þ∨∼p
5r∨∼q∨∼p
If you have significant debt than you should not
by more cloths is equivalent to If you have
money to buy new cloths, then you are not
in significant debt.
If you have a National Merit Scholarship,
then you can afford to go to university in
the State of Florida or out of State is equiv-
alent to If you cannot afford to go to university
out of state and you cannot afford to go to uni-
versity in the State of Florida, then you must
not have a National Merit Scholarship.
Exercises
43

Let p and q represent two statements where p is false and q is true. Determine the truth value of the following statements:
2.5.3. p→q,
2.5.4. The inverse of ∼p→q,
2.5.5. The converse of ∼p only if q.
Let p and q represent two statements where p is false and q is true. Determine the truth value of the following statements:
2.5.6. p→q
2.5.7. The inverse of ∼p→q,
2.5.8. The converse of ∼p only if q.
Show that the logical statements are equivalent.
2.5.9. ∼p∨q
ð
Þ∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ and ∼q
2.5.10. p∨q and p∨q
ð
Þ∧∼p∧q
ð
Þ
2.6
QUANTIFIED STATEMENT
There are four other commonly used forms of English phrases with which one
should become familiar. These are the quantifying statements:
I. All p are q
Universal Affirmative
II. No p are q
Universal Negative
III. Some p are not q
Particular Affirmative
IV. Some p are q
Particular Negative
In order to see how to negate these forms, we must first consider exactly
what they mean.
FORM I: Universal Affirmation
Form I: The universal affirmative; this extreme “all p are q” is actually a con-
ditional statement; for example in the statement “all teachers (are people who)
give exams,” if the antecedent is that “you are a teacher,” then consequence is
that “you give exams.” In addition, as with any conditional statement, this
implication only goes one way. That is, if you are known to give exams, this
does not necessarily imply that you are in fact a teacher: for example, you may
be a doctor giving a physical exam. Hence, the statement “all teachers give
exams” is equivalent to “if you are a teacher, then you give exams.” Thus,
abbreviate “you are a teacher” as t and “people who give exams” as e, then
mathematically, the statement “all teachers give exams” written as t→e.
Another way to think of “all t are e” is in the context of containment (or as
subsets). The group of teachers is contained in the large group of people who
give exams. This idea can be illustrated using circles: a Swiss mathematician
name Euler used them in the 1700s and for this reason these circles are some-
times called Euler circles. Whatever, if we let one circle represent the group of
“teachers” (abbreviated T) and another circle represent the group of people
who give “exams” (abbreviated E), then the relationship between these two
circles or sets of people can be illustrated as shown to the left.
Archival Note
Categorical propositions are discussed in
Aristotle’s Prior Analytics. These types of
propositions occur in categorical syllogisms.
Syllogism

From the Greek συλλογισμός meaning
to conclude or infer
A discourse in which, certain things having been
supposed, something different from the things
supposed results of necessity because these things
are so.
Aristotle
Leonhard Euler was a Swiss mathematician and
physicist working in such fields as mechanics,
fluid dynamics, optics and astronomy; whereas
in set theory, he introduce Euler circles, he also
defined the mathematical constant e.
T
E
44
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.6.1 “All p are q” to “If p, then q”
“All mothers are teachers” written in “if … then …” form is “if you are a mother, then
you are a teacher.”
Hence, “all p are q” is logically equivalent to p→q.
FORM II: Universal Negative
Form II: The universal negative is the extreme “none (no) p are q” is also a
conditional; for example consider the statement “there are no good men” or
“no man is good.” Opinions aside, if the antecedent is that “you are a man,”
the consequence is that “you are not good.” In addition, as with any conditional
statement, this implication only goes one way. That is, if you are known to be
bad (not good), this does not necessarily imply that you are in fact a man:
because if you are bad, then you could have been a woman. Hence, the
statement “there are no good men” is equivalent to “if you are a man, then your
not good.” Note: for all those who think this statement is false will have the
opportunity to contradict me later, but for now this statement is assumed to
be TRUE. Thus, if we let “you are a man” be abbreviate as m and “you are
good” be abbreviated as g, then the statement “there are no good men” can
be written mathematically as m→∼g.
Another way to think of “none (no) m are g” is in the context of non-
containment (mutually exclusive). The group of men has nothing to do with
the group of people who are good and the group of good people has nothing
to do with the group of men. If we let one circle represent the group of
“men” (abbreviated M) and another circle represent the group of people are
“good” (abbreviated G), then the relationship between these two circles or sets
of people can be illustrated as follows.
M
G
Example 2.6.2 “No p are q” to “If …, then …”
“No vegan eats eggs” written in “if … then…” form is “If you are a vegan, then you do
not eat eggs” or “if you eat eggs, then you are not a vegan.” Hence, “no p are q” is log-
ically equivalent to p→∼q or q→∼p.
FORM III: Negation of “All p are q”
Form III: This particular level of logic is not an extreme; in fact, “some p are
not q” is the exact opposite of the extreme “all p are q”; for example, in the
statement “some teachers do not give exams” is equivalent to the statement
“Not all teachers give exams.” Common sense aside, this statement leads to
several consequences; that is, for you to be the one who make this statement
true, then you must both be a teacher and not give exams; maybe you teach
kindergarten? However, if you are not a teacher, you still may or may not give
exams. Hence, the statement “Some teachers do not give exams” is not as easy
to write any other way. Therefore, the best way to consider of “some are not” is
in the context of partial-containment (overlapping sets). The group of teachers
▪
A proposition is a universal affirmative: All
S is P
▪
E proposition is a universal negative: No
S is P
▪
I proposition is a particular affirmative:
Some S is P
▪
O proposition is a particular negative:
Some S is not P
Universal Negatives:
No man is mortal.
No publicity is bad
No man is an island
The above statements are equivalent to:
If you are a man, then you are not mortal
If it gets you publicity, then it is not bad
If you are a man, then you are not an
island
2.6 Quantified Statement
45

is only partially contained in the group of people who give exams. If we let one
circle represent the group of “teachers” (abbreviated T) and another circle rep-
resent the group of people who give “exams” (abbreviated E), then the rela-
tionship between these two circles or sets of people can be illustrated as
follows.
“Some teachers do not give exams”
T
E
Example 2.6.3 “Some p are not q”
“Some automobiles are not cars” translates to “It is not the case that all automobiles are
cars” or “it is not the case that if a vehicle is an automobile then it is a car.” Hence,
“some p are not q” is logically equivalent to ∼p→q
ð
Þ.
FORM IV: Negation of “No p are q”
Form IV: This particular level of logic is not an extreme; in fact “some p are q”
is the exact opposite of the extreme “none (no) p are q”; for example the
statement “some men are good” is equivalent to the statement “it is not that
there no good men.” Proper English aside, this statement can again lead to
several consequences; that is if you are the one who make this statement true,
then you must both be a man and you must be good; there are a few of you?
However, if you are not a man, you still may or may not be good. Hence, the
statement “some men are good” is not as easy to write any other way.
Therefore, the best way to consider “some … are …” is again in the context
of partial-containment (overlapping sets). The group of men is only partial
contained in the group of people who are good. If we let one circle represent
the group of “men” (abbreviated M) and another circle represent the group of
people who are “good” (abbreviated G), then the relationship between these
two circles or sets of people can be illustrated as follows.
“Some men are good”
M
G
Example 2.6.4 “Some p are q”
“Some children are well behaved” translates to “It is not the case that there are no well-
behaved children” or “It is not the case that if you are a child that you are not well
behaved.”
Hence, “some p are q” is logically equivalent to ∼p→∼q
ð
Þ or ∼q→∼p
ð
Þ.
Let p(x) be an open statement or predicate; for example, let p x
ð Þ5 “if x is odd, then
x22≥7.” Consider the truth value of this statement for U5 1, 2, 3, …
f
g, then the open
sentence p(x) represents many statements, one for each x∈U.
p(1)¼“if 1 is odd, then 122≥7” is false, whereas
p(2)¼“if 2 is odd, then 222≥7” is vacuously true.
Using Euler circles, we can illustrate the
universal negative as mutually exclusive events.
Vegan

Coined by Donald Watson to
distinguish those who abstain from all
animal products including eggs and
cheese and not just those who merely
refuse to eat the meat from an animal.
This second logic, then, I mean the worse one, the
teach to talk unjustly, and prevail
Aristophanes
The Clouds (423 BCE)
Particular Affirmative:
Some men are boys
Sometimes too much is bad thing
Some horses are white
Is there any relationship among them?
∀
is read as
“for all”
46
Chapter 2
Logic

Definition 2.6.1 Universal Quantifier: "
The universal quantifier is “for all”, denote by an upside-down A, ∀. The statement
∀x∈U p x
ð Þ
½
 is true if and only if p(x) is true for all x∈U.
For example, let the universal set be the set of integers, then “for all natural
numbers n, n is greater than zero” can be translated as
∀x x>0
ð
Þ
Example 2.6.5 “For all”
Given U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g, determine the truth value for ∀x x2<81


.
Solution
∀x x2<81


translates to “for all digits, the digit squared is less than 81.” However, the
set of digits squared is {0,1,4,9,16,25,36,49,64,81} and hence the truth value of this is
false; there exists a digit such that the digit square is not less than 81, but equal to 81.
Definition 2.6.2 Existential Quantifier: $
The existential quantifier is “there exist,” denote by a backwards E, ∃. The statement
∃x∈U p x
ð Þ
½
 is true if and only if there exist at least one x∈U for which p(x) is true.
For example, “there exists a integer such that this integer squared is less
than 5,” can be translated as
∃x x2<5


:
Example 2.6.6 “There exist”
Given U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g, determine the truth value for ∃x x + 3≥10
ð
Þ
Solution
∃x x + 3≥10
ð
Þ translates to “there exists a digit such the value three more than the digit is
greater than or equal to 10.” Since the subset A5 7, 8, 9
f
g has three elements such that
x∈A→x + 3≥10, there exists at least one value of x such that x + 3≥10 is true, and thus
∃x x + 3≥10
ð
Þ is true.
Example 2.6.7 “For all” and “There exist”
Let the universal set be the set of all college students and
p x, y
ð
Þ5x is a friend of y
q x, y
ð
Þ5x takes a class with y
Write the English sentence from the symbolic statement:
(a)
∀x∀y p x, y
ð
Þ→q x, y
ð
Þ
½

(b)
∀x∃y p x, y
ð
Þ
½

∀
vs.
∃
1.
The statement P(x,y) holds for all x and for
all y if and only if the statement
P(x,y) holds for all y and for all x.
2.
Given there exists an x and there exists a
y such that the statement holds true if
and only if there exists a y and there
exists an x such that the statement holds
true.
3.
Given there exists an x such that for all y
the statement P(x,y) holds true, if and
only if for all y, there exists an x such
that the statement P(x,y) holds true.
2.6 Quantified Statement
47

Solution
(a)
For all college students, x and y, if x is a friend of y, then x takes a class with
student y.
(b)
For all college students, x, there exist a student y such that x is a friend of y.
Let p(x,y) be an open statement regarding two variables x and y, the following are
equivalent
(1)
∀x∀y p x, y
ð
Þ¤∀y∀xp x, y
ð
Þ
(2)
∃x∃yp x, y
ð
Þ¤∃y∃xp x, y
ð
Þ
(3)
∃x∀yp x, y
ð
Þ¤∀y∃xp x, y
ð
Þ
However, it should be noted that any other exchanges of ∀and ∃needs to be handled
very carefully as they are unlikely to give equivalent statements for all cases.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
Write the given statements in symbolic form and illustrate with Euler circles.
2.6.1. All elephants are pink.
2.6.2. Some cars are Hondas
2.6.3. Some politicians are dishonest
2.6.4. Some people are not Democrats
2.6.5. No children are allow to drive
The following statements are from the writings of Lewis Carroll. Write each statement in “if … then …” form.
2.6.6. All my poultry are ducks.
2.6.7. All my sons are slim.
2.6.8. Opium-eaters have no self-control.
2.6.9. Donkeys do have not horns.
2.6.10. Some apples are not ripe.
2.6.11. No porcupines are talkative.
2.6.12. Some chickens are cats.
Translate the following in to complete English statements assuming the universal discourse is the set of all real
numbers.
2.6.13. ∀x,x2≥0
2.6.14. ∀x∃y y52x
ð
Þ
2.6.15. ∀x∀y x5y
ð
Þ→x25y2




2.6.16. ∃x∃y xy52
ð
Þ
2.7
NEGATING STATEMENTS
Symbolic logic may be usefully employed to solve an interesting problem;
namely, that of forming an accurate and concise negation of an English
statement. In order to correctly negate a statement, one must first translate
it into symbolic form. To accomplish this task, we can use some of the algebra
of statements discussed in previous sections. We should then be able to
translate the symbolic negation into smooth and correct English. The principal
rules that are involved in our task have negating English has been previously
discussed. They are as follows:
Archival Note
Symbolic logic was discussed in Aristotle’s
Prior Analytics as part of deductive reasoning
48
Chapter 2
Logic

Common: Negations
∼∼p
ð
Þ≡p
Double negative, is the positive statement ∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡∼p∧∼q Not
at least one is equivalent to not having either; that is, not the first and
not the second (De Morgan’s Law)
∼p∧q
ð
Þ≡∼p∨∼q
“Not both” is equivalent to not having at least one; that is, “not the
first or not the second.” (De Morgan’s Law)
∼p→q
ð
Þ≡p∧∼q
When the first statement does not imply the second statement, the
first statement can be true when (and) the second statement fails (that
is, is false)
Note that De Morgan’s laws state clearly the correct way to negate both the
disjunction and the conjunction of two statements p and q. That is, De
Morgan’s laws indicate the method to use in negating English statements that
involve the words “or” or “and” as the primary connective. Example 2.7.1 is
concerned with the negation of conditional statements. With these rules one
can accurately negate even very complex English statements. We shall illus-
trate their use in the following examples:
Example 2.7.1 ACC Championship
Consider the statement “The ACC championship was won by UNC or Wake Forest.”
What is its negation?
Solution
Suppose that we wish to negate this statement. We could simply say that “it is not the
case that the ACC championship was won by UNC or Wake Forest.”
However, this style is stilted and it is still not clear exactly what is meant. To clarify
matters let us first translate the original statement into symbolic form by letting
u: UNC won the ACC championship
w: Wake Forest won the ACC championship.
The
original
statement
is
u∨w.
By
De
Morgan’s
law,
we
have
∼u∨w
ð
Þ≡∼u∧∼w. Translating this into English we see that the negation of our
original statement is
The ACC championship was not won by UNC and it was not won by Wake Forest.
Another way to express this is to say
The ACC championship was won by neither UNC nor Wake Forest.
This statement is concise and cannot be easily misunderstood. Also, note that u rep-
resents UNC and w represents Wake instead of the conventional p and q. Hence, state-
ments can be represented by the standard lower case letters, p, q and r; or statements can
be represented by distinct lower case letters that better represent the statement itself.
First symbolism in logic:
a¼belongs to every
e¼belongs to no
i¼belongs to some
o¼does not belong to some
Hence, categorical sentences may then be
abbreviated as follows:
AaB5A belongs to every B (Every B is A)
AeB5A belongs to no B (No B is A)
AiB5A belongs to some B (Some B is A)
AoB5A does not belong to some B (Some B
is not A)
Disjunction
vs.
Conjunctions
In Football, AAC stands for the Atlantic Coast
Conference
UNC stands for the University of North
Carolina
Wake Forest University is located in
Winston-Salem, North Carolina
2.7 Negating Statements
49

Example 2.7.2 Voter Approved
Let us now negate the statement “The voters approved amendments one and three to
the constitution.”
Solution
This statement is the conjunction of the statements by letting
o: The voters approved amendment one.
t: The voters approved amendment three.
That is, the original statement symbolically is
o∧t
By De Morgan’s law we have
∼o∧t
ð
Þ≡∼o∨∼t
That is, the negation of the original statement is the English statement
The voters did not approve amendment one or they did not approve amendment three.
Another way to express this is to say
The voters failed to approve at least one of the two amendments offered.
Example 2.7.3 High School Pranks
Consider the conditional statement
If the fountain is turned on, then the students will put Jell-O in it.
Solution
Letting
f: The fountain is turned on,
j: The students put Jell-O in the fountain,
the original statement symbolically becomes f →j.
Example 2.7.4 Weather causes schools to close
Negate the statement “If the cold weather does not break, then gas will become scarce
and school will be closed.”
Solution
Letting
c: The cold weather breaks,
g: Gas will become scarce,
s: School will close,
we have ∼c→g∧s
ð
Þ. Negating this symbolically we get
∼∼c→g∧s
ð
Þ
½
≡∼c∧∼g∧s
ð
Þ≡∼c∧∼g∨∼s
ð
Þ:
If the cold weather does not break, then gas
will become scarce and schools will close.
50
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
Thus, the English negation of the original statement reads as follows:
“The cold will not break but gas will not become scarce or school will not close.”
Common: Quantifying Statements
There are four other commonly used forms of English phrases with which one should
become familiar. These are the quantifying statements:
I.
All p are q
Not “All p are q” is equivalent to “Some p are not q”
II.
No p are q
Not “No p are q” is equivalent to “Some p are q”
III.
Some p are q
Not “Some p are q” is equivalent to “No p are q”
IV.
Some p are not q
Not “Some p are not q” is equivalent to “All p are q”
In order to see how to negate these forms, we must first consider exactly
what they mean.
Consider first Form I. This extreme “all p are q” is actually a conditional
statement p→q. The negation of Form I is, therefore,
∼p→q
ð
Þ≡p∧∼q:
That is, we may negate a statement of the form “All p are q” with a
statement of the form “Some p are not q.”
Q
Q
P
“All p are q”
Not “all p are q”
“Some p are not q”
P
x
Example 2.7.5 “All elections are honest”
Negate the statement “All elections are honest.”
Solution
Letting
e: The occurrence is an election,
h: Occurrence is honest,
the original statement can be written as e→h. Hence,
∼e→h
ð
Þ≡e∧∼h
That is, “The occurrence is an election which is not honest.” Putting this thought
into smoother English, we see that the negation of the statement “All elections are
honest” is the statement “Some elections are dishonest.”
Form II can be handled similarly. To say that “no p are q” is to say that “if
one is a p then he is not q.” Hence, Form II can be expressed symbolically as
p→∼q
and negated symbolically by ∼p→∼q
ð
Þ≡p∧q.
The negation of this statement (that is, when this
statement is false) is when the cold weather
breaks and gas is not scarce and schools do not
close.
“All B are A”
A
B
Negative of “All B are A”
A
B
“No B are A”
A
B
Negative of “No B are A”
A
B
All Pare Q ≡p→q
Not all PareQ ≡p∧∼q
NoP areQ ≡p→∼q
Not the case that no P are Q ≡p∧q
2.7 Negating Statements
51

That is, we may negate a statement of the form “no p are q” with a statement
of the form “Some p are q.”
Q
Q
P
P
“No p are q”
Not “No p are q”
“Some p are q”
x
Example 2.7.6 “No fights are fixed”
The negation of the statement “No fights are fixed” is the statement “Some fights are
fixed.” Here we see that to negate a Form II statement we use Form III. Hence, in order
to negate Form III, we should use Form II. That is, the negation of a statement of the
type “Some p are q” is a statement of the type “No p are q.”
Negation: “Some fights are fixed”
Example 2.7.7 “Some people are Democrats”
Negate the statement “Some people are Democrats.” The desired negation is
literally “No people are Democrats” or, in better English, “Nobody is a Democrat.”
Example 2.7.8 Translations
In each of the following cases, express the given statement into symbolic form; negate
the statement symbolically; and translate the negation into smooth, concise English:
(a)
You will lose weight only if you stop stuffing yourself.
(b)
A necessary condition for being a successful student is that you own a pair of
grubby jeans.
(c)
No mathematicians are sneaky.
(d)
Cafeteria food is cheap and nourishing.
Solution
(a)
Let
l:
You lose weight,
s:
You stop stuffing yourself.
Original statement:
∼s→∼l≡l→s
Negation:
l∧∼s
Translation:
You can lose weight and continue to stuff yourself.
(b)
Let
s:
You are a successful student,
g:
You own a pair of grubby jeans.
Original statement:
∼g→∼s→s→g
Negation:
s∧∼g
Translation:
You can be a successful student but not own a pair of grubby
jeans.
When it is not the case that “no fights are fixed”
then we can say that “some fights are fixed.”
When is not the case that “some people are
democrats” then we can say that nobody is a
democrat.
52
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
(c)
Let
m:
You are a mathematician,
s:
You are sneaky.
Original statement:
m→∼s
Negation:
m∧s
Translation:
Some mathematicians are sneaky.
(d)
Let
c:
Cafeteria food is cheap,
n:
Cafeteria food is nourishing
Original statement:
c∧n
Negation:
∼c∨∼n
Translation:
Cafeteria food is not cheap or else it is not nourishing.
The following exercise is intended to extend the ideas presented in this section
as well as to give the student practice in translating statements from English into
symbols and vice versa. The ability to make such translations quickly is essential
to the work to follow concerning the testing of arguments for validity.
Common: Universal/Existential Qualifiers
In addition, there are the universal quantifier and the existential qualifier, ∀and ∃,
respectively,
1.
∼∀x∀yp x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∃x∃y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

2.
∼∀x∃yp x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∃x∀y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

3.
∼∃x∀yp x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∀x∃y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

4.
∼∃x∃y p x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∀x∀y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

The above four equivalence, the first of which translates to “when it is not
true that for all x and y the open statement p(x,y) holds” is equivalent to “there
exist an x and y for which p(x,y) does not hold.” The second statement trans-
lates to “when it is not true that for all x, there exist a y such that the open
statement p(x,y) holds” is equivalent to “there exist a x such that for all y,
p(x,y) does not hold.”
SYMBOLIC EQUVALENCES
∼≡“not”
∀≡“forall”
∃≡“there exist”
¤≡“logicalequvialent to”
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
2.7.1. Consider the bi-conditional statement p↔q. Note that we have shown that p↔q≡p→q
ð
Þ∧q→p
ð
Þ. Use this infor-
mation to symbolically negate p↔q.
2.7.2. Consider the exclusive disjunction:
a. Show that p∨q≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧∼p∧q
ð
Þ.
b. Use the above equivalence to symbolically negate p∨q.
c. Verbally negate the statement “You can take calculus or finite mathematics but not both.”
Basic Problem
2.7.3. Let
d:
He drinks Singapore slings.
p:
He sees pink elephants.
g:
He has a good time at parties.
Exercises
53

Using this notation put each of the following into symbolic form, negate each symbolically, and translate the
negation into smooth English:
a. If he drinks Singapore slings then he will see pink elephants.
b. Drinking Singapore slings is necessary for having a good time at parties.
c. He sees pink elephants only if he drinks Singapore slings.
d. All people who see pink elephants have a good time at parties.
e. Drinking Singapore slings is necessary and sufficient for having a good time at parties.
f. In order not to see pink elephants, it is sufficient that one not drink Singapore slings.
2.7.4. Negate verbally each of the following:
a. All politicians are devious.
b. Some college presidents are devious.
c. Some college presidents are politicians.
d. All Southerners like grits.
e. No Republicans voted for a Democrat.
f. Some people did not vote.
g. No Italians do not like spaghetti.
2.7.5. Let r: You can register early.
a: You are an athlete.
t: You are tall.
s: You are in style.
Using this notation put the following into symbolic form, negate each symbolically, and translate the negation
into concise English:
a. If you are an athlete or tall, then you can register early.
b. If you are an athlete and tall, then you are in style.
c. You are an athlete or tall.
d. You are short but in style.
e. You are neither tall nor in style but you can register early.
f. For each integer, x, there exists an integer, y, such that y5
ﬃﬃﬃc
p
2.8
TESTING THE VALIDITY OF AN ARGUMENT
One of the most important applications of logic is to determine whether an
argument is valid or fallacious (false). We begin our study of this topic with
the following definitions:
Definition 2.8.1 Deductive Reasoning
Reasoning or deductive reasoning is a cognitive process using arguments to move
from given statements or premises, which are true by assumption, to conclusions.
The conclusions must be true when the premises are true.
Example 2.8.1 “All men are mortal”
Given “all men are mortal” and “Aristotle is a man,” therefore we can deduce “Aristotle
is mortal.”
Deductive reasoning is often contrasted with inductive reasoning in that
inductive reasoning is the process of reasoning in which the premises are an
argument are believed to support the conclusion, how do not entail it; that
is, they do not ensure it but is a generalization.
Archival Note
Deductive reasoning was largely advanced by
the French philosopher and Mathematician
Rene Descartes.
54
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.8.2 “That which goes up, must come down”
Given the proposition, “this object fell when dropped,” therefore one can infer “all
objects fall when dropped.”
Definition 2.8.2 Argument
An argument is an assertion that a given collection of statements p1,p2,…,pn called
premises yields another statement r called the conclusion.
We symbolize an argument as
r
premises
p
p
p
n
∴
2
1
Where the symbol ∴is read “therefore” and the p’s represent the
statement of the argument; the horizontal line simply separates these premises
from the conclusion.
Definition 2.8.3 Valid/Fallacy
An argument is valid if the conclusion r is true whenever the conjunction of the pre-
mises p1,p2,…,pn is true; that is, p1 ∧p2 ∧…∧pn →r is a tautology. Otherwise the
argument is said to be a fallacy. In other words, an argument is valid whenever all
the premises are true, the conclusion is true.
The validity of an argument can be checked by constructing a truth table.
This procedure is illustrated by several examples.
Example 2.8.3 Law of Detachment
Test the validity of the following argument:
p→q
p
∴q
Solution
It suffices to show that
p→q
ð
Þ∧p
½
→q is a tautology. This means that if both premises,
p→q and p, are true, then the conclusion q is true.
The truth table is
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
p
q
q
p
p
q
p
q
p
q
p
T T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F T 
T 
F 
T 
F F 
T 
F 
T 
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Hence,
p→q
ð
Þ∧p
½
→q is a tautology; and therefore if p→q is true and p is true,
then the conclusion q is true. The above argument
p→q
p
∴q
Continued
Archival Note
The word argument comes from the French
meaning a statement and reasoning in support
of a proposition. The word premise is the
grounds or basis of the argument, that which
comes before. The word conclusion is the
deduction reached by reasoning.
\
is read
"therefore" 
Valid
vs.
Fallacy
If you have a dime, you have ten cents.
You have a dime.
Therefore, you have ten cents.
This is rather redundant except the first two are
premises and the third is a conclusion. The
second statement has been detached from the
condition set forth in the first statement.
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
55

Solution—cont’d
is called the law of detachment. In this form, the law of detachment is called modus
ponens. Similarly, the argument
p→q
∼q
∴∼p
using the contrapositive statement, the above argument is one form of the law of
detachment called modus tollens.
Example 2.8.4 Law of Syllogism
Show that the following argument is valid:
p→q
q→r
∴p→r
Solution
It suffices to show that
p→q
ð
Þ∧q→r
ð
Þ
½
→p→r
ð
Þ is a tautology. This can be shown by
constructing its truth table.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
p
q
r
q
p
r
q
r
q
q
p
r
p
r
p
r
q
q
p
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Ÿ
Ÿ
The above argument is called the law of syllogism (hypothetical syllogism) or the
transitive property of implication.
Example 2.8.5 Fallacies in Arguments
Show that the following argument is fallacious:
p→q
q
∴p
Solution
If suffices to show that the statement
p→q
ð
Þ∧q
½
→p is not a tautology.
The truth table is
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
p
q
q
p
q
q
p
p
p
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
Ÿ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Æ
Ÿ
Law of Detachment
&
Modus Ponents
&
Modus Tollens
Comparable to transitivity in equality:
If a5b and b5c; then a5c:
Archival Note
The word syllogism comes from old French
silogisme meaning inference, conclusion,
computation or calculation.
56
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
The third line tells us that the conclusion p is false when both the premise p→q and q
is true. Hence, the argument is a fallacy or fallacious.
Example 2.8.6 Test the Validity
Test the validity of the argument
If it snows, then Maria will ski.
I did not snow:
Therefore, Maria will not ski:
Solution
We first translate the argument into symbolic form. Let p represent “it snows” and q
represent “Maria will ski.” Thus, the argument takes the form
p→q
∼p
∴∼q
The truth table of the argument is given by
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
p
q
q
p
p
p
q
p
q
q
p
q
p
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
Æ
Ÿ
Ÿ
Æ
Æ
Æ
In the third line of Step 7 we observe that both the premise p→q and ∼p are true,
but the conclusion ∼q is false. Thus, the argument is a fallacy.
Example 2.8.7 Test the Validity
Test the validity of the following argument:
If I study, then I will not fail statistics.
If I do not play tennis, then I will study.
I failed statistics:
Therefore, I played tennis:
Solution
Let p represent “I study,” q represent “I failed statistics,” and r represent “I play
tennis.” Thus, we can translate the argument into symbolic form:
p→∼q
∼r→p
q
∴r
To test the validity of this argument, we must show that whenever the pre-
mises p→∼q, ∼r→p and q are true, that the conclusion r must also be true.
If I win the lottery, then I will take you to dinner.
I took you to dinner.
…I win the lottery???
If I study, then I will not fail statistics.
If I do not play tennis, then I can study.
I failed statistics.
… I played tennis
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
57

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
CASE
p
q
r
~ r
q
p
q
r
1 
T 
T T 
F 
F 
F 
T 
2 
T 
T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
3 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
4 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
5 
F 
T T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
6 
F 
T 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
7 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
8 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
Æ
Æ
q
~
~
~
We observe, by crossing out all those that don’t hold true, that the premises
p→∼q, ∼r→p and q are true only in Case 5, and in that case the conclusion r
is also true. Thus, the above argument is valid. Otherwise, we could have
extended the table to include the conjunction of the premises and then finally
the conditional statement p→∼q
ð
Þ∧∼r→p
ð
Þ∧q→r; however, this becomes
extremely tedious. Alternatively, we could have used equivalence and the law
of detachment and law of syllogism.
Since p→∼q ≡q→∼p and ∼r→p ≡∼p→r, the contrapositive, the
argument becomes
q→∼p
∼p→r
q
∴r
Hence, by the law of syllogism,
q→∼p
∼p→r
∴q→r
yielding
q→r
q
∴r
this is valid by the law of detachment or modus ponens. This type of argument
will be extended to proof patterns later in this section.
Example 2.8.8 Test the Validity
Test the validity of the argument
If Fred loves Maria, then Bill will leave town.
Either Bill leaves town or Maria is divorced:
Therefore, if Maria is divorced, then Fred does not love Maria:
Solution
Let p represent “Fred loves Maria,” q represent “Bill will leave town,” and r represent
“Maria is divorced.” Thus, the argument takes the form
p→q
q∨r
∴r→∼p
If I fail statistics, then I did not study.
If I did not study, then I will play tennis.
I failed statistics.
∴I played tennis
If I fail statistics, then I did not study and if I don’t
study, then I will play tennis.
∴If I fail statistics, then I played tennis.
If I fail statistics, then I play tennis.
I failed statistics.
∴I played tennis
58
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
We now construct the truth table of the statements p→q, q∨r and r→∼p
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
CASE
p
q
r
p
~
q
p
r
q
p
r
~
1 
T T T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
2 
T T F 
F 
T 
T 
T 
3 
T 
F T 
F 
F 
T 
F 
4 
T 
F F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
5 
F 
T T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
6 
F 
T F 
T 
T 
T 
T 
7 
F 
F T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
8 
F F F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
Æ
⁄
Æ
Recall that an argument is valid if the conclusion is true whenever the premises are
true. However, in Case 1 of the preceding truth table, the premises p→q and q∨r are
both true, but the conclusion r→∼p is false. Thus, the argument in Example 1.7.6 is a
fallacy.
If an argument has two or three premises, we can always use the concept of a truth
table to check its validity. However, when there are more than three premises, a truth-
table analysis is quite awkward. An easier approach to check validity in such instances is
by use of proof patterns. We have already seen two such patterns; namely, in Example
1.8.1: law of detachment
p→q
p
∴q
and Example 1.8.4: law of syllogism
p→q
q→r
∴p→r
The law of syllogism may be extended to more than two premises, all of
which are conditionals. For example, we can write
p→q
q→r
r→s
s→t
t→u
∴p→u
We observe that in the preceding proof pattern, one just follows the arrows.
The validity of most arguments can be tested using only the laws of detachment
and syllogism. However, when only these proof patterns are used, it is often
necessary to replace one or more of the premises with an equivalent statement;
for example,
Statement
Equivalnce
Reason
p→q
∼q→∼p
Contrapositive
∼p∧q
ð
Þ
∼p∨∼q
De Morgan’s Law
∼p∨q
ð
Þ
∼p∧∼q
De Morgan’s Law
∼p∨q
p→q
Disjunctive Syllogism
The last statement ∼p∨q is true when the implication is true since, ∼p∨p
is a tautology; hence, if p→q is true, then
Detachment

The action of detaching

The condition of being detached
Syllogism

Bring together, the premise and
conclusion

Deductive Reasoning
Contrapositive
vs.
Disjunction
vs.
De Morgan’s Laws
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
59

∼p∨p
Ø
q
≡∼p∨q:
Alternatively, p∨q is equivalent to ∼p→q since by double negatives,
p∨q≡∼∼p
ð
Þ∨q, which is equivalent to ∼p→q by implication.
We shall now give some examples on the use of proof patterns to prove the
validity of certain arguments.
Example 2.8.9 Test the Validity
Prove the validity of the following argument using a proof pattern:
It is raining.
If it is cold, then it is not raining.
If it is not cold, then I cannot go skating:
Therefore, I cannot go skating:
Solution
Let p, q, and r represent the given statements:
p: It is raining
q: It is cold
r: I can go skating
In symbolic form the argument translates to
p
q→∼p
∼q→∼r
∴∼r
Statement
Reason
1.
p
Premise
2.
q→∼p
Premise
3.
∼q→∼r
Premise
4.
p→∼q
Contrapositive of (2.)
5.
p→∼r
Syllogism using (3.) and (4.)
6.
∼r
Detachment using (1.) and (5.)
Thus, the argument in Example 1.6.7 is valid because, when the premises p,
q→∼p and ∼q→∼r are true, then the conclusion ∼r is true.
Example 2.8.10 Test the Validity
Prove the validity of the following argument using a proof pattern:
If Jacob graduates, then he will go to Greece.
If he goes to Greece, then he will visit Athens.
If he does not visit Sparta, then he will not visit Athens.
Jacob did graduate:
Therefore, Jacob will visit Sparta:
Solution
Let p, q, r, and s represent the following statements:
p: Jacob graduates,
60
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
q: He will go to Greece,
r: He will visit Athens,
s: He will visit Sparta.
Then, the above argument translates into
p→q
q→r
∼s→∼r
p
∴s
A proof pattern of the argument is constructed as follows:
Statement
Reason
1.
p→q
Premise
2.
q→r
Premise
3.
∼s→∼r
Premise
4.
p
Premise
5.
p→r
Syllogism using (1.) and (2.)
6.
r→s
Contrapositive of (3.)
7.
p→s
Syllogism using (5.) and (6.)
8.
s
Detachment using (4.) and (7.)
Thus, we conclude that the argument in Example1.7.8 is valid because the
conclusion s is true whenever the premises p→q, q→r, ∼s→∼r and p are
all true.
Example 2.8.11 Test the Validity
Is the following argument valid?
Maria is a good dancer or Matthew is intelligent.
If Deb is a beautiful girl, then Maria is not a good dancer.
Matthew is not intelligent:
Therefore, Deb is a beautiful girl:
Solution
Let p, q, and r represent the given statements:
p: Maria is a good dancer
q: Matthew is intelligent
r: Deb is a beautiful girl
Then the argument translates to
p∨q
r→∼p
∼q
∴r
Statement
Reason
1.
p∨q
Premise
2.
r→∼p
Premise
3.
∼q
Premise
4.
∼p→q
Disjunctive Syllogism using (1.) and (3.)
5.
r→q
Syllogism using (2.) and (4.)
6.
∼q→∼r
Contrapositive of (5.)
7.
∼r
Detachment using (3.) and (7.)
Hence, r is false by definition of negation and therefore we see that the above
argument is not valid; that is, this argument is invalid because the conclusion r is false
when all the premises are true.
Premise
vs.
Syllogism
vs.
Contrapositive
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
61

Example 2.8.12 Test the Validity
Is there a valid conclusion to the following argument?
All men eat cake.
I am a man.
Solution
Let p represent “people who are men” and q represent “people who eat cake.”
Recall, this extreme in logic can be rewritten in terms of a conditional; for example,
“all p are q” is equivalent to p→q. Therefore, you could rewrite this extreme as a con-
ditional and use the logic discussed previously.
Alternatively, you can use Euler circles. Just as above, a conclusion can be drawn in
two situations. Let P be the set satisfying p and Q be the set satisfying q.
Then, the Example 2.44, the conditional argument is: “all p are q” and p; this situ-
ation can be illustrated as follows.
p
Q
P
From this illustration, you can logically deduce q; that is, modus ponens. The pre-
mises can be written as
p→q
p
∴?
which, by modus ponens, has q is the valid conclusion.
Example 2.8.13 Valid Argument
Is the following argument valid?
All boys like bugs.
Alexis does not like bugs.
Therefore, Alexis is not a boy.
Solution
Let p represent “people who are boys” and q represent “people who like bugs.”
The given argument is: “all p are q” and ∼q; this situation can be illustrated as
follows.
q
~
Q
P
From this illustration, you can logically deduce ∼p.
Hence, given the two premises, p→q and ∼q, the logical conclusion is ∼p. Note,
the premise can be written in argument form are
p→q
∼q
∴∼p
which, by modus tollens, has ∼p is the valid conclusion and therefore, this is a valid
argument.
Archival Note
Euler circles or diagrams are related to Venn
diagrams and where used by Leonhard Euler to
represents sets and their relationship.
62
Chapter 2
Logic

Example 2.8.14 Valid Conclusion
Is there a valid conclusion?
All elephants are pink.
Brownie is a not an elephant.
Solution
Let p represent “animals that are elephants” and q represent “animals that are pink.”
Consider the argument “all p are q” and ∼p; this situation can be illustrated as
follows.
p
Q
P
~
From this illustration, you can see that there are two ways this can be situation can
conclude, therefore a single conclusion cannot be logically deduced. Hence, there is no
valid conclusion to this argument; any conclusion drawn would be invalid.
Example 2.8.15 Test the Validity
Is the following argument valid?
All gadgets are thingamajigs.
A wiper snap is a thingamajig:
Therefore, all wiper snaps are gadgets:
Solution
Let p represent “things that are gadgets” and q represent “things that are thingamajigs.”
Given the argument “all p are q” and q; this situation can be illustrated as follows.
q
Q
P
From this illustration, you can see that there are still two ways this can be situation
can be concluded, therefore a single conclusion cannot be logically deduced; any con-
clusion drawn under such premises would be invalid. A wiper snap may or may not be a
gadget; therefore, this is an invalid argument.
Thingamajig

Something that is hard to classify or
whose name is forgotten or unknown
2.8 Testing the Validity of an Argument
63

Example 2.8.16 Test the Validity
Is there a valid conclusion?
No widgets are wedges.
The doohickey is a widget.
Solution
Let p represent “widgets” and q represent “wedges.”
The statement “no p are q” is equivalent to p→∼q. Therefore, you could rewrite
this extreme as a conditional and use the logic discussed previously.
Alternatively, you can use Euler circles; just as before, a conclusion can be drawn in
two situations. Let P be the set satisfying p and Q be the set satisfying q.
Then, the case given in Example 2.45, “no p are q” and p can be illustrated as
follows.
p
P
Q
From this illustration, you can logically deduce ∼q. Therefore, a valid conclusion is
that the doohickey is not a wedge.
Example 2.8.17 Valid Conclusion
Is there a valid conclusion?
No widgets are wedges.
The jam is a wedge.
Solution
Let p represent “widgets” and q represent “wedges.”
Therefore, the argument “no p are q” and q can be illustrated as follows.
q
P
Q
From this illustration, you can logically deduce ∼p. Therefore, the jam is not
a wedge.
Example 2.8.18 Valid Argument
Is the following argument valid?
No real man wears hoop skirts.
Dana does not wear hoop skirts:
Therefore, Dana is a realman:
Widgets

A doodad or gadget

An unnamed article considered in a
hypothetical example
Jams
Blocked or wedged
64
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution
Let p represent “people who are real men” and q represent “people who were hoop skirts.”
Consider the argument “no p are q” and ∼p; this argument can be illustrated as
follows.
p
P
Q
~
From this illustration, you can see that there are two ways this situation can be con-
cluded, therefore a single conclusion cannot be logically deduced. Therefore, the con-
clusion “Dana is a real man” is an invalid argument. Not because Dana is not a real man,
but because there is insufficient evident to prove that Dana is or is not a real man. Dana
is a real man does not follow from the argument made.
Example 2.8.19 Valid Conclusion
Is there a valid conclusion?
Some women are strong.
Sam is a woman.
Solution
Let p represent “people who are women” and q represent “people who are strong.”
Consider the argument: “some p are q” and p, which can be illustrated as follows.
p
P
Q
From this illustration, you can see that there are still two ways this can be situation
can concluded, therefore a single conclusion cannot be logically deduced. That is, there
is no valid conclusion. Sam may or may not be strong.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
2.8.1. Test the validity of the argument
p→q
∼q
∴∼p
2.8.2. Show that the following argument is valid:
∼p→q
q→∼r
∴∼p→∼r
2.8.3. Is the following argument valid?
∼p→∼q
p
∴q
2.8.4. Test the validity of the following argument:
If it stops raining, then Chris will play tennis.
It did not stop raining:
Therefore, Chris did not play tennis:
Exercises
65

2.8.5. Determine the validity of the argument
If Diane invites Dennis, then John will attend her party.
Diane did not invite John:
Therefore, John attended theparty:
2.8.6. Test the validity of the argument
∼p→q
r→∼p
q
∴r
2.8.7. Test the validity of the following argument:
If Linda does not study, then she will fail her course.
If Linda played tennis, then she did not study.
Linda passed her course:
Therefore, Linda did not play tennis:
2.8.8. Is the following argument valid?
If Chris marries Deb, then John joins the Navy.
Either Deb divorces Chris or John joins the Navy.
Therefore, if Deb is divorced, then John joins the Navy.
2.8.9. Using proof patterns prove or disprove the validity of the following argument:
It is hot.
If it is hot, then it is not raining.
If it is not raining, then Maria can go swimming.
Therefore, Maria did not go swimming.
2.8.10. Prove or disprove the validity of the argument
If Sue graduates in the top 10% of her class, then she will go to medical school.
If Sue goes to medical school, then she will specialize in heart disease.
If Sue did not specialize in heart disease, then she did not go to medical school.
Sue graduated in the top 10% of her class:
Therefore, Sue specialized in heart disease:
2.8.11. Show that the following argument is false:
If you like finite mathematics, then you will study.
Either you study or you will fail:
Therefore, if you failed; then you do not like finite mathematics:
2.8.12. Is the argument following argument valid?
p→q
∼q
∴∼p
2.8.13. Illustrate Problem 2.8.8 using Euler circles.
2.8.14. Illustrate Problem 2.8.9 using Euler circles.
2.8.15. Illustrate Problem 2.8.10 using Euler circles.
2.9
APPLICATIONS OF LOGIC
Proof by Induction
The logic associated with conditional statements can be used to prove a
property holds for an infinitely large set. For example, 2n≥n + 1 for all natural
numbers, let P(n) be the statement, the property hold for the natural number n.
Then if we can show that P n
ð Þ→P n + 1
ð
Þ and P(1) is true, then P(n) holds for
66
Chapter 2
Logic

all natural numbers, by induction: P(1) and P 1
ð Þ→P 2
ð Þ true, implies, by
modus ponens, P(2) is true, P(2) and P 2
ð Þ→P 3
ð Þ true, implies, by
modus ponens, P(3) is true, so forth and so on for all n an element of the
natural numbers. In general, proof by induction can be bounded below
by n5c. That is, if the conditional statement in regards to sequentially defined
equation “if it is true for n5k, then is it is true for n5c greater than or
equal to c.”
It should be noted that Mathematical induction (proof by induction)
is not a form of inductive reasoning, but rather an extended form of
deductive reasoning. Proof by induction is a three-step procedure; two of
the steps are the proving the conditional statement and one step to show
for true for n51. “Show for true for n51” can be done first or last, clearly
label each step.
STEPS: Proof by Induction
Step 1.
Show for true for n51 or for n5c, where c is the first n.
Step 2.
Assume the antecedent is true; that is assume true for n5k.
Step 3.
Show true for n5k + 1; since the only conditions under which the conditional
statement fails it when the antecedent is true and the conclusion is false.
If we can show that true for n5k, implies the equation it is true for n5k + 1;
then we have shown that the conditional statement is always true.
Be sure to clearly state what you “need to show” (NTS); clearly define the
left hand side (LHS) and the right hand side (RHS).
Example 2.9.1 Sum of Whole Numbers
Prove 1 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ n5n n + 1
ð
Þ
2
for all natural numbers: n∈N, where ∈is read “an
element of.”
Proof
Step 1: Show true for n51
151 1 + 1
ð
Þ
2
151
True
Step 2: Assume true for n5k; that is,
1 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ k5k k + 1
ð
Þ
2
Step 3: Show true for n5k + 1; that is, we NTS
1 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ k + k + 1
ð
Þ5 k + 1
ð
Þ k + 1
ð
Þ + 1
ð
Þ
2
or equivalently,
1 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ k + k + 1
ð
Þ5 k + 1
ð
Þ k + 2
ð
Þ
2
Hence, LHS51 + 2 + 3⋯+ k + k + 1
ð
Þ, which by assumption becomes
Archival Note
Recall, proof by inductions was introduced with
great rigor by Aristotle. The basic idea is to get
into an infinite loop.
First, show that the statement holds for n51.
Second, assume that the statement is true for
n5k in general.
Third, prove using the assumption stated in
the second part that the statement holds true for
n5k + 1.
NTS≡}Need to show}
LHS≡}Lefthand side}
RHS≡}Right hand side}
Natural Number

The ordinary counting numbers:
1, 2, 3, …
2.9 Applications of Logic
67

51 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ k
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
k k + 1
ð
Þ
2
+ k + 1
ð
Þ
5k k + 1
ð
Þ
2
+ k + 1
ð
Þ
5k k + 1
ð
Þ
2
+ 2 k + 1
ð
Þ
2
5k k + 1
ð
Þ + 2 k + 1
ð
Þ
2
5 k + 1
ð
Þ k + 2
ð
Þ
2
5RHS
Example 2.9.2 n2 + n is a natural number given n∈N
Prove n2 + n is even for all natural numbers: n∈N.
Solution
Note, an even number is a number of the form 2m for some m∈N.
Proof by Induction
STEP 1: Show true for n51
12 + 152×1, and 1∈N
True: 2 is an even number.
STEP 2: Assume true for n5k; that is,
k2 + k52m; where m is a natural number
STEP 3: Show true for n5k + 1; that is, we NTS
k + 1
ð
Þ2 + k + 1
ð
Þ52j; where j is a natural number
Hence, LHS5 k + 1
ð
Þ2 + k + 1
ð
Þ, which by assumption becomes
5 k + 1
ð
Þ2 + k + 1
ð
Þ
5 k2 + 2k + 1


+ k + 1
ð
Þ
5 k2 + k


|ﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
2m
+ 2k + 2
ð
Þ
52m + 2k + 2
52 m + k + 1
ð
Þ
52j
where j5m + k + 1 and hence the property holds for n5k + 1. Therefore, by
induction, we have shown that n2 + n is even for all natural numbers n.
Boolean Algebra
The idea is based on zeros and ones, binary codes; let 0 represent a false
statement and 1 represent a true statement. Let the operation, + be defined
as the maximum of the given truth-values and the operation, × be defined
as the minimum of the given truth-values. Recall the addition in general will
represent “or” and multiplication in general will represent “and.”
Using this algebra, consider the truth-values of p∨q≡Max p, q
ð
Þ and
p∧q ≡Min p, q
ð
Þ.
George Boole was an English mathematician
and philosopher inventing Boolean logic, the
basis of modern digital computer logic.
68
Chapter 2
Logic

p
q
q
p
q
p
1 
1 
Max (1,1) = 1 
Min (1,1) = 1 
1 
0 
Max (1,0) = 1 
Min (1,0) = 0 
0 
1 
Max (0,1) = 1 
Min (0,1) = 0 
0 
0 
Max (0,0) = 0 
Min (0,0) = 0 
⁄
Ÿ
Furthermore, if we consider the negation to be the (truth-value+1) mod 2;
or in layman’s terms, the opposite truth-value, we have the following.
p
p
~
1 
0 
0 
1 
Now for conditionals, it is easier to consider its disjunctive equivalent; but
if you insist one just an algebraic rule, a conditional is the maximum of the
opposite of the antecedent’s truth-value and the consequence’s truth-value;
this is in essence the disjunctive equivalent.
p
q
p
~
q
p
q
p
~
1 
1 
0 
Max (0, 1) = 1 
1 
0 
0 
Max (0, 0) = 0 
0 
1 
1 
Max (1, 0) = 1 
0 
0 
1 
Max (1, 0) = 1 
⁄
Æ
Hence, if we interpret the 1’s as true and the 0’s as false, these truth-values
create the same truth tables introduced previously.
Switching Circuits
The logic of compound statements is often utilized in the design of switching
networks in electrical circuit theory. In this section we shall introduce some of
the basic theory necessary for the construction of switching networks. We
begin by defining what is meant by a switching network.
Definition 2.8.4 Switching Network
A switching network is a collection of wires and switches connecting two terminals, A
and B. A switch may be either open, O, or closed, C. An open switch will not permit the
current to flow while a closed switch will permit current to flow, (Figure 2.1).
We shall now proceed to develop the relationship between logic and the
design of simple switching networks. Given a switch, P, let p be a statement
associated with this switch having the property that
p is true if and only if P is closed
or
Archival Note
Boolean logic is the logical calculus of truth
values developed in the 1840s
Calculus

From Latin calculus “reckoning,
account”
Warning: + and ×
When using Boolean algebra, remember we
changed the meaning of + and ×; these new
definitions lead to similar but very different
properties, some of which look alike and some
of which look vastly different.
A
B
A
P
B
A
P
B
Single Wire
Open switch, P
Closed switch, P
FIGURE 2.1
Various wires.
2.9 Applications of Logic
69

p is false if and only if P is closed.
Two switches, P and Q, may be connected in two fundamental ways: in
series or parallel.
I SERIES
Figures 2.2 and 2.3 illustrate how the switches P and Q are connected in series.
Here, we observe that the current will flow from A to B if and only if both
switches P and Q are closed; that is, if and only if p∧q is true. Also, current
will not flow from A to B if one of the switches is open as shown by Figures 2.3
and 2.4.
That is, p∧q is false. The behavior of P and Q when they are connected in
series is summarized in the following table.
P Q Series Circuit 
p
q
q
p
C C 
C 
T 
T 
T 
C O 
O 
OR 
T 
F 
F 
O C 
O 
F 
T 
F 
O O 
O 
F 
F 
F 
Ÿ
Thus, it is clear that p∧q is true only when both P and Q are closed.
II Parallel
When the switches P and Q are connected in parallel they appear as shown by
Figures 2.5 and 2.6. These two figures illustrate two of the four possible switch
positions.
From these figures it is clear that current will flow from A to B if and only if
either P or Q is closed. That is, in logical terms, current will flow from A to B if
A
P
Q
B
FIGURE 2.4
P closed, Q open.
A
P
Q
B
FIGURE 2.2
Closed switches.
A
P
Q
B
FIGURE 2.3
Open switches.
70
Chapter 2
Logic

and only if p∨q is true. Note also that in Figure 2.5 current will not flow from A
to B since P and Q are open. That is, p∨q is false.
P Q Parallel Circuit 
p
q
q
p
C C 
C 
T 
T 
T 
C O 
C 
OR 
T 
F 
T 
O C 
C 
F 
T 
T 
O O 
O 
F 
F 
F 
⁄
Hence, current will flow from A to B in three out of four possible combi-
nations; namely, P open and Q open, P closed and Q open, P open and Q closed,
or P closed and Q closed.
Example 2.9.3 Current flow from A to B?
Given the following network, when does current flow from A to B?
P
P
A
Q
B
A
Q
P
B
FIGURE 2.6
P closed, Q open.
A
Q
P
B
FIGURE 2.5
P and Q open.
2.9 Applications of Logic
71

Solution
The above network corresponds to the logical statement,
p∧q
ð
Þ∨r
½
 because P and Q
are in series p∧q, and R is in parallel with P and Q,
p∧q
ð
Þ∨r
½
. The question posed will
be answered upon determining the combination of truth values for p, q, and r that will
make the statement
p∧q
ð
Þ∨r
½
 true.
That is,
P 
Q 
R P, Q in
Series
(P and Q) in 
Parallel with R 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
C 
O 
C 
C 
C 
O 
C 
O 
C 
C 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
C 
C 
O 
C 
O 
C 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
C 
O 
C 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
OR
p
q
r
q
p
r
q
p
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
T 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
T 
F 
T 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
Ÿ
Ÿ
⁄
By observing the fifth column, we see that current will flow from A to B in
five out of the eight cases; that is, if and only if
1. P closed, Q closed, R closed or
2. P closed, Q closed, R open or
3. P closed, Q open, R closed or
4. P open, Q closed, R closed or
5. P open, Q open, R closed
In the design aspects of switching networks it is sometimes necessary to
require that one switch be open while another remains closed; that is, for
the switches to be complementary.
Definition 2.8.5 Complementary
Two switches are said to be complementary if one switch is open and the other is
closed, and vice versa. Thus, if one switch is P, the complementary switch will be
labeled P0 (P prime).
The logical counterparts are
Switch
Statement
P
p
P0
∼p
In the preceding sections we discussed the concept of logical equivalence
of statements. Here, in the study of circuit theory, we can have electrical net-
works that are equivalent.
72
Chapter 2
Logic

Definition 2.8.6 Equivalent Electrical Networks
Two electrical networks are said to be equivalent if they have the same electrical prop-
erties concerning the flow and non-flow of current.
This definition simply states that their corresponding statements are log-
ically equivalent. We shall illustrate this concept in the following examples:
Example 2.9.4 Equivalent Electrical Network
Find a network equivalent to the one given in Figure 2.7.
Note that the dashed line indicates the path of the electrical flow. The current in this
network will flow from A to B whenever the logical statement p∨∼p
ð
Þ∧q∨∼q
ð
Þ cir-
cuits is true.
Solution
A network equivalent to Figure 2.7 can be obtained as follows:
Statement
Reason
1.
p∨∼p
ð
Þ∧q∨∼q
ð
Þ
Statement describing the circuit
2.
≡τ∧τ
Complement Law
3.
≡τ
Identity Law
Thus, the above network can be designed equivalently by any tautology such as
p∨∼p. That is,
A
P
B
P
Example 2.9.5 Equivalent Electrical Network
Obtain a network equivalent to the network given in Figure 2.8
A
P
Q
B
Q
P
FIGURE 2.7
Network diagram of the electrical circuit p∨∼p
ð
Þ∧q∨∼q
ð
Þ.
2.9 Applications of Logic
73

Solution
The current in this network will flow from A to B whenever the logical statement,
p∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ is true.
Note that although Figure 2.8 shows a pattern of open and closed switches, a number
of different patterns that will allow current to flow from A to B are possible. The several
patterns are illustrated in the following diagram:
Q
Q
P
P
P
p:
~ p Ÿ q: 
p Ÿ ~ q: 
A
B
Q
Q
P
P
P
A
B
Q
Q
P
P
P
A
B
P
Q
Q
A
P
B
P
FIGURE 2.8
Network diagram of p∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ.
74
Chapter 2
Logic

Solution—cont’d
Observe that the dashed path indicates the path of the electrical flow from A to B.
Now, we proceed to find a statement equivalent to the logical statement already given.
This statement is simply p∨q That is,
Statement
Reason
1.
p∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
Statement describing the circuit
2.
≡∼p∨p
ð
Þ∧p∨q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
Distributive Law (from the left)
3.
≡τ ∧p∨q
ð
Þ
½
∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
Complement Law
4.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∨p∧∼q
ð
Þ
Identity Law
5.
≡p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨p∨q
ð
Þ
Commutative Law
6.
≡p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨p
½
∨q
Associative Law
7.
≡p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨p∧p
ð
Þ
½
∨q
Distribution Law (from the right)
8.
≡p∧∼q∨p
ð
Þ
½
∨q
Distribution Law (in reverse)
9.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧
∼q∨p
ð
Þ∨q
½

Distribution Law (from the right)
10.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨q
½

Commutative Law
11.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨∼q∨q
ð
Þ
½

Associative Law
12.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨τ
ð
Þ
Complement Law
13.
≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧τ
Identity Law
14.
≡p∨q
Identity Law
Thus, the complicated network shown by Figure 2.8 is equivalent to a network made
up of two switches P and Q, connected in parallel; that is,
A
P
Q
B
Example 2.9.6 Equivalent Electrical Networks
Draw a switching network corresponding to the compound statement
p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨q∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q:
Also find an equivalent network simpler in design.
Solution
The switching network described by the preceding logical statement is
~pŸq
p⁄~q
~q
A
Q
P
Q
B
P
Q
Q
Continued
2.9 Applications of Logic
75

Solution—cont’d
To find a statement equivalent to this compound statement we proceed as follows:
Statement
Reason
1.
p∨∼q
ð
Þ∨q∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q
Statement describing the circuit
2.
≡p∨∼q∨q
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q
Associative Law
3.
≡p∨τ
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q
Complement Law
4.
≡τ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q
Identity Law
5.
≡τ∧∼q
Identity Law
6.
≡∼q
Identity Law
Thus, the complicated network we have shown is equivalent to the simple network
given by
Q
B
A
EXERCISES
2.9.1. Given the following network:
P
P
A
Q
B
When does the current flow from A to 5?
2.9.2. In the network given in Problem 1 determine when the current does not flow from A to B.
In Problems 2.9.3-2.9.5 draw switching networks that will correspond to the given compound statement.
2.9.3.
∼p∨q
ð
Þ∨∼q∨p∨∼q
ð
Þ
2.9.4.
∼p∨q
ð
Þ∨∼q∨p∨∼q
ð
Þ
½
∧q
2.9.5.
p∧r
ð
Þ∨q∧r
ð
Þ
½
∨∼q
In Problems 2.160-2.163 draw a pair of switching networks to show each of the pairs of equivalent statements.
2.9.6. ∼p∨∼p≡∼p
2.9.7.
q∨∼q
ð
Þ∧∼p∨p
ð
Þ
½
≡q∨∼q
2.9.8.
∼p∨q
ð
Þ∨∼p∧p
ð
Þ
½
≡∼p
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
Indicate which of the statements in Problems 2.1-2.18 are simple, compound, or non-statements. Also indicate the logical
connective for each compound statement.
2.1. Play tennis.
2.2. The ocean is blue and the sun is yellow.
2.3. Stop drinking.
2.4. Peter is a good athlete but he smokes.
2.5. Do you think we can go steady?
2.6. Run for your life.
2.7.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
69
p
58
2.8. Sport cars are fun but they are dangerous.
2.9. Black is beautiful.
76
Chapter 2
Logic

2.10. If butterflies have their wings, then they can fly.
2.11. Smoking cause cancer but we are not sure.
2.12. If the sun does not shine, then I will kiss you.
2.13. Why were you late?
2.14. Splendor in the grass but baby the rain must fall.
2.15. Yellow roses from Texas and oranges from Florida.
2.16. If football is violent, then soccer is fun.
2.17. Don’t rock the boat and you will be successful.
2.18. Tarzan loves Jane but what happened to him?
2.19. Let p represent the statement “I love you” and let q be “the sun is shining.” Give a verbal interpretation of the
following statements:
(a) ∼q, (b) ∼p, (c) p∨q, (d) p∧q, (e) p∨∼q, (f) ∼p∨∼q, (g) ∼∼p
ð
Þ∨q.
2.20. Let p represent the statement “Jan is beautiful” and q be “Jan is smart.” Express the following statements in symbolic
form:
(a) Jan is beautiful and smart.
(b) Jan is not beautiful but she is smart.
(c) If Jan is beautiful, then she is smart.
(d) Jan is either smart or beautiful.
2.21. Write the negation of the following statements:
(a) Baby the rain must fall.
(b) Plato was a philosopher.
(c) Finite mathematics is an important subject.
(d) Cars are dangerous.
(e) All Hondas are cars
(f) No man is an island
(g) Some apples are purple
Determine the truth value of each of the compound statements in Problems 2.22-2.27 or give conditions that will make the
statement true.
2.22. 3+3¼5 and 7+8¼15.
2.23. Sandy is beautiful or Sandy is smart.
2.24. Rome is in Italy but Tampa is in Florida.
2.25. It is not true that Sandy is smart.
2.26. It is true that 3+2¼6 and 4+4¼8 or John can add.
2.27. Football and tennis are fun or American history is motivating.
Construct truth tables for each of the statements in Problems 2.28-2.40.
2.28. ∼p∧∼q
2.29. ∼p∨q
2.30. ∼∼p
ð
Þ∨q
2.31.
p∧∼q
ð
Þ∨∼p∧q
ð
Þ
2.32.
p∨q
ð
Þ∧r
2.33.
p∧∼r
ð
Þ∨q∧∼r
ð
Þ
2.34. ∼p∨r
ð
Þ∨∼q∨p
ð
Þ
2.35. p→∼q
2.36. ∼p→∼∼q
ð
Þ
2.37. p→∼p∨q
ð
Þ
2.38.
∼p→q
ð
Þ
½
∧∼q∧p
ð
Þ
½

2.39.
p→r
ð
Þ→q
2.40.
p∨∼r
ð
Þ→∼p∧q
ð
Þ
Determine which of the logical statements in Problems 2.41-2.46 are tautologies, self-contradictions, or neither.
2.41. ∼p∨q
2.42. ∼p∧q
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
77

2.43. q→∼q
2.44.
p∧∼p
ð
Þ→p
2.45. q↔p∨q
ð
Þ
2.46.
p∧∼q
ð
Þ→∼p→q
ð
Þ
In Problems 2.47-2.52 determine whether the given statements are equivalent.
2.47. q→p;p∧∼q
2.48. ∼p∧q
ð
Þ;∼p∨∼q
2.49. ∼p→∼q; q→p
2.50. ∼p∧∼q;∼p∧∼q
2.51. p∧q;∼p→∼∼q
ð
Þ
2.52. ∼∼p∧∼q
ð
Þ; p∨q
2.53. For each of the following statements write the converse, contrapositive, and inverse:
(a) If Jan is smiling, then she is happy.
(b) If Jan is smiling, then she is sick.
(c) Jan smiles only when she is happy.
2.54. Show that the p∨q
ð
Þ∨r≡p∨q∨r
ð
Þ.
2.55. Verify that p∨q
ð
Þ∧r≡p∧q
ð
Þ∨p∧r
ð
Þ
2.56. Is p∧p≡p?
2.57. Show that p∨p∧p
ð
Þ≡p.
In Problems 2.58-2.61 determine whether the arguments are valid or fallacious.
2.58
p∧q
p
∴p
2.59
p→∼q
r→q
∴p→q
2.60
p
∼p
∴p→∼q
2.61
p→∼q
∼q
∴p
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Logic is derived from the Greek word logos, which means reason or discourse. A statement is a declarative sentence which is
either true or false but not both. The truth value of a statement is the truth or falsity of the statement.
Definitions:
Logic symbolism: a convenient way to analyze logically compound statements formed by the connectives ∧, ∨, ∼, →and
↔is by structuring their truth tables.
2.2.1. A statement is a declarative sentence which is either true or false, but not both. We shall denote statements sym-
bolically by lower case letters p, q, r…
2.2.2. The truth value of a statement is the truth or falsity of the statement. We shall denote true by T and false by F.
2.2.3. A compound statement is a statement composed of two or more statements connected by the logical connectives,
“and,” “or,” “if then,” “not,” and “if and only if.” A statement which is not compound is said to be a simple
statement.
2.2.4. The conjunction of two statements p and q is the compound statement “p and q”; written symbolically, p∧q, where
the symbol ∧is read “and” or “but.”
2.2.5. The disjunction of two statements p and q is the compound statement “p or q”; written symbolically, p∨q, where the
symbol ∨is read “or.”
2.2.6. Given a statement p, the negation of p is denoted by ∼p. The truth value is obtained from the property: If p is true, then
∼p is false and if p is false, then ∼p is true. The symbol ∼is read as not; that is, ∼p is the statement “not p.” Other
common denotations of the negation of p are p, ∼p or even ¬ p; however, we shall use the notation ∼p.
2.2.7. Statements of the form “if p then q” are called conditional statements and are denoted by p→q. The statement p is
called the hypothesis (condition/antecedent) while statement q is called the conclusion (consequence). The truth
value of p→q is given by the property: p→q is false only when p is true and q is false; otherwise p→q is true.
2.2.8. A statement of the form “p if and only if q” is called a bi-conditional statement, written in shorthand, you will often
write “p iff q,” symbolically, p↔q.
78
Chapter 2
Logic

2.4.1. A compound statement, τ, is said to be a tautology or logically true if it is true for all possible truth values of its
components.
2.4.2. A compound statement, ϕ, is said to be a self-contradiction or logically false if it is false for all possible truth values
of its components.
2.4.3. A paradox is an apparently true statement or group of statements that leads to a contradiction.
2.4.4. Two statements r and s are said to be logically equivalent or simply equivalent if they have identical truth tables; that
is, if r↔s is a tautology. To symbolize two equivalent statements r and s, we write r≡s or r¤s.
Qualifiers are terms that indicate to what extent a property holds: all are, none are, some are not and some are. The universal
qualifier is for all, ∀, and the existential qualifier is there exist, ∃.
2.6.1. The universal quantifier is “for all,” denote by an upside-down A, ∀. The statement ∀x∈U p x
ð Þ
½
 is true if and only
if p(x) is true for all x∈U.
2.6.2. The existential quantifier is “there exist,” denote by a backwards E, ∃. The statement ∃x∈U p x
ð Þ
½
 is true if and
only if there exist at least one x∈U for which p(x) is true.
2.8.1. Reasoning or deductive reasoning is a cognitive process using arguments to move from given statements or pre-
mises, which are true by assumption, to conclusions. The conclusions must be true when the premises are true.
2.8.2. An argument is an assertion that a given collection of statements p1,p2,…,pn called premises yields another
statement r called the conclusion.
2.8.3. An argument is valid if the conclusion r is true whenever the conjunction of the premises p1,p2,…,pn is true; that is,
p1 ∧p2 ∧…∧pn→r is a tautology. Otherwise the argument is said to be a fallacy. In other words, an argument is valid
whenever all the premises are true, the conclusion is true.
2.8.4. A switching network is a collection of wires and switches connecting two terminals, A and B. A switch may be either
open, O, or closed, C. switch will not permit the current to flow while a closed switch will permit current to flow.
2.8.5. Two switches are said to be complementary if one switch is open and the other is closed, and vice versa. Thus, if one
switch is P, the complementary switch will be labeled P0 (P prime).
2.8.6. Two electrical networks are said to be equivalent if they have the same electrical properties concerning the flow and
non-flow of current.
We have defined seven basic laws of algebra: idempotent, associative, commutative, distributive, identity, complement, and
De Morgan’s for statements under the equivalence relation. We have also considered various forms of the conditional
statement.
Properties:
2.2.1. Conjunction: If p is true and q is true, then p∧q is true; otherwise p∧q is false.
2.2.2. Disjunction (inclusive): When p is true or q is true or if both p and q are true, then p∨q is true; otherwise p∨q is false.
Thus, the disjunction p∨q of the two statements p and q is false only when both p and q are false.
2.2.3. Disjunction (inclusive): When p is true and q is false, or when p is false and q is true, then p∨q is true; otherwise p∨q
is false. Thus, this alternative disjunction p∨q of the two statements p and q is false only when both p and q are false
and when both p and q are true.
2.2.4. Negation: When p is true, then ∼p is false; if p is false, then ∼p is true.
2.2.5. Conditional: The conditional statement p→q is false only when p is true and q is false; otherwise p→q is true.
2.2.6. Bi-conditional: If p and q are either both statements are true or both statements are false, then p↔q is true; if p and q
have opposite truth values, then p↔q is false.
Rules:
2.4.1. Idempotent: p∨p≡p and p∧p≡p
2.4.2. Associative: p∨q
ð
Þ∨r≡p∨q∨r
ð
Þ and p∧q
ð
Þ∧r≡p∧q∧r
ð
Þ
2.4.3. Commutative: p∨q≡q∨p and p∧q≡q∧p
2.4.4. Distributive: p∨q∧r
ð
Þ≡p∨q
ð
Þ∧p∨r
ð
Þ and p∧q∨r
ð
Þ≡p∧q
ð
Þ∨p∧r
ð
Þ
2.4.5. Identity: If τ is a tautology and φ is any contradiction, then p∨φ≡p, p∧τ≡p, p∧φ≡φ and p∨τ≡τ
2.4.6. Complement: If τ is a tautology and φ is any contradiction, then p∨∼p≡τ, p∧∼p≡φ, ∼∼p
ð
Þ≡p, ∼τ≡φ
and ∼φ≡τ
2.4.7. DeMorgan’s Rule: ∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡∼p∧∼q and ∼p∧q
ð
Þ≡∼p∨∼q
Summary of Important Concepts
79

Common: Conditional Statements
There are four common ways in which the conditional statement p→q can be expressed.
5. p implies q (Direct statement)
6. p only if q
7. p is sufficient for q
8. q is necessary for p
Common: Equivalent Statements
Analyzing equivalent statements we observe that
1. p→q is not equivalent to q→p because Columns 5 and 6 are not identical.
2. p→q is not equivalent to ∼p→∼q because Columns 5 and 7 are not identical.
3. p→q is equivalent to ∼q→∼p because Columns 5 and 8 are identical.
4. q→p is equivalent to ∼p→∼q because Columns 6 and 7 are identical.
Common: Negations
∼∼p
ð
Þ≡p
Double negative, is the positive statement
∼p∨q
ð
Þ≡∼p∧∼q
Not at least one is equivalent to not having either; that is, not the first and not the second
(De Morgan’s Law)
∼p∧q
ð
Þ≡∼p∨∼q
“Not both” is equivalent to not having at least one; that is, “not the first or not the second”
(De Morgan’s Law)
∼p→q
ð
Þ≡p∧∼q
When the first statement does not imply the second statement, the first statement can be true when
(and) the second statement can fail (that is, is false)
Common: Quantifying Statements
There are four other commonly used forms of English phrases with which one should become familiar. These are the quan-
tifying statements:
I.
All p are q
Not “All p are q” is equivalent to “Some p are not q”
II.
No p are q
Not “No p are q” is equivalent to “Some p are q”
III.
Some p are q
Not “Some p are q” is equivalent to “No p are q”
IV.
Some p are not q
Not “Some p are not q” is equivalent to “All p are q”
Common: Universal and Existential Qualifiers
In addition, there are the universal quantifier and the existential qualifier, ∀and ∃, respectively,
1. ∼∀x∀y p x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∃x∃y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

2. ∼∀x∃y p x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∃x∀y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

3. ∼∃x∀y p x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∀x∃y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

4. ∼∃x∃y p x, y
ð
Þ
½
¤∀x∀y ∼p x, y
ð
Þ
½

Proof by Induction:
Step 1. Show for true for n51 or for n5c, where c is the first n.
Step 2. Assume the antecedent is true; that is assume true for n5k.
Step 3. Show true for n5k + 1; since the only conditions under which the conditional statement fails it when the antecedent
is true and the conclusion is false.
80
Chapter 2
Logic

We have studied several laws with respect to the validity of an argument:
Law of Detachment
p→q
p
∴q
Law of syllogism
p→q
q→r
p→r
Hypothetical syllogism
p→q
q→r
∴p→r
Disjunctive syllogism
p∨q
∼p
∴q
OR
p∨q
∼q
∴p
Conjunctive Simplification
p∧q
∴p
OR
p∧q
∴q
Conjunctive Concatenation
p
q
∴p∧q
Modus ponens
p→q
p
∴q
OR
all p are q
p
∴q
p→∼q
p
∴∼q
OR
no p are q
p
∴∼q
Modus tollens
p→q
∼q
∴∼p
OR
all p are q
∼q
∴∼p
p→∼q
q
∴∼p
OR
no p are q
q
∴∼p
Symbol
(Abbr.)
Name/Origin
Meaning/
Read as
Description
Example/Description
p,q,r
Simple Statements
Abbreviation for a
simple statement
Simple statements are abbreviated by
single lowercase letters
Let s represent the simple
statement: “The sun is
shining.”
∨
Disjunction (Inclusive)
“Or”
At least one statement is true
“It is raining, or I would ride
my bike.”
∨
Disjunction (Exclusive)
“Either … Or …”
Exactly one statement is true
“You can have either ice
cream or cake.”
∧
Conjunction
“And”
Both statements are true
“I am a student and a full-
time employee.”
∼
Negation
“Not”
The opposite of the statements in
terms of validity
“I am not ugly.”
Continued
Summary of Important Concepts
81

REVIEW TEST
Multiple-Choice:
1. Which of the following is/are not statement(s)?
i. Come here
ii. That is a cute kitty
iii. 2 + 255
A. i only
B. i and ii only
C. iii only
D. all of them are statements
E. none of them are statements
2. Which of the following is/are not statement(s)?
i. Watch your step
ii. Susan will call you tonight.
iii. 2+557
iv. 2×557
A. i only
B. ii and iii only
C. iii only
D. all of them are statements
E. none of them are statements
Symbol
(Abbr.)
Name/Origin
Meaning/
Read as
Description
Example/Description
→
Implication/Conditional
“If …, then…”
If the antecedent is true that implies
that the consequence must be true
“If I win the lottery, then I
will buy you dinner”
↔
Bi-conditional
“… if and only if
…”
The conditional holds in both
directions
“I am a male if and only if I
have a Y chromosome”
iff
“if and only if”
Abbreviation for “if and only if”
∀
Universal Qualifier
“for all …”
An upside down A
For all real numbers x, x2  0
∃
Existential Qualifier
“there exist …”
A backwards E
There exist x∈Ζ such that
ﬃﬃﬃx
p 52
≡
Equivalent
“Is the same as
saying”
Equality between compound
statement
Related to the word: Equal
∴
Hebrew
“Therefore”
The abbreviation for “therefore”
Used when drawing
conclusions
ϕ or c
Greek letter “Phi” or an
abbreviation of
contradiction
A contradiction
Statement that is never true
“This statement if false”
τ or t
Greek letter “Tau” or an
abbreviation of tautology
A tautology
Statement that is always true
“A rose is a rose”
∈
Greek letter “Epsilon”
“An element of” or
“is contained in”
Symbol illustrating containment
Let p represent a statement:
p∈S
n
Abbreviation of number
“Number of simple
statements”
Used when counting total number of
possible situations
Given p,q,r: n53
82
Chapter 2
Logic

True/False: Let p represents a true statement and q represent a false statement. Find the truth value of the following com-
pound statements.
3. ∼q∧p∨∼q
ð
Þ
4.
p∨q
ð
Þ→∼p∧q
ð
Þ
Construct a truth table and determine truth value under each condition.
5. p∧∼q
6.
∼q→p
ð
Þ∨p
Determine the value of x that makes the statement true.
7. x + 557, if 3 + 455
8. 7 + 3512 if and only if x + 558
Let p represent “The sun is shining” and q represent “It is raining,” write each of the following in a complete
sentence
9. ∼p∧∼q
ð
Þ
10. p→∼q
Let p represent “The sun is shining” and q represent “It is raining,” write each of the following in symbolic notation
11. If the sun is not shining, then it is raining.
12. The sun is shining and it is raining.
Construct a truth table and determine if the given statements are logically equivalent.
13. p→q,q∨∼p
14. p→q, ∼p→∼q
Give the negations of the following statements.
15. All students enroll in 12 credit hours per semester.
16. I will wash the dishes or I will wash the car.
17. If I offend you, then call the police.
Give a logically equivalent statement to the following statements.
18. I am broke or everything is not expensive
19. If you are traveling abroad, then you need an updated passport
Write the given statement in “if… then…” form.
20. Doing homework is necessary to pass this course.
21. All widgets are thingumabobs.
Write the contrapositive of the following statement.
22. If you are fifteen, then you are a minor.
23. If I win the lottery, then I will take you to dinner.
Write the inverse of the following statement.
24. If you call me, then I will not forget to bring drinks to the party.
25. If x + 457, then x2451.
Determine what conclusion can be logically deduced given that:
26. (i) All engineers are intelligent, (ii) All intelligent people do their jobs well, and (iii) Some contractors do
their job well.
27. (ii) No one who assigns work is well-liked, and (ii) All employers assign work.
Review Test
83

Determine what conclusion is needed in order to make the argument valid, if any.
28.
p→q
p
∴
29.
p→q
∼q
∴
30.
p→q
∼p
∴
31.
∼p→q
∼q
∴
32.
p→∼q
q
∴
33.
p∨q
∼q
∴
34.
p∨∼q
∼q
∴
35.
∼p∨q
p
∴
All of the following arguments have true conclusions but not all are valid. Determine if the argument if valid.
36. All cats are animals. All Maine coons are animals. Therefore, all Maine coons are cats.
37. All flowers have petals. An orchid is a flower. Therefore, an orchid has petals.
38. All birds have feathers. A dove has feathers. Therefore, a dove is a bird.
Determine if the argument if valid.
39. If it is a Washi, then it must be good. This machine is not a Washi. Therefore, it is not good.
40. Peter is at work or he is at home. Peter is not at work. Therefore, he is at home.
41. If you pass the final, then you will pass this course. You passed the course. Therefore, you passed the final.
42. If a man is not handsome, then he is funny. The man is handsome. Therefore, he is not funny.
Practice for the CLAST exam:
43. Select the negation of the statement “Fred is a farmer and George is a baker”
A. Fred is not a farmer and George is not a baker
B. Fred is not a farmer or George is not a baker
C. Fred is not a farmer and George is a baker
D. Fred is a farmer and George is not a baker
44. Select the negation of the statement “If you invite me, I will come to the party”
A. If you invite me, I will not come to the party.
B. If you do not invite me, I will not come to the party.
C. You invited me and I did not go to the party.
D. You invited me and I came to the party.
45. Select the statement that is logically equivalent to “It is not true that both Fred and George are good bowlers”
A. If Fred is not a good bowler, George is a good bowler.
B. Fred is a good bowler or George is a good bowler.
C. Fred is not a good bowler and George is a good bowler.
D. If George is not a good bowler, George is not a good bowler.
46. Select the statement that is not logically equivalent to “If the game is cancelled, Bob will go to the movies”
A. Bob will go to the movies or the game is not cancelled.
B. If Bob goes to the movies, then the game is cancelled
C. If Bob does not go to the movies, then the game will not be cancelled
D. The game is not cancelled or Bob will go to the movies.
47. Read the following valid argument and chose the symbolic form that illustrates the reasoning pattern: Betty will wash the
car or she will go to the store. She did not go to the store. Therefore, she will wash the car.
A.
p∨q
q
∴p
B.
p∨q
p
∴∼q
84
Chapter 2
Logic

C.
p∨q
∼q
∴∼p
D.
p∨q
∼q
∴p
48. Select the rule of logical equivalence which directly transforms first statement (i) into the second statement (ii).
i. Not all men drive trucks.
ii. Some men do not drive trucks.
A. “All are not p” is equivalent to “none are p”
B. “Not all are p” is equivalent to “all are not p”
C. “Not all are p” is equivalent to “some are not p”
D. “If not q then not p” is equivalent to “if p, then q”
49. Read the statements given and select a logical conclusion, if it exists.
All pirates are treasure hunters. All treasure hunters seek gold and diamonds. Ted is seeking gold and diamonds.
A. Ted is a pirate
B. Ted is not a pirate
C. Ted is a treasure hunter
D. None of the above is warranted.
50. Read the statements given and select a logical conclusion, if it exists.
If you study statistics, you will be successful. If you study engineering, you will be successful. You study statistics and
not engineering.
A. You will be successful.
B. You will not be successful.
C. You study chemistry as well.
D. None of the above is warranted.
51. Select the statement that is logically equivalent to “It is not the case that I am happy and you are sad”
A. I am not happy and you are happy.
B. I am not happy or you are not sad.
C. I am happy and you are not sad.
D. I am happy and you are not happy.
E. None of the above.
52. Select the statement that is not logically equivalent to “If you are wearing a suit, then you must wear dress shoes.”
A. You do not wear a suit or you must wear dress shoes.
B. If you need not wear dress shoes, then you are not wearing a suit.
C. You wear a suit and you do not wear dress shoes.
D. You must wear dress shoes or you do not wear a suit.
REFERENCES
Church, A., 1956. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Johnstone Jr., H.W., 1954. Elementary Deductive Logic. Crowell, New York.
Suppes, P., 1957. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, NJ.
Tarski, A., 1946. Introduction to Logic, 2nd rev. ed. Oxford, New York.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978a. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
References
85

Chapter 3
Sets
3.1 Introduction to Set Theory
88
3.2 The Concept of a Set
89
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
97
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
113
Summary of Important Concepts
115
Review Test
117
References
119
Complex Numbers: a + bi
Real Numbers:
√2, e, p
(Quotient)
 Rational Numbers:
1/2, –3/5, √9     
Integers:
Whole Numbers:
Natural
(Counting)
Numbers:
1, 2, 3, ...
0, ...
..., –2, –1, ...
Number is the within of all things.
PYTHAGORAS
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
87

The mathematical delving of Georg Cantor gave rise to the modern theory of the infinite. His imaginative and innovative ideas
also led to new insights in the specialties of topology and geometry. In addition, he did valuable work in analysis and made a
special study of rational and irrational numbers. The Cantor ternary set provides the basis for numerous counterexamples.
Cantor’s parents immigrated to Russia from Denmark before his birth, and went from there to Germany when he was eleven.
While his family was of Jewish descent, his mother was born a Roman Catholic and his father had converted to Protestantism.
Cantor himself preferred Protestant Christianity, but he was intensely interested in medieval theology. This interest, combined
with his studies in philosophy, physics, and mathematics, spurred him to focus on questions of continuity and the infinite. The
direction of his studies was despite his father’s urging him to study engineering, a much more financially rewarding occupation.
Most of Cantor’s career was spent at the University of Halle, a small, second-rate school. The sensitive Cantor dearly
hoped to achieve the distinction of a professorship at the University of Berlin, but he was thwarted in this desire by his
contemporaries’ objections to his concepts of the infinite. Cantor’s mental health suffered greatly under the strain of
continual attacks upon his ideas by colleagues, most notably Leopold Kronecker. These attacks eventually became per-
sonal rather than academic. At the age of thirty-nine, Cantor suffered the first of a series of nervous breakdowns. He never
regained his self-confidence, and died in a mental institution.
Toward the end of his life, recognition for this innovator’s achievements was being granted, and with the twentieth
century, his work came to be accepted. Cantor is now admired for his brilliant thinking; Kronecker’s objections are no
longer taken seriously by most mathematicians. The mathematics of today is greatly indebted to Cantor’s free spirit of a Set.
CANTOR SET
The set of points formed from the closed interval [0,1] by removing first the middle third of the interval, then the middle third
of each remaining interval, and so on indefinitely, the intervals removed being open intervals.
3.1
INTRODUCTION TO SET THEORY
The concept of set theory plays a major role in every branch of modern math-
ematics. Intuitively the term set means an arbitrary collection of objects with
no restriction as to their nature or number, and no required relation between the
objects. Georg Cantor devoted much of his life to developing the theory of sets.
Our aim in this chapter is to introduce some of the basic definitions and
properties of the theory of sets. The usefulness of the concepts we study here
will be illustrated in later chapters when we apply these concepts in practical
analysis. In addition we shall discuss some basic techniques in counting that
involve common problems of daily life.
Recall, we think faster than we speak, we speak faster than we write,
therefore to think quickly and communicate these ideas, we must learn to
abbreviate everything. A summary of modern symbolic logic and how this
relates to the language of set theory is given throughout this chapter, as is a
summary of the language used in set theory.
88
Chapter 3
Sets

3.2
THE CONCEPT OF A SET
Let us begin by considering the thirty-eight presidents of the United States up
to 1976. The members of this collection of individuals are all quite distinct, and
all have met some basic requirements to qualify them as the president of the
United States. This collection of individuals constitutes a set. Also, let us
consider the fifty states that make up the United States of America. This col-
lection is well defined and consists of states that are distinct from one another.
This collection of states constitutes a set, and thus we have the following
definition:
Definition 3.2.1 Set
A set is a collection of distinct objects; the objects that constitute the set are the
members or elements of the set. We shall denote sets symbolically by capital letters
A, B, C… and “an element of” by the Greek letter epsilon, ∈. If an object “is not
an element of,” we shall write 6∈.
For example, the positive integers greater than 5 and less than 13 constitute
a set; namely, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 are the elements of the set. We com-
monly use braces { and } as grouping symbol to enclose the members or ele-
ments of a set. Thus, we can write the preceding set as
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
f
g:
One need not associate numerical values to structure a set. Consider the
American states that begin with the letter M. These states constitute a set
Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan,
f
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montanag:
Herethe set consists ofeight elements,eachelement being a specific state.An
important feature of a set is that it is well defined. In other words, it must be clear
that a given object is either an element of the set or is not an element of the set.
We shall employ capital letters such as A, B, C… to denote sets and low-
ercase letters such as a,b,c,… to denote the elements (members) of the set.
Thus, if we let ℕrepresent the set of all positive integers, 1, 2, 3, …; that
is, the natural numbers and hence we can write
ℕ5 1, 2, 3, 4, : : :
f
g:
We should also mention here that a set may consist of a finite number of
elements or of infinitely many elements. For example, the set that consists
of the eight states whose names begin with M is made up of a finite number
of elements, whereas the set N consists of infinitely many positive integers;
that is, the enumeration of elements in ℕcontinues in the natural manner.
To indicate that an element is a member of a given set, we use the symbol
∈. Its negation 6∈denotes that the element is not a member of the set. For
example, let us consider the set
A5 a, b,c, d, e, f
f
g:
Here, a∈A; that is, a is an element of the set, while g 6∈A, g is not an
element of the set A.
In order to have a convenient way to describe certain sets we shall use the
symbols > which means greater than and < which means less than. When the
symbols are written in the form ≥and ≤it simply means greater than or equal
to and less than or equal to, respectively. We shall also employ letters such as
3.2 The Concept of a Set
89

x,y,z,… to represent elements of a set. To illustrate this, let C be the set of all
natural numbers greater than 5 and less than 110, written in roster notation:
C5 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, …, 108, 109
f
g
A more convenient way of writing the set C is in set-builder notation:
C5 yjy∈N,5<y<110
f
g
Here, the letter y represents an element of the set C. The vertical bar j after
the y is read “such that.” After the bar we place the conditions that must be
satisfied to define the set C. Thus, we read the set C as follows: “C equals
the set of all elements, y, such that y is an natural number greater than 5
and less than 110.” That is, C5 yjy∈N,5<y<110
f
g.
Some common denotations of numerical sets:
Set
Name

5 1, 2, 3, …
f
g
Natural (Counting Numbers)

5 0, 1, 2, 3, …
f
g
Whole Numbers (Natural numbers
including zero)

5 …,23,22,21,0,1,2,3,…
f
g
Integers (Positive/Negative Whole
Numbers)

5 xjx5a
b wherea,b∈Z
n
o
Rational (Quotients)

5 xj2•<x<•
f
g
Real Numbers

5 a + bija,b∈R
f
g
Complex Numbers where i2521
It should be noted that since it is not practical to write in bold, emphasize is
oftengiventothesesetsbywritingthecapitalletterswithadoublestrokeasshown
below. The relation between these sets is shown on the Chapter 2 title page.
Complex
Real
Rational
Integer
Whole
Natural
In set theory we are only interested in the collections of objects that are
well-defined; therefore we are only interested in sets—collections to which
all objects are considered either to belong or not to belong. Non-sets or arbi-
trary collections not considered are collections described by opinions; for
example the statement “dogs that are cute” does not form a well-defined
set. “Bulldogs” is a well-defined set.
Example 3.2.1 First 100 Integers
Write the set that consists of all positive integers less than 100.
Solution
Let x represent the integers less than 100. Then we can write the desired set A as
A5 xjx∈Z,x<100
f
g:
90
Chapter 3
Sets

Example 3.2.2 Roster Notation
List the elements of the set A in Example 3.2.1 in roster notation.
Solution
A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, …, 99
f
g
Example 3.2.3 Antibiotics
Consider the set of antibiotics
A ¼ Penicillin, Streptomycin, Tetracycline, Erythromycin, Chlortetracycline
f
g
Determine which of the following statements are true and which are false.
(a)
Erythromycin ∈A
(b)
Chlortetracycline 6∈A
(c)
Digitalis ∈A
(d)
Penicillin 6∈A
Solution
Statement (a) is true because erythromycin is an element of the well-defined set A.
Statement (b) is false because chlortetracycline is indeed an element of the set A.
Statement (c) is false because digitalis is not an element of the set A. Statement (d)
is false because penicillin is an element of the set A; that is, penicillin ∈A.
Example 3.2.4 Subsets of the Integers
List the elements of the following sets:
(a)
A5 xjx an integer,22≤x<5
f
g
(b)
B5 yjy52n, n a positive integer
f
g
(c)
C5 zjz a positive integer z2 ≤36


Solution
(a)
A5 22,21,0,1,2,3,4
f
g
(b)
Here n∈N, that is n simply represents the numbers n51,2,3,…. Thus, we can
write B as an infinite set of positive even integers:
B5 2, 4, 6, …
f
g
(c)
The set C consists of all positive integers that when squared will be less than or
equal to 36:
C5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g
Example 3.2.5 “Football”
Give a mathematical description of the set of all letters in the word football.
3.2 The Concept of a Set
91

Solution
Let x represent a letter in the word football. Thus, the desired set in set-builder notation
is written
A5 xjx a letter in the word football
f
g
The elements in the set can be listed in roster form:
A5 f, o, t, b, a, l
f
g:
Note that although the word football contains two o’s and two l’s, we write them
only once in structuring the set. In this context, the universal discourse is understood
to be the letters of the alphabet; however, universal discourse is logistical jargon, in
set theory, we shall say the universal set.
Definition 3.2.2 Universal Set
The universal set U is the largest set in a given context; that is, the universal set is the
totality of the elements under consideration. Denoted by the capital letter, U normally
written with the upper bars, U, or a tail, U, as to be it distinguishable from the union
symbol ∪.
Universal Set
Universal Set
Union Symbol
This is the set from which all other sets will be taken, but it is important that
you understand the given context. For example, if the set is defined in the context
of the natural numbers, then the understood universe is U5 1, 2, 3, …
f
g which
the set of all counting numbers including large numbers like 100, 1000, and
1,000,000. However, if the set is defined in the context of the digits, then the
understood universe is the limited set: U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g which does
include the element zero by no integer larger than 9.
To help us better understand certain aspects of set theory we shall use
circles and rectangles to denote sets. The diagram approach originated with
an English logician named John Venn (1834-1923), and we refer to them as
Venn diagrams. Similar to Euler circles in Logic, we can draw sets using Venn
diagrams. The main difference begin, in Logic there are not always physical
boundaries other than those represent by the statements themselves (the sets)
and an implied universal discourse; whereas in Set Theory, there is the
boundary of the contextual universal set. This universal set in a Venn diagram
is emphasized in that it is represented by a rectangle which contains the
primary set; for example, the universal set of digits can be illustrated as
2
6
5
U
9
1
3
8
4
0
7
C
R
UV W
L
F
G
D
S
Q
J
I
Z
N
O T H P
B
A
M
X K
Θ
Ξ
Y
E
Λ
Δ
Ψ
Ω
∑
Φ
Γ
Π
92
Chapter 3
Sets

Definition 3.2.3 Empty Set
This empty set, sometimes call the null set is the smallest set in any context; this set
contains no elements. If we were to write it in “proper” set notation, it would be obvious
that it has no elements, { } or the single symbol ∅.
0
0
f
∅
An empty set
The empty set
A contradicion
Null, Not,
Nothing, Zilch
Zero
Hence, it is possible for a set to have no elements, for example, the set
A5 yjy a unit digit,y<21
f
g
has no elements because there is no digit that is less than or equal to 1. In a
Venn diagram, letting a set be described by a circle, then the empty set would
be represented by an empty circle.
6
5
U
9
8
1
3
7
0
4
2
A
Example 3.2.6 Bounded Sets
List the elements of the set given by
B5 zjz a positive integer, z2525 and 5<z≤25


:
Solution
Here, B is empty because there is no value of z that will satisfy both the condition (a) z is
a positive integer, (b) z2525, and (c) that is greater than five and less than or equal to 25.
The only positive number that when squared is 25 is 5; which is not greater than five.
There are many situations in which the elements of a given set are also the
elements of another set. For example, let us consider the set F which consists of
all female students of a finite mathematics course and the set U which consists
of all students in our university. Here, all the members of the set F are also
members of the set U. That is, all females students are university students; this
idea of containment. Before we state the definition of a subset, let us consider
another example. Define the sets of even digits E and the set of all digits D as
E5 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
f
g and D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g:
We note here that every element of the set E is also an element of the set D.
We symbolize this situation by writing
E⊂D
A⊆U
A5∅
U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g
U5 xjx is a digit
f
g
3.2 The Concept of a Set
93

This idea can be further illustrated in a Venn diagram. Assuming that the
digits is the universal set
2
6
8
1
7
3
9
5
U
0
4
E
Definition 3.2.4 Subset
If every element of a set A is also a member of a set B, then we say that the set A is a
subset of the set B. Logically, if x∈A, then x∈B.
The symbol ⊂in the statement A⊂B is read “A is a subset of B” or “A is
contained in B” in that this symbol looks similar to the letter C or c; however,
not exactly. Recall, capital C usually represents a set and the lowercase c may
represent an element or be an element, but a subset does not curve inward like a
partially closed staple, but rather is straight out more like an unused staple.
Moreover, this symbol indicates a proper subset in that the subset is “sub”
or is “less than” the original set; this symbol is comparable to the symbol
< in algebra. Whereas if the subset is the original set, then we use the symbol
⊆; this symbol is comparable to the symbol ≤in algebra.
Captial C
Lowercase C
(Proper) Subset
Subset
It should be noted that we can compare two sets without the assumption that
the universal set is known.
A
B
It is clear that every set A is a subset of itself; that is, A⊆A. Also, by def-
inition the empty set, ∅, is a subset of every set A, ∅⊂A. In terms of the sets
which constitute Complex numbers: the Natural numbers, Whole numbers,
Integers, Rational numbers, Real number and Imaginary numbers, these sets
are related as follows:
⊂
⊂
⊂
⊂
⊂
This relationship is such that if x∈A and A⊆B, then x∈B, hence, the rela-
tionship of subsets in set theory is comparable to implication in logic; that is,
x∈A⊆B
ð
Þ→x∈B
ð
Þ.
U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g
E5 0, 2, 4, 6, 8
f
g
A⊆B
94
Chapter 3
Sets

English
⊆
Logic
Set Theory
For example, for the set C5 1, 3, 4, 6
f
g we have the following subsets: ∅,
{1}, {3}, {4}, {6}, {1,3}, {1,4}, {1,6}, {3,4}, {3,6}, {4,6}, {1,3,4}, {1,3,6},
{1,4,6}, {3,4,6}, and {1,3,4,6}. Thus, the set C5 1, 3, 4, 6
f
g possesses 16
possible subsets. In fact, there are 2n possible subsets of a given set, where
n is the number of elements that constitute the set. In the preceding example
the set C consists of n54 elements and hence we have 24516 subsets.
Note that the 2n possible subsets of a given set including the empty set
and the entire set.
Example 3.2.7 Subsets
Write all possible subsets of the set
A5 xjx an integer,1<x2 ≤16


Solution
Here, the set A in roster notation is written as
A5 2, 3, 4
f
g
There are 2358 possible subsets of the set A; namely,
∅, 2
f g, 3
f g, 4
f g, 2, 3
f
g, 2, 4
f
g, 3, 4
f
g, and 2, 3, 4
f
g
If subset ⊆in set theory is comparable to implication or a conditional →in
logic, then equality 5 in set theory is comparable to biconditional in logic.
That is, set equality, A5B logically stated is: x∈A if and only if x∈B.
Definition 3.2.5 Subset
Two sets A and B are said to be equal if they have the same elements and we write
A5B:
It is clear that if A⊆B and B⊆A, then the two sets must be equal, A5B. Logically,
A⊆B translates to x∈A→x∈B and B⊆A translates to x∈B→x∈A; that is,
x∈A↔x∈B.
Example 3.2.8 Temperatures
The daily temperatures during the first week in July, 1976 in Clearwater, Florida were
observed to be
88, 92, 89, 89, 88, 88, 86
degrees Fahrenheit. Describe this set.
3.2 The Concept of a Set
95

Solution
Putting these observations in a set form, we have
C5 86, 88, 89, 90, 92
f
g:
Recall that all members of a set must be distinct. Therefore, although 88 and 89 were
recorded twice, when we put them in set form we include the observations only once.
Also, the order in which we list the elements of the set is irrelevant.
Consider temperatures recorded for the same period in Sparkling City:
90, 92, 89, 89, 88, 88, 86
degrees Fahrenheit. Putting these observations in a set form, we have
S5 86, 88, 89, 90, 92
f
g
Since both sets C and S contain the same recordings, C5S.
PROBLEMS
Critical Thinking
3.2.1. Indicate which of the following verbal descriptions a well-defined set:
(a) The players of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers football team,
(b) The collection of all good United States senators,
(c) The states of the United States of America,
(d) The collection of all secretaries who can type at least 75 words per minute,
(e) The golf players who have won the United States Open Golf Tournament.
3.2.2. Let B5 21,a,2,b,c,d
f
g. Indicate which of the following statements are correct:
(a) ∅∈B,
(b) a 6∈B,
(c) d ∈B,
(d) 21 ∈B
3.2.3. Consider the set A5 xjx a positive integer 1<x≤8
f
g Which of the following statements are true?
(a) A 5 {2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7},
(b) A 5 {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
(c) 4 ∈A,
(d) 1 6∈A
(e) a ∈A,
(f) 7 6∈A
3.2.4. Let C5 zjz is an even integer,1≤x<13
f
g. Indicate which of the following statements are true.
(a) C5 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12
f
g
(b) C5 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12
f
g
(c) 7 6∈C,
(d) 1 ∈C,
(e) 8 ∈C
3.2.5. Consider the set of French philosophers during the Age of Reason, an intellectual movement of the 1700s.
P ¼ de Condorcet, Diderot, Helvetius, Rousseau, Voltaire
f
g:
Indicate which of the following are true or false:
(a) de Condorcet ∈P,
(b) Diderot ∈P
(c) Helvetius 6∈P,
(d) Voltaire ∈P
3.2.6. Consider the set of drugs useful in the treatment of certain cancers.
D5 5fluorourucil, methotrexate, cytoxin, Vincristine
f
g:
Indicate which of the following statements are true or false:
(a) 7-fluorourucil ∈D
(b) cytoxin ∈D
(c) 5-fluorourucil 6∈D
(d) Vincristine ∈D
3.2.7. Write the set which consists of all positive integers less than 15.
3.2.8. Write the set of all integers greater than 3 and less than or equal to 4.
3.2.9. Construct the set of all even integers greater than or equal to zero and less than 16.
96
Chapter 3
Sets

3.2.10. Write the set of all integers greater than or equal to 8.
3.2.11. Construct the set of all integers less than zero.
3.2.12. Give a verbal description of the following sets:
(a) A5 a1, a2, a3, a4
f
g
(b) B5 6, 9, 7, 8
f
g
(c) C5 xjx is a positive integer,1<x≤10
f
g
(d) D5 A, t, h, e, n, s
f
g
3.2.13. Write a verbal description of the following sets:
(a) A5 21,1,22,2,23,3
f
g
(b) B5 P, l, a, t, o
f
g
(c) C5 yjy is a integer, y2516


(d) D5 O, l, y, m, p, i, a
f
g
3.2.14. List explicitly, in roster notation, the elements of the following sets:
(a) A5 xjx is a positive integer, x≤5
f
g
(b) B5 yjy is an even positive integer, 4≤y2<16


3.2.15. List explicitly, in roster notation, the members of the following sets:
(a) A5 zjz is an integer, z2564


(b) B5 tjt52n21, n a positive integer
f
g
3.2.16. Give a mathematical description of the following:
(a) the set A of all the letters in the word “retina.”
(b) the set B of all negative integers.
3.2.17. Write the elements of the set Z defined by
Z5 zjz is an integer, z524
f
g
3.2.18. Is the set E given by
E5 eje is an integer, e>5 and e≤5
f
g empty? Why?
3.2.19. Write all possible subsets of the set A5 xjx is an integer,24≤x<0
f
g.
3.2.20. Consider the set of all the American states, the names of which begin with the letter N. How many subsets does this
set have?
3.2.21. Construct a set that contains the sets {2,0}, {1}, {0,1,3} as subsets.
3.2.22. Write the set that contains the sets
{Matthew, Alee}, {George}, {Mark, Sean}, {Francis}
as subsets. How many possible subsets can we write?
3.2.23. Write all possible subsets of the set that consists of the names: Michael, Irene, Nick, Anastasia, and Chris.
3.3
THE ALGEBRA OF SETS
The basic set operators are union, intersection and complement; these oper-
ators in sets are comparable to the logical operators: disjunction, conjunction
and negation. In fact the symbolism used in sets is comparable to the sym-
bolism used in logic; similarly, set notation is a form of coding that abbreviates
large amount of syntax into abridged versions that can be interpreted and
manipulated in the mind more readily. Additional set operators include the
set difference and symmetric difference.
Remember: the speed at which these abbreviations can be interpreted
depends on how often they are used.
Let us consider the sets A5 1, 3, 4, 6, 8
f
g and B5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g, we are
interested in combining and comparing the elements of the two sets A and
B into a new set, say C. Thus, to combine these two sets, we take them in
union, ∪. Thus, we can write
C5A∪B
which we read as “A union B.”
Intersect
Subtract
Symmetric difference
Union
Overlapping sets
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
97

Definition 3.3.1 Union
Let A and B be two sets. The set C if all elements that belong to either set A or B, or both
is called the union of A and B. We denote this operation by
C5A∪B:
Logically, x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∨x∈B
ð
Þ
½
.
x∈A∪B if and only if x∈A or x∈B
ð
Þ
English
Logic
Set Theory
Example 3.3.1 Union
Construct the set C5A∪B of the sets:
A5 1, 3, 4, 6, 8
f
g and B5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g
Solution
The elements that are in either A or B are given by
C5A∪B5 1, 3, 4, 6, 8
f
g∪1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g
5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8
f
g
To further illustrate this set we can represent the previously defined sets A and B by
circles, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Example 3.3.2 Dissolved Oxygen
It has become increasingly evident that the world’s most valuable natural resources—air
and water—are being adversely affected by the activities of civilized man. Our water
supply is threatened by the disposal of organic (and other) waste materials into rivers,
lakes, and streams. This pollution has become a major concern of the scientific com-
munity, and various regulatory agencies have specified minimum levels for dissolved
oxygen, DO, in natural bodies of water. These minimum levels of DO are significant in
that if DO falls below a certain threshold value, the fish and other living organisms may
die. Many organic compounds discharged into rivers, lakes, and streams are effectively
degraded into inoffensive components by the action of bacteria in the water. As the
organisms in a body of water degrade the pollution, they require oxygen, and hence
use the dissolved oxygen that is available to them. Oxygen-consuming pollutants are
1
3
8
4
6
5
2
B
A
FIGURE 3.1
Circle diagram of set A in union with set B.
98
Chapter 3
Sets

Example 3.3.2 Dissolved Oxygen—cont’d
measured in terms of the amount of oxygen required by the bacteria to stabilize them,
called the biochemical oxygen demand, BOD. It is generally accepted that the BOD and
DO, measured in parts per million, or ppm, are the primary indicators of water quality.
Dissolved oxygen is obtained directly from the air by aeration and indirectly through the
photosynthetic process of aquatic plants. In the River of No Return the average monthly
recordings in ppm of DO and BOD for 1976 are
32, 28, 30, 33, 31, 32, 34, 33, 30, 31:28, 30
and
26:29, 27, 30, 29, 32, 31, 33, 32, 30, 31, 32;
respectively. Find the union of the recordings of the indicators of water quality.
Solution
Here, the elements of the two sets are
DO ¼ 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34
f
g and BOD ¼ 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33
f
g:
Thus, the union of DO and BOD is DO∪BOD ¼ 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32
f
, 33, 34g
as shown by Figure 3.2.
Hence, the union of the two sets gives a distinct characterization of the numerical
values of the primary indicator of water quality. This information is useful to the envi-
ronmentalist in planning strategies for water quality control.
Here, the union of the two sets is more than a simple circle; the union of two sets is
the combined circles as illustrated by the shaded region below.
Example 3.3.3 Union with Integers
Find the union of the following sets:
A5 xjx is an integer, 1<x≤6
f
g
B5 yjy is a positive integer, y<5
f
g
C5 zjz is an integer, 23<z≤2
f
g:
34
30
DO
BOD
33
32
28
26
29
27
31
FIGURE 3.2
Circle diagram of Dissolved Oxygen and Biochemical
Oxygen Demand.
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
99

Solution
We begin by listing the elements of each of the sets in roster notation (Figure 3.3)
A5 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g
B5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g
C5 22,21,0,1,2
f
g
Thus, A∪B∪C5 22,21,0,1,2,3,4,5,6
f
g
Although we have defined the union of two sets and have illustrated its meaning with
two and three sets, we are not restricted as to the number of sets.
Physician P1 has a collection of five drugs—call them a,b,c,d,e—from
which he selects to prescribe for his patients for a certain type of virus. Phy-
sician P2, also selects from five drugs—a,b,d,f,g—for his patients with the
same type of virus. A patient who has knowledge of the sets P1 and P2, is inter-
ested in just those drugs that are being used by both physicians. Here, we have
the two sets
P15 a, b, c, d, e
f
g and P25 a, b, d, f, g
f
g
And we are interested in the elements common to both P1 and P2.
Definition 3.3.2 Intersection
Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to both A and B is called
the intersection of the sets A and B. We denote this operation by
C5A∩B:
Logically, x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∧x∈B
ð
Þ
½
.
x∈A∩B if and only if x∈A and x∈B
ð
Þ
English
Logic
Set Theory
Here, the intersection of the two sets is less than a simple circle; the intersection
of two sets is the overlapping circles as illustrated by the shaded region below.
A
C
B
5
3
4
2
1
0
–1
–2
6
FIGURE 3.3
Three way circle diagram of the sets A, B and C.
100
Chapter 3
Sets

The intersection ∩of the preceding sets P1 and P2 is given by
P1 ∩P25 a, b, c, d, e
f
g∩a, b, d, f, g
f
g5 a, b, d
f
g
as shown by Figure 3.4.
Example 3.3.4 Humidity Readings
Find the intersection of the two sets that constitute the humidity recordings. The average
monthly relative humidities as percentages for September to August, 1976 in the City of
Tampa, Florida were
80, 78, 76, 68, 72, 74, 78, 82, 82, 78, 81, 82;
and the averages for St. Petersburg, Florida were
76, 68, 72, 74, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 78, 80:
Solution
The two sets are
T ¼ 68, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80, 81, 82
f
g
and
P ¼ 68, 72, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80
f
g:
Thus, the intersection of the two sets is T∩P ¼ 68, 72, 74, 76, 78, 80
f
g, as shown by
Figure 3.5.
This means that there were six monthly readings during 1976 in which the
average relative humidity in Tampa and St. Petersburg were the same.
c
e
f
g
P2
P1
a
d
b
FIGURE 3.4
Circle graph of overlapping sets of drugs
proscribed by each physicians.
P
T
82
81
79
77
80
78
76
68
72
74
FIGURE 3.5
Circle diagram of humidity readings in Tampa and St. Petersburg
Florida.
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
101

Example 3.3.5 Intersection
Consider the sets given in Example 3.3.3; that is,
A5 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g B5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g C5 22,21,0,1,2
f
g
Find A∩B∩C.
Solution
A∩B∩C5 2
f g. That is, the only element that is common to all three sets is 2, as shown
in Figure 3.6.
Example 3.3.6 Intersections
Find (a) A∩B, (b) A∩C, (c) A∩B∩C, (d) A∩B∩C and (e) A∪B
ð
Þ∩C given
A5 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g
B5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g
C5 22,21,0,1,2
f
g
Solution
(a)
A∩B5 5, 7
f
g
A
B
5
3
7
2
8
1
(b)
A∩C5 1, 3, 7
f
g
5
7
2
8
1
3
A
C
5
6
3
4
2
1
–1
–2
0
C
B
A
FIGURE 3.6
Three circle diagram of sets A, B and C.
102
Chapter 3
Sets

Solution—cont’d
(c)
A∩B∩C5 7
f g
A
B
5
2
8
1
7
3
C
(d)
A∩B
ð
Þ∪C 5
1, 3, 5, 7
f
g∪2, 5, 7, 8
f
g
ð
Þ∩1, 2, 3, 7, 8
f
g
5 5, 7
f
g∪1, 2, 3, 7, 8
f
g5 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8
f
g
A
B
5
2
8
1
7
3
C
(e)
A∪B5 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8
f
g
A
B
5
7
2
8
3 1
(f)
A∪B
ð
Þ∩C5 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8
f
g∩1, 2, 3, 7, 8
f
g5 1, 2, 3, 7, 8
f
g
A
B
5
2
8
1
7
3
C
Sometimes it happens that the intersection of two sets A and B is empty; that is, they
do not have any elements in common, and we say that the two sets are disjoint or
mutually exclusive.
Example 3.3.7 Intersection of D and E
Define the sets D and E as follows:
D5 xjxan integer, 23≤x<1
f
g
and
E5 yjy apositive integer, 3≤y<6
f
g:
Find the intersection of D and E.
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
103

Solution
The elements of the sets D and E are
D5 23,22,21,0
f
g and E5 3, 4, 5
f
g:
Thus, D∩E5∅and the sets are disjoint, as shown by Figure 3.7.
Another important definition in set theory is the complement of a set. That is, given a
set. A, we are interested in considering a new set which consists of those elements which
are not in A. We refer to this new set as the complement of A and denote it by A. For
example, let A be the set of all students at your school who are majoring in modern
dance. The complement of the set A will be all students in your school who are not
majoring in modern dance. Thus, the union of A and its complement A constitute the
largest possible set called the universal set, denoted by U. Recall, the universal set
is the smallest possible set that is required so that every other set considered will be
a subset of U. Now, using the universal set U, we can obtain a better understanding
of the complement of a set by the following definition:
Definition 3.3.3 Complement
Let A be a subset of the universal set U, the complement of A, denoted by A, is the set of
all elements in U that are not in A. Other common denotation of the complement of A is
A0, or Ac; however, we shall use the notation A. Logically, x∈A if and only if x∈U and
x 6∈A.
A
A
—
For example, the thirty-eight presidents of the United States (up to 1976)
constitute the universal set, U. Let us now consider the set of presidents
whose last name begins with the letter J; that is, the set A contains the
names Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, Andrew Johnson, and Lyndon
B. Johnson. It is clear that these four presidents constitute a subset of U.
Thus, the complement of A, A, is a subset of U which consists of the other
thirty-four presidents.
English
Logic
Set Theory
–3
–2
–1
D
0
E
3
4
5
FIGURE 3.7
Circle diagram of Mutually Exclusive sets: D and E.
104
Chapter 3
Sets

Example 3.3.8 Integers
Let the universal set consist of the first ten even integers; that is,
U5 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20
f
g:
Also, let
A5 2, 8, 14, 20
f
g and B5 4, 8, 14, 16
f
g
Find (a) the complement of A, and also B, (b) the complement of A∪B, denoted
A∪B.
Solution
(a)
The complement of A is the set of all elements which are not in A.
That is,
A5 4, 6, 10, 12, 16, 18
f
g;
as shown by Figure 3.8. Also,
B5 2, 6, 10, 12, 18, 20
f
g;
which is displayed in Figure 3.9.
(b)
A∪B is the set of those elements which are not in A∪B; that is, the set of all ele-
ments which are not in either A or B or both.
A∪B5 6, 10, 12, 18
f
g
as shown by the Venn diagram, Figure 3.10.
Continued
A
20
14
8
16
4
18
U
12
10
6
2
A
—
FIGURE 3.8
Venn diagram of set A within the Universe, U.
20
B
—
B
2
8
14
4
18
U
16
12
10
6
FIGURE 3.9
Venn diagram of set B within the Universe, U.
4
U
14
8
18
16
12
10
2
20
A
B
6
FIGURE 3.10
Venn diagram of the complement of the union of sets A
and B; that is, what is not in A and is not in B.
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
105

Solution—cont’d
(c)
The complement of A∩B is the set of elements which are not common to both
A and B. That is,
A∩B5 8, 14
f
g
and
A∩B5 2, 4, 6, 10, 12, 16, 18, 20
f
g
as shown by the Venn diagram, Figure 3.11.
In terms of the sets which constitute Complex numbers: the Natural numbers, Whole
numbers, Integers, Rational numbers, Real number and Imaginary numbers, we have
the following relationships:
Set
Name
Q
Irrational
R
Imaginary numbers
In this section we have introduced two basic operations of sets; namely, the
union ∪and intersection ∩of sets. These set operators are similar to their
logistical counterparts. Logistically, the disjunctive “or” is translated as “at
least one statement is true” and is denoted ∨whereas in set theory union
can be read as “or,” translated as “in at least one set” and is denoted ∪. Logis-
tically, the conjunction “and” is translated as “both statements are true” and is
denoted by the inverted symbol ∧whereas in set theory the intersection can be
read as “and,” translated as “in both sets” and is denoted ∩. The symbolic lan-
guage of these two dialects of mathematics are very similar, hence as in logic,
there are various laws which hold true. We shall now state some properties of
these operations and illustrate their meanings with Venn diagrams.
Let A, B, and C be subsets of the universal set U. Then we have
Rule 3.3.1 Idempotent
A∪A5A and A∩A5A
As in logic, idempotent describes the property of operations, as in math-
ematics and computer science, which yield the same result after the operation
is applied multiple times.
Rule 3.3.2 Associative
A∪B
ð
Þ∪C5A∪B∪C
ð
Þ and
A∩B
ð
Þ∩C5A∩B∩C
ð
Þ
2
6
8
18
14
4
U
16
12
10
20
A
B
FIGURE 3.11
Venn diagram of the symmetric difference; that is, what is not
in both set A and set B.
a, b
f
g∪a, b
f
g5 a, b
f
g
a, b
f
g∩a, b
f
g5 a, b
f
g
106
Chapter 3
Sets

As in logic and in algebra, associative describes the property of operations
that enables statements to re-associate while yielding the same result.
Rule 3.3.3 Commutative
A∪B5B∪A and A∩B5B∩A
As in logic and in algebra, commutative describes the property of operations
that enables statements to move or commute while yielding the same result.
Rule 3.3.4 Distributive
A∪B∩C
ð
Þ5 A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ
and
A∩B∪C
ð
Þ5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩C
ð
Þ
As in logic, distributive describes the property of one operator to be
expanded in a particular way which yield the same result; that is, an equivalent
expression. The distributive law in set theory is more similar to logic. In logic,
the operator for “and” is distributive over the operator for “or” and vice versa,
whereas in set theory, this relation only works the same.
Rule 3.3.5 Identity
If U the universal set and ∅is the empty set, then
A∪∅5A, A∩U5A, A∩∅5∅and A∪U5U
Recall, identity is the state or fact of remaining the same one or ones, as
under varying aspects or conditions, to identify. Hence, the empty set in union
identifies the original set A, but the intersection identifies the empty set. The
universal set in union identifies the universal set, whereas the intersection iden-
tifies original set A.
Rule 3.3.6 Complement
If U the universal set and ∅is the empty set, then
A∪A5U,A∩A5∅,
A
ð Þ5A,
U5∅and ∅5U
A complement is the part needed to make complete or perfect; in logic, this
is the relationship between true and false, in set theory, an element is either in a
given set or not in the given sets. In logic, either the statement is true or the
statement is false and thus p∨p is a tautology τ; in set theory, the set of ele-
ments that are either in a given set A or not in the given set, that is the com-
plement of A, is in union the universal set. In logic, the statement cannot be
both true and false; hence, p∧p is a contradiction φ; in set theory, an element
cannot be both in a set A and not in the set A, hence the set of elements in both A
and A is empty. Furthermore, as in English, a double negative is the positive
statement; in logic, not “not p” then p and in set theory, not in A, that is A
ð Þ, is
the set A. Finally, logically speaking, the negation of a tautology is a contra-
diction and the negation of a contradiction is a tautology. In set theory, the
complement of the universal set is the empty set and the complement of the
empty set is the universal set.
a
f g∪b
f g5 b
f g∪a
f g
a, c
f
g∩b, c
f
g5 b, c
f
g∩a, c
f
g
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
107

Rule 3.3.7 DeMorgan’s Rule
A∪B
ð
Þ5A∩B and
A∩B
ð
Þ5A∪B
De Morgan’s Law illustrates the fact that “or” is the complement of “and”
and vice versa. In both logic and set theory, “or” means at least one and “and”
means both; hence, when you do not have at least one, A∪B
ð
Þ, this is equiv-
alent to you do not have either, or you are missing both A∩B; you do not have
the first and you do not have the second. Similarly, when you do not have both,
A∩B
ð
Þ, this is equivalent to you are missing at least one, A∪B; you do not
have the first or you do not have the second.
To further illustrate De Morgan’s Law, draw the Venn diagram using lines
for the various sets; in union. First, consider A∪B
ð
Þ5A∩B, the Venn diagram
constructed using A∪B
ð
Þ:
A∪B ⇒
A∪B
ð
Þ
A
B
U
A
B
U
⇒
is equivalent to the Venn diagram constructed using A∩B:
A∩B⇒A∩B
A
B
U
B
B—
U
A
A
∩
⇒
—
U
Second, consider
A∩B
ð
Þ5A∪B; the Venn diagram constructed using
A∩B
ð
Þ
A∩B⇒A∩B
ð
Þ
A
B
U
A
B
U
⇒
is equivalent to the Venn diagram constructed using A∪B:
A∪B⇒A∪B
A
B
U
B
B—
U
A
A
∪
⇒
—
U
108
Chapter 3
Sets

Example 3.3.9 Digits
Let U5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
f
g, A5 1, 3, 5
f
g, B5 5, 6, 7
f
g, and C5 5, 7, 8
f
g. Verify (a) the
associative property for unions, (b) distribution property (intersection over union) and
(c) De Morgan’s Law for the complement of a union.
Solution
(a)
Using Property 2 for unions:
A∪B5 1, 3, 5, 6, 7
f
g⇒A∪B
ð
Þ∪C5 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
f
g;
B∪C5 5, 6, 7, 8
f
g⇒A∪B∪C
ð
Þ5 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
f
g
Thus, we have
A∪B
ð
Þ∪C5A∪B∪C
ð
Þ
(b)
Using Property 4 for intersection over union:
A∪B∩C
ð
Þ5 A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ
B∩C5 5, 6, 7, 8
f
g⇒A∪B∩C
ð
Þ5 5
f g
A∩B5 5
f g and A∩C5 5
f g⇒A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ5 5
f g
Thus, we have
A∪B∩C
ð
Þ5 A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ
(c)
Using Property 7 for the complement of a union:
A∪B
ð
Þ5A∩B
A∪B5 1, 3, 5, 6, 7
f
g⇒A∪B5 2, 4, 8
f
g
A5 2, 4, 6, 7, 8
f
g and B5 1, 2, 3, 4, 8
f
g⇒A∩B5 2, 4, 8
f
g
Thus, we have
A∪B
ð
Þ5A∩B
Verification of the remaining properties is left to the student.
Additional set operators include the symmetric difference and the set
difference.
Definition 3.3.4 Set Difference
Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to A but not B is called the
set difference of the sets A and B. We denote this operation by
C5A2B or C5A\B:
We shall use the notation C5A2B. Logically, x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∧x 6∈B
ð
Þ
½
; that is,
x∈C if and only if x∈A and x 6∈B.
Hence, alternatively A2B5A∩B.
A
B
3.3 The Algebra of Sets
109

Example 3.3.10 Digits
Let the universal set consist of the first ten even integers; that is,
U5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g:
Also, let
A5 2, 5, 7, 9
f
g and B5 1, 2, 4, 7, 8
f
g
Find the set differences: (a) A2B and (b) B2A.
Solution
(a) A2B5 5, 9
f
g and (b) B2A5 1, 4, 8
f
g
A
B
4
2
7
1
8
9
5
3
6
Definition 3.3.5 Symmetric Difference
Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to either A or
B is called the symmetric difference of the sets A and B. We denote this operation by
C5AΔB or C5AΟB:
Logically, x∈C↔
x∈A
ð
ÞV x∈B
ð
Þ
h
i
; that is, x∈C if and only if x∈A and x 6∈B
or x 6∈A but x∈B. We shall use the Greek letter delta, Δ, to denote the symmetric
difference.
Alternatively,
AΔB5 A∪B
ð
Þ2 A∩B
ð
Þ
or
AΔB5 A2B
ð
Þ∪B2A
ð
Þ
English
Either...
Logic
Set Theory
Example 3.3.11 Symmetric Difference
Using the sets defined in Example 3.3.10, find the symmetric differences AΔB.
110
Chapter 3
Sets

Solution
AΔB5 1, 4, 5, 8, 9
f
g
A
B
4
2
7
1
8
9
5
3
6
PROBLEMS
Critical Thinking
3.3.1. Let A5 2, 4, 6, 8
f
g, B5 6, 8, 10, 12
f
g and C5 8, 10, 12, 14
f
g. Find
a. A∪B
b. A∪C
c. B∪C
d. A∪B∪C
e. A∩B
f. A∩C
g. B∩C
h. A∩B∩C
3.3.2. Illustrate the solution to Problem 3.3.1 by using Venn diagrams.
3.3.3. Given the following Venn diagram, list the elements of the three sets A, B, and C.
11
6
2
12
9
7
8
1
5
3
A
B
C
3.3.4. Using the sets A, B, and C obtained in Problem 3.3.3, compute
a. A∪B
b. A∩B
c. A∪B∩C
ð
Þ
d. A∩B∪C
ð
Þ
e. A∪B
ð
Þ∩C
f. A∪∅
g. B∩∅
h. A∩∅
ð
Þ∪C
i. A∪∅
ð
Þ∪B
3.3.5. Draw the Venn diagram for Parts (c), (e), (g), and (i) of Problem 3.3.4.
3.3.6. Draw the Venn diagram for Parts (b), (d), (f), and (h) of Problem 3.3.4.
3.3.7. Are the sets A and B, A and C, and B and C defined in Problem 1 disjoint sets?
3.3.8. Let A5 xjx an integer, 21<x≤4
f
g, B5 yjy an integer, 0≤y≤6
f
g, and C5 zjz a positive integer, z≤8
f
g. Find
a. A∪B
b. A∩B
c. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∩B
ð
Þ
Problems
111

d. A∩C
ð
Þ∪∅
e. A∪∅
ð
Þ∩B∩∅
ð
Þ
f. A∪B
ð
Þ∪C
3.3.9. Draw Venn diagrams illustrating the solution to Problem 3.3.8.
3.3.10. Let the universal set U and the subsets A, B, and C be defined as follows: U5 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l
f
g,
A5 a, b, f
f
g, B5 c, d, g, h, l
f
g, and C5 a, b, k, l
f
g. Find the following sets:
a. A∪B∪C
b. A∩C
c. A∩B∩C
3.3.11. Using the sets defined in Problem 3.3.10, find
a. A∪B∪C
b. A∩C
c. A∩B∩C
d. A∩B∩C
3.3.12. Find the following sets using the sets defined in Problem 3.3.10:
a. A∩C
b. U∪∅
c. A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩C
ð
Þ
3.3.13. Draw the Venn diagrams for the results in Problem 3.3.10.
3.3.14. Using Problem 3.3.11, illustrate the results using Venn diagrams.
3.3.15. Show the behavior of the results of Problem 3.3.12 employing Venn diagrams.
3.3.16. Let A, B, and C be subsets of the universal set U. Draw Venn diagrams for the following sets and shade the indicated
areas:
a. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∩C
ð
Þ
b. A∪B
ð
Þ∩C∪B
ð
Þ
c. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪B
ð
Þ
d. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ
3.3.17. Using Venn diagrams, prove that the following identities are true:
a. A∩B5A∪B
b. A∪B5A∩B
3.3.18. Let the universal set U be defined by U5 xjx apositive integer, x≤12
f
g, and subsets A5 yjy an integer,0≤y<6
f
g,
B5 zjz an integer, 4≤z<9
f
g, C5 tjt an integer,1<t≤3 or 6<t≤10
f
g. Using these sets verify (a) the idempotent
law, (b) the commutative law, and (c) the associative law.
3.3.19. Using the universal set U and subsets A, B, and C defined in Problem 3.3.18, show that the following laws are valid:
(a) the distributive law, (b) the identity law, (c) the complement law, and (d) De Morgan’s Law.
3.3.20. Illustrate the solutions to Problem 3.3.18 using Venn diagrams.
3.3.21. Using Venn diagrams, show the results of Problem 3.3.18.
3.3.22. Let U be the universal set and A, B, and C be subsets of U. Prove or disprove each of the following statements:
a. A∪B
ð
Þ∪C5A∪B∪C
ð
Þ
b. A∩B∪C
ð
Þ5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩C
ð
Þ
c. A∪B
ð
Þ∪A∪C
ð
Þ5A∪B∩C
ð
Þ
d. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ5A∪B∪C
ð
Þ
3.3.23. Determine whether the following statements are true or false:
a. ∅∈U
b. ∅⊂U
c. ∅∪U5U
d.
a
f g∈a,b:c
ð
Þ
e.
1, 2, 3
f
g⊂1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
ð
Þ
f. ∅⊆∅
3.3.24. Using the sets defined in Problem 3.3.10, find
a. A2B
b. B2A
c. A Δ B
112
Chapter 3
Sets

3.3.25. Using the sets defined in Problem 3.3.18, find
a. A2B
b. B2A
c. A Δ B
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
3.1. Write the set of all positive integers less than 10.
3.2. Write in a convenient mathematical form the set of all positive integers less than 201.
3.3. List explicitly the elements of the following sets:
a. A5 xjx a negative integer,29≤x
f
g.
b. B5 yjy an integer,23<y<5
f
g.
3.4. List the elements of the following sets:
a. A5 zjz a negative integer,1<z
f
g.
b. B5 tjt an integer,23<t≤5
f
g.
3.5. Give a mathematical description of the set of all letters in the word Mississippi. Also list all the elements of
the set.
3.6. List the elements of the set D5 djd a positive integer,d3527


.
3.7. Let the set A be given by A5 a, b, c, d
f
g. Write all possible subsets of the set A.
3.8. Let B5 xjx an even integer,4<x≤8
f
g. Write all possible subsets of the set B.
3.9. If a set consists of six elements, how many possible subsets can we write from this set?
3.10. Let A5 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g and B5 xjx an integer,1<x2 ≤36


. Are the sets A and B equal? Why?
3.11. Construct a set of all the presidents of the United States whose last names begin with (a) A and (b) T.
3.12. Construct a set which contains the sets {0, 1}, {1, 1, 3}, {a, a} as subsets.
3.13. A partial listing of the subsets of a given set are {Jan, Chris}, {Pete}, {Alex, Liz}. Write the complete set. How many
possible subsets can we write from this set?
3.14. Let A5 2, 4, 5, 8, 10
f
g and B5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
f
g. Construct the sets (a) A∪B and (b) A∩B.
3.15. In Problem 3.3, compute (a) n A∪B
ð
Þ and (b) n A∩B
ð
Þ.
3.16. Construct a Venn diagram and shade in the appropriate portions for Problem 3.14.
3.17. Let
i. A5 xjx an even integer,2≤x≤12
f
g,
ii. B5 yjy an integer,1<y≤7
f
g, and
iii. C5 21,0,2,4,6
f
g.
Find
a. A∪B
b. A∪C
c. B∪C
d. A∪B∪C
3.18. In Problem 3.3, find
a. A∩B
b. A∩C
c. B∩C
d. A∩B∩C
3.19. In Problem 3.3, compute
a. n A∪B
ð
Þ
b. n A∪C
ð
Þ
c. n B∪C
ð
Þ
d. n A∩B
ð
Þ
e. n A∩C
ð
Þ
f. n B∩C
ð
Þ
g. n A∩B∩C
ð
Þ
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
113

3.20. Construct a Venn diagram indicating the relative portions of Problem 3.3.
3.21. Using the sets defined in Problem 3.17, find
a. A∩B
ð
Þ∪C
b. A∩C
ð
Þ∪B
c. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ
3.22. Write the appropriate Venn diagrams to Problem 3.17.
3.23. Let the universal set U be given by
U5 a1, b1, a2, b2, c1, d1, c2, d2
f
g:
Also, let
A5 a1, b2, c1, d2
f
g and B5 a2, b1, b2, c2, d1
f
g
Find
a. A
b. B∩A
c. A∩B
d. A∩B
e. A∪B
ð
Þ∩A
f. A∪B
ð
Þ∪A∪B
ð
Þ
3.24. Construct a sequence of Venn diagrams to illustrate the solution to Problem 3.23.
3.25. Using the following sets, verify (a) the idempotent law, (b) commutative law, and (c) associative law.
i. U5 xjx an integer23≤x≤10
f
g,
ii. A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
f
g,
iii. B5 xjx an integer, 2≤x≤7
f
g,
iv. C5 yjy an integer,0<y2 ≤9


.
3.26. Verify (a) the distributive law, (b) identity law, and (c) complement law using the sets defined in Problem 3.25.
3.27. Using the sets defined in Problem 3.25, compute:
a. n A∪A
ð
Þ, b. n A∩∅
ð
Þ, c. n A∪B∪C
ð
Þ, d. n A∩B∩C
ð
Þ
3.28. For the sets given in Problem 25, compute:
a. n A∩B
ð
Þ, b. n A∪B
ð
Þ, c. n A∪B
ð
Þ∩C
½
, d. n A∩A∪C
ð
Þ
½

3.29. A survey of 1200 people who subscribe to at least one of the “financial assistance newsletters,” More Dollars and
Tomorrow’s Dollar, revealed the following information: 400 subscribe to both More Dollars and Tomorrow’s Dollar,
600 subscribe to only More Dollars. Find how many of the subscribers questioned subscribe only to
Tomorrow’s Dollar.
3.30. Let A5 a1, a2, a3
f
g, B5 b1, b2
f
g Find the product set A×B and n A×B
ð
Þ.
3.31. Let A5 1, 3, 5
f
g, B5 x, y
f
g and C5 c1, c2
f
g. Find the Cartesian product A×B×C and n A×B×C
ð
Þ.
3.32. Construct a tree diagram to determine the number of ordered pairs that constitute the product set A×B of the sets given
in Problem 3.30.
3.33. Obtain the product set A×B×C using the tree diagram approach of the sets given in Problem 3.32. How does your
answer compare with that obtained in Problem 3.30?
3.34. From the Venn diagram, determine n A×B×C
ð
Þ.
114
Chapter 3
Sets

SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
3.2.1. A set is a collection of distinct objects; the objects that constitute the set are the members or elements of the set. We
shall denote sets symbolically by capital letters A, B, C… and “an element of” by the Greek letter epsilon, ∈. If an
object “is not an element of,” we shall write 6∈.
3.2.2. The universal set U is the largest set in a given context; that is, the universal set is the totality of the elements under
consideration. Denoted by the capital letter, U normally written with the upper bars, U, or a tail, U, as to be it dis-
tinguishable from the union symbol ∪.
3.2.3. This empty set, sometimes call the null set is the smallest set in any context; this set contains no elements.
If we were to write it in “proper” set notation, it would be obvious that it has no elements, { } or the single
symbol ∅.
3.2.4. If every element of a set A is also a member of a set B, then we say that the set A is a subset of the set B. Logically, if
x∈A, then x∈B.
3.2.5. Two sets A and B are said to be equal if they contain the same elements and we write A5B. It is clear that if A⊆B
and B⊆A, then the two sets must be equal, A5B. Logically, A⊆B translates to x∈A→x∈B and B⊆A translates to
x∈B→x∈A; that is, x∈A↔x∈B.
3.3.1. Let A and B be two sets. The set C if all elements that belong to either set A or B, or both is called the union of A and
B. We denote this operation by C5A∪B. Logically, x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∨x∈B
ð
Þ
½
. x∈A∪B if and only if (x∈A or
x∈B).
3.3.2. Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to both A and B is called the intersection of the sets
A and B. We denote this operation by C5A∩B. Logically, x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∧x∈B
ð
Þ
½
. x∈A∩B if and only if (x∈A
and x∈B).
3.3.3. Let A be a subset of the universal set U, the complement of A, denoted by A, is the set of all elements in U that are not
in A. Other common denotation of the complement of A is A0, or Ac; however, we shall use the notation A. Logically,
x∈A if and only if x∈U and x 6∈A.
3.3.4. Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to A but not B is called the set difference of the sets
A and B. We denote this operation by C5A2B or C5A\ B. We shall use the notation C5A2B. Logically,
x∈C↔x∈A
ð
Þ∧x 6∈B
ð
Þ
½
; that is, x∈C if and only if x∈A and x 6∈B. Hence, alternatively A2B5A∩B.
3.3.5. Let A and B be two sets. The set C of all elements that belong to either A or B is called the symmetric difference of
the sets A and B. We denote this operation by C5AΔB or C5AΟB. Logically, x∈C↔
x∈A
ð
Þ∨x∈B
ð
Þ


; that is,
x∈C if and only if x∈A and x 6∈B or x 6∈A but x∈B. We shall use the Greek letter delta, Δ, to denote the
symmetric difference. Alternatively, AΔB5 A∪B
ð
Þ2 A∩B
ð
Þ or AΔB5 A2B
ð
Þ∪B2A
ð
Þ.
Rules
3.3.1. Idempotent: A∪A5A and A∩A5A
3.3.2. Associative: A∪B
ð
Þ∪C5A∪B∪C
ð
Þ and A∩B
ð
Þ∩C5A∩B∩C
ð
Þ
3.3.3. Commutative: A∪B5B∪A and A∩B5B∩A
3.3.4. Distributive: A∪B∩C
ð
Þ5 A∪B
ð
Þ∩A∪C
ð
Þ and A∩B∪C
ð
Þ5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩C
ð
Þ
3.3.5. Identity: If U the universal set and ∅is the empty set, then A∪∅5A, A∩U5A, A∩∅5∅and A∪U5U
3.3.6. Complement: If U the universal set and ∅is the empty set, then A∪A5U, A∩A5∅, A
ð Þ5A, U5∅and ∅5U
3.3.7. De Morgan’s Rule: A∪B
ð
Þ5A∩B and A∩B
ð
Þ5A∪B
Summary of Important Concepts
115

Symbol
(abbr.)
Name
Meaning/Read as
Description
Example/Description
A,B,C
Sets
Abbreviation for a
sets
Sets are abbreviated by one capital
letter
Let S represent the set of
statements
{…}
Braces
“The set”
Another way to indicated a set
D5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g—in this
case, D for a Die
j
Bar
“Such that”
A partition used in conjunction with
{…}
E5 xjx is even integer
f
g
∈
Greek letter “Epsilon”
“An element of”
Symbol illustrating containment
2∈D
6∈
“Epsilon” crossed off
“Not an element of”
Symbol illustrating non-containment
5 6∈E
U
Capital letter U
Universal Set
The largest set in a given context
U5 xjx is a digit
f
g
U5 0, 1, 2, …, 9
f
g
∅
Null Set
Empty Set
Set containing nothing—smallest set
Sometimes denoted ∅5fg
∪
Union
“Or” (Inclusive)
Elements are in at least one of the sets
A∪B5 xjx∈A∨x∈B
f
g
∩
Intersection
“And”
Elements are in both sets
A∩B5 xjx∈A∧x∈B
f
g
A or A0
Complement
“Not”
The opposite set as compared to the U
A
05 xjx 6∈A
f
g
2
Minus sign
“Set difference”
The minus sign indicating
difference
A2B5A∩B
Δ or Ο
Greek letter “Delta” or a
emphasized
“Symmetric
difference”
An emphasized minus sign indicating a
type of difference
AΔB5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩B
ð
Þ
⊂or ⊆
Subset
“Is contained in”
An element in the first set is implied to
be in the second set
D⊂U
⊄
Not a Subset
“Not entirely
contained in”
Implies at most partial containment
1, 2, 3
f
g⊄1, 3, 5
f
g
5
Equal
“Is the same set as”
Equality between sets
1, 2, 3
f
g5 3, 2, 1
f
g
@ or ~
Equivalent
“Is the same size
set as”
Related to the word: equal
1, 2, 3
f
g@ x, y, z
f
g
n
Abbreviation of
“number”
“Number of elements
in”
Used when counting elements in a set
n D
ð Þ56
nPr
Abbreviation of
Permutation
“n objects permuted
r at a time”
3P253×256
nCr
Abbreviation of
Combination
“n objects combined
r at a time”
3C253×2
2×153
X
Greek letter “Sigma”
“the sum of”
Summation Notation
X
3
k51
k51 + 2 + 3
116
Chapter 3
Sets

REVIEW TEST
1. List the elements of xjxis acounting numberlessthan 6
f
g.
2. Complete the blank with the correct symbol so that the resulting statement is true.
A.
0
f g____ 21, 0, 1, 2, 3
f
g
B. 0 ____ 21, 0, 1, 2, 3
f
g
3. If A5 a, b, c
f
g, then list all possible subsets of A.
4. Which of the following are true statements?
A. ∅⊆1,2,3
B. ∅∩1,2,35∅
C. ∅∈1,2,3
D. ∅∪1,2,35∅
5. Set A is a subset of B A⊆B
ð
Þ provided that:
A. Every element of A is an element of B
B. Every element of B is an element of A
C. At least one element of A is in B
D. At least one element of Ais not in B
E. None of the above
6. Given a set A and its complement A0, simplify the following:
A. A∩A
0
B. A∪A
0
7. Find the union of sets {a,e,i,o,u} and {s,e,t}.
8. Find the intersection of sets {a,e,i,o,u} and {s,e,t}.
9. Let X5 1, 3, 5, 7
f
g, Y5 2, 4, 7, 9
f
g, Z5 1, 3, 8, 9
f
g and the universal set is the digits, U5 0, 1, …, 9
f
g. Determine the
following sets:
A. X0
B. X
0 ∪Y
0
C. U0
D.
X
0 ∩Z

0
E. X∩Y
ð
Þ
0 ∩Z
10. Determine the number of subsets of {1,2,3,4}.
11. Describe the shaded portion of the Venn diagram below symbolically.
A
B
12. Draw the Venn diagram of the set A∩B∪C
ð
Þ.
13. Draw the Venn diagram of the set A
0 ∩B∪C
ð
Þ.
14. What is the maximum number of elements in any subset of S5 2, 4, 6, 8
f
g?
15. In the figure below, A represents {2,4,6,8,10,12}, B represents {3,6,9,12,15} and C represents {2,6,10,11,16}. What
set is represented by the shaded region?
B
C
U
A
Review Test
117

16. A survey of book club produced the following results:
15 like novels
9 like novels and plays
13 like plays
9 like novels and biographies
14 like biographies 8 like biographies and plays
7 like all three
10 don’t like any of the three
A. How many people were there all together?
B. How many people like biographies only?
C. How many people like exactly one type of literature?
D. How many people do not like biographies?
E. How many people like anything but plays?
17. Let n A
ð Þ523, n B
ð Þ517 and n A∪B
ð
Þ535: Find n A∩B
ð
Þ.
18. Given A5 1, 3, 5, 7, …
f
g and U5 0, 1, 2, 3, ....
f
g, then find A0.
Practice for the CLAST exam:
19. Sets A, B and C are related as shown in the figure below where U is the universal set.
A
B
C
U
Which of the following statements is/are true assuming none of the shown regions is empty?
i. Any element which is a member of U is also a member of set A or B.
ii. Any element which is a member of C is not a member of set A or B.
iii. No element is a member of all three sets.
A.
i only
B.
ii only
C.
iii only
D.
ii and iii
20. Sets X and Y are related as shown in the figure below where U is the universal set. Which of the following statements is/
are true assuming none of the shown regions is empty?
X
Y
U
A. U⊆X
B. Y⊆X
C. X∩Y5X
D. X⊆Y
118
Chapter 3
Sets

21. Sets A, B and C are related as shown in the figure below where U is the universal set. Which of the following statements
is/are true assuming none of the shown regions is empty?
A
B
C
U
A. C⊆A∪B
B. U⊆C
C. A∪B⊆C
D. A⊆B
22. Sets A, B and C are related as shown in the figure below where U is the universal set. Which of the following statements
is/are true assuming none of the shown regions is empty?
A
B
C
U
A. Any element which is a member of U is also a member of set A.
B. Any element which is a member of C is not a member of set U.
C. No element is a member of all three sets
D. None of the above statements is true.
REFERENCES
Breuer, J., 1958. Introduction to the Theory of Sets. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Dinkines, F., 1964. Elementary Theory of Sets. Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York.
Fraenkel, A.A., 1953. Abstract Set Theory. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978b. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
References
119

Chapter 4
Counting Techniques
4.1 Introduction to Counting
122
4.2 Multiplication Principle
124
Multiplication Principle or Sequential Counting Principle
124
4.3 Permutations and Combinations
127
4.4 Other Counting Techniques
133
Alternative Counting Method
135
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
135
Projects
139
Project I: Experiment with Coins
139
Project II: Experimenting with Dice
139
Project III: Combinations
140
Project IV: Permutations
140
Summary of Important Concepts
140
Review Test
142
References
143
Counting
English
Zero
One
Two
Three
Four
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
Nine
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
I
II
II
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
Arabic
Mayan
Roman
Chinese Rods
Chinese
Hindi
Babylonian
Egyptian
Mathematics is the language with which God has written the Universe.
GALILEO GALILEI
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
121

4.1
INTRODUCTION TO COUNTING
Counting began with shepherds who would tie a knot in a piece of string, one
for each sheep they send out to pasture. As the sheep returned, a knot was
untied and if any knots remain, this indicated that there were lost sheep. Hence,
the idea of one, two, three… that is, the natural numbers was created. However,
enumeration is only one way of counting; additional techniques include the
multiplication principle, factorials, permutations and combination, among
others.
Below is an outline of the chapter and the developed formulas. Note, in sets
we are only interested in the collections of objects that are well defined; and
now we only are interested in how many elements are in various sets. But most
of the notations are the same. There are a few new ones.
Definition 4.1.1 Enumeration
Enumeration is the act of enumerating, the mention separately as if in counting; name
one by one as in a list. That is, to ascertain the number of items or elements belonging to
an outlined set.
Example 4.1.1 Pagination
As student turns in a lengthy report which has a 25 page minimum requirement; to help
assess the number of pages turned in by each student, the professor requires that the
pages be numbered.
Definition 4.1.2 Countable (Finite)
A set is countable if there is an enumeration; that is, a set S having a finite number of
elements which form a one-to-one correspondence with a subset the natural numbers,
Ν:
f :Ν →S
Example 4.1.2 Natural Numbers
The natural numbers are enumerable by the identity function f n
ð Þ5n, where n∈Ν the
set of natural numbers; f :Ν →Ν.
Example 4.1.3 Even Numbers
The natural numbers are countable using the function f n
ð Þ52n where n∈Ν the set of
natural numbers; f :Ν →Ε where Ε is the set of even numbers.
Example 4.1.4 Integers
The set of integers, Ζ5 …23,22,21,0,1,2,3,…
f
, are countable using the function
f n
ð Þ5
n
2
n∈Ε
21 + n
2
n∈Ε
8
>
<
>
:
where n∈Ν5Ε∪Ε the set of natural numbers;
f :Ν →Z where Ε is the set of even numbers and Ε is the set of odd numbers.
These are examples of counting, but how might we count larger values.
Pagination

The enumeration of pages or leaves of a
book marked to indicate their sequence
122
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

Definition 4.1.3 Countably Infinite
A set is countably infinite if there is an enumeration; that is, a set S having an infinite
number of elements which form a one-to-one correspondence with the entire set of the
natural numbers, Ν:
f :Ν →S:
PROBLEMS
4.1.1. Determine if the following sets are countable (finite) or countably infinite or neither.
a. Real Numbers
b. Rational Numbers
c. English Alphabet
d. Whole Numbers
4.1.2. Determine if the following sets are countable (finite) or countably infinite or neither.
a. {1,2,3,4,5,6}
b. {xj0≤x≤1}
c. {1.1,1.11,1.111,…}
d.
xjx is an integer and 0<x≤10
f
g
4.1.3. Determine if the following sets are countable (finite) or countably infinite or neither.
a. Deck of standard playing cards
b. Irrational Numbers
c. Set of Digits
d. Integers
4.1.4. Outline a function to show that the set of positive odd integers is countable.
4.1.5. Outline a function to show that the set of positive even integers starting with four is countable.
4.1.6. Outline a function to show that the set of integer is countable.
4.1.7. Outline a function to show that the set of square is countable.
4.1.8. Outline a function to show that the set
1, 1
2, 1
3, 1
4


is countable.
4.1.9. Outline a function to show that the set
1, 1
3, 1
5, 1
7


is countable.
4.1.10. Outline a function to show that the set {7,10,13,16,…} is countable.
4.1.11. Outline a function to show that the set
1, 1
2, 1
4, 1
8, …


is countable.
4.1.12. Outline a function to show that the set {1,8,27,64,…} is countable.
4.1.13. Outline a function to show that the set {1,0.1,0.01,0.001,0.0001,…} is countable.
4.1.14. Outline a function to show that the set {1,0.1,0.01,0.001,0.0001,…} is countable.
4.1.15. TRUE/FALSE: If you remove a countable number of elements from a countable set, there are a countable
number of elements left.
4.1.16. TRUE/FALSE: If you remove a finite number of elements from a countable set, there are a countable number of
elements left.
4.1.17. TRUE/FALSE: The union of two countable sets is countable.
4.1.18. TRUE/FALSE: The intersection of two countable sets is countable.
4.1.19. TRUE/FALSE: You can remove a countably infinite set from a countably finite set.
4.1.20. TRUE/FALSE: You can remove a countably finite set from a countably infinite set.
4.1.21. TRUE/FALSE: The union of two countable infinite set form an uncountable set.
Problems
123

4.2
MULTIPLICATION PRINCIPLE
We have seen that the word “and” is interpreted as “multiply” when per-
forming more than one event. Recall from Chapter 1, in logic, when we had
more than one statement, each having two possible truth-values, we multiplied:
2×2×⋯×2, depending on the number of statements. In sets, when we counted
the number of possible subsets for a given set, each element was taken to be in
the new set or it was not taken and so we multiplied: 2×2×⋯×2, depending
this time on the number of elements in the original set. This idea is referred to
as the multiplication principle.
And similarly, if two dice are tossed, assuming order matters (the first die is
red and the second die is blue) there are 6×6 different possible outcomes.
Multiplication Principle or Sequential Counting Principle
So this idea of “and” means “multiply” is between a multiple number of events
or tasks; to be done in sequence, succession or in order and can be extended to
individual events which can be taken several ways. Unfortunately, this idea is
not as easy to formulate. But let’s try:
Definition 4.2.1 Multiplication Principle
If there are n tasks to be done or events to perform, and each task can be done in
m1,m2,…,mn, then the number of ways to perform all given tasks is m1×m2×⋯×mn.
For example, given the events: a coin is tossed and (then) a die is tossed, there
are 2×6 different outcomes. If we let the collection of possible outcomes be
called our sample space; then S5 H1,H2,H3,H4,H5,H6,T1,T2,T3,T4,
f
T5,T6g. This set may also be referred to as the universal set in this given situation.
Example 4.2.1 Entre´e and Dessert
Given there are five entrees and three desserts, how many different combinations of one
entree and one dessert be selected?
Solution
m155,m253⇒n55×3515:
There are fifteen different selection of an entree and dessert.
Example 4.2.2 Outfits
A woman is selecting an outfit from two pant, three shirts and two pair of shoes. How
many different outfits can be created?
Solution
m152,m253,m252⇒n52×3×2512
There are twelve different outfits that can be created.
(1) Pant 1, Shirt 1 and Shoe 1
(2) Pant 1, Shirt 1 and Shoe 2
(3) Pant 1, Shirt 2 and Shoe 1
(4) Pant 1, Shirt 2 and Shoe 2
Rule 1
Multiplication Principle
124
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

Solution—cont’d
(5) Pant 1, Shirt 3 and Shoe 1
(6) Pant 1, Shirt 3 and Shoe 2
(7) Pant 2, Shirt 1 and Shoe 1
(8) Pant 2, Shirt 1 and Shoe 2
(9) Pant 2, Shirt 2 and Shoe 1
(10) Pant 2, Shirt 2 and Shoe 2
(11) Pant 2, Shirt 3 and Shoe 1
(12) Pant 2, Shirt 3 and Shoe 2
Definition 4.2.2 Multiple Selection
Suppose that k objects are selected from a set of N objects one at a time with replacement.
Then the sample space for this multiple selection consists of Nk outcomes.
Example 4.2.3 Yahtzee
In a game of dice, how many different ways can six dice land on the first toss of six dice
in a game of Yahtzee.
Solution
N56,k56⇒Nk566546,656
Another way to illustrate these events in using what is call a tree diagram. A
tree diagram is a diagram of the possible events that looks like the branches of
a tree; a “tree” diagram, but we normally draw the branching from left to right
and not bottom to top and each new branching represents the next event.
This idea is a very powerful one, in general when performing more than one
event, “and” means “multiply” and order is implied; the tasks or events are
done in sequence. Furthermore, repetition is allowed or it is not relevant.
For example, when tossing two distinct die, repetition of numbers is allowed,
but when a coin was tossed and then a die, repetition is not an issue; these
events are independent of each other.
Definition 4.2.3 Tree Diagram
A tree diagram is a network diagram used to find and analyze the various outcomes in a
multi-stage sampling. Starting at a point, create branches to the first set of possible out-
comes. From each of the secondary points created above, create additional branches to
the second set of outcomes. Repeat as needed.
Rule 2
Multiple Selections
4.2 Multiplication Principle
125

If the events do depend on each other, “and” still means “multiply” but you
have to be careful to compensate for the dependent event.
For example, when two cards are drawn without replacement, the first card
can be chosen out of the entire deck of 52 cards, but the second card depends on
the fact that there is now one less card in the deck and must be chosen out of the
remaining 51 cards; therefore, there are 52×51 ways to choose two cards in suc-
cession without replacement. If the card were to be replaced, these events would
become independent from each other; that is, both the first and the second card
can be chosen out of the entire deck of 52 cards yielding 52×52 ways to choose
two cards in succession with replacement—but “and” still means “multiply.”
However, replacement seems to plays a very important role. It does, so
much so that we will recognize this specific type of counting as permutations.
If we take it a step further and removed the order, we recognize this specific
type of counting as combinations. But no matter: “and” means “multiply” and
order is implied.
Example 4.2.4 Three Fair Coins
Three fair coins are tossed. Count the number of possible outcomes and construct a tree
diagram illustrating the various outcomes.
Solution
N52,k53⇒Nk52358
Toss 1
Toss 2
H
H
H
H
H
H
HHH
HHT
HTH
HTT
THH
THT
TTH
TTT
H
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
Toss 3
Toss Three
Coins
126
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

PROBLEMS
4.2.1. How many three course meals consisting of an appetizer, an entree, and a dessert are possible if there are:
a. 3 appetizers, 4 entrees and 2 desserts
b. 4 appetizers, 5 entrees and 2 desserts
c. 5 appetizers, 10 entrees and 4 desserts
d. 3 appetizers, 8 entrees and 4 desserts
4.2.2. How many outfits consisting of a shirt, a pant, and a jacket are possible if there are:
a. 2 pants, 5 shirts and 2 jackets
b. 3 pants, 2 shirts and 2 jackets
c. 4 pants, 2 shirts and 3 jackets
d. 2 pants, 3 shirts and 4 jackets
4.2.3. Find the number of possible choices when you choose one item from each category.
a. 4 chairs, 6 colors
b. 2 pencils, 3 binders
c. 3 cone sizes, 7 flavors of ice cream
d. 8 men, 5 women
4.2.4. Find the number of possible choices when you choose one item from each category.
a. 3 pairs of shoes, 7 sweaters, 3 pants
b. 5 types of pasta, 2 meats and 3 cheese toppings
c. 2 desserts, 2 drinks, 5 vegetables
d. 7 socks, 12 hats, 3 pairs of shoes
4.2.5. Find the number of possible choices when you choose one item from each category.
a. 2 car type, 3 makes, and 5 colors
b. 3 fruits, 4 beverages and 2 snacks
4.2.6. Find the number of possible choices when you choose one item from each category.
a. 4 pairs of shoes, 9 socks, 6 shirts, 2 pairs of pants, 3 hats
b. 5 scarves, 12 socks, 5 pairs of pants, 2 pairs of sunglasses, 7 pairs of shoes
4.2.7. How many three-digit codes using digits can be created with repetition of digits?
4.2.8. How many three-digit numbers exist with repetition of digits? Note: There are 10 digits: 0, 1, 2, …, 9 and to be a four
digit number, the first digit cannot be zero.
4.2.9. Draw the associated tree diagram for three coins are tossed.
4.2.10. Draw the associated tree diagram for two dice are tossed.
4.2.11. Draw the associated tree diagram for a die is tossed and then a coin is tossed.
4.3
PERMUTATIONS AND COMBINATIONS
We will go back to calling elements, objects. We will now study how many
ways to order n objects.
Definition 4.3.1 Factorials
Suppose that n objects are selected at random one at a time without replacement. Then
the sample space consists of n!5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯×2×1 outcomes. Here, n! is said
“n factorial.” n! counts the number of ways to order n objects. Note: 0!51, there is
one way to order nothing—do nothing.
Example 4.3.1 Books on a Shelf
How many whys can an obsessive compulsive individual order five books on a shelf?
4.3 Permutations and Combinations
127

Solution
Since there are five books, the first book can be selected one of five ways, 5, and the
second book can therefore be selected from the four remaining books, so forth and so on,
until we have
5!55×4×3×2×15120:
Therefore, there are 120 ways an individual can order five books.
Given n A
ð Þ5n and r≤n; if r objects are taken from A in succession
without replacement, then this event is called a permutation; order is implied
and repetition is not allowed; permute meaning to interchange.
Unfortunately the idea is not easy to formulate. There are n ways to choose
the first object and there are n21
ð
Þ ways to choose the second event; if we
continue like this, our counting is off by one! Therefore when we let the
number of permutation be abbreviated by P; then the number of permutations
of n, chosen r at a time is written mathematically:
P n, r
ð
Þ5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯× n2r + 1
ð
Þ:
But the “…” are vague.
So, let’s consider an alternative notation: what happens when r5n; that
is
how
many
permutations
consist
of
all
n
objects?
We
have,
P n, n
ð
Þ5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯× 2
ð Þ× 1
ð Þ, where one is a nice number to end with,
it looks like we are counting backwards down to one; in fact, that is what
we are doing! Using this notation, P 3, 3
ð
Þ53× 2
ð Þ× 1
ð Þ56. In general, we
will call this idea a factorial and will denote this using the abbreviation
“!”, the exclamation mark. Therefore n factorial is n!5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯×
2
ð Þ× 1
ð Þ.
But in general, P n, r
ð
Þ5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯× n2r + 1
ð
Þ where 0<r<n, n! has too
many objects, in fact n!5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯× n2r + 1
ð
Þ× n2r
ð
Þ×⋯× 2
ð Þ× 1
ð Þ has
exactly
n2r
ð
Þ!5 n2r
ð
Þ× n2r21
ð
Þ×⋯× 2
ð Þ× 1
ð Þ times too many objects.
And the opposite of multiply (times) is divided (division), we have
P n, r
ð
Þ5
n!
n2r
ð
Þ!; where n! orders all n objects and dividing by n2r
ð
Þ! removes
the n2r
ð
Þ objects not wanted.
Definition 4.3.2 Permutations
Suppose that k objects are drawn without replacement, with order being preserved, from
a collection of n distinct objects. Then the sample space of permutation consists of
P n, k
ð
Þ5Pk
n5nPk5
n!
nk
ð
Þ!
sample points; that is, the number of ways of ordering n distinct objects taken k at a
time; permutations
Example 4.3.2 Permute 2 out of 3
Consider the set A5 x, y, z
f
g, how many ways are there to permute two out of the three
letters?
0! = 1
1! = 1
2! = 1 · 2 = 2
3! = 1 · 2 · 3 = 6
4! = 1 · 2 · 3 · 4 = 24
5! = 1 · 2 · 3 · 4 · 5 = 120
6! = 1 · 2 · 3 · 4 · 5 · 6 = 720
Rule 3
Permutations
128
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

Solution
There are six ways to permute these three objects two at time:
P 3, 2
ð
Þ53×2
|{z}
idea
MP
53!
1!53×2×1
1
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
formula
56;
namely, {xy,yx,yz,zy,xz,zx}.
Note there is an issue here, the formula P n, r
ð
Þ5
n!
n2r
ð
Þ! is true when
0<r<n, but when r5n, P n, n
ð
Þ5n!, what would we have to define 0! equal
to so as to maintain this formulation: P n, n
ð
Þ5n!
0!5n!? What would we have
to define 0! equal to so as to maintain this formulation: P n, 0
ð
Þ5n!
n!51 and
therefore 0!
0!51? Well, there is only one what to take nothing; even if you have
nothing, there is still one way to take nothing; this is the subset the empty set:
∅. Hence we define 0!51; this will allow the formula to work ∀r,r51,2,…,n.
In many respects, the idea is easier to remember than the formula: start with
n and count down the r objects you are choosing, and then “and” means
“multiply.”
Now consider the case when order does not matter. Given n A
ð Þ5n and
r≤n; if r objects are taken from A in without replacement but the order in
which the objects may be permuted is not considered, then this event is called
a combination; order does not matter, it is not implied however, repetition is
still not allowed; combine meaning to join.
And recall it was the order which we multiply that dictated the ordering;
therefore it stands to reason that division would remove the dictation between
different ordering. Using this idea, if we want to count the number of combi-
nations instead of the permutation; there are P(n,r) ways that r objects out of
the n objects can be ordered and there are r! ways that the r objects could have
been ordered. Therefore, if we let C denote the combinations of n chosen r at a
time is written mathematically:
C n, r
ð
Þ5P n, r
ð
Þ
r!
5
n!
r! n2r
ð
Þ!:
Here again, 0!51.
In many respect, the idea is easier to remember than the formula: start with
n and count down the r objects you are choosing; and then count up the order
on the r objects chosen. Here “and” means “multiply” with order and “divide”
removes order.
Definition 4.3.3 Combinations
Suppose that k objects are drawn without replacement and without regard to order from a
collection of n distinct objects. Then the sample space of combinations consists of
C n, k
ð
Þ5
n
k
 
5nCk5
n!
k! n2k
ð
Þ!
sample points; combinations in set theory.
Combinations are permutations removing order:
ABC
ABD
ACD
BCD
ACB
ADB
ADC
BDC
BAC
BAD
CAD
CBD
BCA
BDA
CDA
CDB
CAB
DAB
DAC
DBC
CBA
DBA
DCA
DCB
Rule 4
Combinations
4.3 Permutations and Combinations
129

Example 4.3.3 Combine 2 out of 3
For example, consider the set A5 x, y, z
f
g, there are three ways to combine these three
objects two at time:
C 3, 2
ð
Þ53×2
1×2
|{z}
idea
MP
5 3!
2!1!53×2×1
2×1×1
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
formula
53;
namely, {xy,yz,xz}.
Know this: for each combination, there are many permutations.
We have seen that factorials order all, but what if objects were allowed to
repeat? How would you count the distinct orderings?
Consider the number of distinct orderings of the letters in the word Missis-
sippi. As there are repetition of letters, switching around the various s’s does
not change the word as it is not distinct. Only if letters are swapped with
different letters does this create a new distinct word.
Definition 4.3.4 Partial Ordering
The distinct ordering of n objects where each of the k distinguishable objects
i51,2,…,k occurs ni times where n1 + n2 + ⋯+ nk5n. Just as before factorials order
all: n! and division removes the individual orderings; hence, the number of distinct
partial orderings is given by:
n!
n1!×n2!×⋯×nk!
Example 4.3.4 “Noon”
How many distinct words can be created using the letter in the word “noon”?
Solution
n54,n15n252⇒4!
2!2!54×3×2×1
2×1×2×156
There are six distinct arrangements of the letters “noon”:
noon, nono, nnoo, onno, onon, oonn.
What if there is overlap; that is, if A∩B≠∅, then the elements in A∩B,
have been counted twice—once as elements in A and once as elements in B,
therefore subtracting out the one additional counting of A∩B will correctly
yield the number of elements that belong to A or B: A∪B.
Property 4.3.1 Overlapping Events
The number of elements in two overlapping sets is the number of elements minus the
number of elements the sets have in common as they have been added twice.
n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ2n A∩B
ð
Þ
Rule 5
Partial Orderings
130
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

Example 4.3.5 A Fair Die
Consider the experiment of tossing a fair die and observing the number that appears on
top. What is the number of ways one can observe an odd number or prime number?
Solution
Here the universe consists of six possible outcomes: U5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g.
Let A be the event that an odd number occurs and B the event that a prime number
occurs:
A5 1, 3, 5
f
g and B5 2, 3, 5
f
g
Then, A∩B5 3, 5
f
g and
n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ2n A∩B
ð
Þ
53 + 32255
Thus, there are 5 ways the number that appears on a single toss of a die will be an odd
number or a prime number.
Example 4.3.6 Three Fair Coins
Consider the experiment of tossing a coin three times. (See Example 4.2.4.) How
many ways can two or more heads appearing consecutively or of all the tosses being
the same?
Solution
Here
the
sample
space
consists
of
eight
possible
outcomes:
S5 HHH, HHT, HTH, THH, HTT, THT, TTH, TTT
f
g, where H and T stand for
heads and tails, respectively and HHH represents the triplet (H,H,H), HHT
represents the triplet (H,H,T), etc.
Let A be the event that two or more heads appear consecutively and B the
event that all tosses are the same; that is,
A5 HHH, HHT, THH
f
g and B5 HHH, TTT
f
g:
Thus, A∩B5 HHH
f
g and the desired probability is given by
n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ2n A∩B
ð
Þ
53 + 22154
That is, there are four out of eight ways we obtain 3 heads and 2 tails.
Now consider events which are mutually exclusive.
Definition 4.3.5 Mutually Exclusive
Two sets, A and B, in a given universal set U are said to be mutually exclusive if they do
not have any elements in common and we denote it by
A∩B5∅:
When we consider a single universe with overlapping sets, to count the total
number of elements that belong to A or B; simply adding the number of element belong
to A with the number of element belong to B is a bit much; however, if A∩B5∅,
then n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ as there is no overlapping regions, n A∩B
ð
Þ50, and
therefore we can easily determine the number of elements that belong to A or B: A∪B.
4.3 Permutations and Combinations
131

Property 4.3.2 Mutually Exclusive Events
The number of elements in two mutually exclusive (non-overlapping) sets is the number
of elements.
n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ
Example 4.3.7 One Missing Sock
Consider the experiment of drawing a sock from a drawer containing six white, four
blue and three red socks. The number of elements in the event a white or red sock is
draw is
n W ∪R
ð
Þ56 + 359
A
B
PROBLEMS
4.3.1. Evaluate the following factorials:
A. 0!
B. 3!
C. 6!
D. 10!
4.3.2. Write 10! in terms of 9!
4.3.3. Write 100! in terms of 99!
4.3.4. How many ways can an individual with OCD place four books on a shelf?
4.3.5. How many ways can eight horses cross a finish line?
4.3.6. How many distinct orderings of the digits {1,2,3,4} are there?
4.3.7.
8P2
4.3.8.
10P5
4.3.9.
8P7
4.3.10.
9P3
4.3.11. P(11,3)
4.3.12. P(10,1)
4.3.13. P(100,1)
4.3.14. P(10,3)
4.3.15. P(10,7)
4.3.16. P(5,3)
4.3.17. P(5,2)
4.3.18. How many three-digit codes using digits can be created without repetition of digits?
4.3.19. How many permutations of three letters are possible from the letters P, E, T, and S?
4.3.20. In how many ways can Alex, Becky, Cindy, and David stand in line?
4.3.21. How many three-digit numbers can you make by arranging the numbers 1, 2, and 3?
4.3.22. Write the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 3 at a time. Note: there are twenty-four possible
permutations.
4.3.23. Write the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 2 at a time. Note: this time there are only twelve
possible permutations.
4.3.24. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
permutations.
4.3.25. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 3 at a time, compute the number of such
permutations.
4.3.26. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such permutations.
4.3.27. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such permutations.
4.3.28. Write the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 3 at a time. Note: there are only four possible
combinations.
4.3.29. Write the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 2 at a time. Note: this time there are only six pos-
sible combinations.
4.3.30. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
combinations.
132
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

4.3.31. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
f
g chosen 3 at a time, compute the number of
such combinations.
4.3.32. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such combinations.
4.3.33. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such combinations.
4.3.34. Write out all subsets of the set A5 a, b, c
f
g. Hint: there are a total of eight combinations including the empty set as
C 3, 0
ð
Þ51.
4.3.35. How many distinct orderings of the word “happy” are there?
4.3.36. How many distinct orderings of your first name are there?
4.3.37. How many distinct orderings of the word “automatic” are there?
4.3.38. How many distinct orderings of the word “statistics” are there?
4.3.39. How many distinct orderings of the word “Chris” are there?
4.3.40. If n A∩B
ð
Þ517, n A
ð Þ547 and n B
ð Þ574, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5_______
4.3.41. If n A∩B
ð
Þ517, n A
ð Þ517 and n B
ð Þ534, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5_______
4.3.42. If a committee of three is to be chosen from a group of ten people: six men and four women. In how many different
ways can this committee be chosen if the committee must consist of two men and one women
4.3.43. If a committee of three is to be chosen from a group of ten people: six men and four women. In how many different
ways can this committee be chosen if the committee must consist of three men and no women
4.3.44. If a committee of three is to be chosen from a group of ten people: six men and four women. In how many different
ways can this committee be chosen if the committee must consist of all men
4.3.45. If a committee of three is to be chosen from a group of ten people: six men and four women. In how many different
ways can this committee be chosen if the committee must consist of all women
4.4
OTHER COUNTING TECHNIQUES
In general, when we consider the event with exactly two outcomes. Given two
events, F as the “first” outcome and S5F
0 as the “second” outcome; or S for
“success” and F for “failure.” Either way, there are two—“bi” numbers or out-
comes “nomials,” that is binomials.
So, either S or F happens. So, I pose a new question, what happens if flip
this coin fifty times? Ok, for argument sake, let’s flip this hypothetical coin
three times.
That is (S or F) and (S or F) and (S or F); recall “or” means “add” and
“and” means “multiply”; therefore, (S or F) and (S or F) and (S or F)5
(S+F)3. Moreover, if you foil this out like algebra, it will list all the possible
sequential outcomes.
S + F
ð
Þ35 S + F
ð
Þ SS + SF + FS + FF
ð
Þ
5SSS + SSF + SFS + SFF
+ FSS + FSF + FFS + FFF
Neat, huh…
And if you incorporate more algebraic abbreviations, it will count the number
of permutation for each combination—that is S + F
ð
Þ35S3 + 3S2F + 3SF2 + F3
can be interpreted as there is one distinct permutations of the repetitive combi-
nation of three S and no F’s, there are three distinct permutations of the repetitive
combination of letter with two S’s and one F, and three distinct permutations of
the repetitive combination of letter with one S and two F’s and finally, there is
one distinct permutations of the repetitive combination of three F and no S’s.
Note:
3
3
 
51,
3
2
 
53,
3
1
 
53, and
3
0
 
51, this is very interesting.
4.4 Other Counting Techniques
133

In general than, if you choose S or F, over and over again n times, we get
S + F
ð
Þn5
n
n
 
SnF0 +
n
n21


Sn21F +
n
n22


Sn22F2 + ⋯+
n
0
 
S0Fn
sometimes referred to as the binomial expansion.
Therefore, if you want to know how many times you will have r “suc-
cesses” in n “trials”; the rest being “failures,” this can easily be counting using
combinations is the number of successes.
Rule 4.4.1 Binomial Coefficients
In the binomial expansion of a + b
ð
Þn, the coefficient on the term with ar and bn2r, the
binomial coefficient, is given by
C n, r
ð
Þ5
n
r
 
:
Example 4.4.1 (a+b)(a+b)n
If you choose either a or b four times. How many ways can you distinct permute a com-
bination with three a’s and one b.
Solution
Since n54 and r53, there are
4
3
 
54×3×2
3×2×1
|ﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄ}
idea
54; namely, {aaab,aaba,abaa,baaa}
Another interesting way to generate these counters is by building Pascal’s triangle.
Pascal’s triangle is infinite numerical table that forms a triangle in shape; this triangle is
such that the nth row of the triangle corresponds to the coefficients in the binomial
expansion of any binomial, say a + b
ð
Þn.
0th
1
There is only one way to take nothing
1st
1
1
Either a or b5a or b5(a+b)
2nd
1
2
1
aa, ab orba, bb5 a + b
ð
Þ2
3rd
1
3
3
1
This will be a homework assignment
4th
1
4
6
4
1
This will be a homework assignment
Pascal’s triangle is continued by adding the two numbers above to the left and to the
right of where the new number will be placed. If not number exist above to the left or to
the right, then the sum will stay one—add zero.
Written mathematically:
n
r
 
5
n21
r21


+
n21
r


; for r<n and n>1
For example the 5th row would be, 0+1¼1, 1+4¼5, 4+6¼10, 6+4¼10, 4+1¼5,
1+0¼1: 1, 5, 10, 10, 5, 1.
Note: each row is symmetric; written mathematically:
n
r
 
5
n
n2r


134
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

Alternative Counting Method
If you asked to find the binomial expansion, an alternative to using the
binomial expansion (combinations) or Pascal’s triangle is the rule:
Rule 4.4.2 Next Coefficient
Start with a coefficient of one. The next coefficient is the current coefficient times the
power of the first entry, then divided by the power of the second entry plus one.
You just have to remember for the first term, the first coefficient is 1, the first power
is n and the second power is 0; and for each consecutive term the first power goes down
one and the second power goes up one.
Start with, a + b
ð
Þn51×an×b0 + …
Coefficient×First Power
Second Power + 1
5 1×n
0 + 15n
#
a + b
ð
Þn5an + n×an21×b1 + ⋯
So forth and so on.
Example 4.4.2 (x+y)3
Expand x + y
ð
Þ3 using the binomial expansion.
Solution
x + y
ð
Þ351x3y0 +
3
|{z}
1×3
0 + 1


x2y1 +
3
|{z}
3×2
1 + 1


x1y2 +
1
|{z}
3×1
2 + 1


x0y3
PROBLEMS
4.4.1. Write the binomial expansion of a + b
ð
Þ2.
4.4.2. Write the binomial expansion of x + y
ð
Þ3.
4.4.3. Write the binomial expansion of p + q
ð
Þ4.
4.4.4. Write the binomial expansion of x + 3y
ð
Þ3.
4.4.5. Write the binomial expansion of x2y
ð
Þ4.
4.4.6. Write the binomial expansion of 2x + 7y
ð
Þ3.
4.4.7. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x + y
ð
Þ5 which has x4 in it.
4.4.8. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x2 + y

3 which has x6 in it.
4.4.9. Write the term in the binomial expansion of 2x2y
ð
Þ6 which has x4 in it.
4.4.10. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x + 3y
ð
Þ6 which has no x term in it.
4.4.11. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x + 5y
ð
Þ4 which has only x term in it.
4.4.12. Construct the first 6 rows of Pascal’s triangle.
4.4.13. Explain how one row in Pascal’s triangle is generated from the previous row.
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
Multiplication Principle:
How many outfits consisting of a shirt, a pant, and a jacket are possible if there are:
4.1. Two shirts, three pants and four jackets to be chosen from.
4.2. Three shirts, three pants and two jackets to be chosen from.
4.3. Four shirts, two pants and two jackets to be chosen from.
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
135

Find the number of possible choices when you choose one item from each category.
4.4. 6 cars, 4 colors
4.5. 5 pens, 2 notebooks
4.6. 6 sizes, 10 flavors
4.7. 18 boys, 15 girls
4.8. 3 pairs of shoes, 7 sweaters, 4 shorts
4.9. 5 flavors, 3 toppings
4.10. 2 desserts, 2 drinks, 5 vegetables
4.11. 7 socks, 12 hats, 3 pairs of shoes
4.12. 12 flavors of ice cream, 3 cones
4.13. 4 shorts, 5 pairs of shoes, 8 sweaters
4.14. 5 colors, 4 styles
4.15. 15 video games, 7 CDs
4.16. 5 vegetables, 4 desserts, 3 drinks
4.17. 6 pairs of shoes, 12 socks, 3 shirts, 2 pairs of pants, 3 hats
4.18. 8 scarves, 10 socks, 3 pairs of pants, 3 pairs of sunglasses, 14 pairs of shoes
4.19. How many four-digit codes using digits can be created with repetition of digits?
4.20. How many four digit numbers exist with repetition of digits? Note: There are 10 digits: 0, 1, 2, …, 9 and to be a four
digit number, the first digit cannot be zero.
Draw the associated tree diagrams
4.21. Two coins are tossed
4.22. A coin is tossed and then a die is tossed
4.23. A die is tossed and then a coin is tossed
4.24. Three distinct coins are tossed
Factorials and Permutations
4.25. Evaluate 0!
4.26. Evaluate 13!
4.27. Evaluate 5!
4.28. Evaluate 9!
4.29. Write 10! in terms of 8!
4.30. Write 100! in terms of 95!
4.31. Write n! in terms of (n21)!
4.32. Write n! in terms of (n22)!
4.33. How many ways can an individual with OCD place five books on a shelf?
4.34. How many ways can five horses cross a finish line?
4.35. How many distinct orderings of the digits are there?
Note: There are 10 digits: 0, 1, 2, …, 9.
4.36. 12P7
4.37. 5P2
4.38. 12P5
4.39. 10P7
4.40. 9P5
4.41. P(15,3)
4.42. P(20,1)
4.43. P(100,1)
4.44. P(100.3)
4.45. P(10,10)
4.46. P(10,0)
4.47. P(5,0)
4.48. How many ways can an individual with OCD place three out of five books on a shelf?
4.49. How many ways can three out of eight horses cross a finish line?
4.50. How many four-digit codes using digits can be created without repetition of digits?
4.51. How many permutations of three letters are possible from the letters I, P, O, and C?
4.52. In how many ways can Stephanie, Katherine, Sierra, and Jacob stand in line?
4.53. How many three-digit numbers can you make by arranging the numbers 9, 1, and 2?
4.54. Write the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 3 at a time. Note: there are twenty-four possible
permutations.
136
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

4.55. Write the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 2 at a time. Note: this time there are only twelve
possible permutations.
4.56. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
permutations.
4.57. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e
f
g chosen 3 at a time, compute the number of such
permutations.
4.58. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
permutations.
4.59. Without writing the list of all permutations of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e, f
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such permutations.
4.60. Write out all permutations of the set A5 1, 2, 3
f
g. Hint: there are a total of sixteen permutations including the empty
set as P 3, 0
ð
Þ51.
Combinations
4.61. Write the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 3 at a time. Note: there are only four possible
combinations.
4.62. Write the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 2 at a time. Note: this time there are only six possible
combinations.
4.63. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
combinations.
4.64. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e
f
g chosen 3 at a time, compute the number of such
combinations.
4.65. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of such
combinations.
4.66. Without writing the list of all combination of the set A5 a, b, c, d, e, f
f
g chosen 4 at a time, compute the number of
such combinations.
4.67. Write out all combination of the set A5 1, 2, 3
f
g. Hint: there are a total of eight combinations including the empty set
as C 3, 0
ð
Þ51.
Distinct Orderings
4.68. How many distinct orderings of the word “Mississippi” are there?
4.69. How many distinct orderings of your last name are there?
4.70. How many distinct orderings of the word “hippopotamus” are there?
4.71. How many distinct orderings of the word “racecar” are there?
4.72. How many distinct orderings of the word “Rebecca” are there?
Overlapping Events
4.73. If n A∩B
ð
Þ≠0, then A∩B≠∅and a formula for n A∩B
ð
Þ5_______
4.74. Write the formula in problem one of this section twenty times neatly as if you were writing a spelling list.
4.75. If n A∩B
ð
Þ517, n A
ð Þ547 and n B
ð Þ574, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5________
4.76. If n A∩B
ð
Þ517, n A
ð Þ517 and n B
ð Þ534, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5_______
4.77. What consequential set relation must hold true between the sets A and B in problem five of the section.
Mutually Exclusive Events
4.78. If A∩B5∅, then n A∩B
ð
Þ5_______
4.79. If n A∩B
ð
Þ50, then A∩B5∅and n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ5_______
4.80. If A and B are mutually exclusive, n A
ð Þ547 and n B
ð Þ574, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5_______
4.81. If A and B are mutually exclusive, n A
ð Þ517 and n B
ð Þ534, then n A∪B
ð
Þ5_______
Binomials
4.82. Write the binomial expansion of a + b
ð
Þ3.
4.83. Write the binomial expansion of x + y
ð
Þ4.
4.84. Write the binomial expansion of x + y
ð
Þ5.
4.85. Write the binomial expansion of x + 2y
ð
Þ3.
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
137

4.86. Write the binomial expansion of x2y
ð
Þ3.
4.87. Write the binomial expansion of 3x + 5y
ð
Þ3.
4.88. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x + y
ð
Þ6 which has x4 in it.
4.89. Write the term in the binomial expansion of x2 + y

3 which has x4 in it.
4.90. Write the term in the binomial expansion of 2x + y
ð
Þ6 which has x4 in it.
Random Counting
4.91. 5!
4.92.
523
ð
Þ!
4.93. 4!23!
4.94. C(7,3)
4.95. P(6,2)
4.96. How many different ways (assuming no ties) can eight horses cross a finish line?
4.97. How many different ways can an obsessive-compulsive person arrange six different books on a shelf?
4.98. How many different ways can someone choose four books out of six books to be placed in a backpack?
4.99. How many different ways can a committee of four be chosen from a group of ten people?
For the next set of problems, if a committee of four is to be chosen from a group of ten people: six men and four women. In
how many different ways can this committee be chosen if the following must hold?
4.100. The committee consist of two men and two women
4.101. The committee consist of three men and one women
4.102. The committee consist of all men
4.103. The committee consist of all women
4.104. Any four members
4.105. A president, a vice-president, a secretary and a treasurer
For the next set of problems, if a committee of five is to be chosen from a group of fifteen people of which six men. In how
many different ways can this committee be chosen if the following must hold?
4.106. The committee consist of exactly two women
4.107. The committee consist of exactly three men
4.108. The committee consist of all men
4.109. The committee consist of all women
4.110. Any four members
4.111. A president, a vice-president, a secretary and a treasurer and a minuteman.
4.112. How many four-digit natural numbers can be made from the set of digits: D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g. Note to be a
four-digit number, the first digit cannot be zero.
4.113. How many nine-digit S.S.N.(s) can be made from the set of digits: D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g.
4.114. How many passwords of length five are there if the characters can be a natural numbers can be made from the set of
digits or a letter from the English alphabet. Repetition allowed.
4.115. How many passwords of length five are there if the characters can be a natural numbers can be made from the
set of digits, or a letter form the English alphabet where the letters are consider “case sensitive” and repetition
allowed.
4.116. How many passwords of length four are there if the characters can only be taken from the set of digits:
D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g where repetition is not allowed.
4.117. How many passwords of length four for less are there if the characters can only be letters form the English alphabet
and repetition is not allowed.
4.118. How many passwords of length seven are there if the characters can only be taken from the set of digits:
D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g and repetition is allowed.
4.119. How many passwords of length seven are there if the characters can only be taken from the set of digits:
D5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
f
g and repetition is not allowed.
4.120. On the multiple choose final, there are 55 question each having four possible answers. In how many ways could you
“Christmas tree” then test; that is how many ways can the test be completed? Do not compute; leave in
exponential form.
4.121. In how many ways can five cards be dealt from a standard 52-card deck?
4.122. In how many ways can four workers be selected for a group of eight applicants, assuming all four jobs are con-
sidered to be the same?
138
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

4.123. In how many ways can four workers be selected for a group of eight applicants, assuming all four jobs are considered
to be different?
4.124. How many three-letter initials can be formed from the English alphabet.
4.125. How many even four digits counting numbers are there?
4.126. How many distinguishable arrangements of the letters in the word “bubble” are there?
4.127. A coin is tossed five times, how many sequences of heads and tails are there?
4.128. From a group of twelve men and eleven women, two men and two women will be selected to attend a conference.
How many possible ways can the selection be made?
4.129. How many two-element subsets can be taken from a larger set containing six elements?
4.130. How many ordered triplets can result in the tossing of three dice?
4.131. From a list of five students who have been approved by the dean of your school we need to select three to represent
the student body to the academic, finance, and athletic committees. In how many ways can we select the three
representatives?
4.132. Compute
a. 6P2, b. nP2, c. nPn2k, d. aPb
4.133. Compute
a.
14
3


b.
n
n21


c.
n22
n23


4.134. In how many ways can we arrange two candidates for public office and three journalists in a straight line in front of a
television camera?
4.135. How many distinct permutations can we form from the letters of each of the following words:
a. Plato, b. Demetri, c. Mississippi.
4.136. A finite mathematics class in your school consists of 16 women and 10 men. The teacher wants to choose a
committee of five students to represent the class in a school contest. In how many ways can the teacher choose this
committee?
4.137. Maria is interested in having a dinner party with four men and three women from the list of her close friends. There
are a total of eight men and 10 women. In how many ways can she select her dinner guests?
4.138. Find the number of different permutations of the letters in each of the following words:
a. Massachusetts, b. hippopotamus, c. Ohoopee.
4.139. Determine the number of different permutations of the letters in each of the following words:
a. Okeechobee, b. appendicitis, c. Chattahoochee
PROJECTS
Project I: Experiment with Coins
On a single sheet of paper
1. Create a tree diagram for the event: Three coins are tossed and generate the implied universe; write in roster notation.
Hint: there are eight elements.
2. Use the multiplication principle to count the total number of outcomes associated with this event.
Project II: Experimenting with Dice
On a single sheet of paper
1. State the universe for the event: a single die is tossed and the number uppermost is observed.
Projects
139

2. Create a box chart illustrating the event: A blue die and a red die are tossed and the uppermost numbers are observed, first
on the red and then on the blue.
red\blue
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
3. Use the multiplication principle to count the total number of outcomes associated with this event.
4. Create another box chart illustrating the event: A blue die and a red die are tossed and the uppermost sums are observed.
5. How many different outcomes are possible. Explain the difference in the count.
Project III: Combinations
On a single sheet of paper
1. Illustrate the formula or idea for counting the different combinations (no order, no repetition) of n objects chosen r at
a time.
2. Use this formula for your favorite three-element set to compute the number of various combinations; that is, compute:
C(3,0), C(3,1), C(3,2) and C(3,3).
3. List all combinations of your favorite three-element set. Hint: there are eight including the empty set.
Project IV: Permutations
On a single sheet of paper
1. Illustrate the formula or idea for counting the different permutations (order, no repetition) of n objects chosen r at a time.
2. Use this formula for your favorite three-element set to compute the number of various permutations; that is, compute:
P(3,0), P(3,1), P(3,2) and P(3,3).
List all permutations of your favorite three-element set. Hint: there are sixteen including the empty set.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
4.1.1. Enumeration is the act of enumerating, the mention separately as if in counting; name one by one as in a list. That is,
to ascertain the number of items or elements belonging to an outlined set.
4.1.2. A set is countable if there is an enumeration; that is, a set S having a finite number of elements which form a one-
to-one correspondence with the natural numbers, Ν: f : Ν →S.
4.1.3. A set is countably infinite if there exist an enumeration; that is, a set S having an infinite number of elements which
form a one-to-one correspondence with the entire set of the natural numbers, Ν:
f : Ν →S:
4.2.1. If there are n tasks to be done or events to perform, and each task can be done in m1,m2,…,mn, then the number of
ways to perform all given tasks is m1×m2×⋯×mn.
4.2.2. Suppose that k objects are selected from a set of N objects one at a time with replacement. Then the sample space for
this multiple selection consists of Nk outcomes.
140
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

4.2.3. A tree diagram is a network diagram used to find and analyze the various outcomes in a multi-stage sampling.
Starting at a point, create branches to the first set of possible outcomes. From each of the secondary points created
above, create additional branches to the second set of outcomes. Repeat as needed.
4.3.1. Suppose that n objects are selected at random one at a time without replacement. Then the sample space consists of
n!5n× n21
ð
Þ×⋯×2×1 outcomes. Here, n! is said “n factorial.” n! counts the number of ways to order n objects.
Note: 0!51, there is one way to order nothing—do nothing.
4.3.2. Suppose that k objects are drawn without replacement, with order being preserved, from a collection of n distinct
objects. Then the sample space of permutation consists of P n, k
ð
Þ5Pk
n5nPk5
n!
n2k
ð
Þ! sample points; that is, the
number of ways of ordering n distinct objects taken k at a time; permutations.
4.3.3. Suppose that k objects are drawn without replacement and without regard to order from a collection of n distinct
objects. Then the sample space of combinations consists of C n, k
ð
Þ5
n
k
 
5nCk5
n!
k! n2k
ð
Þ! sample points; combina-
tions in set theory.
4.3.4. The distinct ordering of n objects where each of the k distinguishable objects i51,2,…,k occurs ni times where
n1 + n2 + ⋯+ nk5n. Just as before factorials order all: n! and division removes the individual orderings; hence,
the number of distinct partial orderings is given by:
n!
n1!×n2!×⋯×nk!.
4.3.5. Two sets, A and B, in a given universal set U are said to be mutually exclusive if they do not have any elements in
common and we denote it by A∩B5∅.
Properties:
4.3.1. Overlapping Events: The number of elements in two overlapping sets is the number of elements minus the number
of elements the sets have in common as they have been added twice. n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ2n A∩B
ð
Þ
4.3.2. Mutually Exclusive Events: The number of elements in two mutually exclusive (non-overlapping) sets is the
number of elements. n A∪B
ð
Þ5n A
ð Þ + n B
ð Þ
Rules:
4.4.1. In the binomial expansion of a + b
ð
Þn, the coefficient on the term with ar and bn2r, the binomial coefficient, are
given by C n, r
ð
Þ5
n
r
 
.
4.4.2. Start with a coefficient of one. The next coefficient is the current coefficient times the power of the first entry, then
divided by the power of the second entry plus one. You just have to remember for the first term, the first coefficient is
1, the first power is n and the second power is 0; and for each consecutive term the first power goes down one and the
second power goes up one. Start with,
a + b
ð
Þn51×an×b0 + …, then Coefficient First Power
Second Power + 1
5 1×n
0 + 15n; thus,
a + b
ð
Þn5an + n× an1×b1 + … So forth and so on.
Below is a list of every idea that might be symbolically abbreviated when counting; that is the counting.
Symbol
(Abbr.)
Name
Meaning/Read as
Description
Example/
Description
∀
For all
“For all”
x>0, ∀x∈N
n!
n “Factorial”
Ways to order all n objects
5!55×4×3× 2×15120
MP
Multiplication Principle
“And” means
“Multiply”
P(n,r)
Permutation
Number of ways to permute n
objects r at a time
Pð3,3Þ56
C(n,r)
or
n
r
 
Combination; be careful, this is
not a fraction!
Number of ways to combine n
objects r at a time
Cð3,3Þ51
3
2
 
53
Summary of Important Concepts
141

Chart on the various ways to count:
REVIEW TEST
1. Determine the number of squares of any size in the figure below.
2. Draw the tree diagram representing the experiment of tossing a six sided die and then a coin.
3. Evaluate the following expressions:
A. 5!
B. (523)!
C. 5!23!
D. C(5,3)
E. P(5,3)
4. How many five member committees can be selected from a club which has 13 members?
5. A restaurant offers three choices of salad, four choices of entree, and three choices of dessert. How many complete meal
could you order if:
A. One of the desserts is milk based and you cannot eat it.
B. There is only one entree you will eat, the one with chicken.
6. How many four-digit codes can be formed from the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 if repetition is not allowed?
7. How many four-digit codes can be formed from the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 if repetition is allowed?
8. How many four-digit numbers can be formed from the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 if repetition is allowed? Hint: a four-digit
number cannot start with 0.
9. How many ways can eight horses competing in a race cross the finish line if ties are not allowed?
10. An exam contains 10 true/false questions. How many different ways can the exam be completed?
11. How many ways can three students be selected from a group of seven if order does not matter?
12. A box contains 6 apples and 4 oranges. How many ways can two apples and two oranges be selected?
13. How many ways can 5 cards be dealt from a standard deck of 52 cards if order does not matter?
14. How many different sequences of heads and tails exist when a coin is tossed five times?
15. How many different three letter initials are there using the English alphabet?
16. How many even four-digit counting numbers are there?
17. How many distinct arrangements are there of the letters in the word happy?
18. Study the examples illustrating the various ways to combine two out of n objects:
n53, A5{a,b,c} with three combinations: ab, ac and bc.
n54, A5{a,b,c,d} with six combinations: ab, ac, ad, bc, bd and cd.
n55, A5{a,b,c,d,e} with ten combinations: ab, ac, ad, ae, bc, bd, be, cd, ce and de.
Repetition Allowed
Repetition Not Allowed
Order
Multiplication Principle
m1×m2×⋯×mn
Permutations
P n,r
ð
Þ5
n!
n2r
ð
Þ!
Partial or No Order
Distinct Orderings (Partial)
n!
n1!×n2!×⋯×nk!
Combination (No Order)
C n,r
ð
Þ5
n!
r! n2r
ð
Þ!
142
Chapter 4
Counting Techniques

How many combinations can be formed taking two out of six objects?
A. 15
B. 18
C. 21
D. 30
19. A soft drink company decides to test five different recipes for a new soda in a pair-wise comparison. How many different
pairs will result from selecting two recipes at a time?
A. 5
B. 6
C. 10
D. 20
20. From a group of three men and two women, how many ways can one man and one woman be selected to be on a
committee?
A. 5
B. 6
C. 3
D. 2
REFERENCES
Hall, M., 1967. Combinational Theory. Blaisdell, Waltham, MA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1972a. Probability Distributions: An Introduction to Probability Theory with Applications. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978c. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
References
143

Chapter 5
Basic Probability
5.1 Introduction to Probability
146
5.2 Definition of Probability
147
5.3 The Sample Space
150
5.4 Computing Probabilities of Events
153
5.5 Laws of Probability
157
5.6 Conditional Probability
163
5.7 Bayes’ Rule
168
5.8 Combinatorial Techniques
175
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
179
Summary of Important Concepts
181
Review Test
183
References
185
We see … that the theory of probabilities is at bottom only common sense reduced to calculations; it
makes us appreciate with exactitude what reasonable minds feel by a sort of instinct, often without
being able to account for it. … it is remarkable that this science, which originated in the consid-
eration of games of chance, should have become the most important object of human knowledge
PIERRE S. DE LAPLACE
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
145

Blaise Pascal was born in the French province of Auvergne in 1623 and showed phenomenal ability in mathematics at a very
early age. At fourteen he was admitted to the weekly meetings of Roberval, Mersenne, Mydorge, and other French geome-
tricians from which, ultimately, the French Academy sprung. At sixteen Pascal wrote an essay on conic sections; and in
1641, at the age of eighteen, he constructed the first arithmetical machine, an instrument that he further improved eight
years later.
In 1650, suffering from ill health, Pascal decided to abandon mathematics and science and devote himself to religious
contemplation. Three years later, however, he returned briefly to mathematical research. At this time he wrote Traite du
Triangle Arithmetique1, conducted several experiments on fluid pressure, and in correspondence with Fermat assisted
in laying the foundation of probability theory.
Only once again, in 1658, did Pascal return to mathematics. While suffering with a toothache some geometrical ideas
occurred to him, and his teeth suddenly ceased to ache. Regarding this as a sign of Divine Will, he obediently applied himself
toward developing these ideas, producing in eight days a fairly full account of the geometry of the cycloid curve and solving
some problems that subsequently, when issued as challenge problems, baffled other mathematicians.
Pascal’s famous Provinciales and Pens_ees, which are read today as models of early French literature, were written
toward the close of his brief life. He died in Paris in 1662 at the age of thirty-nine. His father Etienne Pascal, (588-
1640) was also an able mathematician; it is for the father that the limac¸on of Pascal is named.
5.1
INTRODUCTION TO PROBABILITY
Webster defines probability as “the quality or state of being probable,”
“likelihood,” or “the number of times something will probably occur over
the range of possible occurrences expressed as a ratio”2. The idea of prob-
ability originated with games of chance in the seventeenth century. The ear-
liest writings in the area were the result of the collaboration between the
eminent mathematicians Blaise Pascal and Pierre Fermat, and a gambler,
Chevalier de Mere. There seemed to them to be contradictions between
mathematical calculations and the events of actual games of chance
involving throwing dice, tossing a coin, spinning a roulette wheel, or
playing cards. For example, in repeated throws of a die, it was observed that
each face of the die, 1 to 6, turned up approximately equally often; that is,
each number appeared with a frequency of 1/6. However, if two dice were
rolled, the sum of numbers showing on the two dice; that is, 2, 3, 4, and so
on to 12, did not appear equally often. Similar experiments were conducted,
the outcomes spurring interest in the development of some basic rules.
Probability was developed primarily for application to games of chance
until the eighteenth century.
In recent years, probability has emerged as one of the most important dis-
ciplines. It has been successfully applied with increasing frequency in areas
such as statistics, engineering, operations research, physics, medicine,
business, economics, accounting, education, sociology, physiology, agri-
culture, meteorology, linguistics, and political science. In every profession,
probabilistic questions are encountered. For example,
1. Translated Treatise on the Arithmetic Triangle.
2. Webster’s New World Dictionary of the American Language, 2nd college ed’, s.v.
“Probability”.
146
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Our aim in this chapter is to introduce the basic concepts of probability and
to illustrate the usefulness of the discipline.
5.2
DEFINITION OF PROBABILITY
The development of the concept of probability can be studied by familiarizing
ourselves with the various definitions of the term. We shall begin by intro-
ducing these definitions.
Definition 5.2.1 Personal Probability
Personal probability is a judgment about the probability of an event happening in a
particular manner, and is often based on personal feelings or beliefs rather than on a
mathematical analysis of the situation.
For example, if a person says, “I’m almost certain that we will land on
Mars,” the high probability that he or she has assigned to this possible
In medicine
What is the probability that a particular drug will be effective on a given
patient?
In meteorology
What is the probability that it will rain in a certain city in Florida on a
specific date of the year?
In engineering
What is the probability that the radio we designed will be operable?
In statistics
What is the probability that the number of automobile accidents during
this year’s Christmas holidays will exceed the previous year’s number
of accidents?
In sociology
What is the probability that a child in an urban ghetto will fail to
complete his high school education?
In education
What is the probability that an individual’s score on an intelligence test
will show significant improvement following a refresher course in
verbal skills?
In sports
What is the probability that a certain swimmer can break the world
record in the butterfly event?
In operations
What is the probability that a system (or component) research will
perform its purpose adequately for the period of time intended under the
operating conditions encountered?
In chemistry
What is the probability that an acid solution made by a specific method
will satisfactorily etch a tray?
In business
What is the probability that the fuel supply of a certain airport will be
inadequate on any given day?
In physiology
What is the probability that an experimental animal will convulse upon
administration of a certain pharmacological
agent?
5.2 Definition of Probability
147

happening is not the result of an exact method of determination but rather
the expression of a belief. As a second example, a person might say con-
cerning the occurrence of earthquakes, “It is probable that on a specific
date there will be an earthquake on the island of Rhodes.” Again, this indi-
vidual is assigning a certain probability to the happening in an intuitive
manner—through feelings or beliefs.
To obtain probabilities from a set, let us begin by denoting a certain hap-
pening or event by the capital letter A. The happening could be the result of a
certain experiment that might be quantitative or non-quantitative in nature. We
are interested in determining the probability of the occurrence of A, which we
shall denote by Pr(A) or P(A). We shall assume that there are n outcomes, and
each outcome is equally likely to possess characteristic A.
Definition 5.2.2 Classical Probability
TheclassicaldefinitionoftheprobabilityoftheeventAisequaltotheratioofthenumber
of ways in which event A may occur in a particular situation, denoted by nA, and the total
number of possible outcomes in a given situation, denoted by n. That is,
Pr A
ð Þ5number of elements which attainattribute A
total number of possible outcomes
5nA
n
We shall approach this definition more precisely using some of the basic
concepts of set theory that we have studied previously. First, however, let
us give some examples to illustrate how we obtain probabilities using the clas-
sical definition of probability.
Example 5.2.1 Tossing A Fair Coin
Consider the situation of tossing a fair coin. There are two possible outcomes to this
situation, each of which is equally likely to occur. The probability of obtaining a head,
H, is given by
Pr H
ð
Þ5nH
n 51
2:
Example 5.2.2 Tossing a Fair Die
Consider the situation of tossing a fair die once; we are interested in obtaining the prob-
ability that an odd number will occur. Here, there are six (6) possible outcomes, n56,
each of which is equally likely to occur, and three of which result in an odd number,
nO53. Thus, the probability of an odd number (O) is
Pr O
ð Þ5nO
n 53
651
2:
Example 5.2.3 Drawing a Card
Consider the situation of drawing a card from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. Here there
are 52 possible outcomes, n552, and we assume that each card has the same chance of
being selected. Suppose that we are interested in obtaining the following probabilities:
(a)
The chosen card is a heart, H.
(b)
The chosen card is a picture card, P.
(c)
The chosen card is an ace, A.
148
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Example 5.2.3 Drawing a Card—cont’d
For (a), since 13 of the 52 cards are hearts, we have nH513 and
Pr H
ð
Þ5nH
n 513
5251
4:
For (b), since there are 12 picture cards in an ordinary deck of cards, we have
np512 and
Pr P
ð Þ5np
n 512
525 3
13:
For (c), we have nA54, since there are four aces in the deck of 52 cards, and
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5 4
525 1
13:
In the preceding examples we use the term “fair”—fair coin, fair die, etc.,
so that the classical definition of probability will be applicable. For example, if
the die is not fair, or in other words, the appearance of each of the six faces is
not equally likely, the assumptions of the definition have not been met and if
used, the results will not be correct.
Finally, we should mention that the classical definition of probability is
also called the a priori definition of probability. That is, prior to and without
actually performing the experiment, we can obtain probabilities of various
happenings or attributes in a given situation.
To give a rigorous presentation of the relative-frequency definition of proba-
bility,weneedsomeadvancedconceptsofmathematicswhicharebeyondthescope
of this book. However, we can give a workable description of the definition.
Let n be the total number of identical trials in a given problem and nB the
number of occurrences of attribute or characteristic B. Here, identical means
that each trial in a given situation is performed under identical conditions. The
probability of B happening, Pr(B), is given by
Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n , as n becomes very large
“As n becomes very large” means that the accuracy of measuring the prob-
ability of the happening B becomes greater as the number of trials becomes
very large. For example, in tossing a coin (which need not be fair, as was
required by the classical definition of probability), we are interested in
obtaining the probability of getting a head, which will be
Pr H
ð
Þ5nH
n :
This expression does not give us a specific answer, but it does tell us an
approximate value for a particular number of trials, and that this approxi-
mation will improve as n increases. That is, if we toss a coin 100 times
n5100
ð
Þ and count the number of heads that have occurred, say nH560,
the ratio of nH
n 5 60
10053
5. If we had employed the classical definition we
would have estimated the Pr(H) to be equal to 1
2. It is of interest to mention
that in tossing a fair coin, the probability of obtaining a head, H, approaches
that of obtaining a tail, T. That is,
Pr H
ð
Þ51
25Pr T
ð Þ, as n becomes large say 2000, 3000, etc:
ð
Þ:
Note that the relative-frequency definition of probability is also called a
posteriori because the desired probabilities are calculated after the necessary
information has been collected; whereas in the classical definition the
probabilities are calculated before conducting the experiment. We have been
5.2 Definition of Probability
149

using the word experiment loosely, but in the next section the term will be
carefully defined.
The axiomatic definition of probability originated with a Russian scientist,
A. N. Kolmogorov3. It is the most important definition of probability because it
eliminates most of the difficulties we encounter using the other definitions.
Before stating the axiomatic definition, we shall discuss some additional con-
cepts in Section 5.3.
EXERCISES
The following exercise will be helpful in understanding the classical and relative-frequency definitions of probability.
5.2.1. A card is selected from an ordinary deck of 52 cards.
a. What is the probability that the selected card is a picture card and a heart?
b. What is the probability that the selected card is an ace of hearts?
c. What is the probability that the selected card is a king?
5.2.2. An urn contains 25 balls out of which ten are red and 15 black. A ball is drawn from the urn.
a. What is the probability that the selected ball is black?
b. What is the probability that the drawn ball is red?
c. What is the probability that the chosen ball is yellow?
5.2.3. A doctor purchases a certain drug from three companies: A, B, and C. If equal amounts of drug are purchased from each
company, what is the probability that the drug administered to a specific patient was purchased from Company C?
5.2.4. A certain cartridge tape was purchased from a shelf containing 10 such tapes. If we were told that 10% of the tapes
were defective, what is the probability that the purchased cartridge tape is non-defective?
5.2.5. A fair die is rolled once.
a. What is the probability that an one will turn up?
b. What is the probability that an even number will turn up?
5.3
THE SAMPLE SPACE
The sample space is a set of all possible outcomes in given experiment.
Definition 5.3.1 Experiment
An experiment is the method by which an observation or a measurement is obtained.
Some examples of experiments are
1. making a measurement of the day’s highest temperature,
2. rolling a die and observing the number that appears on the top,
3. recording the effectiveness of a certain drug administered to a patient in a
hospital,
4. recording the weight of a newborn baby,
5. recording a grade on a certain examination, and
6. ascertaining the preference of a voter before an election.
Thus, by an experiment we mean the following of a specific procedure at the
completion of which we observe certain results.
Definition 5.3.2 Sample Point
A possible outcome of an experiment is called a sample point; the actual observations
of an experiment constitute a sample.
3. In probability theory, Kolmogorov’s specialty, he established new directions in research,
formulated two important systems of equations in partial derivation, and worked on the problems
of random stationary processes. His books on this subject include Foundations of the Theory of
Probability and Analytical Methods of Probability, Theory.
150
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Example 5.3.1 Tossing a Fair Coin ×5
Conducting the experiment of tossing a coin five times and recording the outcome each
time will constitute a sample. The outcome of each individual toss is a sample point.
HHHHH
f
g, HHHHT
f
g, etc:
Definition 5.3.3 Population
A group of individual persons, objects, or items from which samples are taken for sta-
tistical measurement constitutes a population.
Definition 5.3.4 Event
An event is a set of sample points.
We shall denote events by capital letters and sample points by lowercase.
Example 5.3.2 Tossing a Fair Coin ×2
Consider the experiment of flipping a coin twice. Some of the possible events are as
follows:
(a)
Event A: You observe two heads.
(b)
Event B: You observe two tails.
(c)
Event C: You observe one head and one tail.
Definition 5.3.5 Simple Event
An event that consists of only one sample point is called a simple or elementary event.
Example 5.3.3 Two Sample Points
Events A and B in Example 5.3.2 are simple or elementary events.Event C is not, because it
can be thought of as consisting of two sample points; namely, HT and TH.
Definition 5.3.6 Compound Event
An event that consists of more than one sample point is called a compound event.
Example 5.3.4 Rolling a Fair Die
Consider the experiment of rolling a fair die and the event an odd number is observed.
There are six possible outcomes; namely,
Event A: a 1 is observed,
Event B: a 2 is observed,
Event C: a 3 is observed,
Event D: a 4 is observed,
Continued
5.3 The Sample Space
151

Example 5.3.4 Rolling a Fair Die—cont’d
Event E: a 5 is observed, and
Event F: a 6 is observed.
Each of the preceding events is an elementary event. With events A, C, or E we
observe an odd number; that is, we observe a l, 3, or 5. Thus, this event of an odd number
is a compound event.
In view of the preceding definitions, we can say that an event that cannot be
decomposed is a simple or elementary event. Similarly an event that can be
decomposed into two or more simple events is a compound event. It is clear
that in Example 5.3.4 events A, B, C, D, E, and F cannot be decomposed.
However, the event of observing an odd number is decomposable.
Definition 5.3.7 Sample Space
A set of all possible outcomes of an experiment is called a sample space. We shall
denote the sample space by S.
Hence, that the sample space is simply the set of all possible sample points
of a given experiment.
Example 5.3.5 Tossing a Fair Coin
Consider the experiment of tossing a fair coin. The sample space S consists of the two
possible outcomes
H5 ahead wasobserved and T5 atail wasobserved:
Note that outcomes H and T are sample points. Using set theory we symbolize the
sample space by S5 H, T
f
g.
Example 5.3.6 Tossing a Fair Coin ×2
Consider the experiment of tossing a coin twice. The possible outcomes are as follows:
Event A5
H, H
ð
Þ
f
g5 head in the firsttoss, head in the second toss;
Event B5
H, T
ð
Þ
f
g5 head inthe first toss, tail in the second toss;
Event C5
T, H
ð
Þ
f
g5tail in the firsttoss, head in the second toss; and
Event D5
T, T
ð
Þ
f
g5 tail in the first toss, tail in the second toss:
Thus, the sample space S consists of the simple events (sample points) A, B, C, and
D. Again, using set notation we can write the sample space as follows:
S5
H, H
ð
Þ, H, T
ð
Þ, T, H
ð
Þ, T, T
ð
Þ
f
g
or
S5 A, B, C, D
f
g:
The sample space may be viewed symbolically in terms of the Venn diagram. The
sample space of Example 5.3.6 is shown by Figure 5.1.
A
C
D
B
S
FIGURE 5.1
Venn diagram for Example 5.3.6.
152
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Having constructed the sample space, we can formulate additional events
by grouping the necessary sample points. That is, in Example 5.3.6 the event of
obtaining either two heads or two tails will consist of the simple events A
and D. This event is represented on the Venn diagram by circling the sample
points A and D, as shown by the enclosed‘ portion of S in Figure 5.1.
Definition 5.3.8 Mutually Exclusive
Two events, A and B, of the sample space S are said to be mutually exclusive if
A∩B5∅.
That is, events A and B do not have any elements in common.
Example 5.3.7 Mutually Exclusive Events
In Example 5.3.6, the events A and D are mutually exclusive; the definition of mutually
exclusive events can similarly be extended to a larger number of events. For example,
the events A, B, and C are mutually exclusive if A∩B5∅, A∩C5∅, B∩C5∅, and
A∩B∩C5∅:
EXERCISES
5.3.1. Make a list of five examples that illustrate the meaning of an experiment.
5.3.2. Which of the following describe an experiment:
a. recording a test grade,
b. tossing a coin and observing the face which appears,
c. making a measurement of the daily rainfall,
d. recording the rushing yards of a running back in a football game?
5.3.3. Consider the experiment of flipping a coin three times. Make a list of all possible sample points.
5.3.4. Consider the experiment of tossing a coin and a die. Make a list of the 12 possible sample points.
5.3.5. Do the sample points which you have listed in Problem 5.3.3 constitute simple or compound events?
5.3.6. Distinguish which of the observations you have listed in Problem 5.3.4 are elementary and which are compound
events.
5.3.7. Consider the experiment of tossing three coins and recording the number of heads observed, Define the sample
space of the experiment.
5.3.8. Construct the sample spaces of Problems 5.3.3 and 5.3.7.
5.3.9. The sample space S consists of five elements:
S5 s1, s2, s3, s4, s5
f
g:
Let A1 and A2 be subsets of S : A15 s1, s3, s5
f
g and A25 s2, s4
f
g Draw a Venn diagram to illustrate symbolically S, A1,
and A2.
5.4
COMPUTING PROBABILITIES OF EVENTS
We have defined the sample space S to be the set of all possible outcomes of an
experiment. Now we shall be concerned with calculating probabilities of dif-
ferent events or a collection of events defined on the sample space. It is of
interest at this point to reiterate the fact that if the sample space consists of
n sample points, then we can obtain probabilities of 2n possible events in S.
That is, there are 2n possible subsets of a set that consists of n elements.
We proceed by stating the axiomatic definition of probability.
5.4 Computing Probabilities of Events
153

Definition 5.4.1 Axiomatic Probability
Let A1, A2,…,An be events defined on the sample space S. The probability of each event,
denoted by Pr Ai
ð
Þ, i51, 2,…,n, are numbers that satisfy the following axioms:
1.
0 ≤Pr Ai
ð
Þ
2.
Pr S
ð Þ51
3.
Pr A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪An
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
Þ + P A2
ð
Þ + … + Pr An
ð
Þ,
when
A1, A2,…,An
are
mutually exclusive events, Pr(Ai).
Axiom 1 simply says that the probability of every event defined on the
sample space is greater than or equal to zero. If the sample space has n points,
the empty event on S, the probability of which will be equal to zero, is the
impossible event, that is, an event containing no sample points. You recall that
we denote such an event by ∅, It is clear why the probability of ∅is zero,
Pr ∅
ð
Þ5n∅
n 50
n50:
Axiom 2 saysthattheprobability ofthe set S,the samplespace,isone.That is,
Pr S
ð Þ5ns
n 5n
n51:
Weshouldalsomentionherethatifwedeterminetheprobabilityofeveryevent
onthesamplespaceS,thenwesaythatSisaprobabilityspace.Furthermore,ifwe
sum the probabilities of every possible simple event on S, the sum will be equal to
one. These facts will be illustrated in detail with the examples to follow.
Axiom3saysthattheprobabilityoftheunionofasequenceofeventsdefined
on S is equal to the sum of their probabilities, provided that the sequence of
eventsismutuallyexclusive.Yourecallthattwoevents,A1andA2,ofthesample
space S are said to be mutually exclusive if A1 ∩A25∅. In order to meet the
condition of the third axiom, every possible pair in the sequence must be
mutually exclusive. (In a later section we shall discuss techniques to allow us
to calculate probabilities of events that are not mutually exclusive.)
We would like to emphasize here that the axiomatic approach to probability
in no way assigns a numerical value to the probability of any event. It is used
primarily to manipulate probabilities of compound events so that we may
express them in terms of probabilities of simple events, which in turn may
be evaluated by one of the other definitions of probability already mentioned.
The following example illustrates this concept:
Example 5.4.1 Tossing a Fair Die ×2
Consider the experiment of tossing two fair dice once in the interest of obtaining the
following four probabilities:
1.
The probability that the sum showing on the two dice is equal to four,
2.
The probability that the sum showing on the two dice is less than five,
3.
The probability that the absolute value of the difference on the dice is equal to
three, and
4.
The probability that the absolute value of the difference on the dice is greater than or
equal to four.
Here, the sample space consists of 36 sample points (simple events). Let us represent
each sample point by an ordered pair in which the first and second numbers refer to the
observed values on the first and second die, respectively. Thus, the sample space S con-
tains the following sample points:
S5
1, 1
ð
Þ 1, 2
ð
Þ 1, 3
ð
Þ 1, 4
ð
Þ 1, 5
ð
Þ 1, 6
ð
Þ
f
2, 1
ð
Þ 2, 2
ð
Þ 2, 3
ð
Þ 2, 4
ð
Þ 2, 5
ð
Þ 2, 6
ð
Þ
3, 1
ð
Þ 3, 2
ð
Þ 3, 3
ð
Þ 3, 4
ð
Þ 3, 5
ð
Þ 3, 6
ð
Þ
4, 1
ð
Þ 4, 2
ð
Þ 4, 3
ð
Þ 4, 4
ð
Þ 4, 5
ð
Þ 4, 6
ð
Þ
5, 1
ð
Þ 5, 2
ð
Þ 5, 3
ð
Þ 5, 4
ð
Þ 5, 5
ð
Þ 5, 6
ð
Þ
6, 1
ð
Þ 6, 2
ð
Þ 6, 3
ð
Þ 6, 4
ð
Þ 6, 5
ð
Þ 6, 6
ð
Þg:
154
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Example 5.4.1 Tossing a Fair Die ×2—cont’d
Before we proceed to answer the posed questions, we shall illustrate the meaning of
Axioms 1 and 2. Each of the 36 simple events (sample points) has an equal chance of
occurring. According to the classical definition, the probability of each simple event
Ai, is 1
36; that is,
Pr Ai
ð
Þ5 1
36, i51, 2,…,36:
Thus, the probability of each simple event, Pr(Ai), is greater than zero, and it will be
equal to zero for any other event which is not in S2 Axiom 1. Now, from Axiom 2 we
see that
Pr S
ð Þ5Pr A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪A36
f
g
5Pr A1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
Þ + … + Pr A36
ð
Þ
5Pr
1, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 3
ð
Þ
f
g + … + Pr
6, 6
ð
Þ
f
g
5 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + … + 1
36
51:
To answer the first part of Example 5.4.1; that is, the event, B1, that the sum of the
faces is equal to four, we find only three sample points which yield a sum of four: (3,1),
(2,2), and (1,3). Therefore
B15
3, 1
ð
Þ, 2, 2
ð
Þ, 1, 3
ð
Þ
f
g:
The probability of this event, Pr(B1), can be obtained by applying Axiom 3; that is,
by adding the probabilities of each of the simple events contained in B1, Hence,
Pr B1
ð
Þ5Pr
3, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
2, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 3
ð
Þ
f
g
5 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
365 3
365 1
12:
To answer the second part, we refer to the sample space of the problem and we see
that there are six sample points constituting the compound event B2; namely, (1,1),
(1,2), (2,1), (3,1), (2,2), and (1,3). That is,
B25
1, 1
ð
Þ, 1, 2
ð
Þ, 2, 1
ð
Þ, 3, 1
ð
Þ, 2, 2
ð
Þ, 1, 3
ð
Þ
f
g:
Therefore,
Pr B2
ð
Þ5Pr
1, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
2, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
3, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
2, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 3
ð
Þ
f
g
5 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
365 6
3651
6:
For the third part, there are six sample points in the sample space where the absolute
value of the difference on the dice is equal to three; namely, (1,4), (4,1), (2,5), (5,2),
(6,3), and (3,6). Let B3 be the compound event which consists of the six sample points;
that is,
B35
1, 4
ð
Þ, 4, 1
ð
Þ, 2, 5
ð
Þ, 5, 2
ð
Þ, 3, 6
ð
Þ, 6, 3
ð
Þ
f
g:
Thus, using Axiom 3 we have
Pr B3
ð
Þ5Pr
1, 4
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
4, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
2, 5
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
5, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
3, 6
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
6, 3
ð
Þ
f
g
5 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
365 6
3651
6:
To answer the fourth part, we refer to the sample space of the problem and see that
there are six sample points where the absolute value of the difference on the dice is
greater than or equal to four; namely, (1,5), (5,1), (2,6), (6,2), (1,6), and (6,1). Let
B4 represent the compound event that consists of the six sample points; that is,
B45
1, 5
ð
Þ, 5, 1
ð
Þ, 2, 6
ð
Þ, 6, 2
ð
Þ, 1, 6
ð
Þ, 6, 1
ð
Þ
f
g:
Continued
5.4 Computing Probabilities of Events
155

Example 5.4.1 Tossing a Fair Die ×2—cont’d
Therefore, applying Axiom 3, we can write
Pr B4
ð
Þ5Pr
1, 5
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
5, 1
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
2, 6
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
6, 2
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
1, 6
ð
Þ
f
g + Pr
6, 1
ð
Þ
f
g
5 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
36 + 1
365 6
3651
6:
This means that the probability that the absolute value of the difference on the dice is
greater than or equal to four is 1
6.
EXERCISES
5.4.1. The sample space of the experiment of tossing a coin and a die was obtained in 5.3 Exercise, Problem 5.3.4.
Calculate the probability of the following events:
a. the event of a tail on the coin and an even number on the die,
b. the event of a head and an odd number, and
c. the event of a tail and an even number or a head and an odd number.
5.4.2. Refer to 5.3 Exercises, Problem 5.3.3 and obtain the probability of the following events:
a. the event of two heads,
b. the event of three heads,
c. the event of two or more tails, and
d. the event of two heads or two tails.
5.4.3. The results of a certain experiment are shown in the accompanying diagram.
5.4.4. Calculate the probability of the following events assuming all sample points are equally likely:
(a) Pr(A), (b) Pr(B), (c) Pr(A) (d) Pr A∪C
ð
Þ.
5.4.5. Three horses, H1, H2, and H3, participate in a race. Suppose all possible results are equally likely.
a. What is the probability that horse H1 wins?
b. What is the probability that horse H3 wins?
c. What is the probability that horse H1 “shows” (comes in first or second)?
156
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

5.4.6. On a bargain table in a shoe store are many shoes of a single size and style, not matched in pairs. If the number of left
shoes equals the number of right shoes,
a. What is the probability of picking two shoes and getting a matched pair (left and right)?
b. What is the probability of obtaining a matched pair when three shoes are picked?
5.4.7. Two people play a game involving coins. Each tosses a coin. If they match, A wins; if not, B wins. What is the
probability that A wins?
5.4.8. One way of eliminating one of three contest winners is to have all three toss coins. In “odd man out,” the one whose coin
does not match the other two loses. However, if all three outcomes of the coins match, no one loses. What is the
probability that no one is eliminated in the first toss?
5.4.9. An experiment consists of tossing two fair dice once. What is the probability that the sum showing on the two dice is
equal to seven?
5.4.10. In Problem 5.4.9, calculate the probability that the sum showing on the dice is greater than five.
5.4.11. In Problem 5.4.9, what is the probability that the absolute value of the difference on the dice is equal to six?
5.5
LAWS OF PROBABILITY
Consider the experiment of drawing a single card from a well-shuffled deck.
We might be interested in obtaining the probability of the event that the card
drawn is a diamond or a picture card. Here, the sample space consists of 52
sample points corresponding to the 52 possible cards that might be drawn.
Let A1 represent the occurrence of a diamond in a single draw and A2 the occur-
rence of a picture card in a single draw. The question we have posed requires us
to find the
Pr A1 ∪A2
ð
Þ
However, since the events A1, and A2 are not mutually exclusive, we cannot
apply the axiomatic definition of probability to obtain the desired result.
Clearly, the reason the events are not mutually exclusive is the fact that A1
can be a picture diamond.
Many other problems involve events that are not mutually exclusive. To
allow us to overcome this difficulty we state the following basic laws:
Property 5.4.1 Complement
If A is any event of the sample space S, then
Pr A
ð Þ512Pr A
ð Þ;
where A denotes the complement of event A.
A
S
A
–
FIGURE 5.2
Venn diagram of Theorem 1.
5.5 Laws of Probability
157

From Figure 5.2, we can write the following equation:
S5A∪A;
that is, the sample space is the union of the subset A and its complement, A.
Since A and A are mutually exclusive, we can apply Axiom 3 to the preceding
equation; that is,
Pr S
ð Þ5Pr A∪A
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr A
ð Þ:
From Axiom 2 we know that Pr S
ð Þ51, thus
15Pr A
ð Þ + Pr A
ð Þ or Pr A
ð Þ512Pr A
ð Þ:
Example 5.5.1 Contents of an Urn
Consider an urn that contains 15 red and 10 black balls
What is the probability that a ball drawn will be black? Thus,
Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n 510
2552
5
and the probability that the ball drawn is not black is
Pr B
ð Þ512Pr B
ð Þ5122
553
55Pr R
ð Þ;
due to Property 5.4.1.
The following results give a more rigorous reasoning concerning the prob-
ability of the empty set (impossible event), ∅.
Property 5.4.2 Empty Set
If ∅is the impossible event (empty set) of the sample space S, then
Pr ∅
ð
Þ50:
We know that S5S∪∅and that S and ∅are mutually exclusive since they
do not have any elements in common. Thus, applying Axiom 3 we can write
Pr S
ð Þ5Pr S∪∅
ð
Þ5Pr S
ð Þ + Pr ∅
ð
Þ:
But we know from Axiom 2 that Pr S
ð Þ51, Therefore
151 + Pr ∅
ð
Þ or Pr ∅
ð
Þ50;
Example 5.5.2 Tossing Two Fair Dice
In the experiment consisting of tossing two dice and observing the sum uppermost, what
is the probability that the sum showing on the two dice is equal to 13?
Solution
Here, the event in question is impossible (empty) because one can never obtain a sum of
13 in tossing a pair of fair dice. Thus, the desired probability is zero.
158
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Property 5.4.3 Union
If A and B are any two events of the sample space S, then the probability of their union is
given by
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ:
This property says that if the events A and B are not mutually exclusive, then
the probability of the union of these events is equal to the sum of the probabilities
of each of the events minus the probability of the intersection of the events. The
proof of this statement can be reasoned as follows: The sum, Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ,
contains the sum of the probabilities of all sample points in A∪B but includes
a double counting of the probabilities of all points in the intersection, A∩B.
Subtracting the Pr A∩B
ð
Þ gives the correct result. That is, when we calculated
the Pr(B) and the Pr(A) we used the common points of A and B twice therefore,
we must subtract these once to obtain the correct result.
We can also show this analytically. From Figure 5.3, we see that we can
write A∪B5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪B. Note that the events A∩B and B are mutually
exclusive events. Thus, applying Axiom 3 we have
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ + Pr B
ð Þ:
However, we can write event Aas apair of mutuallyexclusive events;that is,
A5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩B
ð
Þ
and thus,
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ + Pr A∩B
ð
Þ or Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
by Axiom 3, since the events A∩B and A∩B are mutually exclusive events.
Substituting the preceding expression, Pr A∩B
ð
Þ, into the expression for
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ we have
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ:
This expression is called the additive law of probability.
If the events A and B are mutually exclusive, then Pr A∩B
ð
Þ50 because A
and B do not have any sample points in common. We then write
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ:
Thus, we compute the Pr A∪B
ð
Þ when events A and B are not mutually
exclusive and when the outcomes are equally likely as follows:
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5nA
n + nB
n 2nA∩B
n
:
Example 5.5.3 Tossing a Fair Die
Consider the experiment of tossing a fair die and observing the number that appears on
top. What is the probability of an odd number or prime number? Here the sample space
consists of six possible outcomes:
S5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
f
g:
Continued
B « A–
A « B–
A
S
B
FIGURE 5.3
Venn diagram for Example 5.5.3.
5.5 Laws of Probability
159

Example 5.5.3 Tossing a Fair Die—cont’d
Let A be the event that an odd number occurs and B the event that a prime number
occurs:
A5 1, 3, 5
f
g and B5 2, 3, 5
f
g
Then, A∩B5 3, 5
f
g and
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
5nA
n + nB
n 2nA∩B
n
53
6 + 3
622
654
652
3
Thus, there is a 2/3 chance that the number that appears on a single toss of a die will
be an odd number or a prime number.
Example 5.5.4 Tossing a Fair Coin ×3
Consider the experiment of tossing a coin three times. What is the probability of two or
more heads appearing consecutively or of all the tosses being the same? Here the sample
space consists of eight possible outcomes
S5
H, H, H
ð
Þ, H, H, T
ð
Þ
f
, H, T, H
ð
Þ, H, T, T
ð
Þ, T, H, H
ð
Þ,
T, H, T
ð
Þ, T, T, H
ð
Þ, T, T, T
ð
Þg;
where H and T stand for heads and tails, respectively, Let A be the event that two or
more heads appear consecutively, and B the event that all tosses are the same; that is,
A5
H, H, H
ð
Þ, H, H, T
ð
Þ, T, H, H
ð
Þ
f
g and B5
H, H, H
ð
Þ, T, T, T
ð
Þ
f
g:
Thus, A∩B5
H, H, H
ð
Þ
f
g and the desired probability is given by
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
53
8 + 2
821
854
851
2:
We shall now reconsider the problem we posed in introducing these basic
laws of probability.
Example 5.5.5 Drawing a Card
Consider the experiment of drawing a card from a well-shuffled deck of 52 cards. We
would like to find the probability of the following events:
1.
The event of drawing a diamond or a picture card (including a picture diamond); and
2.
The event of not obtaining a diamond or a picture card; that is, of obtaining; any card
other than a picture card or a diamond.
1
3
2
5
6
4
B
A
S
FIGURE 5.4
Venn diagram for Example 5.5.3.
160
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Example 5.5.5 Drawing a Card—cont’d
The sample space consists of 52 sample points corresponding to the 52 possible
cards that might be drawn. Let A be the event that the card drawn is a diamond and
B the event that the card drawn is a picture card. It is clear that events A and B are
not mutually exclusive. For the first part, we must apply Theorem 3:
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
There are 13 diamonds in an ordinary deck of 52 cards; thus, using the classical def-
inition of probability, we have
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 513
5251
4:
Similarly, there are 12 picture cards in a deck of cards and
Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n 512
525 3
13:
Also, there are three picture cards that are diamonds in such a deck and
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5nA∩B
n
5 3
52:
Therefore,
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ513
52 + 12
522 3
52522
52511
26:
Thus, there is an 11
26 chance that the drawn card is a picture card or a diamond.
For the second part, we simply apply Theorem 1. That is,
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ512Pr A∪B
ð
Þ
51211
26515
26
Property 5.4.4 Additive Law
The additive law of probability can be easily extended to a finite number of events
defined on the sample space. For example, let A, B, and C be any three events defined
on the sample space S. The probability of the union of these events is given by
Pr A∪B∪C
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ + Pr C
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ2Pr A∩C
ð
Þ
2Pr B∩C
ð
Þ + Pr A∩B∩C
ð
Þ
5nA
n + nB
n + nC
n 2nA∩B
n
2nA∩C
n
2nB∩C
n
+ nA∩B∩C
n
:
The validity of the preceding expression of Pr A∪B∪C
ð
Þ can be easily
demonstrated by means of the accompanying Venn diagram (Figure 5.4)
and the following reasoning. In calculating Pr(A) and Pr(B) we used the ele-
ments that are common to A and B in both cases; thus, we must subtract
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ once. Similarly, when, we calculate Pr(A) and Pr(C) we must sub-
tract the Pr A∩B
ð
Þ once. Again, for the case when we obtain Pr(B) and Pr(C),
we must subtract the Pr B∩C
ð
Þ once. However, the probability of the common
elements to all three events, Pr A∩B∩C
ð
Þ, has been subtracted more than once
and should be added once for the balance.
If the events A, B, and C are mutually exclusive, then according to Axiom 3
we have (Figure 5.5)
Pr A∪B∪C
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ + Pr C
ð Þ
5.5 Laws of Probability
161

EXERCISES
5.5.1. The results of certain experiments are delineated in the accompanying Venn diagram. Calculate the probability of
the following events:
a. the occurrence of event A,
b. the occurrence of event C,
c. the occurrence of event B,
d. the occurrence of event A or B.
5.5.2. From the experiment: three fair coins are tossed, obtain the probability of the following events:
a. Two heads appear or all the tosses are the same.
b. Three heads appear or all the tosses are not the same.
5.5.3. From a single card is drawn from a standard deck of 52 playing cards, calculate the probability of the following events:
a. Drawing a heart or an ace heart,
b. Not obtaining a heart or an ace heart.
5.5.4. The probability that a student entering the snack bar at the student union will buy a soda is 75%. The probability that
he or she will buy ice cream is 45%. The probability that a student will buy both ice cream and soda is 40%. What is
the probability that a student will buy a soda, ice cream, or both?
5.5.5. Consider the experiment of rolling a fair die.
a. What is the probability of observing an odd number or a number less than four?
b. What is the probability of observing an even number or a number greater than four?
5.5.6. A box contains 10 operable, 4 defective, and 6 semi-operable electric shavers. Here, semi-operable means that the
shaver can be classified between operable and defective. In appearance the shavers cannot be distinguished. A shaver
is chosen from the box; obtain the probability that it is operable or semi-operable.
5.5.7. The experiment of tossing a coin and a die, determine the probability of the following events:
a. Heads and an even number appear or a prime number appears.
b. Tails and an odd number appear or a prime number appears.
S
A
B
C
A « C
A « B « C
A « B
B « C
FIGURE 5.5
Venn diagram of event A∪B∪C
ð
Þ.
S
20
15
10
5
A
B
162
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

5.5.8. In a class of 50 history majors, 10 elected a finite mathematics course, 15 elected a philosophy course, and five
elected to take both mathematics and philosophy. A student is chosen from this class. What is the probability that
he or she has elected the mathematics or philosophy course?
5.6
CONDITIONAL PROBABILITY
Suppose that from a deck of 52 cards we removed the three picture diamonds
(jack, queen, and king), and from the remaining 49 cards selected a card at
random. We want to know the probability of the chosen card being a picture
card, with the additional condition that we know the card drawn is a spade.
That is, we want to know the probability of a certain event under a specific
condition that influences the answer to the posed question, problems of this
type can be easily handled using the following definition:
5.6.1 Definition Conditional Probability
Let A and B be any two events of the sample space S. We define the conditional prob-
ability of event A, given that event B has occurred, denoted by Pr(AjB), by
Pr AjB
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
:
where Pr B
ð Þ>0.
That is, the conditional probability of event A, given that event B has
occurred, is equal to the probability of the intersection of the events A∩B
divided by the probability of B. Note that Pr(B) cannot be equal to zero
because division of a number by zero is undefined and is thus not permissible.
Also, is not meaningful to be asked to obtain the probability of an event under
the condition of the impossible event. We can also write
Pr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
:
where Pr A
ð Þ>0.
We can easily compute conditional probabilities once the sample space S
has been constructed.
For example, in Figure 5.6, let the sample space consist of n simple events,
nA of which have the attribute associated with A, nB of which have the attribute
associated with B, and nA∩B of which have the attributes associated with both
A and B. Then, using the classical definition of probability, we have
Pr AjB
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
5
nA∩B
n
nB
n
5nA∩B
nB
and
Pr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5
nA∩B
n
nA
n
5nA∩B
nA
We shall now answer the questions posed at the beginning of the section.
S
B
A
A«B
FIGURE 5.6
Venn diagram of the event A∩B.
5.6 Conditional Probability
163

Example 5.6.1 Drawing a Single Card
Consider the experiment of drawing a single card from a deck of cards that is missing the
three picture diamonds. We would like to find the probability of the following events:
1.
The chosen card is a picture card, given that this card is a spade.
2.
The drawn card is a spade, given that this card is a picture card.
Solution
Here, the sample space S consists of 49 simple events. Let A be the event that the chosen
card is a picture card, and let event B denote that the chosen card is a spade; Event B
consists of 13 sample points, since there are 13 spades in an ordinary deck of 52 cards.
The probability of this event occurring is
Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n 513
49:
The event A∩B consists of three sample points, since there are only three picture
cards that are spades. Hence,
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5nA∩B
n
5 3
49:
For the first part, applying the definition of conditional probability, we have
Pr AjB
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
5
3
49
13
49
5 3
13:
Thus, if we draw a single card from such a deck and we are told that this card is a
spade, there is a 3
13 chance that the card selected is a picture card, Similarly, event A
consists of nine sample points, since there are 12 picture cards in a 52-card deck and
three are missing. Thus,
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5 9
49:
For the second part, we have
Pr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5
3
49
9
49
53
951
3:
Note that Pr AjB
ð
Þ≠Pr BjA
ð
Þ.
Example 5.6.2 Tossing a Fair Die ×2
Consider the experiment of rolling a pair of fair dice. We would like to know the prob-
ability of at least one of the dice showing a 3, given that we know a sum of seven has
been observed.
Solution
The sample space of this experiment consists of 36 sample points. Let A be the event
that the observed sum is 7 and let B denote the event that a 3 appears on at least one die.
Here, event A consists of six sample points:
A5
1, 6
ð
Þ, 2, 5
ð
Þ, 3, 4
ð
Þ, 4, 3
ð
Þ, 5, 2
ð
Þ, 6, 1
ð
Þ
f
g
and event B is made up of 11 simple events:
B5
3, 1
ð
Þ, 3, 2
ð
Þ, 3, 3
ð
Þ, 3, 4
ð
Þ, 3, 5
ð
Þ, 3, 6
ð
Þ
f
6, 3
ð
Þ, 5, 3
ð
Þ, 4, 3
ð
Þ, 2, 3
ð
Þ, 1, 3
ð
Þg:
Thus, the event A∩B consists of two sample events.
A∩B5
3, 4
ð
Þ, 4, 3
ð
Þ
f
g
164
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Solution—cont’d
Applying the definition of conditional probability, we have
Pr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5nA∩B
nA
5
2
36
6
36
52
651
3:
Therefore, there is a 1
3 chance of at least one of the dice showing a three if we are told
the sum of seven has been observed.
The definition of conditional probability can be written as
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr B
ð ÞPr AjB
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr BjA
ð
Þ
by simply cross-multiplying. That is, if we are given the conditional proba-
bility of a given event along with either the Pr(A) or Pr(B), we can obtain
the probability of the intersection of the two events, A∩B.
Rule 5.6.1 Multiplicative
Let A and B be any two events on S. The probability of the intersection A∩B is
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr B
ð ÞPr AjB
ð
Þ:
The multiplicative law of probability for a sequence of elements
Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩…∩An
ð
Þ
5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr A2jA1
ð
ÞPr A3jA1 ∩A2
ð
Þ…Pr AnjA1 ∩A2 ∩…∩An21
ð
Þ
Thus, for n53; that is, three events, A1, A2, A3, the multiplicative law is written
Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩A3
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr A2jA1
ð
ÞPr A3jA1 ∩B2
ð
Þ
Example 5.6.3 Effects of a Drug
A biochemist administers a particular drug to 40 white mice. From previous experience he
knows that 15% or six of these mice will not be affected by the drug. Three of the 40 mice
wereselectedatrandombythebiochemisttobeusedinanewexperiment.Weareinterested
in the probability that all three have been affected by the drug.
Solution
Let A1, A2, and A3 be the events that the first, second, and third mice have been affected
by the drug. Let nA be the number of mice affected at the beginning of the experiment.
Here, the probability that the first mouse has been affected is
Pr A1
ð
Þ5nA
n 534
40:
The probability that the second mouse has been affected by the drug, given that the
first has been affected, is
Pr A2jA1
ð
Þ5nA21
n21 533
39:
That is, since we know that the first mouse selected has been affected by the drug
there are only 4021539 left to choose from; also, there were originally 4026534 mice
affected by the drug, and one has already been chosen, which leaves us with 3421533
mice from which to choose the second mouse. Similarly, the probability that the third
mouse has been affected by the drug, given that the first two have been affected, is given
by
Pr A3jA1 ∩A2
ð
Þ5nA22
n22 532
38:
Continued
5.6 Conditional Probability
165

Solution—cont’d
Thus, applying the multiplicative law we obtain the probability of interest,
Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩A3
ð
Þ; that is,
Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩A3
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr A2jA1
ð
ÞPr A3jA1 ∩A2
ð
Þ
5 34
40

 33
39

 32
38


5 0:85
ð
Þ 0:8462
ð
Þ 0:8421
ð
Þ50:606
Therefore, there is a 60.6% chance that all three mice selected have been affected by
the drug.
5.6.2 Definition Independent Events
Let A and B be any two events of the sample space S. The event A is said to be inde-
pendent of event B if
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr B
ð Þ
That is, the probability of the intersection of the events A∩B is equal to the product
of the probabilities of A and B.
When we say “two events are independent,” we mean the occurrence or
nonoccurrence of one event has no effect on the probability of the occurrence
of the other. Likewise when we ask for the probability of some event A, given
event B, we insinuate that we have information that B has occurred and now
wish to know the probability that A will occur based on this knowledge. If A
and B are independent, then it makes sense to assume that the probability of
the occurrence of A is not affected by this knowledge.
Note that from the definition of conditional probability, if A and B are
independent events, then we have
Pr AjB
ð
Þ5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
5Pr A
ð ÞPr B
ð Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
5Pr A
ð Þ;
That is, the probability of the occurrence of event A is not affected by the
fact that event B has occurred.
Example 5.6.4 Testing a Specific Drug
Consider the experiment in which two individuals are given a specific drug. Let A and B
represent these individuals. It has been previously observed that the probabilities that
this drug will affect A and B are 1
3 and 1
4, respectively. What is the probability this drug
will affect both A and B?
Solution
Here, we have Pr A
ð Þ51
3 and Pr B
ð Þ51
4. The probability that A is affected by the drug is
not influenced by what happens to B. Thus, the behavior of A is independent of that of B,
and the probability that the drug will affect both of them is
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr B
ð Þ5 1
3
  1
4
 
5 1
12:
166
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

We frequently want to find the conditional probability of certain event, A,
given that a different event, B, has occurred at some prior time. For example,
we might want to know the probability of our favorite football team winning on
a specific Saturday, given that the team has won its games the preceding two
Saturdays. Or, we might be interested in knowing the probability of a student
passing the final examination in mathematics, given that he or she has passed
all previous examinations. Answering questions of this type requires an appli-
cation of the multiplicative law derived by Thomas Bayes, which we shall
study in the next section.
EXERCISES
5.6.1. In the experiment: a single card is drawn form a standard deck of playing cards; calculate the probability of the
following events:
a. The selected card is an ace of diamonds, given that this card is a diamond.
b. The drawn card is a heart when we have been told that this card is a picture card.
5.6.2. In the experiment: two fair dice are tossed and the sum appearing uppermost is observed; what is the probability that
one of the dice is 2 if the sum is 6?
5.6.3. The probability that it will rain in Tampa, T, and Clearwater, C, Florida during any 24-h period was given by
the Florida weather station to be 0.20 and 0.15, respectively. That is, Pr T
ð Þ5:20 and Pr C
ð Þ5:15. It was also given
that the probability that it will rain simultaneously at both cities during a 24-h period is 0.08. Determine the prob-
ability of the following events:
a. It will rain (or is raining) in Tampa, given that it is raining in Clearwater.
b. It will rain in Clearwater, given that it is not raining in Tampa.
c. It will not rain in Tampa, given that it is not raining in Clearwater.
d. It will rain in both Tampa and Clearwater.
5.6.4. Consider the experiment of tossing a fair die. What is the probability of observing an odd number, given that the
number that has appeared is greater than four?
5.6.5. The dean’s advisory committee at a certain university consists of seven members of which two are students. A sub-
committee of two members is to be selected from the advisory committee to study a particular problem. If the two
individuals are selected at random, what is the probability that the students will be selected?
5.6.6. From Problem 5.6.1,
a. What is the probability that the chosen card is an ace of diamonds?
b. What is the probability that the drawn card is a picture heart?
5.6.7. Refer to Problem 5.6.3 and let A1 and A2 denote the events of the occurrence of rain in Tampa and Clearwater,
respectively. Are A1 and A2 independent?
5.6.8. Two individuals, A1 and A2, are shooting at a target. The probabilities that A1 and A2 hit the target are 0.30 and 0.40,
respectively. What is the probability that the target will be hit if A1 and A2 each shoot at the target?
5.6.9. The English majors at a certain university revealed the following information: 10% of them failed mathematics,
20% failed biology, and 5% failed both mathematics and biology. Determine the probability of the following
events:
a. An English major failed mathematics, given that he or she passed biology.
b. The student passed biology, given that he or she passed mathematics.
c. The student passed mathematics and it is known that he or she failed biology.
5.6.10. A secondary education class at a certain college consists of 24 students. Sixteen of them are females and eight are
males. Three students are selected by the instructor to debate a certain issue. What is the probability that all three of
the students are females? What is the meaning of the complement of this event?
5.6.11. A box contains two new and one used portable radios. The radios are numbered 1, 2, and 3, respectively. A second
box contains only one new radio. Consider the following experiment: A radio is chosen from the first box and placed
in the second box. Without being able to make a visual distinction between the two radios in the second box, a radio
was chosen. What is the probability that the radio chosen from the second box is new? Furthermore, answer the same
question if the radios were not numbered.
Exercises
167

5.7
BAYES’ RULE
Consider that in a department store we have two large boxes, each of which con-
tains 50 portable electric hair dryers. We have been told that the first box con-
tains 44 operable and six defective dryers and that the second box contains 46
operable and four defective dryers. We purchased a dryer from this store and we
would like to know the probability that this dryer will be operable. The problem
here is that we have not been told from which box the purchased dryer was
selected. Of equal interest would be the following situation: A physician pur-
chased a certain drug from two different companies, say, A and B. There is a
slight variation in the effectiveness of the two preparations. The physician
administered one of the drugs when treating a particular patient. The patient’s
condition has improved remarkably and we would like to know which of the
two preparations the physician used. That is, assuming that the probability of
the doctor choosing one batch or the other is the same, we wish to know the prob-
ability that the patient was helped by the drug from Company A. Questions of
this type, which are quite common, would be answered using Bayes’ formula.
Suppose, for instance, that we are concerned with the establishment of a
certain committee within the student senate. The approval or disapproval of this
committee is deferred until after the election of the president of the senate.
Assume, that there are two candidates, say X and Y, running for the presidency
and the probabilities that they will be elected are 0.35 and 0.65, respectively. Fur-
thermore, if Candidate X is elected the probability that the committee will be
established is 0.70 and if Candidate Y is elected the probability is only 0.30.
The question of interest is: What is the probability that the committee will be
established?
Let A represent the approval of the committee and let B be the event that
Candidate X was elected. Here, we can write event A as the union of two
mutually exclusive sets:
A5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩B
ð
Þ;
as shown by the Venn diagram in Figure 5.7. Thus, applying Axiom 3 we have
Pr A
ð Þ5 A∩B
ð
Þ∪A∩B
ð
Þ
½

5Pr A∩B
ð
Þ + Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Now, using the conditional definition of probability, we can write the pre-
ceding expression as
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr B
ð ÞPr AjB
ð
Þ + Pr B
ð ÞPr Aj B
ð
Þ:
A « B
A « B
S
B
A
–
FIGURE 5.7
Venn diagram of event A.
168
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

We know that Pr B
ð Þ50:35, which implies that Pr B
ð Þ512Pr B
ð Þ5
120:3550:65, and that Pr AjB
ð
Þ50:70 and Pr Aj B
ð
Þ50:30. Therefore,
substituting these probabilities in our formula, we have
Pr A
ð Þ5 0:35
ð
Þ 0:70
ð
Þ + 0:65
ð
Þ 0:30
ð
Þ
50:245 + 0:19550:44
Hence, the probability that the committee will be established under the
given circumstances is 0.44.
A convenient way of describing the probability of the event A, Pr(A), is by
the use of a tree diagram. The tree diagram for the preceding expression is
shown in Figure 5.8.
The branches of the tree show only those possible outcomes which lead to
event A. The probability for each branch is obtained by multiplying the prob-
abilities of the two stages and, finally, the Pr(A) is given by the sum of the
probabilities of the two branches leading to A. This expression is sometimes
called the rule of elimination and its general form is given below:
Rule 1 Elimination
Let A1, A2,…,An be mutually exclusive events of the sample space S, such that
A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪An5S; and it is given that Pr A1
ð
Þ>0 for i51, 2, …, n, Then for any event
A we have
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ + … + Pr An
ð
ÞPr AjAn
ð
Þ
Note from Figure 5.9 that event A overlaps the mutually exclusive events
Ai, i51, 2, …, n which constitute S and can be written as
A5 A∩A1
ð
Þ∪A∩A2
ð
Þ∪…∪A∩An
ð
Þ;
where the events A∩Ai are mutually exclusive. Thus, applying Axiom 3 and
then the definition of conditional probability, we have the rule of elimination.
The rule of elimination may be visualized using a tree diagram, as shown in
Figure 5.10.
Pr(B)
Pr (A|B)
Pr (A|B)
–
Pr(B)
–
( )
(
)
: Pr
Pr
A
B
A B
+
( )
(
)
: Pr
Pr
A
B
A B
( )
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
Pr
Pr
Pr
Pr
Pr
A
B
A B
B
A B
=
+
FIGURE 5.8
Tree diagram.
A1
A2
A3
A4
An–1
An
S
A5
A
...
...
FIGURE 5.9
Venn diagram of the rule of elimination.
5.7 Bayes’ Rule
169

Example 5.7.1 Cutting Methods
A dress manufacturer uses three different cutting methods in his operation; let A1, A2,
and A3 represent these methods which produce respectively 40%, 35%, and 25% of the
total number of dresses in the factory. The percentages of imperfectly sized dresses cut
by these methods are 5%, 4%, and 3%, respectively. Suppose that a dress produced by
this manufacturer was selected at random; what is the probability that the dress is sized
imperfectly?
Solution
Let A be the event that the dress chosen is imperfect. We are given that Pr A1
ð
Þ50:40,
Pr A2
ð
Þ50:35, and Pr A3
ð
Þ50:25. Also, Pr AjA1
ð
Þ50:05, Pr AjA2
ð
Þ50:04, and
Pr AjA3
ð
Þ50:03. That is, the probability that the dress is imperfect, given that it was
produced using method A1, is 0.05; the probability that the dress is imperfect, given that
it was made using method A2, is 0.04; and so on. Thus, using the rule of elimination we
have
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ + Pr A3
ð
ÞPr AjA3
ð
Þ
5 0:40
ð
Þ 0:05
ð
Þ + 0:35
ð
Þ 0:04
ð
Þ + 0:25
ð
Þ 0:03
ð
Þ50:0415
Hence, there is a 4.15% chance that the chosen dress is imperfect. This result is
shown using the tree diagram in Figure 5.11.
To introduce another important law of probability; namely, Bayes’ formula,
suppose that in the preceding example we want to know the probability that the
imperfect dress that was selected was produced by method A2. That is, if the dress
was selected at random and found to be imperfect, what is the probability that the dress
was produced by method A2? We assume here that each dress produced by the three
methods had an equal chance of being selected. Thus, we must obtain the Pr(A2jA),
Pr (A1)
Pr (A2)
Pr (A|A2)
Pr(A|An–1)
Pr (A|An)
Pr (An–1)
Pr (An)
A: Pr(A1) Pr(A A1)
+
A: Pr(A2) Pr(A A2)
+
+
A: Pr(An−1) Pr(A An−1)
+
A: Pr(An) Pr(A An)
FIGURE 5.10
Tree diagram of the rule of elimination.
0.25
0.35
0.40
0.04
0.05
0.03
A3
A2
A1
(
)(
)
.4
0 0
.0
0 5
+
+
(
)(
)
.25
.0
0
0
3
( )
Pr
.0
0 415
A =
P(A1A) =
(
)(
)
.35
.0
0
04
P(A2A) =
P(A3A) =
FIGURE 5.11
Tree diagram of Example 5.7.1.
170
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Solution—cont’d
the probability that the chosen imperfect dress was produced using method A2. Using
the definition of conditional probability, we have
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5Pr A∩A2
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
:
The numerator, Pr A∩A2
ð
Þ, can be written
Pr A∩A2
ð
Þ5Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ:
We thus obtain the formula
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
:
In the example, we were given that Pr A2
ð
Þ50:35 and Pr AjA2
ð
Þ50:04. Also, we
calculated the probability that the chosen dress was imperfect to be
Pr A
ð Þ50:0415:
Substituting these probabilities in the formula for Pr(A2jA), we have
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5 0:35
ð
Þ 0:04
ð
Þ
0:0415
50:3374
Hence, the probability that the chosen imperfect dress was produced using method
A2 is 0.3374. Similarly, the probabilities that the imperfect dress was made by methods
A1 and A3 are given by
Pr A1jA
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5 0:40
ð
Þ 0:05
ð
Þ
0:0415
ð
Þ
50:4819
and
Pr A3jA
ð
Þ5Pr A3
ð
ÞPr AjA3
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5 0:25
ð
Þ 0:03
ð
Þ
0:0415
ð
Þ
50:1807;
respectively. That is, the probabilities are 48.19% and 18.07% that the imperfect dress
was made using methods A1 and A2, respectively.
These results can also be obtained from the tree diagram shown in
Figure 5.10. The Pr(A2jA) is simply the ratio of the probability of reaching
event A along the branch passing through A2 to the sum of the probabilities
of reaching event A through all three branches of the tree. Similarly, we can
obtain from the tree diagram the probabilities the imperfect dress selected
was made using methods A1 or A3.
The formulas that we used to find the necessary probabilities of the posed
problem are special cases of “Bayes” rule:
Bayes’ rule: Let A1, A2,…,An, be mutually exclusive events, such that
A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪An5S, and let A be any other event of the sample space S. If
Pr A
ð Þ>0, then for every i51, 2,…, n we have
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5
Pr Ai
ð
ÞPr AjAi
ð
Þ
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ + … + Pr An
ð
ÞPr AjAn
ð
Þ
5Pr Ai
ð
ÞPr AjAi
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
It is clear that Pr(A) is the formula we obtained for the rule of elimination
and the numerator was obtained using the definition of conditional probability,
Pr AjAi
ð
Þ5Pr A∩Ai
ð
Þ
Pr Ai
ð
Þ
, i51, 2,…, n
or
Pr AjAi
ð
ÞPr Ai
ð
Þ5Pr A∩Ai
ð
Þ:
We proceed to illustrate Bayes’ rule returning to the problem at the
beginning of this section.
5.7 Bayes’ Rule
171

Example 5.7.2 Operable Hair Dryers
Suppose that in a department store we have two large boxes, each of which contains 50
portable electric hair dryers. It is known that the first box contains 44 operable and six
defective dryers and the second box contains 46 operable and four defective dryers. We
are interested in obtaining the probability that a dryer purchased from this store will be
operable. Also, if it is given that the dryer will be operable, we wish to find the prob-
ability that the dryer was chosen from Box 1. We shall assume that the probability of
making a selection from each of the boxes is the same.
Box 1
Box 2
It is clear that we do not know from which box the purchased dryer was selected. If
we had the information, for example, that the dryer was taken from Box 2, it would be
easy to calculate the desired probability. That is, using the classical definition of prob-
ability, the desired probability would be simply 46
50 in that case.
Solution
Let A1 and A2 be the events of selecting the first and second boxes, respectively; and let
A be the event that an operable dryer was chosen. The first part of the problem can be
solved using the elimination rule; that is, the event of selecting an operable hair dryer, A,
can occur either with A1 (Box 1) or A2 (Box 2); that is
A5 A∩A1
ð
Þ∪A∩A2
ð
Þ:
Since, the events A∩A1 and A∩A2 are mutually exclusive, applying Axiom 3, we
have,
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A∩A1
ð
Þ + Pr A∩A2
ð
Þ:
Using the definition of conditional probability, we can write
Pr A∩A1
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ
and
Pr A∩A2
ð
Þ5Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ:
Thus,
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A
ð Þ5Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
the elimination rule we obtained previously. Since the probability of making a selection
from each of the boxes is the same, we have
Pr A1
ð
Þ5Pr A2
ð
Þ51
2:
172
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Solution—cont’d
Also
Pr AjA1
ð
Þ5n0
n 544
50 and Pr AjA2
ð
Þ5n0
n 546
50:
Hence, using the elimination rule, we obtain
Pr A
ð Þ5 1
2
  44
50


+
1
2
  46
50


522
50 + 23
50545
505 9
10;
the probability that the purchased dryer is operable. For the second question, the prob-
ability that the operable dryer chosen was taken from the first box, Pr(A1jA), is
obtained using Bayes‘ rule. That is,
Pr A1jA
ð
Þ5
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5
1
2
  44
50


9
10
5
22
50
9
10
5 22
50


9
10


522
45:
Therefore, there is a 22
45548:89% chance that the chosen operable hair dryer was
selected from Box 1. Similarly, the probability that the chosen operable dryer was taken
from Box 2 is given by
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
Pr A
ð Þ
5
1
2
  46
50


9
10
5
23
50
9
10
5 23
50

 10
9


523
45:
Note that we are certain that the dryer was selected from one of the two boxes:
That is
Pr A1jA
ð
Þ + Pr A2jA
ð
Þ522
45 + 23
4551;
the sure event.
The tree diagram of the preceding example is shown by Figure 5.12.
The Pr(A1jA) is simply the ratio of the probability of reaching event A along the
branch passing through A1 to the sum of the probabilities of reaching A through the
branches A1 and A2. Similarly, we can obtain the Pr(A2jA).
46
50
—
A2
44
50
—
A1
2–1
2–1
1
44
2
50
⎛
⎞⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠⎝
⎠
+
1
46
2
50
⎛
⎞⎛
⎞
⎜
⎟⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠⎝
⎠
( )
9
Pr
10
A =
P(A1A) =
P(A2A) =
FIGURE 5.12
Tree diagram of Example 5.7.2.
5.7 Bayes’ Rule
173

Example 5.7.3 Testing the Probability
In the testing center of a certain university, the probability that a student completed all
the necessary courses prior to taking a standard examination is 2
3. The probability that a
student will pass the examination having taken all the required courses is 3
4. The prob-
ability that he or she will pass the examination without having completed the required
courses is only 1
4. Suppose that a student successfully completed this standard exami-
nation. What is the probability that the student completed all the required courses prior
to taking the examination?
Solution
Let A1 and A2 represent the events that a student completed and did not complete all the
required courses prior to taking the examination, respectively; and let A be the event that
a student passed the examination. Here we want the Pr(A1jA); that is, using Bayes’
Rule, we have
Pr A1jA
ð
Þ5
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ:
We are given that Pr A1
ð
Þ52
3, Pr A2
ð
Þ512Pr A1
ð
Þ5122
351
3, Pr AjA1
ð
Þ53
4, and
Pr AjA2
ð
Þ51
4. Thus,
Pr AjA2
ð
Þ5
2
3
  3
4
 
2
3
  3
4
 
+
1
3
  1
4
 5
1
2
1
2 + 1
12
5 1
2
  12
7


56
7:
Therefore, the probability is 6
7585:7% that the student who passed the examination
completed all the required courses. Similarly, the probability that the student who
passed the examination did not complete all the required courses is
Pr A2jA
ð
Þ5
Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ
5
1
3
  1
4
 
2
3
  3
4
 
+
1
3
  1
4
 
5
1
12
1
2 + 1
12
5
1
12

 12
7


51
7:
There is only a 1
7514:3% chance that the student who passed the examination did
not complete all the required courses.
EXERCISES
5.7.1. In Example 5.7.1, what is the probability that the selected dress is correctly sized?
5.7.2. A cola bottling plant employs three different methods to inspect their product prior to packaging for distribution.
The first method is used to inspect 45% of the product, and the second and third methods 30% and 25%, respec-
tively. It has been estimated, however, that the first method fails to detect defective bottles 6% of the time, while
the second and third methods fail in the inspection only 3% and 2%, respectively. When a single bottle of this cola
is bought by a customer,
a. What is the probability that the bottle is defective?
174
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

b. What is the probability that the bottle is not defective?
c. Draw tree diagrams to illustrate (a) and (b).
5.7.3. Consider that we have in a truck leaving an electronics factory two large boxes, each of which contains 30 walkie-
talkies. From previous experience it is known that the first box contains 26 walkie-talkies in excellent condition and
four in poor condition. The second box contains 28 walkie-talkies in excellent condition and two in poor condition.
A walkie-talkie was purchased. Assume that the probability of making a selection from each of the boxes is the same.
a. What is the probability that the purchased walkie-talkie is in excellent condition?
b. What is the probability that it is in poor condition?
c. Draw a tree diagram to illustrate the answers to (a) and (b).
5.7.4. Three different treatments are being employed by a large research hospital to cure a certain disease. We shall refer to
these treatments as A1, A2 and A3. Laboratory tests have so far revealed that treatment A1 is effective ten out of
12 times; treatment A2, 9 out of 12 times; treatment A3, 8 out of 12 times. At the present stage of the study no
one treatment is being given preference and each of the three is equally likely to be selected. A patient being treated
by one of these methods asks the physician, “What is the probability that I will be cured”? Draw a tree diagram to
illustrate the solution to the problem.
5.7.5. In Example 5.7.1, what is the probability that the imperfectly sized dress was cut by the first method of operation?
5.7.6. Example 5.7.2, what is the probability that the selected dryer is not operable?
a. What is the probability that the defective dryer was chosen from the first box?
b. Draw a tree diagram to illustrate the solution to the problem.
5.7.7. In Problem 5.7.2,
a. What is the probability that the non-defective bottle was inspected by the first method?
b. What is the probability that the defective bottle was inspected by the second method?
c. Draw a tree diagram to visualize the solution of the problem.
5.7.8. In Problem 5.7.3,
a. What is the probability that a purchased walkie-talkie in excellent condition was chosen from the second box?
b. What is the probability that it was chosen from the first box?
c. Draw a tree diagram illustrating (a) and (b) of the problem.
5.7.9. In Problem 5.7.4,
a. Given that the patient was cured, determine the probability that treatment A1 was used.
b. Given that the patient was cured, determine the probability that treatment A2 was used.
5.8
COMBINATORIAL TECHNIQUES
As we have seen throughout our discussion, the basis for obtaining probabil-
ities of various events defined on the sample space depends primarily on the
number of sample points or observations that constitute S. For example, if we
know that in a given problem, the sample space was made up of n equally
likely observations and nA of them possess characteristic A or are favorable
to event A, then the probability that event A will occur is given by
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n :
Thus, it is important to know various counting techniques in order to be
able to obtain the total number of observations that constitute the sample space.
In this section we shall introduce five basic rules for counting the sample
points of S, Some of these counting techniques have been previously intro-
duced; however, to enhance your understanding of the role they play in prob-
ability, we shall repeat certain ones. The usefulness of each rule will be
illustrated by considering a number of examples.
Recall from Chapter 4 the main rules in counting: Multiplication Principle,
Multiple Selection, Permutations, Combinations, and Partial Ordering.
5.8 Combinatorial Techniques
175

Example 5.8.1 Rolling a Fair Die ×3
Consider the experiment of rolling a fair die three times. How many sample points are
associated with this problem? What is the probability that the same number will appear
in all three rolls?
Solution
Here, N is equivalent to the number of faces on the die and k the number of times we roll
the die. Thus, according to multiple selection rule, the sample space S consists of
Nk5635 6
ð Þ 6
ð Þ 6
ð Þ5216 samplepoints:
Hence, the sample space consists of 216 sample points. Let A be the event that the
same number appears on each of the three rolls. There are six sample points on the
sample space which are favorable to event A; that is,
A5
1, 1, 1
ð
Þ, 2, 2, 2
ð
Þ, 3, 3, 3
ð
Þ, 4, 4, 4
ð
Þ, 5, 5, 5
ð
Þ, 6, 6, 6
ð
Þ
f
g:
Thus,
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5 6
2165 1
36:
Example 5.8.2 Defective Radios
A department store receives a shipment of 50 radios. It is known from previous expe-
rience that 10% of these radios will be defective. Ten radios were sold over a certain
period of time.
1.
What is the probability that all ten radios sold were operable?
2.
What is the probability that half of the radios sold were operable and half defective?
Solution
Here,thetenradiossoldwillconstituteourrandomsample.Weassumethattheradioswere
not tested prior to being taken by the customer. The sample space consists of
n
k
 
5
50
10


5
50!
10! 50240
ð
Þ!
sample points.
For the first part of our problem, let A be the event that all ten radios sold are
operable. There are 5025545 operable radios in the shipment. Thus, the total number
of sample points in S that are favorable to event A is given by
45
10


.
Therefore,
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5
45
10


50
10

 5
45!
10! 45210
ð
Þ!
50!
10! 50210
ð
Þ!
50:311
Thus, there is only a 31.1% chance that all ten radios sold are operable.
For the second part, let B be the event that five of the radios sold are defective and
five are operable. The number of ways of drawing five operable radios out of the 45 is
given by
45
5


; the number of ways of drawing five defective radios out of the five
defective is given by
5
5
 
. The total number of ways of achieving event B is given
by applying the multiplication principle; that is
45
5


5
5
 
:
176
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Solution—cont’d
Thus,
Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n 5
45
5


5
5
 
50
10


:
Note that the size of the sample space remains the same for both parts.
Example 5.8.3 Seven Random Cards
Suppose that seven cards are selected at random from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. We
wish to obtain the probability that two of the cards are aces, one is a nine, one is a ten,
one is a jack, one is a queen, and one is a king.
Solution
The sample space consists of n552, k57
ð
Þ
n
k
 
5
52
7


sample points. Let A be the event that the seven cards drawn consist of two aces, one
nine, one ten, one jack, one queen, and one king. There are four aces in an ordinary deck
of cards and the number of ways of obtaining two aces is
4
2
 
. The number of ways of
obtaining one nine, one ten, one jack, one queen, or one king is
4
1
 
. Thus, the total
number of possible ways of achieving event A; that is, the total number of sample points
in the sample space that are favorable to event A, is given by
4
2
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
:
Therefore
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5
4
2
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
4
1
 
52
7


50:0000459
Hence, there is a 0.00459% chance that we will receive the desired combination of
cards if seven cards are drawn.
Example 5.8.4 Defective Can Openers
A large box contains 30 electric can openers numbered 1 to 30. The can openers are
drawn at random, one by one, and are divided among five customers. The manager
of the store knows that the electric openers numbered 2, 7, 11, 17, and 21 are defective.
1.
What is the probability that each customer will receive one defective can opener?
2.
What is the probability that one customer will receive all five defective can
openers?
5.8 Combinatorial Techniques
177

Solution
The sample space according to Rule 5 for k530 and k156, k256, k356, k456, k556
consists of
k
k1, k2, k3,k4, k5


5
30
6, 6, 6, 6, 6


5
30!
6!6!6!6!6!
sample points.
For the first part of the problem, let A be the event that each customer will receive
one defective can opener. The total number of sample points favorable to event A can be
reasoned as follows: There are five defective can openers which can be distributed to the
five customers in
5
1, 1, 1,1, 1


5
5!
1!1!1!1!1!5120
ways, according to Rule 5, so that each customer will have one such can opener.
The remaining 3025525 can openers can be divided among the five customers in
25
5, 5, 5,5, 5


5
25!
5!5!5!5!5!
ways. Thus, according to Rule 1, there are
5
1, 1, 1,1, 1


25
5, 5, 5,5, 5


sample points that are favorable to event A. Therefore
Pr A
ð Þ5nA
n 5
5
1, 1, 1,1, 1


25
5, 5, 5,5, 5


30
6,6,6,6,6


:
For the second part, let B be the event that all five defective can openers will be
drawn by one customer. It is clear that the size of the sample space remains the same
as in the first part. The total number of sample points that are favorable to event B can be
reasoned as follows: The five defective can openers can be distributed to the five cus-
tomers so that one of them will have all five defective can openers; that is,
5
5
 
51. But,
any one of the five customers can have all five defective openers; that is
5
1
 
55.
The remaining 3025525 can openers can be divided among the five customers in
25
1, 6, 6,6, 6


5
25!
1!6!6!6!6!
ways. Thus, according to Rule 1 we have
5
5
 
5
1
 
25
1, 6, 6,6, 6


sample points that are favorable to event B. Therefore, the probability that a single cus-
tomer will receive all five defective can openers is
Pr B
ð Þ5
5
5
 
5
1
 
25
1, 6, 6,6, 6


30
6, 6, 6,6, 6


178
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

EXERCISES
5.8.1. Consider the experiment of casting four fair dice. How many sample points are associated with this problem?
5.8.2. Consider the experiment of tossing three fair coins. How many sample points are in the sample space?
5.8.3. In Problem 5.8.1, what is the probability that the same number will be observed on all four fair dice?
5.8.4. In Problem 5.8.2.
5.8.5. What is the probability that we observed three heads?
5.8.6. What is the probability of the complement of (a)?
5.8.7. Five basketball players, each a different height, are to be given a physical examination. If the players are called into
the examining room one at a time, what is the probability that they will be called in order of decreasing height?
5.8.8. A debating class consists of ten students of varying ability. If the debating coach is to select six students at random,
what is the chance that exactly four of the best six students would be among those selected?
5.8.9. Consider the experiment of drawing five cards from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. What is the probability that two of
the cards are aces, two kings, and one a queen?
5.8.10. In Example 5.8.4, what is the probability that one customer will receive four defective can openers?
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
5.1. A bag contains eight black balls and four white balls. A ball is drawn at random. What is the probability that it is white?
5.2. In a single throw of two dice, what is the probability of the following events:
a. A total of nine is observed?
b. A total other than nine is observed?
5.3. A philosophy class consists of 10 seniors, 20 juniors, and five sophomores. A student is chosen at random by the
instructor to discuss a particular question. Find the probability of the following events:
a. The chosen student is a senior.
b. He or she is a sophomore.
c. He or she is a graduate student.
d. He or she is a junior.
5.4. Let A1 and A2 be events defined on the sample space S, If the probability of the occurrence of event A1 is 1
2; of event
A2, 1
3; and of event A1 and A2, 1
2; find the following probabilities:
a. Pr A1 ∪A2
ð
Þ
b. Pr A1


c. Pr A2


d. Pr A1 ∪A2


e. Pr A1 ∩A2


f. Pr A1 ∪A2


g. Pr A1 ∪A2


h. Pr A1 ∩A2


i. Pr A1 ∩A2


j. Pr(A1jA2)
k. Pr(A2jA1)
l. Pr A1jA2


m. Pr A1
A2


n. Pr A1
A2


o. Pr A2
A1


5.5. A card is drawn at random from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. Obtain the probability of the following even:
a. An ace or a king is observed.
b. An ace or a diamond card is observed.
5.6. Twenty-five students are in a finite mathematics class. Fifteen of these students are males and ten are females. Eight of
the males and four of the females have also registered for a philosophy course. A student is selected at random from the
class. Obtain the probability of the following events:
a. The chosen student is female or is registered for the philosophy course.
b. The chosen student is female or is not taking the philosophy course.
5.7. An urn contains three red and two white balls. The balls are drawn one at a time without replacement. What is the
probability that the first will be red, the second white, the third red, and so on alternately?
5.8. Suppose that from a deck of cards the three picture diamonds (jack, queen, and king) are removed, and from the
remaining 49 cards we select one card at random. Determine the probability of the following events:
a. The chosen card is a picture card, given that it is a spade.
b. The chosen card is a spade, given that it is a picture card.
5.9. In Problem 5.8, what is the probability that the chosen card is a picture spade?
5.10. A sample poll of 100 voters revealed the following information concerning their opinions on three party candidates,
A1, A2, and A3, who are running for three different offices:
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
179

5.11. Refer to the information below:
10 in favor of both A1 and A2
35 in favor of A1 or A2 but not A3
25 in favor of A2 but not A1 or A3
65 in favor of A2 or A3 but not A1
25 in favor of A3 but not A1 or A2
0 in favor of A1 and A3 but not A2, and 15 uncommitted
Determine the probability of the following events:
a. The voters favor all three candidates; A1 and A2 that is, A1 ∩A2 ∩A3.
b. The voters favor candidates A1 and A3; that is, A1 ∩A2.
c. The voters favor candidates A1 and A3; that is, A1 ∩A3.
d. The voters favor candidates A2 and A3; that is, A2 ∩A3.
5.12. In Problem 5.11, are the events A1, A2, and A3 independent?
5.13. A family owns two automobiles, an American and a foreign model. In any given year the probability that the family
will be involved in an accident with the American model is 0.02 and with the foreign model 0.06. Determine the
probability of the following events:
a. In a given year the family will be involved in automobile accidents with both models.
b. In a given year the family will not be involved in any automobile accidents.
c. In a given year the family will have an accident with one car but not both.
5.14. A lot in a certain warehouse contains 30 electrical generators of which six are known to be defective. On a particular
day, three generators will be used. What is the probability that all three will be operable?
5.15. Consider a situation in which two guns are used to shoot at the same target. It has been observed that the probability
that the first gun will hit the target is 0.6 and. the second 0.72. If one shot is fired from each gun, determine the prob-
ability that both shots will hit the target.
5.16. The defense lawyer in a criminal case intends to ask a group of five individuals to testify on behalf of the defendant.
Three of the witnesses will speak the truth; the lawyer assumes that the other two will lie. If the lawyer selects the
witnesses at random, what is the probability that they will alternate in true and untrue testimony?
5.17. Four cards are dealt at random from an ordinary deck of 52 cards, one at a time. What is the probability that all four
cards are aces?
5.18. A lot contains 16 electric pencil sharpeners of which four are partially defective. Four of the sharpeners are drawn at
random, one after the other. What is the probability that all four pencil sharpeners are in perfect condition?
5.19. On a given day a doctor delivered four babies of whom two were girls and two were boys. What is the probability that
the first was a boy, the second a girl, the third a boy, and the fourth a girl?
5.20. A car rental agency purchases 40% of its tires from Company A1, 35% from Company A2, and 25% from Company A3.
It has been observed that 5% of the tires purchased from Company A1 will be defective, 4% will be defective from
Company A2, and 3% from Company A3. A tire is chosen at random at the garage of the rental agency to put on one of
its cars. What is the probability that the chosen tire will be defective?
5.21. In Problem 5.20, the tire chosen at random was very carefully inspected and found to be defective. Obtain the prob-
ability of the following events:
a. The defective tire was purchased from Company A1,
b. The defective tire was not purchased from Company A2,
c. The defective tire was purchased from Company A3.
5.22. The probability that a student will pass finite mathematics is 0.80, English composition 0.70, and both courses
0.60. What is the probability that the student will pass the mathematics or the English course?
5.23. Three automatic machines are used by an industrial complex to produce a certain sewing machine part. Machine A1
produces 45% of the total, Machine A2, 35% and Machine A3, 20%. It is known from previous experience that 10% of
the parts produced by Machine A1 will not pass inspection, and for Machine A2 and Machine A3, 6% and 2%, respec-
tively. If one part is chosen at random from the combined output, determine the probability that
a. the part will conform to the specifications,
b. the part was produced by Machine A1.
5.24. Three men in turn each draw a card from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. If the cards are not replaced, what is the prob-
ability that the first man will draw the jack of diamonds, the second the queen of hearts, and the third the king of
spades?
5.25. In a certain state 10% of the men and 6% of the women are alcoholics. Furthermore, men comprise 58% of the state’s
population. A person from the state is selected at random and found to be an alcoholic. What is the probability that the
person is a woman?
180
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

5.26. Two urns contain 20 and 30 items, respectively. The first urn contains 15 good items and five defective items. The
second urn contains 25 good items and five defective ones. An item is drawn at random from each um. Obtain the
probability of the following events:
a. One of the items is defective and one is good.
b. Both items are good.
c. One item is good and one is defective and drawn from the second urn.
5.27. The probabilities that two weapon systems, A1 and A2, will hit a given target are 0.70 and 0.80, respectively. If each
fires only one shot at the target,
a. What is the probability that both weapon systems will hit the target?
b. What is the probability that only one of them will hit the target?
c. Given that only one weapon system hit the target, what is the probability that it was A1?
5.28. Three weapon systems are shooting at the same target. Theoretically, each weapon is equally likely to hit the target;
however, in actual practice it has been observed that the precision of the weapon systems is not the same; that is, the
first weapon hits the target 8 out of 10 times, the second hits seven out of ten times, and the third hits only six out of 10
times. If each weapon system fires one shot at the target, determine the probability that the target will be hit.
5.29. In Problem 5.28, if we observe that the target was hit, what is the probability that the shot was fired by the second
weapon system?
5.30. In Problem 5.28, given that the target was hit, which of the three weapon systems is more likely to have fired the shot?
5.31. Suppose we chose two items at random from a box containing ten items of which four were defective. Calculate the
probability of the following events:
a. Both items selected were defective.
b. Both items selected were not defective.
c. At least one item was defective.
5.32. Suppose that three cards are drawn at random from an ordinary deck of 52 cards. Find the probability of the following
events:
a. One card is a diamond and one a heart.
b. Both cards are diamonds.
5.33. Suppose we chose three flashlight batteries at random from a box containing 20 batteries, five of which were dead.
Determine the probability of the following events:
a. All three of the batteries chosen were dead.
b. All three were good.
c. Only one was dead.
5.34. An urn contains ten balls of the same size that are numbered 1 to 10. Three balls are drawn at random without
replacement. What is the probability that the sum of the numbers observed on the balls is even?
5.35. In Problem 5.34, determine the probability that the observed sum on the balls is even if the three balls are drawn one at
a time with replacement.
5.36. A debating committee of five students is to be selected at random by the instructor of a political science class con-
sisting of 14 girls and 16 boys. Determine the probability of the following events:
a. The committee will consist of all boys.
b. The committee will consist of three girls and two boys.
c. The committee will consist of five girls.
5.37. A box in a wholesale jewelry store contains 20 watches numbered 1 to 20. The watches are drawn at random, one by
one, and divided among four customers. Suppose that it is known that watches 4, 8, 12, and 16 are not operable. What
is the probability that each customer will receive one defective watch?
5.38. In Problem 5.100, determine the probability that one customer will receive all four defective watches.
5.39. In Problem 5.100, determine the probability that two of the customers will receive two defective watches each and the
others will receive no defective watches.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
We have discussed four definitions of probability; namely,
1. probability as a measure of belief (Definition 5.2.1),
2. the classical definition of probability (Definition 5.2.2),
3. the relative-frequency definition of probability (Definition 5.2.3), and
4. the axiomatic definition of probability (Definition 5.4.1).
Summary of Important Concepts
181

Definitions:
5.2.1. Personal probability is a judgment about the probability of an event happening in a particular manner is often based
on personal feelings or beliefs rather than on a mathematical analysis of the situation.
5.2.2. The classical definition of the probability of the event A is equal to the ratio of the number of ways in which event A
may occur in a particular situation, denoted by nA, and the total number of possible outcomes in a given situation,
denoted by n. That is, Pr A
ð Þ5number of elements attain attribute A
total number of possible outcomes
5nA
n
5.2.3. Let be the total number of identical trials in a given problem and nB the number of occurrences of attribute or
characteristic B. Here, identical means that each trial in a given situation is performed under identical conditions.
The probability of B happening, Pr(B), or relative frequency is given by Pr B
ð Þ5nB
n , as n becomes very large
5.3.1. An experiment is the method by which an observation or a measurement is obtained.
5.3.2. A possible outcome of an experiment is called a sample point; the actual observations of an experiment constitute a
sample.
5.3.3. A group of individual persons, objects, or items from which samples are taken for statistical measurement constitutes
a population.
5.3.4. An event is a set of sample points.
5.3.5. An event that consists of only one sample point is called a simple or elementary event.
5.3.6. An event that consists of more than one sample point is called a compound event.
5.3.7. A set of all possible outcomes of an experiment is called a sample space. We shall denote the sample space by S.
5.3.8. Two events, A and B, of the sample space S are said to be mutually exclusive if A∩B5∅. That is, events A and B do
not have any elements in common.
5.4.1. The sample space S is the set of all possible outcomes of our experiment. We have given a number of definitions
associated with the sample space. Let A1,A2,…,An be events defined on the sample space S. The probabilities of the
events, denoted by Pr(Ai), i51,2,…,n, are numbers that satisfy the following axioms:
1. 0 ≤Pr A1
ð
Þ
2. Pr S
ð Þ51
3. Pr A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪An
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
Þ + P A2
ð
Þ + … + Pr An
ð
Þ, when A1,A2,…,An are mutually exclusive events, Pr(Ai).
5.6.1. Let A and B be any two events of the sample space S. We define the conditional probability of event A, given that
event B has occurred, denoted by
(
)
Pr A B , by Pr AjB
ð
Þ5 Pr A∩B
ð
Þ
Pr B
ð Þ
where Pr B
ð Þ>0.
5.6.2. Let A and B be any two events of the sample space S. The event A is said to be independent of event B if
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr B
ð Þ. That is, the probability of the intersection of the events A∩B is equal to the product of
the probabilities of A and B,
Properties:
5.5.1. If A is any event of the sample space S, then Pr A
ð Þ512Pr A
ð Þ where A denotes the complement of event A.
5.5.2. If ∅is the impossible event (empty set) of the sample space S, then Pr ∅
ð
Þ50.
5.5.3. If A and B are any two events of the sample space S, then the probability of their union is given by
Pr A∪B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ 2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ.
5.5.4. The additive law of probability can be easily extended to a finite number of events defined on the sample space. For
example, let A, B, and C be any three events defined on the sample space S. The probability of the union of these
events is giver by
Pr A∪B∪C
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð Þ + Pr B
ð Þ + Pr C
ð Þ2Pr A∩B
ð
Þ2Pr A∩C
ð
Þ
2Pr B∩C
ð
Þ + Pr A∩B∩C
ð
Þ5nA
n + nB
n + nC
n 2nA∩B
n
2nA∩C
n
2nB∩C
n
+ nA∩B∩C
n
:
182
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

Rules:
5.6.1. Let
A
and
B
be
any
two
events
on
S.
The
probability
of
the
intersection
A∩B
is
Pr A∩B
ð
Þ5Pr A
ð ÞPr BjA
ð
Þ5Pr B
ð ÞPr AjB
ð
Þ.
The
multiplicative
law
of
probability
for
a
sequence
of
elements Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩…∩An
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr A2jA1
ð
ÞPr A3jA1 ∩A2
ð
Þ …Pr AnjA1 ∩A2 ∩…An + 1
ð
Þ. Thus, for n53; that
is, three events, A1, A2, A3, the multiplicative law is written Pr A1 ∩A2 ∩A3
ð
Þ5Pr A1
ð
ÞPr A2jA1
ð
ÞPr A3jA1 ∩B2
ð
Þ
5.7.1. Let A1,A2,…,An an be mutually exclusive events of the sample space S, such that A1 ∪A2 ∪…∪An5S;
and
it
is
given
that
Pr A1
ð
Þ>0
for
i51,2,…,n,
Then
for
any
event
A
we
have
Pr A
ð Þ5Pr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ + ⋯+ Pr An
ð
ÞPr AjAn
ð
Þ which reflects the elimination of A0.
5.7.2. Bayes’ rule: Let A1, A2, and A3 be mutually exclusive events, such that A1 ∪A2 ∪A35S. Let A be any other event of S.
If Pr Ai
ð
Þ>0, then
Pr AijA
ð
Þ5
Pr Ai
ð
ÞPr AjAi
ð
Þ
Pr A1
ð
ÞPr AjA1
ð
Þ + Pr A2
ð
ÞPr AjA2
ð
Þ + Pr A3
ð
ÞPr AjA3
ð
Þ
REVIEW TEST
1. Which of the following cannot be the probability of an event?
a. 0.0001
b. 1
3
c. 0.25
d. 1.00
e. None of these
2. A box contains five red, two green and three blue marbles. If one ball is selected at random, find the probability that the
marble will be:
a. Green
b. Red or blue
c. Yellow
3. A box contains five red, two green and three blue marbles. If two ball is selected at random (without replacement), find the
probability the marbles will be:
a. Both red.
b. The first is red and the second is green.
c. One is red and the other is green.
4. A fair coin is tossed three times. Find the probability of getting three heads.
5. A fair die is tossed. What is the probability of getting a:
a. Six.
b. Seven.
c. Three or less.
d. Greater than two.
e. An odd number less than 5.
6. Two fair dice are tossed. Find the probability that their dot sum will be:
a. Six.
b. Greater than eight.
c. Three or less.
7. A single card is drawn from a standard deck of 52 cards. Find the probability that the card is:
a. A heart or a king.
b. A club or a jack.
c. A face card.
8. Two cards are drawn from a standard deck of 52 cards without replacement. Find the probability that:
a. Both are fives.
b. The first is an ace and the second is a jack.
Review Test
183

9. The probability of an event is 3
7, what are the odds in favor of the event?
10. If the odds against an event are 7:1, find the probability that the event will occur.
11. If the odds in favor an event are 5:3, find the probability that the event will occur.
12. A box contains seven good fuses and three defective fuses. A single fuse is selected at random. What is the probability
that it is not defective?
13. A box containing 20 pens contains two defective pens. A single pen is selected at random. What is the probability that it
is not defective?
14. A shipment of 50 cars contains 13 used cars. Three cars have been purchased. What is the probability that:
a. The probability that all three cars are used.
b. The probability that all three cars are new.
15. The probability that a student passes French 101 is 0.59 and the probability that a student passes Humanities is 0.73.
Assuming that the events are independent, what is the probability that:
a. A student passes both courses?
b. A student passes at least one course?
16. A survey was taken to determine which sports on the Wii are enjoyed by various age groups. The results are as follows:
Ages
Golf
Bowling
Archery
Ping-pong
Total
13-18
7
13
10
15
35
19-30
10
15
11
16
42
31-45
16
18
14
12
60
Total
33
46
35
43
137
a. What is the probability that a person preferred Wii Golf?
b. What is the probability that a person was in the 31-45 age group?
c. What is the probability that a person surveyed was in the 13-18 age group given they preferred golf?
17. One fair die is rolled followed by the tossing of a fair coin. Find the probability of getting a head and an odd number on
the die.
18. A container holds one dozen eggs of which two are bad. What is the probability of randomly selecting:
a. A rotten egg?
b. Two rotten eggs when selected without replacement?
c. Two rotten eggs when selected with replacement?
19. A draw contains two pairs of black socks, three pairs of white socks and a pair of blue socks. The first sock selected is
white without replacement. What is the probability that the second sock selected at random matches the first?
20. The A, K, Q, J and ten of hearts are shuffled and dealt out one at a time. What is the probability that the cards are dealt in
order: 10, J, Q, K and A?
21. In a group of students, 37% are taking algebra, 43% are taking English and 21% are taking both. A student in this group
is selected at random. Find the probability that the student is taking at least one of these two courses.
22. The probability that a student passes Math or English is 0.89, the probability that a student passes English is 0.63, and the
probability of passing both is 0.57. What is the probability a student passes Math?
Practice problems for the CLAST exam:
23. A box contains three red, five white and two blue marbles. Two marbles are drawn from the box at random without
replacement. What is the probability that neither is red?
a. 7
10× 2
10
b. 7
10× 7
10
c. 7
10×6
9
d. 7
10
24. The odds against Bob winning the election are 8:5. What is the probability that Bob will win the election?
a. 8
5
b. 5
8
c. 5
13
d. 8
13
184
Chapter 5
Basic Probability

REFERENCES
Carnap, R., 1950. Logical Foundations of Probability. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Cramer, H., 1955a. The Elements of Probability Theory. Wiley, New York.
Drake, A.N., 1967. Fundamentals of Applied Probability Theory. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Feller, W., 1968a. 3rd ed. An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, vol. 1. Wiley, New York.
Parzen, E., 1960a. Modern Probability and Its Applications. Wiley, New York.
Tsokos, C.P., 1972b. Probability Distributions: An Introduction to Probability Theory with Applications. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978d. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
Tsokos, C.P., Wooten, R.D., 2011a. The Joy of Statistics Using Real-World Data. Kendall Hunt, Florida.
Wadsworth, G.P., Bryan, J.G., 1960. Introduction to Probability and Random Variables. McGraw-Hill, New York.
References
185

Chapter 6
Binomial Probability
6.1 Introduction to Random Variables
188
6.2 Discrete Random Variables
193
6.3 Expected Value and Variance
198
6.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
208
6.5 Expected Value and Variance for a Binomial RV
219
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
226
Summary of Important Concepts
227
Review Test
229
References
230
−1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
0.5
x
n = 1
Frequency
2.0
−1
0.0
1.5
3.0
1
x
n = 2
Frequency
3
2
−1
0
2
4
1
x
n = 3
Frequency
3
−1
0
3
6
1
x
n = 4
Frequency
5
3
−1
0
4
8
3
1
x
n = 5
Frequency
5
0
0
10
20
2
x
n = 6
Frequency
6
4
0
0
15
30
4
x
n = 7
Frequency
8
0
0
30
60
x
n = 8
Frequency
8
4
0
60
120
4
0
x
n = 9
Frequency
8
0
0
150
x
n = 10
Frequency
8
4
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
0
200
300
100
100
x
n → ∞
Frequency
0 2 4 6 8 1012
0
400
600
800
200
x
Frequency
μ = np,σ2 = np(1 −p)
The discrete probability distribution approaches a continuous probability distribution as the sample
size increases.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
187

The merchant family, Bernoulli, of Basel, Switzerland, has produced scientists in each generation since the end of the sev-
enteenth century. One of the distinguished members of this family was Jakob (also called James or Jacques), who pioneered
work in differential and integral calculus and the field of probability theory. His work on the binomial distribution produced,
among other achievements, Bernoulli’’s law and Bernoulli trials. Jakob’s initial studies were in theology, primarily because
of his father’s insistence, but he refused a church appointment and began lecturing on experimental physics. He became a
mathematics professor at Basel University, and later served as rector there. His earliest papers concerned astronomy (espe-
cially the motions of comets); later papers explored infinite series and their summation (the Bernoulli numbers are named
for him). Both Jakob and his brother, Johann (John, Jean) constantly exchanged correspondence with Leibniz (often with
bitter rivalry), producing many of the fundamentals of calculus and the integration of ordinary differential equations. Jakob
examined many special curves, including the catenaries (the curve of a hanging chain), the isochrones (the curve along
which a body falls with uniform velocity), and the logarithmic spiral (that reproduces itself under various transformations).
This last was such a delight to him that he willed that it be engraved on his tombstone with the inscription, eadem mutata
resurgo (“Although changed, I shall arise the same”).
6.1
INTRODUCTION TO RANDOM VARIABLES
Observations generated by an experiment are classified as quantitative or qual-
itative. To observe measures in quantitative terms involves the assessment of
numerical values. On the other hand, observations that are qualitative do not
involve numerical measurements. For example, the measures of total rainfall
on a given day at an airport, the consumption of coffee at the student union,
and the number of visitors at Disney World during a certain period, among
others, are quantitative observations. Weather descriptions, such as snowy,
sunny, or rainy, or the description of a certain product as good, fair, or poor
are qualitative observations.
We shall be concerned here primarily with quantitative measurements. In
every study, statistics can be used to describe various discrete characteristics of
the population of interest.
There are several real world problems involving a discrete response, such
as how large is the average family in the United States? Such questions lead to
us seeking various probabilities that a specific number will appear, among
other interesting questions.
Our aim in this chapter is to introduce the basic concepts of discrete random
variables and to illustrate the usefulness of the discipline by addressing some of
the questions we mentioned above, among others.
In daily life, we are not interested, for the most part, in the possible out-
comes of a given experiment, but only in a certain number associated with
the experiment. For example, in the experiment of rolling two dice, our
interest may only be in the total odd number of points showing (a quanti-
tative measurement). Or in the experiment of tossing a pair of coins, our
interest may be centered on the number of heads that will be obtained.
To measure the particular outcomes of interest among all possible outcomes
of an experiment we must incorporate the concept of a discrete random
variable.
Discrete

Separate or disconnected from others

Discontinuous

Using only algebra and arithmetic
Domain

A field of action—in Math, the set of
values assigned to the independent
variable.
Range

A space in which one may dwell—in
Math, the set of values taken on by the
dependent variable
Mathematics

The science of numbers, there
generalization and their abstractions.
Math
The universal language of thought,
usually an abbreviated form of the
native language.
Formula

A set form, a general fact—in Math, this
rule is written in groups of symbols with
associated meaning.
188
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Before we proceed to define the meaning of and the role of a random var-
iable in probability and applications, we shall briefly discuss the concept of a
function, which plays a central role in real scientific investigations.
Definition 6.1.1 Function
A function is a relation between two variables, x and y, such that for each value of the
independent variable, usually selected to be x, there is at most one value of
the dependent variable, y. That is, “y is a function of x” when for each value of x in
the domain, there is one value of y in the range. We express this relation by y5f x
ð Þ.
Recall, we think faster than we speak and we speak faster than we write—
therefore, we abbreviate everything. Now let us consider the notation used,
similar to that used for the probability of an event, if we write,
“y is a function of x”
Then we can translate this
Hence, “y is a function of x” is written mathematically as y5f x
ð Þ.
In mathematics and in many of the physical and social sciences we
encounter basic formulas; formulas, like functions, are concise ways of
expressing information symbolically. For example, if r is the radius of a circle,
then the area of the circle is a function of r, A5f rð Þ, and is given by A5πr2.
Thus, if we wish to determine the area of a circle, we must specify its radius.
For each value of r, there is a corresponding value of the area; and the col-
lection of these pairs of numbers is a function; that is, a function is a rule
or relationship between values of r and A. Hence, we can say that the area
of a circle is a function of its radius, or A5f rð Þ.
A random variable is a function (rule) that assigns a number to each pos-
sible outcome of an experiment. In other words, it assigns a number to each
point in the sample space. Some examples of random variables are the
following:
1. The number of heads in three flips of a coin. In 20 flips of a coin.
2. The height of a person chosen for a psychology experiment.
3. The number of traffic accidents in Miami during the month of January.
4. The number of defects in a foreign car.
5. The number of passes completed by a quarterback.
And many others.
Note that all of the preceding experiments yield a numerical measurement that
may vary from sample point to sample point and hence is called a random
variable; that is, we do not know which outcome will appear.
6.1 Introduction to Random Variables
189

We have, then, the following definition:
Definition 6.1.2 Random Variable
A random variable (RV) is a numerically valued function defined over a sample space.
We shall use capital letters, say X or Y, to denote random variables,
and the corresponding lowercase letters, x or y, to denote the possible
values that they may assume. That is, if s is a point (an observation) in
the sample space S and X is a random variable, then X sð Þ 5 x is the
numerical value of the random variable at s. Example 5.1 should further
clarify the meaning.
Example 6.1.1 Two Fair Coins
Consider the experiment of tossing two coins. There are four conceivable outcomes:
H, H
ð
Þ, H, T
ð
Þ, T, H
ð
Þ, and T, T
ð
Þ:
Thus, the sample space consists of four points, or four possible outcomes of this
experiment.
s15 H, H
ð
Þ, s25 H, T
ð
Þ, s35 T, H
ð
Þ, and s45 T, T
ð
Þ:
Suppose that we are interested in the number of heads observed: Let X be a random
variable that can assume the values x1, x2, x3, and x4, where
x1 ¼ number of heads ins1,
x2 ¼ number of heads ins2,
x3 ¼ number of heads ins3, and
x4 ¼ number of heads ins4:
Solution
The random variable X can assume the values x152, x251, x351, and x450. That is,
the numerical value of the random variable X at s denoted by X(s) is as follows:
Observation in S
s1
s2
s3
s4
X(s)
2
1
1
0
Note: Here the sample space consists of all the possible values that the defined
random variable may assume. Random variables are classified as either discrete or
continuous.
190
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Example 6.1.2 Tumor Size in Breast Cancer
Consider the observation of tumor size in breast cancer. There are a variety of possible
outcomes, all of which range from the minimum of 0.5 cm to a maximum observed
value of 4 cm.
Thus, the sample space consists of points in an open interval,
S5 xj0:5≤x≤4
f
g:
Suppose that we are interested in the number of patients with tumor size greater than
1: Let X be a random variable that can assume the values between 0.5 and 4 cm.
Solution
The random variable X can assume the values between x50.5 and x54. Note: Here the
sample space consists of all the possible values that the defined random variable may
assume. This random variable is not discrete as illustrated by the fact that we cannot list
all possible outcomes; thus, this random variable is continuous.
Hence, we proceed to define both discrete random variables and
continuous random variables, which will be the subject of the next chapter.
Definition 6.1.3 Discrete RV
A discrete random variable is one that can assume only a finite, or countably infinite,
number of distinct values. A discrete random variable can be easily identified by exam-
ining the nature of the values it may assume. In most practical problems, discrete
random variables represent a count of sample points possessing a specific characteristic.
Some examples of a discrete random variable are:
1. The number of defective radios in a lot of 20.
2. The number of A’s given in a history course.
3. The number of blondes at a certain California university.
4. The number of tournaments won by a tennis player.
Foreshadowing:
Quantitative variables can be discrete or continuous. For comparison, we
proceed to formally define continuous random variable that will be the
subject of study in this chapter.
Definition 6.1.4 Continuous RV
A continuous random variable is one that can assume any value in some interval or
intervals of real numbers (and the probability that it assumes any specific value is zero).
0.5
1
1.5
Tumor size
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
0
Countably infinite

A set whose members can be arranged in
an infinite sequence:
k1, k2, k3, k4, …
in such a way that every member occurs in
only one position; that is, the set is countable.
Continuum

A coherent whole characterized as a
collection
6.1 Introduction to Random Variables
191

Here, the term continuous random variable implies that the variation takes
place along a continuum. That is, it is a random variable, the set of possible
values of which is an interval on the real axis.
As we mentioned, we will study continuous random variables in Chapter 7
in more detail. However, having discussed the concept of a random variable,
our aim now is to learn how to calculate the probability that a given random
variable will assume a specific value or set of values. This subject will be
studied in the next section.
PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
Function: Is the relation a function?
6.1.1. {(4, 3), (8, 7), (6, 8), (3, 9), (7, 5)}
6.1.2. {(0, 6), (3, 1), (2, 5), (6, 4), (6, 1), (9, 1)}
6.1.3. {(6, 9), (0, 9), (6, 8), (5, 8), (5, 5)}
6.1.4. {(100, 175), (18, 162), (117, 178), (121, 194), (10, 208), (128, 178)}
6.1.5. {(6, 114), (6, 76), (48, 114)}
Discrete versus Continuous
6.1.6. List five examples of a discrete random variable.
6.1.7. Specify which of the following are discrete or continuous random variables:
a. The amount of snow in the state of Maine for the month of January, 2010.
b. The number of incoming calls through Verizon during a 12-h interval.
c. The time required to finish taking an exam.
d. The number of completed passes in a given football game.
6.1.8. Explain the difference between the following random variables:
a. The amount of rain collected in a rain gage at a given site during a rain storm.
b. The total number of drops of rain collected in a rain gage at a given site during a rain storm.
6.1.9. In the experiment of flipping four fair coins, we are interested in the number of heads. Construct a table to show the
possible values that the random variable can assume.
6.1.10. In the experiment of tossing two fair dice, we are interested in the sum of the values showing uppermost. Construct a
table to show the possible values that the random variable can assume.
6.1.11. Suppose we draw cards consecutively from a deck of cars until an ace is obtained. Let X be the number of cards
drawn.
a. Is X a random variable?
b. If so, what type?
c. What are the smallest and largest values X can attain?
Critical Thinking
6.1.12. Give two examples of a function.
6.1.13. List five examples of a random variable.
6.1.14. List five examples of a discrete random variable.
6.1.15. Specify which of the following are discrete or continuous random variables:
a. The amount of snow in the state of Maine for the month of January, 1978.
b. The number of incoming calls at the New York City telephone switchboard during a 12-h interval.
c. The time required to finish recording a certain song.
6.1.16. Explain the difference between the following random variables:
a. The amount of rain collected in a glass at a given site during a rainstorm.
b. The total number of drops of rain collected in a glass at a given site during a rainstorm.
192
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

6.1.17. In the experiment of flipping three fair coins, let us say we are interested in the number of heads. Construct a table
similar to that given in Example 4.1.1 to show the possible values that the random variable can assume.
6.1.18. Two dice are rolled and, since we are playing craps, we are interested in the total number of points showing.
Construct a table showing the possible values that the random variable can assume in this problem.
6.1.19. Suppose we draw cards consecutively from a deck of cards until an ace is obtained. Let X be the number of cards
drawn.
a. Is X a random variable?
b. If so, what type?
c. What are the smallest and largest values X can attain?
6.1.20. Distinguish between a discrete random variable and a discrete probability distribution.
6.1.21. Distinguish between a continuous and discrete random variable.
6.2
DISCRETE RANDOM VARIABLES
As we mentioned in the previous section, a discrete random variable can
easily be identified by examining the values it can assume. For example, an
experiment consists of tossing three fair coins, and our interest is in the number
of heads observed. Let X be the random variable that represents the number of
heads, a discrete random variable that may take on a finite number of values
(four). That is, X 5 0, no head was observed; X 5 1, one head was observed;
and similarly, X 5 2 and X 5 3.
Having a discrete random variable that describes a certain problem, our
next and most important objective is to learn how to obtain the probability that
a random variable will assume one or another of the values. For example in
the preceding problem we might be interested in obtaining the probability that
two heads were observed; that is, P(X52), or the probability that no head was
observed, P(X50). A function (rule) will be used to obtain these probabilities.
Such a function we call a probability distribution for the discrete random var-
iable. A probability distribution is a formula or table that provides the proba-
bility associated with each value that the discrete random variable may assume.
For example, let x1, x2, …, x10 be the values in a certain experiment that the
discrete random variable X can assume. If P(x) is the probability distribution
function for the discrete random variable X, then we can obtain the following
probabilities:
P X5x1
ð
Þ5P x1
ð
Þ
P X5x2
ð
Þ5P x2
ð
Þ
P X5x3
ð
Þ5P x4
ð
Þ
⋮
P X5x10
ð
Þ5P x10
ð
Þ
Note that if x1, x2, …, x10 are all the possible observations that constitute
the sample space, then the sum of all the probabilities should add to one;
that is,
P x1
ð
Þ + P x2
ð
Þ + ⋯+ P x10
ð
Þ51;
the sure event. We formally define such a function (rule) P(x) as follows:
There are ten sided dice for this. The outcome is
a discrete random variable.
Tossing three fair coins.
Toss
Coin
Toss 1
H
T
H
T
T
H
T
H
T
H
T
H
HHH
HHT
HTH
HTT
THH
THT
TTT
TTH
T
Toss 2
Toss 3
H
X  { x | x  0, 1, 2, 3}
6.2 Discrete Random Variables
193

Definition 6.2.1 Probability Distribution
Let X be a discrete random variable. A function (rule) P(x) is called the probability
distribution of the random variable X if it satisfies the following two conditions:
1.
P x
ð Þ≥0, for all x
2.
X
∀x
P x
ð Þ51
This distribution is also referred to as the probability density function and is often
denoted by f(x), f x
ð Þ5P X5x
ð
Þ.
The first condition of the definition simply says that when we evaluate P(x)
with anyofthe values that the discrete random variable can assume, its probability
will be greater than or equal to zero. It will equal zero if we substitute a value that
the randomvariable cannot assume theimpossible event, ∅.The secondcondition
says that if we obtain the probability of every possible value that the random var-
iable can assume, they must sum to one; that is, the sure event, S.
The following examples will further illustrate the meaning of the proba-
bility distribution of a discrete random variable.
Example 6.2.1 Two Fair Coins
Consider the problem we discussed in Example 6.1.1. The sample points along with
their respective probabilities are given in the following table:
Sample point
Random variable
Probability
s15 H, H
ð
Þ
x152
P s1
ð Þ5 1
4
s25 H, T
ð
Þ
x251
P s2
ð Þ5 1
4
s35 T, H
ð
Þ
x351
P s3
ð Þ5 1
4
s45 T, T
ð
Þ
x450
P s4
ð Þ5 1
4
Solution
You recall that x152, x251, x351, and x450 represent the number of possible heads in
the experiment; that is, the values that the random variable X can take on. Thus,
P X50
ð
Þ5P x1
ð
Þ5 1
4,
P X51
ð
Þ5P x2
ð
Þ + P x3
ð
Þ 51
4 + 1
451
2;
and
P X52
ð
Þ5P x4
ð
Þ 5 1
4:
For convenience, we can write this information in the form of a table:
x
0
1
2
or
x
P(x)
P(x)
0.25
0.50
0.25
0
0.25
1
0.50
2
0.25
Toss
coin
Toss 1
H
T
H
T
HH
HT
TT
TH
T
Toss 2
H
The symbol ∀(the upside down capital letter A,
is read “for all”
P(x) is also referred to as the probability
density function (pdf).
The symbol ∅is the empty set or the
impossible event.
P ∅
ð
Þ50
P S
ð Þ51
194
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution—cont’d
Note that the conditions of the definition of a probability distribution are satisfied.
That is,
1.
For all values of x, P x
ð Þ≥0.
2.
SP x
ð Þ50:25 + 0:50 + 0:2551:00:
We can represent the discrete probability distribution of P(x) in graphical form as
shown in Figure 6.1. The spikes represent the probabilities that the random variable can
assume their respective values.
Recall, there are two types of discrete data, qualitative (bar charts) and quantitative
(histograms). This discrete random variable that is quantitative: x50,1,2,… and
therefore, there are boundaries between these distinct observations which we use to con-
struct a histogram shown in Figure 6.1.
Thus, there is 25% chance that we will obtain no heads, 50% chance of obtaining one
head, and 25% chance of obtaining two heads.
Example 6.2.2 Even Number on a Fair Die
Consider the experiment of rolling a single die. We are interested in observing an even
number. Here the random variable X is discrete and can assume the values 2, 4, and 6.
We shall consider the outcomes 2, 4, and 6, exclusively; if a 1, 3, or 5 occurs it will be as
though the experiment did not take place. Thus, the probability distribution of the
random variable X is given in the following table:
x
2
4
6
or
x
1
2
3
4
5
6
P(x)
1/3
1/3
1/3
P(x)
0
1/3
0
1/3
0
1/3
or
x
P(x)
2
1/3
4
1/3
6
1/3
Continued
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1
x
P(x)
2
FIGURE 6.1
Histogram of probability distribution for the experiment
two fair coins are tossed.
If treated as a qualitative variable:
Bar Chart
0
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1
2
x
P(x)
2
4
6
1 3 5
Odds
S
n(S)  6
6.2 Discrete Random Variables
195

Example 6.2.2 Even Number on a Fair Die—cont’d
Note that P x
ð Þ≥0 and
X
∀xP x
ð Þ51. The graph of P(x) is given in Figure 6.2.
Then, there is a 1
3 probability of obtaining an even number in a single roll of a fair
dice.
Example 6.5 Prime Number on a Fair Die
Consider the experiment of rolling a single die and assume that we are interested
in observing a prime number, 2, 3, and 5. Here, we let X be a random variable that
represents the occurrence of a prime number; if a 1, 4, or 6 occurs it will be as though
the experiment did not take place. Obtain the probability distribution of the random
variable X.
Solution
The possible values that the random variable X can assume are 2, 3, and 5, exclusively.
Thus, the probability distribution of the discrete random variable X is
x
2
3
5
P(x)
1/3
1/3
1/3
We should mention that the probability distributions are also referred to in the lit-
erature as discrete probability density functions, probability distribution functions,
and probability mass functions.
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
2
3
x
P(x)
4
5
6
FIGURE 6.2
Histogram of discrete (quantitative) random variable.
If treated as a qualitative variable:
Bar Chart
Histogram
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
2
3
x
4
5
6
P(x)
If treated as a qualitative variable:
Bar Chart
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
2
3
x
4
5
6
P(x)
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1
2
3
x
P(x)
4
5
6
196
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
6.2.1. Consider the experiment of rolling a single die. We are interested in observing an odd number. Indicate how we can
introduce the concept of a random variable and state all the possible values it can assume.
6.2.2. Consider the experiment of tossing a fair coin three times and the number of heads observed. Construct a table to
show the sample points in the sample space and all the possible values that the discrete random variable can assume.
6.2.3. Obtain the probability distribution of the discrete random variable in Problem 6.2.1.
6.2.4. Give a graphical representation of the probability distribution of Problem 6.2.1.
6.2.5. Calculate the probability distribution of the random variable in Problem 6.2.2.
6.2.6. Give a graphical representation of the probability distribution of Problem 6.2.2.
6.2.7. Suppose that a certain family has two children. Let X be the random variable that represents the number of girls in
the family. Find the probability distribution of the random variable X.
6.2.8. Give a graphical representation of the probability distribution of the random variable X in Problem 6.2.7. Also show
that the definition of the discrete probability distribution of the variable X is satisfied.
6.2.9. Consider an experiment of rolling a pair of dice. Let Y be a random variable that represents the number of spots
observed. Find the probability distribution of the random variable Y.
6.2.10. Give a graphical representation of the probability distribution in Problem 6.2.9.
Experimental Probability Distributions: Give the outlined probability distribution in tabular form and answer the
following questions
6.2.11. Last night, Alexis counted the number of instant messages she received. She received 4 from Luis, 3 from Alexis, 11
from Samuel, 5 from Christopher, and 30 from her best (and very chatty) friend Savannah. She turned on her com-
puter. What is the probability that the first instant message she receives is from Savannah?
6.2.12. Morgan has taken 32 math quizzes this year. Of those, she scored above 90% on 4 of them and 80% or above on 15
of them. What is the probability that she will score from 80% to 90% on her next math quiz?
6.2.13. Austin counts the grasshoppers in the garden on Monday. He finds 35 big ones and 12 small ones. On Tuesday he
counts them again. This time he counts a total of 99 grasshoppers. What is a reasonable prediction to make as to how
many of the grasshoppers were large ones when he counted them on Tuesday?
6.2.14. The Ramirez family grew a large crop of sunflowers this year. As they were collecting the seeds and drying them,
naturally they ate some to see how they tasted. In all they opened about 400 seeds. Some of them they could not eat
(about 15) because there was no embryo inside. In two cases they could not eat the seed because there was a worm
inside. Assuming these results are typical for the entire crop, as they eat the seeds throughout the year, what is the
probability that any particular seed chosen at random will be edible? State your answer as a percent rounded to the
nearest 10th of a percent.
6.2.15. Zachary and Aaron go to the mall parking lot on weekends to see if they can find any loose change. People tend to
lose small amounts of money in the parking lot. Over the past year they have kept track of how much money they
have found. They found 19 quarters, three 50-cent pieces, 23 dimes, 31 nickels, and 298 pennies. What is the prob-
ability that the next coin they find will be worth more than 10 cents? State your answer as a percent to the nearest
percent.
Graphical Representations: For the given exercise, give a graphical representation of the probability distribution
6.2.16. Exercise 6.2.11
6.2.17. Exercise 6.2.12
6.2.18. Exercise 6.2.13
6.2.19. Exercise 6.2.14
6.2.20. Exercise 6.2.15
Theoretical Probability Distributions: Give the outlined probability distribution in tabular form and answer the
given question
6.2.21. You are playing the “shell” game. In this game, there is an object (let’s say a ball) hidden under one of five cups and
you have to try and guess which cup it is under. Assuming the game is fair and there are five cups, what is the
probability you will guess correctly on the first try?
Problems
197

6.2.22. If the odds of winning a particular card game are 1:4, approximately how many times can you expect to win if you
play the game 900 times?
6.2.23. Anna is playing with a standard die. On her last roll she got a five. What is the probability she will get a five the
next roll?
6.2.24. What is the probability of choosing a heart from a standard deck of 52 randomly arranged playing cards?
6.2.25. Suppose a family has four children. Let X be the random variable that represents the number of girls in the family.
Find the probability distribution of the random variable X. State any assumptions you have made in solving this
problem.
6.2.26. Rework Problem 6.2.25 assuming the odds of a girl are 1:3.
6.2.27. Consider an experiment of rolling a pair of fair dice. Let Y be a random variable that represents the number of dots
observed uppermost. Find the probability distribution of the random variable Y.
Compound Events
6.2.28. Sarah shows her friend Christina a deck of cards. Assuming the cards in the deck are randomly distributed, what is
the probability that Sarah draws an ace and does not replace it, and then draws another ace?
6.2.29. There are eight black marbles, nine red marbles and eight white marbles in a bag. The first marble selected at
random from the bag is red. The red marble is not put back in the bag. What is the probability of pulling out a
red marble on the next try?
6.2.30. Cameron does not know the answer to two questions on a multiple choice exam. The first question has four choices
and the second question he does not know has seven choices. What is the probability that he will get both
questions wrong?
6.2.31. What is the probability, that on two consecutive rolls of a die, first an odd number, then an even number will
come up?
6.2.32. You have five pennies, seven nickels, and three dimes in a piggy bank. If you turn the bank upside down and shake it
until a coin comes out of the slot, what is the probability that you will get out two pennies in a row?
6.2.33. Emily rolls a die twice. What is the probability she will get a three both times?
6.2.34. You have six pennies, seven nickels, and five dimes in a piggy bank. If you turn the bank upside down and shake it
until a coin comes out of the slot, what is the probability that you will get out two pennies in a row?
Critical Thinking
6.2.35. Distinguish between a frequency distribution and a probability distribution.
6.3
EXPECTED VALUE AND VARIANCE
The expected value or population mean, sometimes called the mathematical
expectation, of a discrete random variable is very important in character-
izing its probability distribution. Originally, the concept of expected value
was introduced with reference to games of chance where, if a player stood
to win an amount k with a probability p, then his expected value or expec-
tation was defined as the product k×p. Let’s look at a specific example.
Example 6.3.1 Games of Chance
A gambler tosses a fair die. If a 2, 4, or 6 appear, the gambler will be paid $2; if a 1 or a 3
turns up, he will lose $2; and if a 5 is showing, he will win $4. Naturally, the gambler
wants to know his “expected” or “average” or “mean” winnings. Here, the payoffs are
–2, 2, and 4 dollars and their respective probabilities are 1/3, 1/2, and 1/6. That is, let A1
be the event that a 1 or a 3 is observed in a single throw of a die. Then
P A1
ð
Þ5n A1
ð
Þ
n S
ð Þ 52
651
3:
S
n(S)=6
1
3
2
4
6
5
A3
A1
A2
198
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Example 6.3.1 Games of Chance—cont’d
Similarly, if we let A2 and A3 be the events that a 2, 4, or 6 is observed and a 5 occurs,
respectively, then
P A2
ð
Þ5n A2
ð
Þ
n S
ð Þ 53
651
2
and
P A3
ð
Þ5n A3
ð
Þ
n S
ð Þ 51
6
where n5n S
ð Þ56 is the total number of sample points in the sample space. The
expected value (or average or mean) is obtained by multiplying each payoff by its
chance of occurrence and adding the results; thus,
Expectation5 22
ð
Þ×P 22
ð
Þ + 2
ð Þ×P 2
ð Þ + 4
ð Þ×P 4
ð Þ
5 22
ð
Þ×P A1
ð
Þ + 2
ð Þ×P A2
ð
Þ + 4
ð Þ×P A3
ð
Þ
522×1
3 + 2×1
2 + 4×1
651:
What this means is that if a player plays this game a large number of times, he can
expect to win one dollar per toss of the die.
When we speak of the expected value of a random variable X, we refer to an
ideal or a theoretical average. However, if a given experiment is repeated
many times, we would expect the average value of a random variable involved
to be near its expected value. Here by average we simply mean the arithmetic
mean, defined as follows:
Definition 6.3.1 Arithmetic Mean
The arithmetic mean, average, or sample mean of a set of n measurements x1,x2,…,
xn is equal to the sum of the measurements divided by n. We denote the average by x,
thus:
x5
X
n
i51
xi
n
Listed data
ð
Þ
x5
X
k
i51
xif i
ð
Þ
n
Frequency data
ð
Þ;
where fi is the associated frequency for the set of distinct measures xi, i51,2,…,n and
X
k
i51
f i5n.
The mean or average is a descriptive measure of the central tendency or
central location of the data or information. We should also mention that we
refer to x as the sample mean. That is, it represents the arithmetic mean of
the random sample of size n.
Data in frequency form is further manipulated and written in terms of the
associated relative frequencies or probabilities as follows:
x5
X
k
i51
xif i
ð
Þ
n
5x1f 1 + x2f 2 + ⋯+ xkf k
n
5x1f 1
n
+ x2f 2
n
+ ⋯+ xkf k
n
5x1p1 + x2p2 + ⋯+ xkpk
5
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ
where pi5P xi
ð Þ. In this form, the measure is called the expected value.
A2 = {2,4,6}
A3 = {5}
The Arithmetic Means is also referred to as
)
The Average
)
Sample Mean
)
Uniformly weighted mean
)
Standard mean
)
Population mean (though unrealistic)
A1 = {1,3}
6.3 Expected Value and Variance
199

When we speak of the expected value of the random variable, in essence
we mean a measure of its central tendency. We shall denote the expected
value of a discrete random variable X by E(X). Thus, we formally have
the definition of expected value below.
Definition 6.3.2 Expected Value
Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). Then the
expected value of X is given by
E X
ð Þ5
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ
where pi5P xi
ð Þ and ∀i is read “for all i.”
The definition simply says that we sum the product of all possible values
that the random variable X can take on, and their respective probabilities. Thus,
in order to calculate the expected value of a random variable, we must know
its probability distribution. For convenience we sometimes denote the
expected value of a random variable by μ; that is, E X
ð Þ5μ. We also refer
to μ as the population mean that is being estimated by the sample mean x.
Now we shall illustrate how the preceding definition is used to obtain
expectations of random variables.
Example 6.3.2 Expected Value
Calculate the expected value of the random variable X, the probability distribution of
which is given that
x
P(x)
0
0.25
1
0.50
2
0.25
Solution
Thus, we have
E X
ð Þ5
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ50×0:25 + 1×0:50 + 2×0:2551:
This can also be expressed in the alternative chart form below:
x
P(x)
0
0.25
1
0.50
2
0.25
It means that in tossing a fair coin twice, we expect to obtain one head. Note: This is
also the most likely outcome.
Example 6.3.3 Expected Value
Obtain the expected value of the discrete random variable X, the probability distribution
of which is given by Example 6.2.2.
200
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution
The values that the random variable X can take on, along with its probability distri-
bution, are
x
P(x)
2
1/3
4
1/3
6
1/3
Hence,
E X
ð Þ5
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ52×1
3 + 4×1
3 + 6×1
354:
Alternatively,
x
P(x)
xP(x)
2
1/3
2/3
4
1/3
4/3
6
1/3
6/3
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ54
Thus, we expect to observe a four on the average when observing the even numbers
on a fair die. Note: Here, four is not the most frequent as they are all equally likely;
however, four is the mean and the median.
Example 6.3.4 Games of Chance
Consider the experiment of a student rolling a fair die. If a prime number occurs, he pays
his girlfriend that number of dollars; however, if a non-prime number is observed, she
pays him that number of dollars. Find the expected value of the random variable that
characterizes this game of chance.
Solution
Let X be the discrete random variable that represents our interest in the outcomes of the
experiment. Here, X assumes the values 2, 3, 5, 1, 4, 6.
Thatis,thenumbers2,3,and5correspondtothefactthataprimenumberappears
andthenegativesignindicatesthatthestudentlosestohisgirlfriendthatmanydollars.Sim-
ilarly, the non-prime numbers 1, 4, and 6 represent a possible outcome in the experiment
and, at the same time, the amount the student receives from his girlfriend. Thus, the prob-
ability distribution of the discrete random variable, X, is given by
x
P(x)
1
1/6
4
1/6
6
1/6
2
1/6
3
1/6
5
1/6
Note that the conditions of a probability distribution are satisfied; that is, P x
ð Þ≥0
for all values of X and
X
∀x
P X
ð Þ51. Therefore, the expected value of the game is
Continued
S
X
n(S)=3
4
2
6
Prime Numbers:
2, 3, 5
Nonprime Numbers:
1, 4, 6
6
Winnings
4
1
E(x)= 0.1667
−2
−3
−5
6.3 Expected Value and Variance
201

Solution—cont’d
E X
ð Þ5
X
∀x
xipi
ð
Þ51×1
6 + 4×1
6 + 6×1
6
522×1
623×1
625×1
651
6;
and the game is favorable to the student. That is, if this game is repeated many times, the
girlfriend tends to lose and is expected to lose approximately 16-cent per game.
Example 6.3.5 Expected Value in Stocks
Weighing the odds when playing the stock market: investors make money when the
price of stocks increase and lose money when the stock decreases in value. The prob-
ability that an investor will make a profit of $500 on a certain stock is 3/4 and the prob-
ability that he or she will take a loss of $250 is 1/4. Determine the expectation of the
investor.
Solution
Here, the investor’s expectation is obtained as follows:
E X
ð Þ5
X
∀x
xipi
ð
Þ5500×3
42250×1
45$312:50;
that is, the investor can expect a $312.50 profit as the amount expected is greater than
the money at risk.
We shall now define the concept of the variance of a discrete RV, which is a
measure of the spread or dispersion of the random variable around its expected value
or mean. However, first we shall define the (true population) variance, σ2, of a discrete
random variable.
Definition 6.3.3 Population Variance
Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). Then the pop-
ulation variance of X is the mean of the square error, in terms of expected values is
given by
σ25Var X
ð Þ5E
X2μ
ð
Þ2
h
i
5
X
∀x
x2μ
ð
Þ2P x
ð Þ5V X
ð Þ
where ∀x is read “for all x.”
Alternatively, in terms of listed data,
σ25
X
N
i51
xi2μ
ð
Þ
N
5
X
N
i51
ε2
i
N
;
where εi5xi2μ is the error term, collectively called the residuals.
Definition 6.3.4 Residuals
Let X be a discrete random variable with population mean μ, the residual errors, col-
lectively called the residuals, are the differences between what is observed and what
is expected: that is,
εi5xi2μ:
The population variance, σ2, tells us how close
to the population mean one can expect the value
of a discrete random variable to be.
202
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Note that the probability distribution relates only to the random variable X.
Also the population variance σ2 is a non-negative quantity, because no matter
what x or μ may be, their difference is squared; that is, x2μ
ð
Þ2 and P(x) must
always be greater than or equal to zero by definition. A large variance implies a
large measure of variation between the values that the random variable
assumes and its expected value (central tendency). Small variance implies that
the values that the random variable can assume are very close to the mean; that
is, there is a very small spread. Another concept commonly used as a measure
of the dispersion of a random variable with respect to its population mean is the
population standard deviation, defined as follows:
Definition 6.3.5 Population Standard Deviation
Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). The square root
of the variance of a discrete random variable is called the standard deviation, denoted
by the lowercase Greek letter sigma
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V x
ð Þ
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
σ2
p
:
In actual practice, we are usually given a set of measurements, say x1,
x2,…,xn, from which we calculate the sample mean x as an estimate of the
theoretical expected value (population mean) μ. In addition, we want to obtain
an estimate of the population variance σ2 in order to measure the spread or var-
iability of the measurements x1,x2,…,xn about the sample mean x. We shall
define an estimate of the theoretical (population) variance σ2 as follows:
Definition 6.3.6 Sample Variance
The sample variance of a set of n measurements: x1,x2,…,xn, denoted by s2, is the
average of the square of the deviations of the measurements about their sample mean;
that is,
s25
X
n
i51
xi2x
ð
Þ2
n21
:
Thus, the positive square root of the sample variance is the sample standard
deviation. Note that the variance is measured in terms of the square of the
original measurements; that is, if the original measurements were in pounds,
the variance would be expressed in square pounds. However, taking the square
root of the variance, yielding the standard deviation, returns the variability
measure of the data to the original units of measurement.
Sometimes in real world problems, we need to transform data by either
adding or subtracting a value possibly to convert measurements into the same
units. For example, weather stations in the United States record temperature in
degrees Fahrenheit, whereas some other countries record temperature in
degrees Celsius; hence to compare these data sets, we will convert them to
the same scale. How does this affect the expected value and variance?
Property 6.3.1 Adding a Constant
Given a data set, x1,x2,…,xn, with an expected value of (population mean), E X
ð Þ5μ,
and variance, V X
ð Þ5σ2. Let y1,y2,…,yn be a manipulation of the original data such that
y5x + a, where a is any constant, then E Y
ð Þ5μ + a and V Y
ð Þ5σ2. Here, we expect a
constant to be itself and not vary.
Population
Sample
Statistics
Parameters
(n)
(N)
The sample variance, s2 estimates the (true)
population variance, σ2.
The standard sample deviation, s, estimates
the (true) standard population deviation, σ.
6.3 Expected Value and Variance
203

Example 6.3.6 Adding a Constant
In a quality control experiment, after weighing 50 widgets to test the variance in their
weights, the technician realizes that the scale was not zeroed out and the weight of the
small felt pad that is on the scale to set the widget on had been included in each measure.
The average weight recorded was 15.2 oz with a variance of 0.15, and the small felt pad
weighted 0.25 oz. Determine the mean weight of the widgets and the effect (if any) on
the variance.
Solution
Let x represent the original recorded observations and y represent the desired weights of
the widgets. Then we have E X
ð Þ515:2 and V X
ð Þ50:15, and we are looking for E(Y)
and V(Y), where y5x20:25. Hence, we have
E Y
ð Þ5E X20:25
ð
Þ5E X
ð Þ + E 20:25
ð
Þ
515:220:25514:95
and
V Y
ð Þ5V X20:25
ð
Þ5V X
ð Þ + V 20:25
ð
Þ
515:2 + 050:15:
Hence, the mean weight of the widgets is 14.95 oz, where 14.95+0.25 (the weight of
the felt pad)¼15.2 oz (the mean weight observed). However, as the bias introduced by
the felt pad is consistent and therefore does not vary. Thus, the variance in the weights of
the widgets is the same variance we see in the original recordings, 0.15 oz.
Property 6.3.2 Multiplying a Constant
Given a data set, x1,x2,…,xn, with an expected value of (population mean), E X
ð Þ5μ,
and variance, V X
ð Þ5σ2. Let y1,y2,…,yn be a manipulation of the original data such that
y5mx, where m is any constant, then E Y
ð Þ5mμ and V Y
ð Þ5m2σ2. Recall, variance is a
measure of error squared.
Example 6.3.7 Multiplying a Constant
Some online map searches can give directions to the nearest hundredth of a mile;
however, this can vary, depending on which search engine you use and the restriction
you place on the travel path (such as shortest distance or shortest time). Moreover, there
is the option to have this information in either miles or kilometers. If the mean distance
we are given is 1405.35 miles with a sample standard deviation of 55.86 miles, determine
the mean distance and standard deviation in kilometers.
Solution
Let X represent the distances given in miles and Y represent the distances in kilometers.
Then we have E X
ð Þ51405:35 and V X
ð Þ555:86253120:842, and we are looking for
E(Y) and V(Y), where y51:609344x. Hence, we have
E Y
ð Þ5E 1:609334X
ð
Þ51:609334E X
ð Þ
52261:672
and
V Y
ð Þ5V 1:609334X
ð
Þ51:6093342V X
ð Þ
52:589956×3120:84258082:843:
Vary
To make a partial change in

To undergo change or show differences
204
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution—cont’d
and thus,
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V Y
ð Þ
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
8082:843
p
589:9046:
Hence, the mean distance is approximately 2261.7 km and the variance in the travel
distances is approximately 89.9 km.
Note: Here we have rounded to one significant digit; however, as these are all esti-
mates, we can keep this accurate to four or five decimal places, but if we are going to do
this, we could just simply select a smaller scale such as meters, as 0.001 of a kilometer is
a meter.
Example 6.3.8 Temperature Scales
There are three temperature scales in use today: Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin. The
Kelvin temperature scale is the base of thermodynamic temperature measurements in
the International System (IS), and has an absolute zero. The Fahrenheit temperature
scale is based on 32 for the freezing point of water and 212 for the boiling point of water.
The Celsius temperature scale also uses the freezing point and boiling point of water,
but uses 0 and 100, respectively. Hence, we can convert between degrees Fahrenheit
and degrees Celsius using the linear equation:
F59
5C + 32:
Given that the mean temperature in the United States is 11 °C with a standard devi-
ation of 9 °C, determine the mean temperature and its standard deviation in degrees
Fahrenheit.
Solution
Given E C
ð Þ511 and V C
ð Þ592581, using the properties for both adding and multi-
plying data by a constant we have:
E F
ð Þ5E 9
5C + 32


59
5E C
ð Þ + 32
59
5×11 + 32551:8
and
V F
ð Þ5V 9
5C + 32


5 9
5
 2
V C
ð Þ + 0
581
25×81 + 262544:
and thus,
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V F
ð Þ
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
262:44
p
516:2:
Hence, the mean temperature in degrees Fahrenheit is approximately 51.8 °F
(11 °C) and the standard deviation is 16.2 °F (9 °C).
Here, “” is read as “equivalent to”
1 mile  1:609334 km
1 mile  8 furlongs
1 furlong  20 chains
1 chain  22 yards
1 mile  1760 yards
1 yard  3 ft
1 ft  12 inches
1 mile  5280 ft
1 km  1000 m
1 m  100 cm
1 cm  10 mm
1 dm  10 cm
where dm is decimeter
1 m  100 cm
amongothers
6.3 Expected Value and Variance
205

PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
Find the expected value and standard deviation in the following raffles:
6.3.1.
Value
Tickets
Grand prize
$4000.00
1
Second place prize
$500.00
20
Third place prize
$10.00
40
Fourth place prize
$5.00
200
Total number of tickets sold
10,000
6.3.2.
Value
Tickets
Grand prize
$2000.00
1
Second place prize
$800.00
20
Third place prize
$40.00
60
Fourth place prize
$30.00
300
Total number of tickets sold
10,000
6.3.3.
Value
Tickets
Grand prize
$3000.00
1
Second place prize
$500.00
10
Third place prize
$90.00
30
Fourth place prize
$40.00
200
Total number of tickets sold
10,000
6.3.4. A woman purchases a ticket for a certain raffle. The probability that she wins the first prize of $1000 is 0.0005 and the
probability she wins the second prize is 0.005. What is the reasonable price for her to pay for the raffle ticket?
6.3.5. The probability that a businessman will make a profit of $400 on a given item during the Christmas holiday is 2/3
and the probability that he will take a loss of $50 is 1/3. Determine the businessman’s expected profit.
6.3.6. The probability of the discrete random variable X is as follows:
x
–2
–1
0
1
2
P(x)
1/10
1/5
1/10
2/5
1/5
a. Calculate the expected value of the random variable X.
b. Obtain the variance of the random variable X.
c. Determine the standard deviation of the discrete random variable X.
6.3.7. The probability of the discrete random variable X is as follows:
x
4
8
12
16
20
P(x)
1/8
1/6
3/8
1/4
1/12
a. Determine the expected value of the random variable X.
b. Obtain the variance of the random variable X.
c. Calculate the standard deviation of the discrete random variable X.
206
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

6.3.8. A student rolls a fair die once. If an odd number is observed, he pays his roommate that number of
dollars. However, if an even number is observed, his roommate pays him three dollars.
a. Determine the probability distribution of the discrete random variable.
b. Obtain the expected value of the random variable X.
c. Interpret the meaning of the expectation of the discrete random variable.
d. Calculate the variance of the random variable X.
e. Find the standard deviation of the discrete random variable X.
Effects of adding and multiplying the data: Given E x
ð Þ5μ and V x
ð Þ5σ2, let y5f x
ð Þ. Find E(y) and V(y).
6.3.9. Given E x
ð Þ55 and V x
ð Þ53, let y5x22.
6.3.10. Given E x
ð Þ57 and V x
ð Þ55, let y52x.
6.3.11. Given E x
ð Þ52 and V x
ð Þ52, let y55x23.
6.3.12. Given E x
ð Þ52 and V x
ð Þ52, let y5x22
2 .
6.3.13. Given E x
ð Þ524 and V x
ð Þ55, let y524x + 1.
Critical Thinking
6.3.14. The probability that a businessman will make a profit of $400 on a given item during the Christmas
holidays is 2/3 and the probability that he might take a loss of $50 is 1/3. Determine the businessman’s expected
profit.
6.3.15. A woman purchases a ticket for a certain raffle. The probability that she can win the first prize of $1000
is 0.0005 and the probability that she can win the second prize of $500 is 0.005. What is a reasonable price for
her to pay for the ticket?
6.3.16. The probability distribution of the discrete random variable X is as follows:
x
–2
–1
0
1
2
P(x)
1/10
1/5
1/10
2/5
1/5
a. Calculate the expected value of the random variable X and discuss its meaning.
b. Obtain the variance of the random variable X and explain its usefulness.
c. Determine the standard deviation of the discrete random variable X.
6.3.17. The probability distribution of the discrete random variable X is given below:
x
4
8
12
16
20
P(x)
1/8
1/6
3/8
1/4
1/12
a. Determine the expected value of the random variable X and explain it usefulness.
b. Obtain the variance of the discrete random variable X and discuss what information it conveys to you.
c. Calculate the standard deviation of the random variable X. How can we improve it?
6.3.18. A student rolls a fair die once. If an even number is observed, he pays his roommate that number of dollars.
However, if an odd number is observed, his friend pays him that number of dollars.
a. Determine the probability distribution of the random variable that characterizes this situation and show that it
satisfies the two basic properties.
b. Obtain the expected value of the discrete random variable that characterizes the behavior of the random variable.
c. Interpret the meaning of the expectation obtained in part (b).
d. Calculate the variance of the random variable that characterizes the present situation.
e. Find the standard deviation of the random variable.
Problems
207

6.4
THE BINOMIAL PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION
We encounter many important real world problems that can be characterized
by a discrete random variable, the probability distribution of which was
developed by Jakob Bernoulli, 1654-1705.
We shall illustrate the importance and usefulness of Bernoulli/binomial prob-
ability distribution by stating several actual problems in games of chance,
sports, education, biology, and business, as well as in other areas.
The discrete probability distribution that we use to answer these questions,
among others, is the binomial or Bernoulli probability distribution. Before
we formally discuss this probability distribution, we shall list the properties
that constitute its applicability.
The applicability of the binomial probability distribution in any real
world problem must follow the following properties:
Property 6.4.1 Binomial Experiment
In a binomial experiment, the follow must hold true:
a)
It consists of n identical trials.
b)
Each trial results in one of two outcomes; for example, success or failure, life or
death, acceptance or rejection, etc.
c)
The probability of a success in each trial is equal to p and remains the same for each
of the n trials. The probability of a failure is q512p.
d)
The trials are independent.
The discrete random variable that comes into play in such a situation is the
number of successes that one observes in a specified number of trials. That is,
we would like to obtain the probability that in n trials we will encounter exactly
k k≤n
ð
Þ successes, at least k successes, or at most k successes. The proba-
bility distribution that we use to answer these types of question concerning the
behavior of this variable is the binomial or Bernoulli probability distri-
bution—the subject of study in this section.
In order to enhance our understanding of the derivation of the binomial
probability distribution, we shall first review the binomial theorem that
you have studied in elementary algebra.
A binomial is an algebraic expression that consists of two terms: for
example, a + b
ð
Þ, 3x22y
ð
Þ, and
1
2 x + 2
3y


, and so on. The binomial theorem
gives the expansion of the binomial expression a + b
ð
Þn, where n is any positive
integer. For example, it is easy to verify that for n52, 3, 4, and 5 we have
a + b
ð
Þ25a2 + 2ab + b2
a + b
ð
Þ35a3 + 3a2b + 3ab2 + b3
a + b
ð
Þ45a4 + 4a3b + 6a2b2 + 4ab3 + b4
a + b
ð
Þ55a5 + 5a4b + 10a3b2 + 10a2b3 + 5ab4 + b5
Note that in each case the expansion consists of n + 1 terms and the
exponent of a decreases by one while the exponent of b commences with zero
and increases to n.
The coefficient of the first and last terms is one, while the coefficient of the
second term corresponds to the exponent of a in the first term. The coefficient
of the third term is the product of the coefficient of the second term and the
exponent of a in the second term divided by two (the number of terms pre-
ceding it), and so on. In general, the next coefficient is the previous coefficient
times the power of the first term divided by the second power plus one. This
pattern suggests that we can write
The Binomial probability distribution is also
known as the Bernoulli probability
distribution.
Probabilities of Inequalities
The probability of…

At most k success is P x≤k
ð
Þ

Exactly k success is P x5k
ð
Þ

At least k success is P x≥k
ð
Þ
Note: in discrete probability distributions,
P x<k
ð
Þ5P x≤k + 1
ð
Þ
Pascal’s Triangle is a well-known set of
numbers, written in the shape of a triangle, which
represent the primary coefficients in a binomial
expansion
1
1 1
1 2 1
1 3 3 1
1 4 6 4 1
⋮
Where each consecutive row is formed by
partial sums of the previous row
row 1 to row 2
0 1 0
0+1¼1 1+0¼1
row 2 to row 3
0 1 1 0
0+1¼1 1+1¼2 1+0¼1
etc.
Hence, the fifth row is
1 5 10 10 5 1
208
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

a + b
ð
Þn5
X
n
k50
n
k
 
an2kbk
5
n
0
 
anb0 +
n
1
 
an21b1 +
n
2
 
an22b2 +
⋯+
n
n21


a1bn21 +
n
n
 
a0bn;
where
n
k
 
the number of ways to combine k out of n objects.
The proof of the theorem is by mathematical induction. The binomial
theorem can also be expressed in terms of combinations is beyond the scope
of this course. However, we will illustrate this point with several examples.
Example 6.4.1 Binomial Expansion
Expand a + b
ð
Þ6.
Solution
a + b
ð
Þ65
n
0
 
a6b0 +
6
1
 
a5b1 +
6
2
 
a4b2 +
6
3
 
a3b3 +
6
4
 
a2b4
+
6
5
 
a1b5 +
6
6
 
a0b6
5a6 + 6a5b + 15a4b2 + 20a3b3 + 15a2b4 + 6ab5 + b6:
If the sign in the binomial expression is negative, the expansion begins with a plus
and then alternates its sign.
We shall now proceed to develop the binomial probability distribution. Consider
an experiment that consists of a single trial n51
ð
Þ, the outcome of which is a success, S,
or a failure, F, with probabilities p and q512p, respectively. Let the value x51 be
associated with sample point S (success) and x50 with F (failure). Thus, the resulting
probability distribution of the discrete random variable X, which may assume the values
0 or 1, is as follows:
x
0
1
P(x)
q
p
That is, the probabilities of a success and of a failure are given by
P X51
½
5p
and
P X50
½
5q512p:
Note that the two conditions of properties of a probability distribution have been
met:
X
∀x
P x
ð Þ5
X
1
x50
P x
ð Þ5p + q5p + 12p
ð
Þ51
and since 0≤p≤1, we have 0≤q≤1; that is,
P x
ð Þ≥0;
for x51 or 0.
⇒A histogram is representation of a frequency distribution using rectangles whose
width represents the class width (class interval) and whose heights are proportional to
relative frequencies. Hence, in order to make the transition from the discrete binomial
probability distribution to the normal probability distribution and correction for conti-
nuity in Chapter 7, we will illustrate this discrete RV x using a histogram with bound-
aries 0.5 to the left of x and 0.5 to the right of x.
Continued
0
Success
p
q
Failure
1
2
3
4
5
6
All a’s
aaaaaa
All but one a:
aaaaab
aaaaba
aaabaa
aabaaa
abaaaa
baaaaa
All but two a:
aaaabb
aaabab
aabaab
abaaab
baaaab
aaabba
aababa
abaaba
baaaba
aabbaa
ababaa
baabaa
abbaaa
babaaa
All but three a’s:
bbaaaa
⋮
Binomial Probability
P Success
ð
Þ5p
P Failure
ð
Þ5q
where q512p
Bar chart:
success/failure
Here, we have used an arbitrary probability;
however, if we know the probability of success,
we can compute these probabilities exactly.
For example, assume that there is a 50-50
chance of success. That is, in two independent
trials, we expect one success and one failure.
However, there are four equally likely
possibilities:
6.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
209

Solution—cont’d
Now consider an experiment that consists of two trials n52
ð
Þ. The outcome of which
is a success, S, or a failure, F, with probabilities p and q512p, respectively.
Here, the possible sample points or outcomes are SS, SF, FS and FF. That is, SS rep-
resentsasuccessonthefirstandasuccessonthesecondtrial,andsoon.Thus,sincethetrials
are independent, applying the multiplicative law of probability we have
P SS
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP S
ð Þ5p×p5p2
P SF
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP F
ð Þ5p×q5pq
P FS
ð
Þ5P F
ð ÞP S
ð Þ5q×p5qp
P FF
ð
Þ5P F
ð ÞP F
ð Þ5q×q5q2:
The random variable X, here representing the number of successes, can assume the
values 0, 1, 2 with probabilities p2, 2pq, and q2, respectively. Thus, the probability dis-
tribution is given by
x
0
1
2
P(x)
p2
2pq
q2
That is, the probability of one success in two trials is
P X51
½
5P SF∪FS
ð
Þ5P SF
ð
Þ + P FS
ð
Þ
5pq + qp5pq + pq52pq:
Note also that the properties of a probability distribution are satisfied:
X
∀x
P x
ð Þ5
X
2
x50
P x
ð Þ5q2 + 2pq + p2
5 12p
ð
Þ2 + 2p 12p
ð
Þ + p2
5 122p + p2


+ 2p22p2 + p2
51;
and since 0≤p≤1, we have 0≤q≤1; that is,
P x
ð Þ≥0;
for x50 or 1 or 2.
We shall relate the preceding probability distribution to the binomial theorem.
Expand the binomial expression
p + q
ð
Þ25
2
0
 
p0q2 +
2
1
 
p1q1 +
2
2
 
p2q0
5q2 + 2pq + p2:
The coefficient of q2 is
2
0
 
represents the number of ways in which we can obtain
0 successes in 2 trials, and of course it is
2
0
 
5
2!
0! 220
ð
Þ!51 way; that is, FF failures in
the first and second trials. The probability of this occurring is q×q5q2. Similarly, the
coefficient of pq is
2
1
 
, represents the number of ways we can obtain 1 success in 2
trials,
2
1
 
5
2!
1! 221
ð
Þ!52 ways, SF and FS. The probability of this happening is 2pq.
Finally, the coefficient of p2 is
2
2
 
represents the number of ways in which we can
obtain 2 successes in 2 trials, and of course it is
2
2
 
5
2!
2! 222
ð
Þ!51 way; that is, the prob-
ability of SS, success in the first and second trials, is p2.
Similarly, if we consider an experiment with n53
ð
Þ trials satisfying the conditions
of a probability distribution, we have the following sample points in the sample space
along with their probabilities:
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
1
x
P(x)
2
3
−1
Success, Success
P SS
ð
Þ50:5×0:550:25
Success, Failure
P SF
ð
Þ50:5×0:550:25
Failure, Success
P FS
ð
Þ50:5×0:550:25
Failure, Failure
P FF
ð
Þ50:5×0:550:25
The combination of one success and one
failure: SF or FS is most probable occurrence:
P SF∪FS
ð
Þ 5P SF
ð
Þ + P FS
ð
Þ
50:25 + 0:2550:5
210
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution—cont’d
P SSS
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP S
ð ÞP S
ð Þ5p×p×p5p3
P SSF
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP S
ð ÞP F
ð Þ5p×p×q5p2q
P SFS
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP F
ð ÞP S
ð Þ5p×q×p5p2q
P FSS
ð
Þ5P F
ð ÞP S
ð ÞP S
ð Þ5q×p×p5p2q
P SFF
ð
Þ5P S
ð ÞP F
ð ÞP F
ð Þ5p×q×q5pq2
P FSF
ð
Þ5P F
ð ÞP S
ð ÞP F
ð Þ5q×p×q5pq2
P FFS
ð
Þ 5 P F
ð ÞP F
ð ÞP S
ð Þ 5q×q×p5pq2
P FFF
ð
Þ 5 P F
ð ÞP F
ð ÞP F
ð Þ 5q×q×q5q3
Thus, the discrete random variable X assumes the values 0, 1, 2, and 3 and its prob-
ability distribution is
x
0
1
2
3
P(x)
q3
3pq2
3p2q
p3
It can easily be shown that the conditions of a probability distribution are satisfied:
That is,
X
∀x
P x
ð Þ5
X
3
x50
P x
ð Þ
5q3 + 3p2q + 3pq2 + q3
5 q + p
ð
Þ3
5 12p
ð
Þ + p
ð
Þ351351;
and since 0≤p≤1, we have 0≤q≤1; that is,
P x
ð Þ≥0;
for x50 or 1 or 2 or 3.
Again, we can relate this probability distribution to the binomial theorem. That is,
p + q
ð
Þ35
3
0
 !
p0q3 +
3
1
 !
p1q2 +
3
2
 !
p2q1 +
3
3
 !
p3q0
5q3 + 3p2q + 3pq2 + p3:
The coefficient of q3 is
3
0
 
represents the number of ways in which we can obtain
0 successes in 3 trials, and of course it is
3
0
 
5
3!
0! 320
ð
Þ!51 way; that is, FFF. The prob-
ability of this happening is q×q×q5q3.
Thus, we have established a pattern in these experiments. Along with their proba-
bility distributions, they can be expressed in terms of the binomial theorem as follows:
n51, P x
ð Þ5
1
x
 
pxq12x x50,1
n52, P x
ð Þ5
2
x
 
pxq22x x50,1,2
n53, P x
ð Þ5
3
x
 
pxq32x x50,1,2,3:
⋮
The general case can therefore be written as
P x
ð Þ5
n
x
 
pxqn2x, x50,1,2,…,n;
where the values of x represent the possible number of successes in n trials, p and
q5 12p
ð
Þ being the probability of a success or a failure, respectively, at each trial.
Histograms for the binomial(n,p) with
Varying n, fixed p
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
x
P(x)
6
8
4
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1
2
x
P(x)
3
4
−1
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1
2
x
P(x)
3
5
4
−1
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
1
2
x
P(x)
3
6
5
4
−1
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
2
x
P(x)
6
4
6.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
211

We shall now formally state the binomial probability distribution.
Definition 6.4.1 Binomial Probability Distribution
A discrete random variable X is said to have a binomial or Bernoulli probability dis-
tribution if its probability distribution is given by the following function:
P xjn,p
ð
Þ5
n
x
 
pxqn2x;
for x50,1,2,…,n, where 0<p<1, q512p and the vertical bar “j” is read “such that.”
In the preceding discussion, we developed a pattern leading to the binomial
probability distribution, also known as the Bernoulli probability distribution.
We shall now give a summary of the assumptions that underlie the probability
distribution and a shorter logic that leads to its formulation.
Consider an experiment consisting of n independent trials; the outcome of
each trial is either a success or a failure with probabilities p and q5 12p
ð
Þ,
respectively. Let 0 denote a failure and 1 denote a success. If the random var-
iable X denotes the number of successes among the n independent trials, the
value that A: assumes will equal the number of 1’s appearing. For example, in a
sequence of n trials such as 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0 (here n510), we have a
failure on the first trial, a success on the second and third trials, a failure on the
fourth trial, and so on.
In such a sequence, the possible values that X can assume are 0,1,2,…,n.
In order to obtain the probability that there are X5r successes, we proceed as
follows: The r 1’s and n2r
ð
Þ 0’s can occur in any one of
n
r
 
¼
n!
r! nr
ð
Þ!
distinct orderings of the n trials. The probability of each such ordering is equal
to the product of r p’s and n2r
ð
Þ q’s because all trials are independent.
Adding these probabilities, we obtain the binomial probability distri-
bution: The probability of r successes is given by
P X5r
½
5
n
r
 
prqn2r;
for r50,1,2,…,n where 0<p<1 and q512p.
It is easy to see that P(x) is a probability distribution, it satisfies the basic
two properties.
X
∀x
P x
ð Þ5
X
n
x50
P x
ð Þ5qn + npn21q + ⋯+ pn
5 q + p
ð
Þn
5 12p
ð
Þ + p
ð
Þn
51n51;
where 0≤p≤1. Moreover, we have,
P x
ð Þ≥0;
for x50, 1, 2, 3, …, n.
In actual situations in which the binomial probability distribution is appli-
cable, the number of independent trials, n, and the probability of success p
must be specified. However, we shall see in later chapters that the probability
of “success,” p, is estimated from a given set of data.
Common Binomial Calculations
There are usually three types of questions which are likely to be asked with
respect to a random variable X that characterizes a worldwide phenomenon.
These are as follows:
Note: p51 is the sure event and p50 is the
impossible event, therefore, the binomial
probability distribution restricts p to be
greater than 0, and less than 1.
Logic
The study of reasoning

The science which deals with the criteria
necessary for validity of inference
Histograms for the binomial(n,p) with
Fixed n, varying p
0
2
0.00
0.10
0.20
4
6
x
P(x)
8
10
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
2
4
x
P(x)
6
10
8
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
x
P(x)
10
8
6
4
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
x
P(x)
10
6
8
4
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
x
P(x)
6
10
8
4
212
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

1. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will equal a
point r exactly? That is,
P X5r
½
5P rð Þ
2. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will assume
values up to the point a (at most r)? That is,
P X≤r
½
5
X
∀x≤r
P x
ð Þ5
X
r
i50
P x
ð Þ:
3. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will assume
values greater than or equal to the point a (at least r)? That is,
P X≥r
½
5
X
∀x≥r
P x
ð Þ5
X
r
i50
P x
ð Þ:
The following examples will illustrate the meaning and usefulness of the
binomial probability distribution in all real world questions.
Example 6.4.2 Breast Cancer
Given that 28% of breast cancer patients have tumors of size greater than 1 cm, what is
the probability that in a sample of 100 breast cancer patients, exactly 25 have a tumor
size greater than 1 cm.
Note that in this problem that the four properties of the binomial probability distri-
bution are satisfied.
Solution
Given that the probability of a tumor size greater than 1 cm is 28%, we have p50:28, in
a sample of 100 patients means n5100 and therefore, we have
P 25
ð
Þ5
100
25


0:2825 120:28
ð
Þ7550:0731:
Therefore, given that 28% of breast cancer tumors have a size greater than 1 cm, in a
sample of 100 patients; there is a 7.31% chance that exactly 25 patients have a tumor of
size greater than 1 cm.
Example 6.4.3 Brain Cancer
Given that 40% of brain cancer patients are female, what is the probability in a sample of
10 brain cancer patients, that exactly five are female.
Solution
Here you can reason that the four properties of the binomial probability distribution are
satisfied. Thus, given that the probability of being female is 40%, we have p50:40, in a
sample of 10 patients, this means n510 and hence
P 5
ð Þ5
10
5


0:405 120:40
ð
Þ550:2007:
Therefore, we can conclude that there is a 20.07% chance that exactly five of the
brain cancer patients are female in a random sample of 10 patients.
Histogram
0
0.00
0.10
P(x)
0.20
2
4
x
6
8
10
0
0
5
10
15
1
2
Tumor Size
Frequency
3
4
Histogram of data set: Breast Cancer
(tumor size)
6.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
213

Example 6.4.4 Ten Fair Coins
Consider the experiment of tossing a fair coin 10 times. We shall consider heads a
success and tails a failure. What is the probability that:
(a)
We will observe exactly seven successes?
(b)
We will observe at most seven successes?
(c)
We will observe at least seven successes?
Solution
Clearly, the probability of a head (a success) is one-half, p51
2


, n510 and the assump-
tions that underlie the binomial probability distribution are satisfied.
The first part of the problem, the probability of exactly seven successes, is given by
P X57
½
5P 7
ð Þ5
10
7

 1
2
 7
121
2

3
5
10
7

 1
2
 7 1
2
 3
5
10!
7! 1027
ð
Þ!
1
2
 10
5 15
128 ≈0:1172:
Thus, the probability that we will observe exactly 7 heads in 10 tosses of a fair coin is
0.1172.
Part (b), the probability of observing at most 7 heads in 10 trials, is given by
P X≤7
½
5
X
7
x50
P x
ð Þ5
X
7
x50
10
x

 1
2
 x
121
2

n2x
5
10
0

 1
2
 0 1
2
 10
+
10
1

 1
2
 1 1
2
 9
+ ⋯+
10
7

 1
2
 7 1
2
 3
5121
128 ≈0:9453:
Hence, there is a 94.53% chance that in 10 flips of a fair coin we will observe at most
seven successes (heads).
Part (c), the probability of observing at least 7 heads in 10 trials, is
P X≥7
½
5
X
10
x57
P x
ð Þ5
X
10
x57
10
x

 1
2
 x
121
2

102x
5
10
7

 1
2
 7 1
2
 3
+
10
8

 1
2
 8 1
2
 2
+ ⋯+
10
10

 1
2
 10 1
2
 0
5 176
1024 ≈0:1719:
Therefore, there is a 17.19% chance that we will observe at least seven successes in
10 flips of a fair coin.
Example 6.4.5 Completions in Football
A quarterback on a football team has a pass completion average of 0.62. If, in a given
game, he attempts 16 passes, what is the probability that he will complete (a) exactly 12
passes and (b) more than half of his passes?
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
4
x
P(x)
6
8
10
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
4
6
x
P(x)
8
10
0
0.00
0.10
P(x)
0.20
2
4
6
x
8
10
P X512
½
≈0:1224
Complete exactly twelve passes
X∼Binomial 16, 0:62
ð
Þ
214
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution
The assumptions that underlie the binomial probability distribution are satisfied; that is,
the experiment consists of 16 identical trials and each trial (pass) results in a completion
(success) or an incomplete pass (failure). The probability of the pass being completed on
each try is equal to 0.62, and it remains the same for each of the 16 attempts. The prob-
ability of a failure is 12p5120:6250:38, and the trials (pass attempts) are
independent.
For Part (a), the probability that the quarterback will complete exactly 12 passes in
16 attempts is
P X512
½
5P 12
ð
Þ5
16
12


0:62
ð
Þ12 120:62
ð
Þ16212
5
16!
12! 16212
ð
Þ! 0:62
ð
Þ12 0:38
ð
Þ4
50:1224
Thus, there is only a 12.24% chance that he will complete 12 passes in 16 tries.
For Part (b), the probability that he will complete more than half of his passes; that is,
that the random variable X assumes values greater than eight, is
P X>8
½
5P X≥9
½
5
X
16
x59
16
x


0:62
ð
Þx 0:38
ð
Þ162x
5
16
9


0:62
ð
Þ9 0:38
ð
Þ1629 +
16
10


0:62
ð
Þ10 0:38
ð
Þ16210 + ⋯+
16
16


0:62
ð
Þ12 0:38
ð
Þ16216
50:7701:
Therefore, the probability that the quarterback will complete more than half of his
passes is 0.7701% or 77.10%.
Example 6.4.6 Expected Number of Children
A certain family has four children. Assume that the probability of any of the children
being a boy is 1/2. What is the probability that there are two boys and two girls in the
family?
Solution
Here, it can be reasoned that the assumptions that underlie the binomial probability dis-
tribution are satisfied.
For example the four children in the family will be treated as four independent trials
of an experiment for which the probability of a success is 1/2. Thus, n54, p51=2, and
q5121=251=2 the probability of two boys is
P X52
½
5P 2
ð Þ5
4
2
  1
2
 
121
2

422
5
4!
2! 422
ð
Þ!
1
2
 4
50:375:
Therefore, there is a 37.5% chance that the family consists of two boys and two girls.
Example 6.4.7 Expected Number of Defects
A department store receives large lots of a certain product and applies the following
inspection scheme for accepting the lots. Ten of the items are to be examined and
the lot will be rejected if two or more are defective. If it is known from prior experience
that each lot contains about 4% defective items, find the probability of (a) accepting the
lot and (b) rejecting the lot.
Wishful thinking for any quarterback!
X∼Binomial 16, 0:62
ð
Þ
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
5
10
x
P(x)
15
X∼Binomial 4, 0:5
ð
Þ
P X52
½
50:375
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
5
x
P(x)
10
15
P X>8
½
≈0:7701
Note, here to complete more than half the
passes, 8 is not included, hence, in this discrete
case,
P X>8
½
5P X≥9
½

0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
−1
1
2
x
P(x)
3
4
5
6.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution
215

Solution
Here n510 and p50:04, the probability of observing a defective item on a single trial.
Applying the binomial probability distribution, we obtain the desired probabilities.
For Part (a), the probability of accepting the lot is simply the probability
that the random variable X assumes the values 0 or 1; a defective or non-defective-
item. That is, if it assumes any value greater than one, the lot will be rejected.
Thus,
P X≤1
½
5
X
1
x50
P x
ð Þ5
X
1
x50
10
x
0
@
1
A 0:04
ð
Þx 120:04
ð
Þ102x
5P X50
½
 + P X50
½

5P 0
ð Þ + P 1
ð Þ
5
10
0
0
@
1
A 0:04
ð
Þ0 0:96
ð
Þ1020 +
10
1
0
@
1
A 0:04
ð
Þ1 0:96
ð
Þ1021
5 10!
0!10! 0:96
ð
Þ10 + 10!
1!9! 0:04
ð
Þ 0:96
ð
Þ9
50:6648 + 0:277050:9418:
Hence, there is a 94.18% chance of accepting the lot. That is, the probability that a
lot will be accepted is 94.18%.
For Part (b), the probability of rejecting the lot is equal to one minus the probability
of accepting the lot or the probability that we have observed two or more defective items
in the lot. That is,
P X≥2
½
512P X<2
½
512P X≤1
½

5120:941850:0582:
That is, the probability that the lot will be rejected is 5.82%.
Note that in this case we are using the property that P A
ð Þ512P AÞ

; that is, to sim-
plify the calculations for obtaining the desired probability, we use the fact that the
P X≥2
½
512P X≤1
½
 that is equivalent to 12P X<2
½
 since in a discrete probability
distribution P X<r
½
5P X≤r21
½
. Thus, the probability of rejecting the lot is 0.0582.
It is important to note, that P X<r
½
5P X≤r21
½
 is not true in a continuous proba-
bility distribution. In fact, in a continuous probability distribution, P X5r
½
50 and
therefore, P X<r
½
5P X≤r
½
. This will be further discussed in Section 5.6. The dif-
ference between “less than” and “greater than” as opposed to “less than or equal
to” and “greater than or equal to” should also be noted.
Example 6.4.8 Sickle Cell Anemia
Sickle cell anemia, a hereditary disease, afflicts 1 out of 400 African Americans in this
country. If a screening program for newborns is set up in a metropolitan hospital, what is
the probability that exactly one case of sickle cell anemia will be detected among the
first 25 African Americans infants born after the program’s initiation?
X∼Binomial 10, 0:04
ð
Þ
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
2
4
6
x
P(x)
8
10
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
2
4
6
x
P(x)
8
10
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
2
4
6
x
P(x)
8
r −1 r
10
216
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution
Here, a newborn infant either does or does not suffer from the disease. The probability
that an infant will have the disease is p5 1
400. Assume that the 25 African American
infants tested will represent that number of independent trials. Thus, the binomial prob-
ability distribution is applicable and
P X51
½
5P 1
ð Þ
5
25
1


1
400

1
12 1
400

2521
≈0:0588:
Therefore, there is only a 5.88% chance that exactly one case of sickle cell anemia
will be detected among the 25 babies.
We shall continue our study of the binomial probability distribution in the next
section by examining two of its basic properties; namely, the expected value and var-
iance of a random variable that is binomially distributed.
It should be noted that as p gets extremely small (that is, for rare events,
the
distribution
becomes
significantly
skewed
and
extremely
large
samples
are needed to focus in on the expected number of “successes.” This special form of
the binomial distribution is the Poisson probability distribution.
PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
Using a binomial probability distribution to find probabilities:
6.4.1. Given X∼Binomial n510,p50:2
ð
Þ, find P(2).
6.4.2. Given X∼Binomial n5100,p50:2
ð
Þ, find P(20).
6.4.3. Given X∼Binomial n525,p50:4
ð
Þ, find P(20).
At Most, At Least & Exactly!
6.4.4. State the assumptions that underlie the binomial probability distribution and give an example of a physical situation
that satisfy these assumptions.
6.4.5. Fair coins: A fair coin is tossed 10 times. What is the probability we will observe:
a. Exactly 6 heads?
b. At most 6 heads?
c. At least 6 heads?
6.4.6. Bulls eye: A man fires at a target six times; the probability of him hitting the bull’s eye is 0.40 on each trial.
a. What is the probability that the man will hit the target at least once?
b. What is the probability that he will not hit the target at all?
6.4.7. Batting average: A baseball player’s batting average is 0.310. If in a given game he bats four times, what is the
probability that he will get
a. No hits?
b. At most two hits?
c. At least two hits?
X∼Binomial 25, 0:0025
ð
Þ
0
0.0
0.4
0.8
−1
1
2
3
x
P(x)
4
5
6
P X51
½
≈0:0588
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
5
10
x
P(x)
15
Problems
217

6.4.8. Standard deck of cards: A card is drawn and replaced four times from a standard deck of 52 cards. What is the
probability that
a. Four aces were drawn?
b. Four diamonds were drawn?
c. Four picture cards were drawn?
d. Why is it necessary that the card was replaced?
6.4.9. Birth: Assuming that newborns are equally likely to be boys or girls, what is the probability that a family of six
children will have at least two boys?
6.4.10. Space travel: Assuming that it is known that 99.8% of the launchings of satellites into orbit are successful. What is
the probability that in the next five launchings there will be
a. No mishaps?
b. Exactly one mishap?
c. At least one mishap?
6.4.11. Passing statistics: The probability that a history student will pass a statistics course is 0.80. What is the probability
that out of 10 history majors enrolled in such a course
a. At least five will pass?
b. None will fail?
6.4.12. Christmas-treeing: When a student does not know the answers to a multiple choice test, they often randomly com-
plete the test create strings of dark circles for each answer in the shape of Christmas tree lights. A student Christmas-
trees a 10 question exam where each question had five options of which exactly one is correct.
a. What is the probability that the student correctly answered exactly 7 questions?
b. What is the probability that the student passed with 7 or more correct answers?
c. What is the probability that the student answers at most 6 correctly?
6.4.13. English alphabet: The most frequently used letter in the English alphabet is E. The letter Z is the least frequently
used letter. The letter E occurs 12.7% of the time whereas Z occurs only 0.07% of the time.
a. What is the probability of at least two Zs occurring in a page containing 2500 characters?
b. What is the probability of exactly two Es occurring in a sentence containing 25 characters?
c. What is the probability of at least two Es occurring in a sentence containing 25 characters?
d. What is the probability of exactly one Z occurring in a page containing 2500 characters?
e. What is the probability of exactly two Zs occurring in a page containing 2500 characters?
Critical Thinking
6.1.14. State the assumptions that underlie the binomial probability distribution and give an example of a physical sit-
uation that satisfies these assumptions.
6.1.15. A fair coin is tossed 10 times. What is the probability that we will observe
a. Exactly 6 heads?
b. At most 6 heads?
c. At least 6 heads?
6.4.16. A fair die is rolled six times. Consider a roll to be a success if a 1 or 6 is observed.
a. What is the probability that we observe exactly two successes?
b. What is the probability that we observe three failures? (A failure would be a 2, 3, 4, or 5 being observed.)
6.4.17. A man fires at a target six times; the probability of his hitting it is equal to 0.40 on each trial.
a. What is the probability that the man will hit the target at least once?
b. What is the probability that he will not hit the target at all?
6.4.18. A baseball player’s batting average is 0.310. If in a given game he bats four times, what is the probability that he will
get
a. No hits?
b. At most two hits?
c. At least two hits?
218
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

6.4.19. A card is drawn and replaced four times from an ordinary deck of 52 cards and the sequence of colors is observed.
What is the probability that
a. Four red cards were drawn?
b. Four black cards were drawn?
c. Two red and two black cards were drawn?
d. Why is it necessary to say that the card was replaced?
6.4.20. The basketball team of a certain university has a probability of 0.80 of winning whenever it plays a home game. The
team will play 10 games at home. What is the probability that the team will win
a. Exactly eight games?
b. At most six games?
6.4.21. Assuming that newborns are three times more likely to be boys or girls, what is the probability that a family of six
children will have at least two boys?
6.4.22. Assume that it is known that 95% of the launchings of satellites into orbit are successful. What is the probability that
in the next four launchings there will be
a. No mishap?
b. Exactly one mishap?
6.4.23. The probability that a history major will pass a finite mathematics course is 0.90. What is the probability that out of
10 history majors enrolled in such a course
a. At least five will pass?
b. None will fail?
6.5
EXPECTED VALUE AND VARIANCE FOR A
BINOMIAL RV
You will recall that in speaking of the expected value or mean of a
random variable, we are referring to a measure of its central tendency.
We shall now focus on obtaining the expected value of a discrete random
variable
that
is
being
characterized
by
the
binomial
probability
distribution.
For example, in a given problem to which the binomial probability
distribution is applicable; that is, a situation in which we have: identical
and independent trials, each classified as a success or a failure
with probability of success on each trial μ, the expected value or
mean of the random variable representing the number of successes
observed can be interpreted as the number of successes we can “expect”
in n trials.
Definition 6.5.1 Expected Value: Binomials
The mean or expected value of the discrete random variable X which is binomially
distributed is given by
μ5E X
ð Þ5np:
For example, if we inspect n components of a system in which each has a
probability p of being operable, we could “expect” the total number of
operable components to be close to np.
 Using summation notation, we can express this through the following
manipulations:
PD ¼ Probability Distribution
Expected

To consider probable or certain

To look forward to or await
Recall:
E x
ð Þ5
X
∀x
xP x
ð Þ
x!5x x21
ð
Þ!
0×a50
px5p×px21
n!5n n21
ð
Þ!
6.5 Expected Value and Variance for a Binomial RV
219

E x
ð Þ5
X
n
x50
xP x
ð Þ5
X
n
x50
x×
n
x
 !
px 12p
ð
Þn2x
5
X
n
x50
x×
n!
x! n2x
ð
Þ!px 12p
ð
Þn2x
5
X
n
x51
n!
x21
ð
Þ! n2x
ð
Þ!px 12p
ð
Þn2x
5
X
n
x51
np
n21
ð
Þ!
x21
ð
Þ! n2x
ð
Þ!px21 12p
ð
Þn2x
5np
X
n
x50
n21
ð
Þ!
x21
ð
Þ! n2x
ð
Þ!px21 12p
ð
Þn2x
5np
X
n21
y50
n21
ð
Þ!
y! n2y21
ð
Þ!py 12p
ð
Þn2y21
5np
X
m
y50
m!
y! m2y
ð
Þ!py 12p
ð
Þm2y
5np 1
ð Þ5np
That is, the expected value in any binomial distribution is the
probability of success (percent success) times the number of trials (sample
size n).
Example 6.5.1 Boys & Girls
Let us consider 64 families with four children each and assume all sex distributions to be
equally probable. How many families would you expect to have (a) at least one girl and
(b) exactly two girls?
Solution
For Part (a), the probability of at least one girl is obtained using the binomial probability
distribution; that is,
P X≥1
½
512P X<1
½

512P X50
½

512
4
0
  1
2
 0 1
2
 4
512 1
16515
16
is the probability of each family having at least one girl. Thus, for n564, p515
16, and
using the fact that the E X
ð Þ5np, we have the expected number of families having at
least one girl:
E X
ð Þ5np564×15
16560:
Therefore, we expect 60 families to have at least one girl.
Let:
y5x21
then
x51⇒y50
and
x5n⇒y5n21
Let:
m5n21
Remember:
⇒reads “implies”
We expect 60 families to have at least one girl. In
reality we may not realize this expectation but
we should be close to the number.
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
−1
1
2
x
P(x)
3
4
5
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
−1
1
2
x
P(x)
3
4
5
220
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution—cont’d
For Part (b), the probability of exactly two girls is obtained as follows:
P X52
½
5
4
2
  1
2
 2 1
2
 2
5 6
1653
8:
Thus, for n564 and p53=8, we have the expected number of families with two girls:
E X
ð Þ5np564×3
8524:
Therefore, we expect to find that about 24 of the 64 families have two girls.
Example 6.5.2 Damaged Books
A bookstore receives a shipment of 50 books. Previous experience has indicated that
about 10% of the books are damaged in transit. Find the expected number of
damaged books.
Solution
Here, n550 and p50:10 and
E X
ð Þ5np550×0:155:
Thus, in a shipment of 50 books we can expect about five books to be damaged.
Example 6.5.3 Completions
Refer to Example 6.4.5. What is the number of passes that the quarterback is expected to
complete?
Solution
The probability that he will complete a pass any time he attempts one is 0.62.
If he throws the ball 16 times, we expect that he will complete about 10 passes. That is,
E X
ð Þ5np516×0:6259:92:
Note that for this answer to be meaningful we must round it off to the nearest whole
number—in this case 10.
As we mentioned previously, two other important characteristics of a random var-
iable are its variance and standard deviation; that is, the measure of the “spread” or
“dispersion” of the random variable around its expected value or central tendency. We
proceed by stating the variance of a random discrete variable which is binomially dis-
tributed. The variance takes into account the sample size n and the probability of
success p and the probability of failure q5 12p
ð
Þ; recall, “and” means “multiply.”
0
0.00
0.10
5
10
x
np=5
P(x)
15
In real world problem we do not know p; thus, we
estimate it.
N vs: n
μ^p5p≈^p
σ2
^p5npq ≈n^p^q
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
≈
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n^p^q
p
^q5x
n
x is the number of successes and n is the
number of trials
Remember everything in our society is subject to
variation.
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
5
10
x
P(x)
np=10
15
6.5 Expected Value and Variance for a Binomial RV
221

Definition 6.5.2 Variance/Deviation in a Binomial
The variance of the discrete random variable X which is binomially distributed is
given by
σ25Var X
ð Þ5V x
ð Þ5npq;
and therefore, the standard population deviation is given by
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
:
The proof of this statement is similar to the proof that E X
ð Þ5np and is
recommended that the student think through the summation notation required
in this proof. Interpreting this formulation, we have that the variances in the
sample size in taking into account, not only, the probability of success, but
the probability of failure.
Example 6.5.4 Family of Four
Find the variance and standard deviation of the random variable X characterized in
Example 6.5.2; that is the number of girls in a family of four assuming that any given
child could have been a boy or girl.
Solution
Here, for Part (a), p515
16, q512p5 1
16 and n564. Thus, the variance and standard devi-
ation are given by
σ25Var X
ð Þ5npq564×15
16× 1
1653:75
and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3:75
p
≈1:94.
This tells us that with such a large probability of that within a family of four there is
at least one girl, we expect np560 out of 64 such families to have at least one girl, but
this number will deviate by approximately 2; hence, it is more than likely that in a
family of four, between 58 and 62 families have at least one girl.
For Part (b), p53
8 , q5123
8 55
8, and n564. Thus we have,
σ25Var X
ð Þ5npq564×3
8×5
8515
and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
15
p
≈3:88.
This tells us that with such a large probability that within a family of four
there are exactly two girls, we expect np524 out of 64 such families to have
exactly two girls, and we expect this to deviate by approximately 4; hence, it is
highly likely that out of 64 families with four children, between 20 and 28 fam-
ilies will have exactly two girls.
Thus, in both cases, since the variance or standard deviation is fairly
small, we can expect most of the values that the random variable can assume
to be located close to its expected value.
Example 6.5.5 Boys & Girls
Assume all sex distributions to be equally probable:
a.
What is the expected number of girls in a family of six children?
b.
What is the variance of the random variable that describes the present
situation?
c.
What is the probability that a family of six has the “expected” number
of girls?
24∓4
⇓
20 to28
it is more likely that the number of families that
will have at least one girl as a member between
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
2
x
P(x)
4
6
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
2
x
np=3
P(x)
4
6
σ253:75≈4
⇓
σ51:94≈2
Thus, we are more likely to have
μ∓2
⇓
np∓2
⇓
60∓2
⇓
58 to 62
σ2515
⇓
σ53:88≈4
μ5np53
σ251:5
⇓
σ51:22≈1
Thus,
μ∓1
⇓
np∓1
⇓
3∓1
⇓
2 to 4
222
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Solution
For Part (a), since the sexes are equally probable we have p5q50:5. Thus, for n56, we
have
E X
ð Þ5np56×0:553:
For Part (b), the variance is given by
Var X
ð Þ5npq56×0:5×0:551:5
and
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
15
p
≈1:22.
Therefore, while in a family we expect to have three girls and three boys, this may
deviate by 1.22; that is, we expect three boys and three girls, give or take
approximately one.
For Part (c), the probability that the expected number of girls; that is, three, will be
realized in the present family is as follows:
P X
ð Þ5E X
ð Þ
½
5P X53
½
5
6
3
 !
0:5
ð
Þ3 0:5
ð
Þ623
5
6!
3! 623
ð
Þ! 0:5
ð
Þ6
50:1875:
Thus, there is only an 18.75% chance that the expected number of girls will be realized in
a family of six.
Example 6.5.6 Births in the U.S.
Children born to older women are more susceptible to premature births, with 14% of all
women over the age of 40 giving birth at between 32 and 36 weeks of gestation. Given a
group of 50 women, age 40 years or more,
a)
What is the expected number of premature births?
b)
What is the variance of the random variable that describes the present
situation?
c)
What is the probability that in this group of women, between 5 and 9 babies
will be born prematurely?
Solution
For Part (a), since there is a 14%, p50:14, chance that the baby is premature, with
n550, we have
E X
ð Þ5np550×0:1457
For Part (b), the variance is given by
Var X
ð Þ5npq550×0:14×0:8656:02
and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
6:02
p
≈2:45.
Therefore, in a group of 50 women over the age of 40 who give birth in the United
States, we expect an average of 7 premature births with a 2.5 standard deviation.
Therefore, on average, we expect between 4.5 and 9.5 premature births; however, on
a discrete measure where the RV take on the integer values, we can round and estimate
between 5 and 9 premature births in a group of 50 women over the age of 40.
Continued
0
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
2
x
P(x)
4
6
0
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
10
5
x
P(x)
20
15
25
0
5
10
15
20
25
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
x
P(x)
σ256:02
⇓
σ52:45≈2:5
Thus,
μ∓2:5
⇓
np∓2:5
⇓
7∓2:5
⇓
4:5 to 9:5
6.5 Expected Value and Variance for a Binomial RV
223

Solution—cont’d
For Part (c), the probability that between 5 and 9 women, included, have premature
babies is as follows:
P 5≤X≤9
½
5P 5
ð Þ + P 6
ð Þ + P 7
ð Þ + P 8
ð Þ + P 9
ð Þ
5
50
5


0:14
ð
Þ5 0:86
ð
Þ5025 +
⋯+
50
9


0:14
ð
Þ9 0:86
ð
Þ5029
50:12857 + 0:15698 + 0:16063 + 0:14055 + 0:10678
50:69351:
Thus, there is an approximate 69% chance that in a group of 50 women who were
over the age of 40 when they gave birth will have done so prematurely.
PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
Find the mean and variance in normal approximation of the binomial. Find μ and σ2
6.5.1. n5100,p50:3
6.5.2. n510,p50:3
6.5.3. n5250,p50:1
6.5.4. n5125,p51
5
6.5.5. n5135,p52
7
6.5.6. Damaged goods: A drugstore received a shipment of 60 vials of a certain pharmaceutical. Previous experience
indicates that such a shipment will result in about 2% of the vials being damaged. Find the expected number of
undamaged vials in the shipment.
6.5.7. Light bulbs: The probability that a new light bulb will be defective is 0.005. If a lot of 5000 light bulbs was pur-
chased from the same company, what is the expected number of defective light bulbs in the lot?
6.5.8. Light bulbs: Find the variance and standard deviation of the random variable described in the previous exercise.
Interpret the meaning of the answer obtained.
6.5.9. ACT: Assume that 25% of all those who take a particular achievement examination obtain scores that indicate a
need for remedial work. If the examination is given to 20 randomly chosen people, what is the expected number in
need of remedial work?
6.5.10. Lemons: Suppose that 20% of the used cars of Lemons Automotive Company are defective. If 30 cars were sold in a
given week, how many of these cars would you expect to be defective?
6.5.11. Christmas-treeing: When a student does not know the answers to a multiple choice test, they often randomly
complete the test create strings of dark circles for each answer in the shape of Christmas-tree lights.
A student Christmas-trees a 10-question exam where each question had five options of which exactly one is
correct.
a. Find the mean and standard deviation for the number of correct answers.
b. Using the normal approximation and correction for continuity, what is the probability that the student correctly
answered exactly seven questions?
c. Using the normal approximation and correction for continuity, what is the probability that the student passed with
seven or more correct answers?
d. Using the normal approximation and correction for continuity, what is the probability that the student answers at
most six correctly?
P X55
½
 5
50
5


0:14
ð
Þ5 0:86
ð
Þ45 ≈0:12857
P X56
½
5
50
6


0:14
ð
Þ6 0:86
ð
Þ44 ≈0:15698
P X57
½
5
50
7


0:14
ð
Þ7 0:86
ð
Þ43 ≈0:16063
P X58
½
5
50
8


0:14
ð
Þ8 0:86
ð
Þ42 ≈0:14055
P X59
½
5
50
9


0:14
ð
Þ9 0:86
ð
Þ41 ≈0:10678
224
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

6.5.12. English alphabet: The most frequently used letter in the English alphabet is E. The letter Z is the least frequently
used letter. The letter E occurs 12.7% of the time whereas Z occurs only 0.07% of the time.
a. Find the mean and standard deviation for the number of times the letter E will be found in a written page of 2500
characters.
b. In a passage with 2500 characters, is it unusual to find the letter E 180 times?
c. How many Zs are expected in these 2500 characters?
d. Using the normal approximation and correction for continuity, what is the probability of exactly one Z?
6.5.13. Large families: A family consists of 10 children. Assuming that the sexes are equally probable, find the expected
number of boys in the family. What is the probability that the expected number of boys will not occur?
6.5.14. Modified coins: A certain coin has been modified in such a way that when it is tossed a head will turn up 66% of the
time. Find the expected number of tails if the coin is tossed 100 times.
6.5.15. Standard deck of cards: From an ordinary deck of 52 cards a card is drawn at random, recorded, replaced and the
deck is shuffled. This is done five times.
a. What is the probability that all the cards are diamonds?
b. What is the number of diamonds that one would expect?
c. What is the probability of the expected number of diamonds?
6.5.16. M&M MARS: Proportion of M&Ms by variety according to M&M Mars Inc.
Variety
Red (%)
Orange (%)
Yellow (%)
Green (%)
Blue (%)
Brown (%)
Plain
13
20
14
16
24
13
Peanut
12
23
15
15
23
12
Dark
17
16
17
16
17
17
Almond
10
20
20
20
20
10
Crispy
17
16
17
16
17
17
Peanut butter
10
20
20
20
20
10
a. M&M Mars Company claims that 14% of their Plain M&Ms are yellow. In a bag of 253 M&Ms, how many are
expected to be yellow; that is, what is the mean number of yellow M&Ms? What is the standard deviation?
b. M&M Mars Company claims that 20% of their Almond M&Ms are orange. Find the mean and standard devi-
ation for the number of orange M&Ms in such a bag.
c.  What is your favorite type of M&M and what is your favorite color? Purchase a bag of M&Ms of your
choice and count the number of M&Ms in your favorite color. Is this what you expected to find? Does the
observed frequency fall within reason; that is, within two standard deviations of the mean?
d. In a bag of Peanut Butter M&Ms, what is the probability that exactly 10 out of 100 M&Ms are red?
e. What is the probability that at most 2 M&Ms are brown in a bag of Crispy M&Ms?
f. In a bag of Dark M&Ms, what is the probability that eight or more M&Ms are not green?
Critical Thinking
6.5.17. A drugstore receives a shipment of 60 vials of a certain pharmaceutical. Previous experience indicates that such a
shipment will result in about 2% of the vials being damaged. Find the expected number of undamaged vials in the
shipment.
6.5.18. The probability that a new light bulb will be defective is 0.005. If a lot of 5000 light bulbs were purchased from the
same company, what is the expected number of defective light bulbs in the lot?
6.5.19. A family consists of 10 children. Assuming that the sexes are equally probable, find the expected number of boys in
the family. What is the probability that the expected number of boys will not occur?
6.5.20. A fair die is rolled 120 times. What is the expected number of aces?
6.5.21. A certain coin has been modified in such a way that when it is tossed a head will turn up 66% of the time. Find the
expected number of tails, if the coin is tossed 100 times.
6.5.22. Find the variance and standard deviation of the random variable described in Problem 6.5.19. Interpret the meaning
of the answers obtained.
Problems
225

6.5.23. Find and interpret the meaning of the standard deviation of the situation described in Problem 6.5.20.
6.5.24. From an ordinary deck of 52 cards a card is drawn at random, recorded, replaced and the deck shuffled. This is done
five times.
a. What is the probability that all cards are diamonds?
b. What is the number of diamonds that one would expect?
6.5.25. Assume that 25% of all those who take a particular achievement examination obtain scores that indicate a need for
remedial work. If the examination is given to 20 randomly chosen people, what is the expected number in need of
remedial work?
6.5.26. Suppose that 20% of the used cars of Lemons Automobile Company are defective. If 30 cars were sold in a given
week, how many of these cars would you expect to be defective?
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
Basic Problems
6.1. Consider the experiment of rolling a single fair die. Let X be the random variable denoting the number that appears
uppermost.
a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable X.
b. Give a graphical representation of P(x).
c. Show that the conditions of a probability distribution are satisfied.
6.2.
A coin has been weighted in such a way that the probability of heads is 5/6 and the probability of tails is 1/6. The coin is
tossed twice. Let X be the random variable representing the number of heads that occur.
a. Find the probability distribution of the random variable X.
b. Give a graphical representation of P(x).
c. Show that the conditions of a probability distribution are satisfied.
6.3. Find the expected value of the discrete random variable X, the probability distribution of which is
a.
x
–2
–1
0
1
2
P(x)
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.1
b.
x
2
4
8
16
P(x)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
6.4. Find the expected value of the discrete random variable Y, the probability distribution of which is
a.
y
1
2
3
6
12
P(y)
1/3
1/4
1/8
1/8
1/6
b.
y
–4
–2
2
4
P(y)
1/6
1/3
1/6
1/3
6.5. The probability that a grocer will make a profit of $100 selling a certain type of fruit during the Thanksgiving holiday is
0.80, the probability that he will take a loss of $60 is 0.20. Determine the expectation of the grocer.
6.6. A card player is paid $4 if he draws a spade from an ordinary deck of 52 cards, he is paid $6 if he draws a picture card,
and he loses $0.50 if any other card is drawn. What is the expected value of the gambling game?
Critical Thinking
6.7 Determine if the random variable is discrete or continuous:
a. In a genetic study, to monitor the productivity of a newly developed pea pod, a researcher counts the number of peas
per pod.
226
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

b. In a genetic study, to monitor the rate of mutation, a researcher measures the time between spontaneous mutations
in brown rats.
c. In a genealogical study, to monitor the population growth rate, a census counting the number of children per female
is performed every 10 years.
6.8. What is the expected value and variance in the following binomial distributions:
a. n5182,p50:12
b. n573,p50:28
c. n520,p50:92
6.9. Given the probability of success is 5%, what is the probability that you succeed twice in 15 trials.
6.10. What is the expected value and standard deviation in the following Poisson distribution:
a. λ53:6
b. λ52:8
c. λ516:9
d. λ51:44
6.11. Given that a litter size of the common house cat is 4.1, what is the probability that a cat has a litter of 8?
6.12. What is the expected value and standard deviation in the following geometric distribution:
a. n5182,p50:12
b. n573,p50:28
c. n520,p50:92
6.13. Given the probability of success is 5%, what is the expected number of trials before success is obtained and what is the
expected standard deviation?
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions
6.1.1. A function is a relation between two variables, x and y, such that for each value of the independent
variable, usually selected to be x there is at most one value of the dependent variable, y. That is, “y is a function
of x” when for each value of x in the domain, there is one value of y in the range. We express this relation
by y5f x
ð Þ.
6.1.2. A random variable (RV) is a numerically valued function defined over a sample space.
6.1.3. A discrete random variable is one that can assume only a finite, or countably infinite, number of distinct values. A
discrete random variable can be easily identified by examining the nature of the values it may assume. In most
practical problems, discrete random variables represent a count of sample points possessing a specific characteristic.
6.1.4. A continuous random variable is one that can assume any value in some interval or intervals of real numbers (and
the probability that it assumes any specific value is zero).
6.2.1. Let X be a discrete random variable. A function (rule) P(x) is called the probability distribution of the random
variable X if it satisfies the following two conditions:
1. P x
ð Þ≥0, for all x
2.
X
∀xP x
ð Þ51
This distribution is also referred to as the probability density function and is often denoted by f(x), f x
ð Þ5P X5x
ð
Þ.
6.3.1. The arithmetic mean, average, or sample mean of a set of n measurements x1,x2,…,xn is equal to the sum of the
measurements divided by n. We denote the average by x, thus:
x5
X
n
i51
xi
n
Listed data
ð
Þ
x5
X
k
i51
xif i
ð
Þ
n
Frequency data
ð
Þ;
where fi is the associated frequency for the set of distinct measures xi, i51,2,…,n and
Summary of Important Concepts
227

X
k
i51
f i5n
6.3.2. Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). Then the expected value of X is given by
E X
ð Þ5
X
k
i51
xipi
ð
Þ
where pi5P xi
ð Þ and ∀x is read “for all x.”
6.3.3. Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). Then the population variance of X is the mean
of the square error, in terms of expected values is given by
σ25Var X
ð Þ5E½ðX2μÞ
25
X
∀x
x2μ
ð
Þ2P x
ð Þ5V X
ð Þ5E X2
	

2 E X
½ 
ð
Þ2
where ∀x is read “for all x.”
6.3.4. Let X be a discrete random variable with population mean μ, the residual errors, collectively called the residuals, are
the differences between what is observed and what is expected: that is, εi5xi2μ.
6.3.5. Let X be a discrete random variable with probability distribution P(x). The square root of the variance of a
discrete random variable is called the standard deviation, denoted by the lowercase Greek letter sigma
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V x
ð Þ
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
σ2
p
.
6.3.6. The sample variance of a set of n measurements: x1,x2,…,xn, denoted by s2, is the average of the square of the
deviations of the measurements about their sample mean; that is, s25
X
n
i51
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
:
6.3.7. A discrete random variable X is said to have a binomial or Bernoulli probability distribution if its probability dis-
tribution is given by the following function:
P xjn,p
ð
Þ5
n
x
 
pxqn2x;
for x50,1,2,…,n, where 0<p<1, q512p and the vertical bar “j” is read “such that.”
6.5.1. The mean or expected value of the discrete random variable X which is binomially distributed is given by
μ5E X
ð Þ5np:
6.5.2. The
variance
of
the
discrete
random
variable
X
which
is
binomially
distributed
is
given
by
σ25Var X
ð Þ5V x
ð Þ5npq, and therefore, the standard population deviation is give by σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
.
Properties
6.3.1. Given a data set, x1,x2,…,xn, with an expected value of (population mean), E X
ð Þ5μ, and variance, V X
ð Þ5σ2. Let
y1,y2,…,yn be a manipulation of the original data such that y5x + a, where a is any constant, then E Y
ð Þ5μ + a and
V Y
ð Þ5σ2. Here, we expect a constant to be itself and not vary.
6.3.2. Given a data set, x1,x2,…,xn, with an expected value of (population mean), E X
ð Þ5μ, and variance, V X
ð Þ5σ2. Let
y1,y2,…,yn be a manipulation of the original data such that y5mx, where m is any constant, then E Y
ð Þ5mμ and
V Y
ð Þ5m2σ2. Recall, variance is a measure of error squared.
6.4.1. In a binomial experiment, the follow must hold true:
a. It consists of n identical trials.
b. Each trial results in one of two outcomes; for example, success or failure, life or death, acceptance or rejection, etc.
c. The probability of a success in each trial is equal to p and remains the same for each of the n trials. The probability
of a failure is q512p.
d. The trials are independent.
228
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Common: Binomial Calculations
There are usually three types of questions which are likely to be asked with respect to a random variable X that characterizes
a worldwide phenomenon. These are as follows:
1. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will equal a point r exactly? That is,
P X5r
½
5P rð Þ:
2. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will assume values up to the point a (at most r)? That is,
P X≤r
½
5
X
∀x≤r
P x
ð Þ5
X
r
i50
P x
ð Þ:
3. What is the probability that the discrete random variable X will assume values greater than or equal to the point a (at least
r)? That is,
P X≥r
½
5
X
∀x≥r
P x
ð Þ5
X
r
i50
P x
ð Þ:
Distribution
PDF
Means
Variance
Standard deviation
Binomial
f xjn,p
ð
Þ5
n
x
 
px 12p
ð
Þn2x;
x50,1,2,…,n
μ5np
σ25np 12p
ð
Þ
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
REVIEW TEST
1. Determine if the following relationships are functions:
A. {(0,1),(1,2),(2,3)}
B. {(0,1),(0,2),(0,3)}
C. {(1,0),(2,0),(3,0)}
2. Specify which of the following are discrete or continuous measures:
A. The amount of coffee used to brew a pot of coffee.
B. The number of pistons in a car engine.
3. Which of the following are random variables:
A. Length of an arbitrary race track.
B. Length of a specific race track.
4. Three coins are tossed and the number of heads observed is recorded. List all possible outcomes in the experiment.
Assuming the coins are fair, construct a table showing the theoretical probability distribution.
5. Suppose that a certain family has three children. Let X be the random variable that represents the number of girls in the
family and p be the probability of having a girl. Find the probability distribution of the random variable X.
6. Give a graphical representation of the probability distribution outlined in Problem 5 above given p50:32.
7. There are seven True/False questions on a quiz. Betty does not know the answers to any of them and “Christmas-trees”
the exam, guessing each answer. What is the probability that she misses all seven questions?
8. The probability of the discrete random variable X is as follows:
A. Calculate the expected value of the random variable X.
B. Obtain the variance of the random variable X.
C. Determine the standard deviation of the discrete random variable X.
9. Given E x
ð Þ5μ and V x
ð Þ5σ2, let y522x + 5. Find E(y) and V(y).
10. Given X∼Binomial n510,p50:2
ð
Þ, find P(1).
11. Given X∼Binomial n510,p50:2
ð
Þ, find P X≤2
ð
Þ.
12. Given X∼Binomial n510,p50:2
ð
Þ, what is the expected number of successes? What is the variance?
13. A fair die is rolled 30 times. Find the probability of getting exactly 10 fours.
Review Test
229

REFERENCES
Feller, W., 1968b. 3rd ed. An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, vol. 1. Wiley, New York.
Mendenhall, W., 1971a. Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 3rd ed. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Meyer, P.L., 1965a. Introduction to Probability and Statistical Applications. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1972c. Probability Distributions: An Introduction to Probability Theory with Applications. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978e. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
Tsokos, C.P., Wooten, R.D., 2011b. The Joy of Statistics Using Real-World Data. Kendall Hunt, Florida.
230
Chapter 6
Binomial Probability

Chapter 7
Normal Probability
7.1 Introducing Continuous Random Variables
232
7.2 Normal Probability Distributions
235
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
238
7.4 Normal Approximation to the Binomial
256
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
261
Summary of Important Concepts
262
Review Test
263
References
263
The discrete probability distribution approaches a continuous probability distribution as the
sample size increase.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
231

German mathematician and physicist Carl Friedrich Gauss is sometimes called the “Prince of Mathematics.” He was a
child prodigy. At the age of 7, Gauss started elementary school and his potential was noticed almost immediately. His
teachers were amazed when Gauss summed the integers from 1 to 100 instantly. At age 24, Gauss published one of the most
brilliant achievements in mathematics, Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1801). In it, Gauss systematized the study of number
theory. Gauss applied many of his mathematical insights in the field of astronomy, and by using the method of least squares
he successfully predicted the location of the asteroid Ceres in 1801. In 1820 Gauss made important inventions and discov-
eries in geodesy, the study of the shape and size of the earth. In statistics, he developed the idea of the normal distribution. In
the 1832 he developed theories of non-Euclidean geometry and mathematical techniques for studying the physics of fluids.
Although Gauss made many contributions to applied science, especially electricity and magnetism, pure mathematics was
his first love. It was Gauss who first called mathematics “the Queen of the Sciences.”
In Chapter 6, we introduced the binomial or Bernoulli probability distri-
bution—the most useful distribution for discrete random variables. In this
chapter, we shall focus on the continuous random variable and study the
normal or Gaussian Probability Distribution—the most important distri-
bution for continuous random variables and the most popular. A number of
interesting applications will be described to illustrate the usefulness of this
probability distribution.
7.1
INTRODUCING CONTINUOUS RANDOM
VARIABLES
A continuous random variable can assume an uncountable number of values;
that is, continuous random variables are associated with sample spaces
representing a very large (infinitely large) number of sample points contained
on a line interval. (You recall, on the other hand, that discrete random variables
are restricted to taking on isolated values.) A continuous probability distri-
bution is given by a continuous function
P x
ð Þ5f x
ð Þ;
where f(x) depends on the various parameters that characterizes the subject
phenomenon.
We can formally define the continuous random variable (RV) as follows.
Definition 7.1.1 Continuous RV
A random variable which can assume an infinitely large number of values associated
with the points on a line interval, and the probability of which is spread continuously
over these points, is called a continuous random variable.
To obtain the probabilities that a random variable will assume values
within a certain interval on the real axis, we must know the probability distri-
bution of the continuous random variable. A rigorous and precise presentation
of this topic is beyond the scope of this book; however, we shall give a
descriptive presentation of continuous probability distributions and then
232
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

concentrate our study on the famous and very useful normal or Gaussian
Probability Distribution.
Let us begin with a discussion of a physical phenomenon. Consider putting
an electrical system into operation at time, t50, and considering the time that
elapses until its failure (not predictable) as a random variable X that assumes
values from the interval:
0≤X≤T
Here, the random variable X may assume an infinitely large number of
values Furthermore, let us assume that we have observed n such systems
and have recorded the elapsed times until failure. Of course, we could
interpret X as a discrete random variable and calculate the probabilities that
it could assume certain isolated values. However, from a realistic point of
view, it is more useful to deal with intervals rather than with isolated points.
Let us divide the time interval 0≤X≤T into r subintervals each of equal
length:
t0≤x<t1, t1 ≤x<t2, tr21 ≤x<tr
such that,
0<t1<t2<⋯<T:
In a discrete sense, let xr, represent the number of systems that have failed
in the rth subinterval, such that
X
r
i51
xi5n
is the total number of systems that have been observed. Thus, the number of
systems that have failed in a given interval divided by the total number of
systems that have been observed will be the probability that a system will fail
between the two times. For example, if x3 systems failed in the interval
t2 ≤x<t3, then the probability that a system will fail in that interval is x3
n. This
ratio is also referred to as the relative frequency.
Thus, we can construct a graph by drawing rectangles, the bases of which
coincide with the preceding class intervals and the areas of which are propor-
tional to the class frequencies (see Figure 7.1). Such a graph is called a prob-
ability histogram and represents a discretization of a continuous probability
distribution. That is, each area of the rectangle represents the probability,
^pi5xi
n; where i51,2,…,r, the number of systems that failed between ti21
and ti, divided by the total number of systems that have been observed, n. It
is clear that if we sum the areas (probabilities) of all the rectangles the sum
will equal one; that is
X
r
i51
pi51:
7.1 Introducing Continuous Random Variables
233

Thus, we can estimate the probability that a system will fail in the interval t0
to t4 by adding the areas of the four rectangles over this interval. That is, if X is
the random variable that represents the number of failures, then
P t0 ≤X≤t4
½
5P t0 ≤X≤t1
½
 + P t1<X≤t2
½
 + P t2<X≤t3
½
 + P t3<X≤t4
½

5x1
n + x2
n + x3
n + x4
n
5p1 + p2 + p3 + p4:
Using this approach, we can obtain estimates of the probabilities that a con-
tinuous random variable is contained in an interval in terms of areas. These esti-
mates can be improved by decreasing the widths of the intervals, which, in turn,
increases the number of such intervals so that we can approximate the area under
the rectangles by a continuous function, f(x), as shown in Figure 7.2.
Thus, the probability that a continuous random variable X assumes a value
between a and b,
P a≤x≤b
ð
Þ;
is simply the area under the curve f(x) from point a to point b. This area (prob-
ability) is also shown by Figure 7.2. The continuous curve f(x) is called the
probability distribution of the continuous random variable X.
Note: here that the area under the curve, the function, f(x) is equal to one,
which corresponds to the sure event and if we add the areas of all the rectangles
will be one (taking rounding errors into account).
x
t0
t1 t2
ti–1
ti+1
pi –1
ti
pi + 1
pi
P(x)
FIGURE 7.1
Histogram of probabilities between failure times.
a
b
x
P(x)=f(x)
FIGURE 7.2
Histogram of failure times with the overlying normal approximation.
234
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

In Section 7.2, we shall study one of the most famous probability distribu-
tions of a continuous random variable and illustrate its usefulness by applying it
to a number of problems. This probability distribution is applicable as an exact
or approximate characterization of practically any physical phenomenon.
PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
7.1.1 Determine in the following which variables are continuous or discrete random:
(a) Number of characters in a document.
(b) The amount of time it takes to make dinner.
(c) The height of a palm tree.
7.1.2 Determine if the following are continuous or discrete random variables:
(a) The length of a road trip.
(b) The number of steps in a stair well.
(c) The temperature of a nuclear reactor.
7.1.3 Determine if the following are continuous or discrete random variables:
(a) The number of times one must try before finding success.
(b) The age of a sea turtle.
(c) The number of chess pieces remaining on a chess board.
Critical Thinking
7.1.4 Distinguish between discrete data and continuous data.
7.1.5 Distinguish between continuous and discretized data.
7.2
NORMAL PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
The normal or Gaussian Probability Distribution is most popular and
important because of its unique mathematical properties which facilitate its
application to practically any physical problem in the real world; if not for
the data’s distribution directly, then in terms of the sampling distribution, this
will be the discussion in Section 7.3. It constitutes the basis for the devel-
opment of many of the statistical methods that we will learn in the following
chapters. The study of the mathematical properties of the normal probability
distribution is beyond the scope of this book; however, we shall concentrate
on its usefulness in characterizing the behavior of continuous random variables
that frequently occur in daily experience.
The normal probability distribution was discovered by Abraham De
Moivre in 1733 as a way of approximating the binomial probability distri-
bution when the number of trials in a given experiment is very large. In 1774,
Laplace studied the mathematical properties of the normal probability
distribution. Through a historical error, the discovery of the normal distri-
bution was attributed to Gauss who first referred to it in a paper in 1809.
In the nineteenth century, many scientists noted that measurement errors in
a given experiment followed a pattern (the normal curve of errors) that was
closely approximated by this probability distribution. The normal probability
distribution is formally defined as follows:
Definition 7.2.1 Normal Probability Distribution
A continuous random variable X is normally distributed or follows a normal prob-
ability distribution if its probability distribution is given by the following function:
f x
ð Þ5
1
σ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
e2 x2μ
ð
Þ2
2σ2 ;
2∞< x<∞,2∞< μ<∞,0< σ2<∞:
7.2 Normal Probability Distributions
235

The universally accepted notation X∼N μ, σ2


is read as “the continuous
random variable X is normally distributed with a population mean μ and pop-
ulation variance σ2. Of course in real world problems we do not know the true
population parameters, but we estimate them from the sample mean and
sample variance. However, first, we must fully understand the normal proba-
bility distribution.
The graph of the normal probability distribution is a “bell-shaped” curve,
as shown in Figure 7.3. The constants μ and σ2 are the parameters; namely, “μ”
is the population true mean (or expected value) of the subject phenomenon
characterized by the continuous random variable, X, and “σ2” is the population
true variance characterized by the continuous random variable, X. Hence, “σ”
the population standard deviation characterized by the continuous random var-
iable X; and the points located at μ2σ and μ + σ are the points of inflection; that
is, where the graph changes from cupping up to cupping down.
The area under the bell-shaped curve is so disposed that it represents prob-
ability; that is, the total area under the curve is equal to one. The random var-
iable X can assume values anywhere from minus infinity to plus infinity, but in
practice we very seldom encounter problems in which random variables have
such a wide range. The normal curve graph of the normal probability dis-
tribution) is symmetric with respect to the mean μ as the central position.
That is, the area between μ and κ units to the left of μ is equal to the area
between μ and κ units to the right of μ. This fact is illustrated in Figure 7.4.
P μ≤X≤μ + κ
½

f (x)
 m - s
 m + s
m
FIGURE 7.3
Normal probability with points of inflections μ 2 σ and μ + σ.
m - k
m + k
m
f(x)
FIGURE 7.4
Normal probability from the center, μ to μ + κ; that is, k above center.
236
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

There is not a unique normal probability distribution, since the mathe-
matical formula of the graph depends on the two variables, the mean μ and the
variance σ2. Figure 7.5 is a graphical representation of the normal distribution
for a fixed value of σ2 with μ varying.
You recall that the variance or standard deviation is a measure of the
spread or “dispersion” of the random variable X around its expected value
or central tendency, μ. Thus, σ2 of the normal distribution determines the
shape of the bell-shaped curve. Figure 7.6 is a graphical representation of
the normal distribution for a fixed value of μ with varying σ2. Thus, the
expected value μ, locates the central tendency of the random variable, X,
and the variance σ2 determines the shape of the bell-shaped curve. That is,
for small values of σ2, the distribution is clustered close to the mean; as σ2
increases, the distribution deviates away from the mean. Despite the fact that
the shapes are different, the total area under each curve which represents prob-
ability is equal to one.
m=0
m=2
m=5
m = 10
f (x)
f (x| m = 0, s = 3)
f (x| m = 2, s = 3)
f (x| m = 5, s = 3)
f (x| m = 10, s = 3)
FIGURE 7.5
Normal probability distribution for fixed σ and varying μ.
f (x)
f(x|m = 0, s = 1)
f(x|m = 0, s = 2)
f(x|m = 0, s = 3)
f(x|m = 0, s = 5)
m=0
FIGURE 7.6
Normal probability distribution for fixed μ and varying σ.
7.2 Normal Probability Distributions
237

PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
7.2.1 Illustrate the following normal curves indicating the points of inflection μ∓σ
(a) X∼N μ55,σ254


(b) X∼N μ510,σ254


(c) X∼N μ515,σ254


7.2.2 Illustrate the following normal curves indicating the points of inflection μ∓σ
(a) X∼N μ510,σ254


(b) X∼N μ510,σ259


(c) X∼N μ510,σ2516


7.2.3 Illustrate the following normal curves indicating the points of inflection μ∓σ
(a) X∼N μ525,σ251


(b) X∼N μ5100,σ254


(c) X∼N μ5200,σ2516


Critical Thinking
7.2.4 Distinguish between the bell-shaped normal probability distribution and the standard normal probability
distribution.
7.2.5 Distinguish between a curve (probability distribution) and a symmetric probability distribution.
7.2.6 Discuss the use of the tilde “” as it is used in statistics.
7.3
STANDARD NORMAL PROBABILITY
DISTRIBUTIONS
As we see, there is a normal probability distribution for each pair of
numerical values of μ and σ2. Thus, we could generate numerous bell-
shaped normal distributions, one for each possible data set. However, as
it is difficult to calculate probabilities for each because of its mathematical
complexity, we can overcome this difficulty by making the following
substitution.
Let
z5x2μ
σ
in the formula for the normal distribution to obtain
f zð Þ5 1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
e2 z2
2 ; 2∞<z<∞:
238
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

0
z
–1
–2
–3
–4
1
2
3
4
f(x)
Definition 7.3.1 Standard Normal
The standard normal probability distribution (standard normal curve) has mean of
zero, E Z
ð Þ50, and unit variance, V Z
ð Þ51 and will be denoted Z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ.
Hence, the transformation of the data moves the center of symmetry is to zero and
changes the variance to one:
f zð Þ5 1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
e2z2
2 ;
2∞<z<∞:
The transformation into the standard normal distribution is shown by
Figure 7.7.
Therefore, when we have a continuous random variable X that is normally
distributed with mean μ and variance σ, we can apply the substitution z5 x2μ
σ
and subsequently speak of the standard normal distribution, z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ.
m=0
f (x)
f(x|m = 0, s = 1)
f(x|m = 0, s = 3)
f(x|m = 1, s = 3)
m=1
FIGURE 7.7
Transformation into standard normal.
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
239

Definition 7.3.2 Standard Score
The standard score is the transformation of the data given by:
z5x2μ
σ
;
where z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ.
All of our real world problems that follow the Normal/Gaussian PDF are
given in terms of X∼N μ, σ2


, but in order for us to solve them, we must
reduce the data into the standard normal PDF, Z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ.
For example, suppose that we are interested in obtaining the probability
that the random variable X assumes values between a and b; that is,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ
where X∼N μ, σ2


.
This would be the same as the probability that the random variable Z
assumes its values between za5a2μ
σ and zb5 b2μ
σ ; that is,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ5P a2μ
σ
≤Z≤b2μ
σ


:
Figure 7.8 is a graphical presentation of this relationship.
Since we can always reduce the continuous normally distributed random
variable X into the standard normally distributed random variable Z, the
areas of the latter have been tabulated. Applying appropriate conversion for-
mulas, the table can be used to find probabilities for any normally distributed
random variable.
The table for probabilities to the center for the standard normal proba-
bility distribution is given in the Appendix. A sample, for illustrated purpose
is given bellow.
The areas under the standard normal curve between the mean, z50 and
z52:09, are recorded in Table 7.1.
z
f(z|µ = 0, s= 1)
f(x|µ=1, s=3)
P(x1 £ x £ x2)=
P(z1 £ z £ z2)
x
x1
x2
z1
f(x)
z2
FIGURE 7.8
Standardizing the data.
240
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Appendix Standard Normal
Since the standard normal distribution is symmetrical about zero and the total
area under the curve is equal to one, half of the area would lie to the right of
zero and half to the left. Thus, if we know the areas under the curve from z50
and z53:49, we also know the areas under the curve from z50 and z523:49.
Note in Table 7.1 that z is in only correct to the second decimal place; the first
decimal is recorded in the left-hand column and the second decimal place for z,
corresponding to hundredths, is given across the top row. The corresponding
probabilities are correct to the fourth decimal and in Table 7.1, are the prob-
abilities to the center. However, it is also common practice to provide tables
which give probabilities to the left, see Appendix.
The standard normal curves below illustrate how the probabilities are
obtained by the various graphs.
TABLE 7.1 Standard Normal Probability Distribution: To the Center P(0≤Z≤z)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
0.0000
0.0040
0.0080
0.0120
0.0160
0.0199
0.0239
0.0279
0.0319
0.0359
0.1
0.0398
0.0438
0.0478
0.0517
0.0557
0.0596
0.0636
0.0675
0.0714
0.0753
0.2
0.0793
0.0832
0.0871
0.0910
0.0948
0.0987
0.1026
0.1064
0.1103
0.1141
0.3
0.1179
0.1217
0.1255
0.1293
0.1331
0.1368
0.1406
0.1443
0.1480
0.1517
0.4
0.1554
0.1591
0.1628
0.1664
0.1700
0.1736
0.1772
0.1808
0.1844
0.1879
0.5
0.1915
0.1950
0.1985
0.2019
0.2054
0.2088
0.2123
0.2157
0.2190
0.2224
0.6
0.2257
0.2291
0.2324
0.2357
0.2389
0.2422
0.2454
0.2486
0.2517
0.2549
0.7
0.2580
0.2611
0.2642
0.2673
0.2704
0.2734
0.2764
0.2794
0.2823
0.2852
0.8
0.2881
0.2910
0.2939
0.2967
0.2995
0.3023
0.3051
0.3078
0.3106
0.3133
0.9
0.3159
0.3186
0.3212
0.3238
0.3264
0.3289
0.3315
0.3340
0.3365
0.3389
1.0
0.3413
0.3438
0.3461
0.3485
0.3508
0.3531
0.3554
0.3577
0.3599
0.3621
1.1
0.3643
0.3665
0.3686
0.3708
0.3729
0.3749
0.3770
0.3790
0.3810
0.3830
1.2
0.3849
0.3869
0.3888
0.3907
0.3925
0.3944
0.3962
0.3980
0.3997
0.4015
1.3
0.4032
0.4049
0.4066
0.4082
0.4099
0.4115
0.4131
0.4147
0.4162
0.4177
1.4
0.4192
0.4207
0.4222
0.4236
0.4251
0.4265
0.4279
0.4292
0.4306
0.4319
1.5
0.4332
0.4345
0.4357
0.4370
0.4382
0.4394
0.4406
0.4418
0.4429
0.4441
1.6
0.4452
0.4463
0.4474
0.4484
0.4495
0.4505
0.4515
0.4525
0.4535
0.4545
1.7
0.4554
0.4564
0.4573
0.4582
0.4591
0.4599
0.4608
0.4616
0.4625
0.4633
1.8
0.4641
0.4649
0.4656
0.4664
0.4671
0.4678
0.4686
0.4693
0.4699
0.4706
1.9
0.4713
0.4719
0.4726
0.4732
0.4738
0.4744
0.4750
0.4756
0.4761
0.4767
2.0
0.4772
0.4778
0.4783
0.4788
0.4793
0.4798
0.4803
0.4808
0.4812
0.4817
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
241

0
z
f(z)
d
0≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
z
f(z)
0
d
P 2∞≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
Or
z
f(z)
P(– • £ x £ d) = 0.5
0
d
P 2∞≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ50:5 + P 0≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
f(z)
z
0
d
P δ≤Z≤∞
ð
Þ
242
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

0
z
f(z)
P(– • £ z £ •)= 1
P(– • £ z £ d)
P(d £ z £ •)
d
P δ≤Z≤∞
ð
Þ512P 2∞≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
Or
0
z
f(z)
P(0 £ z £ •) = 0.5
P(0 £ z £ d)
P(d £ z £ •)
d
P δ≤Z≤∞
ð
Þ50:52P 0≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
0
z
f(z)
d
–d
P 2δ≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
Or
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
243

0
z
f(z)
d
−d
P 2δ≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ52×P 0≤Z≤δ
ð
Þ
This probability density function is well-defined, and hence as with the
charts in the Appendix, we can create accurate probability charts depending
on the number of decimals we take the standard z-score to.
Example 7.3.1 Standard Normal Probabilities
Using the chart, find the following probabilities:
(a)
P 0≤Z≤1:72
ð
Þ
(b)
P 21:81≤Z≤0
ð
Þ
(c)
P 1:12≤Z≤2:1
ð
Þ
(d)
P 22:0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ
(e)
P Z≤2:57
ð
Þ
(f)
P Z≥1:97
ð
Þ
Solution
For Part (a), using the chart which gives the probabilities to the center, we can just look
up 1.7 in the left-most column and 0.02 in the first row (corresponding to
z51:7 + 0:0251:72). From this row and column, we can cross-hatch the table to find
the area under the curve (a probability) of 0.4573.
How to use the Appendix
Standard Normal Probability Distribution: To the Center P 0≤Z≤z
ð
Þ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
0.0000
0.0040
↓
0.0120
0.0160
0.0199
0.0239
0.0279
0.0319
0.0359
0.1
0.0398
0.0438
0.0517
0.0557
0.0596
0.0636
0.0675
0.0714
0.0753
0.2
0.0793
0.0832
0.0910
0.0948
0.0987
0.1026
0.1064
0.1103
0.1141
1.6
0.4452
0.4463
0.4484
0.4495
0.4505
0.4515
0.4525
0.4535
0.4545
1.7
→
0.4573
0.4582
0.4591
0.4599
0.4608
0.4616
0.4625
0.4633
1.8
0.4641
0.4649
0.4656
0.4664
0.4671
0.4678
0.4686
0.4693
0.4699
0.4706
244
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Solution—cont’d
Hence, we have
P 0≤Z≤1:72
ð
Þ50:4573;
which means that there is a 45.73% chance that the continuous random variable, z, will
assume a value between 0 and 1.72.
For Part (b), by symmetry,
P 21:81≤Z≤0
ð
Þ5P 0≤Z≤1:81
ð
Þ
hence using Appendix G1, we have
P 21:81≤Z≤0
ð
Þ5P 0≤Z≤1:81
ð
Þ50:4649
This means that there is approximately 46.5% chance that the continuous random
variable will assume a value between –1.81 (standard deviation from the mean) and
0 (standard deviations from the mean). Recall: z is the standard score, that is, the number
of standard deviations from the mean.
For Part (c), using the chart to the center we have
P 1:12≤Z≤2:1
ð
Þ5P 0≤Z≤2:1
ð
Þ2P 0≤Z≤1:12
ð
Þ50:482120:3686
50:1135:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Hence, there is an 11.35% chance that the continuous random variable will
assume a value between 1.12 and 2.10. For Part (d), we have
P 22:0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ5P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ + P 22:0≤Z≤0
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤2:0
ð
Þ
50:1915 + 0:477250:6687
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
P 1:12≤Z≤2:10
ð
Þ511:35%
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
245

Hence, there is a 66.87% chance that the continuous random variable will
assume a value between 2.00 and 0.50.
For Part (e), since the mean is the median we have,
P Z≤2:57
ð
Þ5P Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤2:57
ð
Þ50:5 + 0:494950:9949
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
P( Z£0) =0.5
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Hence, it is high likely that the data is less than 2.57 standard deviations
above the mean; in fact, there is an approximately 99.5% that the continuous
random variable will assume a value less than 2.57 standard deviation from the
mean. Hence, there is only a 0.5% change that is will exceed this value.
For Part (f), P Z≥1:97
ð
Þ, since the mean is the median, we have
P Z≥1:97
ð
Þ50:52P 0≤Z≤1:97
ð
Þ
50:520:4765
50:0235
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P(Z≥0) = 0.5
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
This means that there is a 2.35% chance that the continuous random var-
iable, z, will assume a value between 0 and 1.97.
We should also mention the fact that we can find a value for the standard
normal random variable Z such that the probability of a larger or a smaller
value is equal to a certain area (probability); that is, we can use the chart in
reverse (backward).
For example, find a value for Z such that the probability of a larger value is
equal to 0.0517. The probability of a larger value is the area to the right of δ as
shown by the graph below:
0
z
f(z)
δ
0.0517
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
P Z≥1:97
ð
Þ52:35%
246
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

The area between zero (0) and δ must be 0.500020.0517 or 0.4483.
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P (Z > 0)=0.5
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Thus, looking at Appendix G2, for the value of δ such that
P 0≤z≤δ
ð
Þ50:4483≈0:4484
we find that δ51:63.
Thus, there is a 5.17% chance that the random variable, z, will assume a
value greater than 1.63.
How to use Appendix backward
Standard Normal Probability Distribution P(0<Z<z)
STANDARD NORMAL PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION P( 0 < Z < z ) 
0.00 
0.01 
0.02
0.03
0.04 
0.05 
0.06 
0.07 
0.08 
0.09
0.0 0.0000 0.0040
0.0080
0.0160 
0.0199
0.0239 0.0279
0.0319 0.0359
0.1 0.0398 0.0438
0.0478
0.0557 
0.0596
0.0636 0.0675
0.0714 0.0753
0.2 0.0793 0.0832
0.0871
0.0948 
0.0987
0.1026 0.1064
0.1103 0.1141
1.5 0.4332 0.4345
0.4357
0.4382 
0.4394
0.4406 0.4418
0.4429 0.4441
1.6 
0.4484
0.4495 
0.4505
0.4515 0.4525
0.4535 0.4545
1.7 0.4554 0.4564
0.4573 0.4582
0.4591 
0.4599
0.4608 0.4616
0.4625 0.4633
Before proceeding to illustrate the usefulness of the normal probability dis-
tribution, let us summarize how we use the standard normal areas for finding
probabilities for the general normal variable. Let X be normal with mean μ and
variance σ2, X∼N μ, σ2


: Suppose that we are interested in finding the prob-
ability that a random selected value for X will be between a and b. That is,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ:
To obtain this probability, we must first calculate two numbers z1 and z2
using the following formulas:
z15a2μ
σ
and z25b2μ
σ
:
Then,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ5P z1 ≤Z≤z2
ð
Þ
If we assume that μ574, σ2536, a569:8, and b578:8, the probability that
a value selected at random for X will be between 69.8 and 78.8 is obtained as
follows: first we calculate
z15a2μ
σ
569:8274
6
524:2
6
520:7
and
z25b2μ
σ
578:8274
6
54:8
6 50:8:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
247

Then,
P 69:8≤X≤78:8
ð
Þ5P 20:7≤Z≤0:8
ð
Þ
5P 20:7≤Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:8
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤0:7
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:8
ð
Þ
50:2580 + 0:258050:5461
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Hence, there is a 54.61% chance that the random variable, X, will assume a
value between 69.8 and 78.8.
We shall illustrate some of the applications of the normal distribution
with the following examples:
Example 7.3.2 Normal Probabilities
We may assume that scores, of a biology examination to be characterized by a con-
tinuous random variable, X, that is normally distributed with μ575 and σ2564. What
is the probability that
a)
A student’s score chosen at random will between 80 and 85?
b)
A student’s score chosen at random will be less than or equal to 85%?
c)
A student’s score chosen at random will above 90?
Solution
For Part (a), we need to obtain
P 80≤X≤85
ð
Þ
Here
z15a2μ
σ
580275
8
55
850:625≈0:63
and
z25b2μ
σ
585275
8
510
8 51:25
Thus,
P 80≤X≤85
ð
Þ5P 0:63≤Z≤1:25
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤1:25
ð
Þ2P 0≤Z≤0:63
ð
Þ
50:394420:235750:1587
Therefore, there is about a 15.87% chance that a student’s score will fall between
80% and 85%.
For Part (b), we want to find
P 0≤X≤85
ð
Þ:
Here,
z15a2μ
σ
50275
8
575
8 529:375
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
248
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Solution—cont’d
and
z25b2μ
σ
585275
8
510
8 51:25:
Thus,
P 0≤X≤85
ð
Þ5P 29:375≤Z≤1:25
ð
Þ
5P 29:375≤Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤1:25
ð
Þ
≈0:5 + P 0≤Z≤1:25
ð
Þ
50:5000 + 0:394450:8944
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P(Z£ 0) =0.5
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Note that P 29:735≤Z≤0
ð
Þ is not included in Table 7.1; however, practically 0.5 of
the probability is contained in the interval from zero to 3.9. Thus, approximately 0.5 of
the probability is contained in the interval from zero to 9.375. Hence, there is an 89.44%
chance that the score of a student will be lower than or equal to 85%. Hence, there is
approximately an 89.4% chance that a student’s score will fall below 85%; that is,
approximate 89.4% of the values this random variable takes is between the minimum
of 0 and (above average), an 85.
For Part (c), we must calculate
P X≥90
ð
Þ512P X<90
ð
Þ
First, we calculate
z5a2μ
σ
590275
8
515
8 51:875:
Thus,
P X≥90
ð
Þ512P X<90
ð
Þ
512P Z<1:875
ð
Þ
512 P Z<0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤1:875
ð
Þ
½

512 0:5 + P 0≤Z≤1:875
ð
Þ
½

50:52P 0≤Z≤1:875
ð
Þ
50:500020:469950:0301:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
P(Z >0)=0.5
–
Therefore, there is only a 3.01% chance that the score will be a grade
exceeding 90%.
Example 7.3.3 Minting Nickels
The thickness of the nickels minted in the Denver mint varies. We shall assume that the
random variable, X, characterizing this phenomenon is normally distributed with mean
Continued
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
249

Example 7.3.3 Minting Nickels—cont’d
μ5 1
18 inch and σ25 1
49 inch. A nickel will activate a gumball vending machine and gives
two gumballs if its thickness is between 1
33 inch and 2
33 inch. What is the probability that if
a student randomly selects a nickel from his pocket and drops it into a machine he will
get the gumball he paid for plus an additional gumball?
Solution
The machine will be activated if X, the thickness of the nickel, is between 1
33 inch and 2
33
inch. Thus, we need to obtain
P
1
33 ≤X≤2
33


5P 0:030≤X≤0:061
ð
Þ:
We are given μ5 1
1850:056, σ51
750:143, and
z15a2μ
σ
50:03020:056
0:143
520:026
0:143 520:182
and
z25b2μ
σ
50:06120:056
0:143
50:005
0:14350:035
Hence,
P 0:030≤X≤0:061
ð
Þ5P 20:182≤Z≤0:035
ð
Þ
5P 20:182≤Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:035
ð
Þ
50:0714 + 0:016050:0874:
–4
0.0
0.1
0.2
=
+
0.3
0.4
–2
0
2
4
z
–4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
–2
0
2
4
z
Therefore, there is only an 8.74% chance that the student will receive candy.
Example 7.3.4 Mean Weight of Man
Assume that the weights of male students, X, are normally distributed with mean weight
of 160 pounds and standard deviation of 20. Out of 1000 men, how many students weigh
(a)
between 150 and 170 pounds?
(b)
more than or exactly 190 pounds?
Solution
Here, μ5160, σ520, and for Part (a)
z15a2μ
σ
51502160
20
5210
20 520:5
and
z25b2μ
σ
51702160
20
510
2050:5:
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
–2
–4
2
4
z
250
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Solution—cont’d
Hence,
P 150≤X≤170
ð
Þ5P 20:5≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ
5P 20:5≤Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ
52×P 0≤Z≤0:5
ð
Þ
52×0:191550:3830:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Therefore, 38.3% of the 1000 students, or 383 of them, weigh between 150 and 170
pounds.
For Part (b), we need to obtain the following probability:
P X≥190
ð
Þ512P X<190
ð
Þ
First, we calculate
z5a2μ
σ
51902160
20
530
2051:5
Thus,
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P(Z ≥0)=0.5
P (X ≥ 190)=1 – P (X <190)
=1 – P (Z<1.5)
=1 – [P (Z<0) + P (0 £Z£ 1.5)]
=1 – [0.5 + P (0£Z£1.5)]
=0.5 – P (0£Z£1.5)]
=0.5000–0.4332=0.0668
4
–
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
=
Hence, only 6.68% of the 1000 students, or about 67 of them, weigh more than 190
pounds.
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
251

Example 7.3.5 Seismology
In the “time-term” method of refraction seismology, depths from ground level to a
refraction layer are estimated using the time of arrival of vibrations from a distant
explosion. Suppose that, for a particular survey, the estimate of depth at each point
is subject to a random error, which is assumed to be normally distributed with mean
μ of 2 feet and variance of 4 feet. What is the probability that the estimated “depth”
will be negative?
Solution
When we see that the estimated depth appears to fall above the ground, this will be in
effect a negative depth. Therefore, we need to find
P X<0
ð
Þ:
We are given X∼N μ52,σ254


, thus we have
z5a2μ
σ
5022
2 522
2 521
Thus,
P X<0
ð
Þ5P Z<21
ð
Þ
5P Z>1
ð
Þ
512P Z≤1
ð
Þ
512 P Z<0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤1
ð
Þ
½

512 0:5 + 0:3413
½

50:1587:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P(Z ≥0) =0.5
P(Z £0) =0.5
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Thus, there is a 15.87% chance that the estimated “depth” will be negative. This
information is important to seismologist for strategic planning purposes.
Example 7.3.6 Electric Lamps
A certain company annually uses a large number of electric lamps that bum continu-
ously day and night. Assume that, under such conditions, the life of a lamp may be
regarded as a continuous random variable, X, normally distributed about a mean of
70 days with a standard deviation of 20. On January 1st, the company put 10,000
new lamps into service. Approximately how many lamps would be expected to need
replacement by February 1st of the same year?
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
252
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Solution
Here, μ570, σ520, and we need to find
P 0≤X≤31
ð
Þ;
that is, the probability that a lamp will need to be replaced during the period of January
1st to February 1st. Thus,
z15a2μ
σ
50270
20 5270
20 523:5
And
z25b2μ
σ
531270
20
5239
20 521:95:
Hence,
P 0≤X≤31
ð
Þ5P 23:5≤Z≤21:95
ð
Þ
5P 23:5≤Z≤0
ð
Þ2P 21:95≤Z≤0
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤3:5
ð
Þ2P 0≤Z≤1:95
ð
Þ
50:499820:474450:0254:
–4
–2
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
z
2
4
–
=
–4
–2
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
z
2
4
Therefore, the expected number of lamps that will need replacement is equal to
10,000 (0.0254) or 254 lamps.
Example 7.3.7 Corn Crops
A large agricultural complex is conducting a research project on the yields of corn using
different types of fertilizers. A farm is partitioned into a large number of small exper-
imental plots. Suppose that the yield of corn in pounds per plot is normally distributed
around a mean of five pounds, μ55, with a standard deviation of 2 pounds, σ52.
Determine the probability that the yield of a plot will
(a)
exceed 5 pounds
(b)
be between 3.5 and 6.5 pounds.
Solution
Let X be a random variable denoting the yield of a plot. Here, for Part (a), we are inter-
ested in obtaining
P X>5
ð
Þ512P X≤5
ð
Þ;
Thus, for μ55, σ52
z5a2μ
σ
5525
2 50
250;
and
P X>5
ð
Þ5P Z>0
ð
Þ
50:5:
Thus, there is a 50% chance that the corn yield of a plot chosen at random will
exceed 5 pounds. For Part (b), we need to obtain
Continued
–4
–2
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
z
2
4
7.3 Standard Normal Probability Distributions
253

Solution—cont’d
P 3:5≤X≤6:5
ð
Þ
Hence,
z15a2μ
σ
53:525
2
521:5
2
520:75;
we must also consider
z25b2μ
σ
56:525
2
51:5
2 50:75:
Thus,
P 3:5≤X≤6:5
ð
Þ5P 20:75≤Z≤0:75
ð
Þ
5P 20:75≤Z≤0
ð
Þ + P 0≤Z≤0:75
ð
Þ
52×P 0≤Z≤0:75
ð
Þ
52×0:273450:5468
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
+
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Therefore, there is a 54.68% chance that the yield of a plot chosen at random will be
between 3.5 and 6.5 pounds of corn.
Example 7.3.8 Rainfall
In the United States, rainfall measurements are taken in three different regions: the
northern region, central region and the southern region. Suppose that the amount of
yearly rainfall is normally distributed with mean of 5 inches, μ55, and standard devi-
ation of 1 inch, σ51. Determine the probability that the rainfall will
(a)
exceed 6.2 inches
(b)
be between 3.5 and 6.5 pounds.
Solution
Let X be a random variable denoting the amount of rain. Here, for Part (a), we are inter-
ested in obtaining
P X>6:2
ð
Þ512P X≤6:2
ð
Þ;
Thus, for μ55, σ51
z5a2μ
σ
56:225
2
51:2
2 50:60:
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
254
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Solution—cont’d
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
P(Z ≥ 0)=0.5
4
–
=
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Thus, using the charts in the appendix, there is a 72.57% chance that the rainfall will
exceed 6.2 inches.
PROBLEMS
Critical Thinking
7.3.1. Find the probability that a single value of the standard normal random variable Z will be between zero and 1.52.
7.3.2. What is the probability that the value the standard normal random variable Z assumes will be greater than 0.64?
7.3.3. Calculate the probability that the standard normal random variable Z will assume a value between 0.43 and 2.20.
7.3.4. Determine the probability that the standard normal random variable Z will assume a single value between 1.42 and
0.75.
7.3.5. Find a value for the standard normal variable Z such that the probability of a larger value is equal to .025.
Basic Problems
7.3.6. The random variable X is normally distributed with mean μ550 and σ510. Find the following probabilities:
(a) P X≤66
ð
Þ
(b) P X≤56
ð
Þ
(c) P 43≤X≤63
ð
Þ
(d) P 37≤X≤46
ð
Þ
7.3.7. The random variable X is normally distributed with mean μ50:06 and standard deviation σ50:02 Determine the
following probabilities:
(a) P X≥0:07
ð
Þ
(b) P 0:07≤X≤0:079
ð
Þ
7.3.8. If the random variable X is normally distributed with μ550 and σ510, find k so that the P X≤k
ð
Þ50:1841.
7.3.9. Assume that the height of 1000 students is normally distributed with mean height of 68 inches and standard devi-
ation of 4 inches.
(a) Determine the number of students with a height between 64 and 72 inches.
(b) Find the number of students with a height exceeding the mean height.
7.3.10. Suppose that the test scores on a history examination are normally distributed with mean score of 74 and standard
deviation of 10.
(a) Find the probability that a student’s test score chosen at random will be between 80 and 90.
(b) Determine the probability that a student’s test score will be lower than 60.
7.3.11. Suppose that the diameters of golf balls manufactured by a certain company are normally distributed with mean
μ51:94 inches and standard deviation σ50:03 inch. A golf ball will be considered defective if its diameter is less
than 1.89 inches or greater than 1.99 inches. What is the percentage of defective balls manufactured by the
company?
7.3.12. A noise voltage, X, which assumes values of x volts is normally distributed with mean μ51 volt and standard devi-
ation σ50:9 volt.
(a) Determine the probability that the noise voltage is between –1 volts and 2 volts; that is, P 21≤X≤2
ð
Þ.
(b) Find the noise-voltage level such that the probability that this level is exceeded is 0.95.
0.0
−4
−2
0
z
2
4
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Problems
255

7.4
NORMAL APPROXIMATION TO THE BINOMIAL
In Chapter 5, we studied the concept of a discrete random variable and its char-
acterization by the binomial or Bernoulli probability distribution. That is,
given n independent trials, the outcome of each trial is either a success or a
failure, with probabilities p and q512p, respectively. Let X denote the
number of successes that occur in the n trials. Thus, X may assume the values
0,1,2,…,n. You recall that the probability distribution which characterizes
this phenomenon is the binomial probability distribution given by
P x
ð Þ5
n
x
 
pxqn2x, x50,1,2,…,n 0<p<1
When the number of trials n in a given experiment is large, the calculation
of various probabilities of the possible values X can assume becomes quite
tedious. Since many practical problems involve large numbers of repeated
trials, it is of interest to have a rapid technique for calculating the probabilities.
Such a method is given by the normal probability distribution. That is, when
n is sufficiently large, the normal curve can be used as an approximation to the
binomial distribution for the calculation of probabilities for which the binomial
is the correct probability distribution. It has been shown that the expected value
or mean and variance of a discrete random variable that is binomially dis-
tributed are as follows.
Rule 7.4.1 Normal Approximation
To use Normal Approximation, given the binomial probability of success, p, and a
given number of trials, n, then the expected number of successes is
μ5np;
and the variance depends on the sample size, n, the probability of success, p, and the
probability of failure, 12p
ð
Þ; that is, σ25np 12p
ð
Þ and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
.
Thus, in the normal probability distribution we need to substitute the mean
and variance and use the approach of standardizing the normal curve as we
have learned previously to obtain approximate probabilities of problems
involving the binomial distribution. That is,
P x
ð Þ5
n
x
 
px 12p
ð
Þn2x ≈
1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
e
2 1
2
x2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p

2
;
for large n.
For example, suppose that we must find the probability that the number of
successes in a binomial situation is between a and b.
The exact probability is given by
P a≤x≤b
ð
Þ5
X
b
x5a
n
x
 
px 12p
ð
Þn2x:
To obtain an approximation to this probability using the normal curve, we
proceed as follows: let
z15a2μ
σ
5
a2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
256
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

and
z25b2μ
σ
5
b2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
Hence,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ≈P z1 ≤Z≤z2
ð
Þ
5P
a2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
≤Z≤
b2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
 
!
;
and for specific values for a, b, n, and p we can read the desired probabilities
from the Appendix.
In the preceding discussion, we are approximating probabilities of a dis-
crete distribution with a continuous distribution, and so we need to introduce
a correction factor for continuity. In the discrete case, the probability is con-
centrated at the integers; but, when we approximate such probabilities with a
continuous distribution, the corresponding probability is spread over a rect-
angle with base stretching from –1/2 to +1/2 on either side of the integer
involved, as shown in figures to the left and below.
x
x
1
2
2
1
x
x + 1
+
x − 1
−
That is, if we were to approximate the probability at a point x, we would use
the techniques studied in the previous section and find the area from x21
2 to
x + 1
2. That is, we have
P X5x
ð
Þ≈P
x21
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
≤Z≤
x + 1
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
0
B
@
1
C
A
as shown by
z15
x21
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
and z25
x + 1
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
:
7.4 Normal Approximation to the Binomial
257

Hence,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ≈P z1 ≤Z≤z2
ð
Þ5P
a2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
≤Z≤
b2np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
 
!
;
where a5x21
2 and b5x + 1
2:
Example 7.4.1 Normal Approximation
For example, in a problem in which binomial probability distribution is applicable with
p51
2, n510, the normal curve approximation with the correction factor is significantly
closer to the exact probabilities, as shown in the following table:
x
Binomial Probabilities
Normal Approximation
n510, p50.5
μ55, σ 51.58
0
0.0010
0.0020
1
0.0098
0.0112
2
0.0439
0.0435
3
0.1172
0.1145
4
0.2051
0.2045
5
0.2461
0.2482
6
0.2051
0.2045
7
0.1172
0.1145
8
0.0439
0.0435
9
0.0098
0.0112
10
0.0010
0.0020
This table is constructed as follows: we use the binomial probability distribution to
obtain the exact probability of six successes in 10 trials; that is,
P X56
ð
Þ5
10
6

 1
2
 6 1
2
 4
50:2051:
Now we obtain the normal approximation of obtaining six successes in 10 trials;
here, μ5np510×1
255 and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
10×1
2×1
2
q
51:6,
z15
x21
22μ
σ
5
621
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
5
621
225
1:6
50:5
1:650:3125
and
z25
x + 1
22μ
σ
5
6 + 1
22np
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
npq
p
5
6 + 1
225
1:6
51:5
1:650:9375:
Thus,
P a≤X≤b
ð
Þ5P z1 ≤Z≤z2
ð
Þ
5P 0:3125≤Z≤0:9375
ð
Þ
5P 0≤Z≤0:9375
ð
Þ2P 0≤Z≤0:3125
ð
Þ
50:328620:124150:2045
258
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

Example 7.4.1 Normal Approximation—cont’d
0
−2
−4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2
4
0
z
z
−2
−4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2
4
=
–
The difference between the exact probability, 0.2051 and the approximate proba-
bility using the normal probability distribution, 0.2045, is a very small difference of
0.0006.
Note that even for a small number of trials (n510) the normal curve gives a good
approximation to the binomial probabilities. In general, when the value of p in the
binomial is close to 1/2, the approximations are better than when p is close to 0 or 1.
This is because, for p51=2, the binomial distribution is symmetrical (see the preceding
table), and, as we have seen, the curve of the normal distribution is symmetrical.
Note also, the assumptions are satisfied, that is, there are a count of at least five in
each category; five expected successes and five expected failures. However, if this
assumption had not been satisfied, the approximation would not have been as accurate.
Alternatively, we have the following summary of formulations:
0
z
−2
−4
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
2
4
7.4 Normal Approximation to the Binomial
259

Property 7.4.1 Normal Approximation
When using normal approximation to the binomial, the standard score can be
expressed in terms of the number of success or the relative frequency; and either with
and without correction for continuity.
In terms of expected number of successes:
μ5np, σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
and without correction for continuity
z5x2μ
σ
and with correction for continuity
z5 x∓0:5
ð
Þ2μ
σ
In terms of expected proportions:
μ^p5p, σ^p5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
r
:
and without correction for continuity
z5
^p2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
r
and with correction for continuity
z5
^p∓0:5
n


2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
r
PROBLEMS
Basic Problems
7.4.1. Let the random variable X be binomially distributed with p50:6 and n510. Evaluate the following probabilities:
7.4.2. Use the normal approximation both with and without correction for continuity to obtain the probabilities asked for in
the previous exercise and compare your result with those of that problem.
7.4.3. During tests of reliability of a certain item, the probability of failure is 0.1. During a test of 100 items, determine the
probability that the number of failures will be between 3 and 5.
7.4.4. A fair coin is tossed 15 times. Determine the probability that between 6 and 8 heads inclusive occurring
(a) the binomial probability distribution.
(b) the normal approximation without correction for continuity.
(c) the normal approximation with correction for continuity.
7.4.5. An encyclopedia salesman has observed that, on the average, the probability of making a sale on the first contact is
equal to 0.49. The salesman will contact 200 customers during a six-month period. What is the probability that the
number of successful contacts will be between 100 and 110?
7.4.6. A fair die is tossed 200 times. Using normal approximation to the binomial, what is the probability that an ace (one)
will appear between 34 and 36 times?
Critical Thinking
7.4.7. Suppose that a “loaded” coin is tossed a large number of times. If the probability of a head occurring at any given toss
is 0.60, find the number of tosses required in order for the experiment to result in fewer than 20 tails, with probability
of at least 0.95.
260
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

7.4.8. The probability of having a girl is 0.5, so, using the normal approximation, what is the probability that in a family of
five will have exactly one boy? Compare this to the binomial probability distribution. Discuss.
7.4.9. If the probability of having a girl is 0.35, using normal approximation, what is the probability that in a family of five
will have exactly one boy? Compare this to the binomial probability distribution. Discuss.
7.4.10. If the probability of having a girl is 0.35, using the normal approximation, what is the probability that in a family of
five will have exactly three boys? Compare this to the binomial probability distribution. Discuss.
7.4.11. If the probability of finding success in a business venture is 0.05, using the normal approximation, what is the prob-
ability that in 200 business ventures the number of success
(a) will be between 10 and 15?
(b) will be exactly 10?
(c) will exceed 10?
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
Basic Problems
7.1. Let the random variable X be normally distributed with mean 75 and standard deviation 10. Calculate the following
probabilities:
(a) P X≤74
ð
Þ
(b) P X>68
ð
Þ
(c) P 72≤X≤76
ð
Þ
7.2. Suppose that the weights of the football players in the NFL are normally distributed with a mean of 235 pounds and a
standard deviation of 30 pounds. What is the probability that a football player chosen at random will weigh
(a) less than 240 pounds?
(b) between 225 and 245 pounds?
7.3. Assuming that the test grades of a biochemistry examination are normally distributed with mean 75% and standard
deviation 10%. What is the probability that a test grade of a student selected at random will be
(a) lower than 80%?
(b) between 68% and 78%?
(c) greater than 96.7%, an A+?
7.4. A race car driver is experimenting with two different strategies to determine which will bring him the greatest success.
The time it takes to cover the course is the main criterion by which he is judging the two strategies. Suppose that the
time using Strategy A is normally distributed with a mean of 4 hours and a standard deviation of 0.8 hours; for Strategy
B the distribution is also normal with a mean of 4.5 hours and a standard deviation of 0.4 hours. If our driver is to be a
top contender to win the race, he must cover the course within 4.6 hours. Which strategy is the better choice?
7.5. The length of life of a plasma TV is known to be normally disturbed with a claimed mean of 100,000 hours to half-life
or approximately 54 years at 3 hours per day with a standard deviation of 12 years. What is the probability that a
plasma TV selected at random will operate for between 30 and 60 years.
7.6. Suppose the diameter of golf balls manufactured by a certain company is normally distributed with a mean of 1.90
inches and a standard deviation of 0.5 inches. A golf ball produced by this company will be approved for use in the US
Open Golf Tournament if its diameter is within 0.08 inches from the mean. What is the probability that a golf ball of
this kind chosen at random will not be acceptable for use the tournament?
7.7. Assuming the breaking strength of a woolen fabric is normally distributed with a mean of 100 pounds and a standard
deviation of 8 pounds. A fabric of this type will successfully pass a government inspection if its breaking strength is
greater than 90 pounds. What is the probability that a woolen fabric chosen at random will pass the inspection?
7.8. The probability that a freshman entering a certain university and eventually graduating is 0.66. Suppose that a
freshmen class consists of 36,358 students enrolled in the University of South Florida in 2009. What is the probability
that
(a) at least 2400 of the entering freshmen will graduate?
(b) the number of freshmen who will eventually graduate is between 1950 and 2250?
7.9. A basketball player succeeds on 82% of his foul shots. If during a basketball season he will shoot about 130 foul shots,
determine the probability that he will be successful with at least 80 baskets.
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
261

7.10. Suppose that temperature fluctuation (measurements) during the winter months in Clearwater, Florida are normally
distributed with a mean of 76 °F and standard deviation of 12 °F. What is the probability that on a selected windy day
the temperature in Clearwater will be
(a) between 70 °F and 80 °F?
(b) higher than 80 °F?
7.11. About 10% of the pantyhose manufactured by company A do not pass inspection and are considered irregular or
defective. What is the probability that in a random sample of 500 pantyhose produced by this process
(a) at most 50 will be defective?
(b) between 40 and 60 will not pass inspection?
7.12. Let X be binomially distributed with n5100, and p50:6. Use the normal approximation to determine the following
probabilities:
(a) P X≤70
ð
Þ
(b) P 58≤X≤62
ð
Þ
7.13. Suppose that 5% of the pollution devices in the new automobiles are not effective after the first year of operation. If,
following that year, we sampled 100 automobiles with such device, determine the probability that we would find
fewer than 40 automobiles with ineffective pollution devices? (Assuming that owners did not bother to have these
devices checked during the first year.)
Critical Thinking
7.14 Determine if the random variable is discrete or continuous:
(a) In an experiment, to monitor the productivity of a newly developed fuel, a researcher measures the liters produced
by as single corn stock.
(b) In an experiment, the rate at which salts dissolve in water, the times are recorded from the moment the water is
poured into the salt until no crystals can visually be seen.
(c) In an ecology study, to monitor trout in the St. Johns river, trout are counted and counted before being weighted,
tagged and returned to the water.
7.15 Given that the data follows the normal probability distribution with mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15,
determine the following probabilities:
(a) P x≤110
ð
Þ
(b) P x≥110
ð
Þ
(c) P 70≤x≤110
ð
Þ
(d) P x≤80
ð
Þ
(e) P 65≤x≤90
ð
Þ
(f) P x≥70
ð
Þ
7.16 Given that the data follows the normal probability distribution with mean of 100 and standard deviation of 15, find the
value of a such that:
(a) P x≤a
ð
Þ50:90
(b) P x≥a
ð
Þ50:90
(c) P 2a≤x≤a
ð
Þ50:9
(d) P x≤a
ð
Þ50:95
(e) P 2a≤x≤a
ð
Þ50:95
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
7.1.1 A random variable which can assume an infinitely large number of values associated with the points on a line interval,
and the probability of which is spread continuously over these points, is called a continuous random variable.
7.2.1 A continuous random variable X is normally distributed or follows a normal probability distribution if its prob-
ability distribution is given by the following function:
f x
ð Þ5
1
σ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
e2 x2μ
ð
Þ2
2σ2 ;
2∞<x<∞,2∞<μ<∞,0<σ2<∞
7.3.1 The standard normal probability distribution (standard normal curve) has mean of zero, E zð Þ50, and unit var-
iance, V zð Þ51 and will be denoted z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ. Hence, the transformation of the data moves the center of symmetry is
to zero and changes the variance to one:
f zð Þ5 1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2π
p
e2z2
2 ;
2∞<z<∞:
262
Chapter 7
Normal Probability

7.3.2 The standard score is the transformation of the data given by: z5 x2μ
σ ; where z∼N 0, 1
ð
Þ.
Rules:
7.4.1. To use Normal Approximation, given the binomial probability of success, p, and a given number of trials, n, then
the expected number of successes is
μ5np;
and the variance depends on the sample size, n, the probability of success, p, and the probability of failure, 12p
ð
Þ; that
is, σ25np 12p
ð
Þ and σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
.
Properties:
7.4.1. When using normal approximation to the binomial, the standard score can be expressed in terms of the number of
success or the relative frequency; and either with and without correction for continuity.
In terms of expected number of successes: μ5np, σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
np 12p
ð
Þ
p
; and without correction for continuity z5x2μ
σ
and with
correction for continuity z5 x∓0:5
ð
Þ2μ
σ
.
In terms of expected proportions: μ^p5p, σ^p5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
q
and without correction for continuity z5
^p2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
r
and with cor-
rection for continuity z5
^p∓0:5
n


2p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p 12p
ð
Þ
n
r
.
REVIEW TEST
1. Which one of the following would not be expected to be normal?
(a) The height of a rose bush
(b) The yearly family income in the United States
(c) The lifetime of a car battery
2. Which statement(s) is/are true regarding normally distributed data?
(a) The mean equals the median equals the mode
(b) The mean is positive.
(c) The points of inflection are at μ±σ
3. Given the distribution of IQ scores is normally distributed with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15. What
percentage of all scores lie within 1, 2, and 3 standard deviations from the mean?
4. On an exam, the scores are normally distributed with a mean of 145 and a standard deviation of 18. What percentage of
the scores are
(a) above 200
(b) below 120
(c) between 120 and 200
(d) between 150 and 180
(e) between 100 and 130
5. The wait time to be checked out at a local convenience store is normally distributed with a mean of 15 minutes and a
standard deviation of 4 minutes. If there are 200 customers in a given day, answer the following questions:
(a) What percent of customers waited between 10 and 25 minutes?
(b) How many customers are expected to have waited between 10 and 25 minutes?
(c) What percent of customers waited for more than 25 minutes?
(d) How many customers are expected to have waited for more than 25 minutes?
6. A fair die is rolled 30 times. Find the probability of getting exactly 10 fours using normal approximation to the binomial.
REFERENCES
Cramer, H., 1955b. The Elements of Probability Theory and Some of Its Applications. Wiley, New York Almquist & Wiksell, Stockholm, 1954.
Goldberg, S., 1960. Probability: An Introduction. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Monroe, M.E., 1951. Theory of Probability. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Parzen, E., 1960b. Modern Probability Theory and Its Applications. Wiley, New York.
Tsokos, C.P., 1972d. Probability Distributions: An Introduction to Probability Theory with Applications. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978f. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
Tsokos, C.P., Wooten, R.D., 2011c. The Joy of Statistics Using Real-World Data. Kendall Hunt, Florida.
References
263

Chapter 8
Basic Statistics
8.1 Data Organization
266
8.2 Graphical Representative of Qualitative Information
275
8.3 Graphical Representation of Quantitative Information
286
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
294
8.5 Measuring Deviation from the Center
312
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
322
Summary of Important Concepts
323
Review Test
326
References
327
Numerical quantities focus on expected values, graphical summaries on unexpected values.
John Wilder Tukey
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
265

JohnWilder Tukey was a chemist turned topologist turned statistician and was one of the most influential statisticians of the past
50 years. He is credited with inventing the word software. He worked as a professor at Princeton University and was a senior
researcher at AT&T’s Bell Laboratories. He made significant contributions to the fields of exploratory data analysis and robust
estimation.Hisworksonthespectrumanalysisoftimeseriesandotheraspectsofdigitalsignalprocessinghavebeenwidelyused
in engineering and science. He coined the word bit, which refers to a unit of information processed by a computer. In collab-
oration with Cooley, in 1965, Tukey introduced the fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm that greatly simplified computation
for Fourier series and integrals. Tukey authored or coauthored many books in statistics and wrote more than 500 technical
papers. Among Tukey’s most far-reaching contributions was his development of techniques for “robust analysis” and approach
tostatistics thatguardagainst wrong answersinsituationswherearandomlychosensampleofdatahappenstopoorlyrepresent
the population. Tukey also made significant contributions to the analysis of variance.
8.1
DATA ORGANIZATION
When data is first gathered, it is listed in some form; we refer to it as the listed
data. Listed data is a sequence of information presented (listed) as it is
observed; usually denoted: x1,x2,…,xn, where n is the sample size. Three
basic forms of summarizing the frequency distribution of the given data
include Dot Plot, Stem-and-Leaf Plot, and Frequency Tables.
We begin with a Dot Plot.
Definition 8.1 Dot Plot
A dot plot is one of the simplest ways to determine the distribution of numerical data—
using a real number line, create a scale that includes the minimum and maximum data
values, and then place a dot above each observed data point.
The simplest form of statistical plots best suited for smaller sample sizes; a
useful aid in organizing numerical information.
Step-by-Step Dot Plot
Step 1.
Construct a number line that contains both the minimum and maximum data
and is partitioned into an appropriate scale.
Step 2.
One at a time, as you run through the numbers, place a dot above the number
line and above any previously drawn dot to create columns above each
observed value as a count of frequency.
Example 8.1.1 Dot Plot of Listed Data
Given the listed data: 1, 4, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 3, draw the associated dot plot.
266
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution
Step 1.
Draw a real number line which covers the full range of data, the minimum is 1
and the maximum is 5.
Step 2.
Then, one data value at a time, placing a dot over the observed value yields the
following dot plot.
1
2
3
4
5
Looking at the dot plot we can see that the most frequently observed value is 3 and it
appears 4 times, the number 4 appears 3 times, and the remaining three observations: 1,
2, and 5 all occur once.
Dot plots are useful to help organize and describe discrete quantitative
data sets with relative small sample size and little variability; however, for
larger quantitative data sets, a stem-and-leaf plot is more appropriate.
Definition 8.1.2 Stem-and-Leaf Plot
A stem-and-leaf plot is completed in two stages. First the basic stem and leaf are con-
structed by breaking the observed data values into categories such as tens and hundreds
(the stem) and then units digits or the remaining associated information (the leaves).
This initial sort does give the overall distribution, but it is common practice to then
sort the leaves. The range of a data set is the difference between the minimum and
maximum value; or maximum minus minimum.
A four step procedure is given on how to structure a stem-and-leaf plot.
Step-by-Step Stem-and-Leaf Plot
Step 1.
Construct a column of stems—this is subjective to the range of numbers. For
example, if numbers range from 100 to 150, then the hundreds and tens might
be the stem and the units value the leaf.
Step 2.
Once the stems are in place, read the data values one at a time, placing each
leaf on the appropriate stem.
Step 3.
Once the basic stem-and-leaf configuration is complete, sort each of the stems
within their respective category.
Step 4.
↻If there is more than one data set being considered, we might extend this in
both directions and create a back-to-back stem-and-leaf table. That is, repeat
Steps 1-3 for each set of comparable data.
Example 8.1.2 Stem-and-Leaf Plot
We have obtained the following data from an experiment: 193, 405, 330, 503, 244, 323,
487, 385, 454, and 391. Develop the Stem-and-leaf plot.
8.1 Data Organization
267

Solution
Since the data ranges over (503193)¼310 values, we will assign the hundred’s place
value to be the stem and the tens and units values to be the leaf.
Step 1
Construct Stem
Step 2
Add Leafs
Step 3
Sort Leafs
Stem
Stem
Leaf
Stem
Leaf
1
1
93
1
93
2
2
44
2
44
3
3
30, 23, 85, 91
3
23, 30, 85, 91
4
4
05, 87, 54
4
5, 54, 87
5
5
03
5
3
There are many ways to define a stem-and-leaf plot; however, there are a few
underlying constructs. Thus, in steps 2 and 3 we see that most of the observations
are in the third stem; that is, the most frequent category is one with numbers in the
300 s. There are no obvious gaps—thus we have low variability.
Given below are three rules that we follow constructing the stem-and-leaf.
Rule 8.1.1 Stem-and-Leaf Plots
A stem-and-leaf plot must follow the following rules:
1.
The defined stems and leaves must be based on equal intervals.
2.
All intermediate categories must be included even though there might be zero data
values in a given category.
3.
Including empty categories within the outlined range of data values appear as gaps
and these gaps are indicative of variability in the data.
Example 8.1.3 Stem-and-Leaf Plot
A given experiment results in the following measurements: 5.63, 5.94, 5.73, 5.64, 5.69,
5.36, 5.88, 5.82, 5.59, and 5.67. Develop a stem-and-leaf plot of the data and interpret.
Solution
Since the data ranges over (5.945.36)¼0.58 values, which is less than one, we will
be assigning the units and tenths place value to be the stem and the hundredths place
value to be the leaf.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Stem
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.3
6
9
3, 4, 9, 7
8, 2
4
3
6
9
3, 4, 7, 9
2, 8
4
3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5.3
5.4
0
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
Stem
Stem
Leaf
Leaf
268
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
In the above stem-and-leaf plot, we see that there is variability in the data as indi-
cated by the gap, there are no observations starting with 5.4. However, this does appear
most frequently in the 5.6’s. The data ranges from 5.36 to 5.94, a maximum difference
(range) of 0.58.
Definition 8.1.4 Frequency Table
A frequency table is simply a “t-chart” or two-column table which outlines the various
possible outcomes and the associated frequencies observed in a sample.
Frequency tables are used for discrete data or discretized data (that is
continuous data partitioned into distinct intervals which can be considered
discretely).
The capital Greek letter sigma (Σ) will be used to represent the idea “to
sum”; for example, as the sample size is the sum of the frequencies, it can
be written n5
X
f. If there are k distinct outcomes with associated fre-
quencies fi for i51,2,…,k, then this notation can be extended to include more
detail by including this count; that is, n5
X
k
i51
f i ¼ f 1 + f 2 + ⋯+ f k. The lower
script defines the counter, i, as well as the under script states the starting point
(when simply counting, this is, 1) and the upper script defines the point of ter-
mination (in listed data this is simply n.)
Step-by-Step Frequency Table
Step 1.
Construct a column of the different data values in ascending order.
Step 2.
For each data value, count the number of times each value occurs.
Example 8.1.4 Frequency Table
The results of a given experiment are: 6, 4, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 3, 5, and 3 and the associated
Frequency Table is given by:
Outcome
2
1
5
4
2
1
3
4
5
6
Frequency
Here we see that the most frequent data (the mode) is 3, the minimum is 2 and the
maximum is 6.
From this frequency table, we can begin to visualize the frequencies or frequency
distribution of the given data.
A common and useful method is to develop the frequency distribution of a
given set of data.
Definition 8.1.4 Frequency Distribution
A frequency distribution is a tabulation of the values that one or more variables take in
a sample which can be organized in a frequency table or illustrated graphically.
8.1 Data Organization
269

Frequency distribution is distinguished from probability distribution as the
occurrence of each outcome is a count and not a percent. These counts can
be manipulated by dividing by the total number of trials in the sample; that
is, the sample size n, to obtain the relative frequency distribution. That is,
the occurrence of each outcome in a percent or proportion of the total sample
size; the relative frequency. Moreover, with a few additional calculations, both
of these measures, the count that is frequency, f and the rate, f
n that is relative
frequency can be described cumulatively: and cumulative relative frequency.
Definition 8.1.5 Relative Frequency
A relative frequency is a measure between 0 and 1 that describes the frequency with
which the values of the variable take relative to the sample size, n.
pi5f i
n
where
n5
X
k
i51
f i
and k is the distinct number of outcomes.
Definition 8.1.6 Probability Distribution
A probability distribution is a tabulation of the values that one or more variables take
in a sample written in terms of relative frequency, percentages, or proportions. If
these values follow a formula, then this formula will be denoted as f(x).
Step-by-Step Frequency Table Extended
Step 1.
Construct a column of the different data values in ascending order.
Step 2.
For each data value, count the number of times each value occurs.
Step 3.
↳Using the sum of the frequencies, we can verify that we have included all the
data points as well as create a column for relative frequencies; that is, given
that the frequency of a given outcome is fi and the sample size (sum of
frequencies) is n, then the relative frequency is pi5 f i
n .
Step 4. ↳Using the frequencies, we can also compute the cumulative frequencies;
that is,
ci5
X
i
j51
f j5f 1 + f 2 + ⋯+ f i
for i51,2,…,k, where k is the number of distinct outcomes.
Step 5.
↳Using the cumulative frequencies, we can then compute the cumulative
relative frequency
Ci5ci
n 5
X
i
j51
pj5p1 + p2 + ⋯+ pi
Note:
X
k
i51
pi51
Example 8.1.5 Frequency Table Extended
Using the data from the frequency table in Example 6.4, compute the relative
frequency.
270
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution
Since the total sample size is n5
X
f51 + 5 + 4 + 2 + 1513, the relative frequency is
the frequency of each of the data value divided by 13.
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Outcome
2
3
4
5
6
2
1
5
4
2
1
13
13
1
= 1/13 =0.0769
= 5/13 = 0.3846
= 4/13 = 0.3077
= 2/13 = 0.1538
= 1/13 = 0.0769
5
4
2
1
3
4
5
6
2
3
4
5
6
x
x
f
x
f
p
Outcome
Outcome
Relative
frequency
Frequency
Frequency
Above relative frequencies are given too many decimals, but this can be rounded or
written as a percentage. For example, from the above table, we see relative to the data
set, 38.4% of the information is in a single category, the mode 3.
The cumulative frequencies are created consecutively, adding additional counts as
you progress, and you should always end with the total sample size n.
Step 4.
Outcome
Frequency
Cumulative frequency
2
1
C1= 1
C2=1+5 = 6
C3=6+4 = 10
C4=10+2 = 12
C5=12+1 = 13
1
5
6
4
10
2
12
1
13
13
3
4
5
6
x
f
ci
ci
The cumulative relative frequencies are created in a similar way to the relative fre-
quencies, except we are using the cumulative frequencies or summing the relative fre-
quencies. Note: the last entry should be 1.000 or 100%.
2
1
0.0769
0.4615
0.7692
0.9231
1.0000
=1/13=0.0769
=6/13=0.4615
=10/13=0.7692
=12/13=0.9231
=13/13=1.0000
6
10
12
13
13
3
4
5
6
ci
Ci
Step 5.
Outcome
Cumulative
frequency
Cumulative
relative
frequency
Continued
8.1 Data Organization
271

Solution—cont’d
Otherwise, using the relative frequency, we have the following.
Outcome
2
1
0.0769
0.3846
0.3077
0.1538
0.0769
5
4
2
1
3
4
5
6
Frequency
Relative frequency
C1 = p1
C2 = p1 + p2
C3 = p1 + p2 + p3 = C2 + p3
C4  =  p1 + p2 + p3 + p4 = C3 + p4  =
C5  =  p1 + p2 + p3 + p4 + p5
= C4 + p5 =
=0.0769
=0.0769+0.3846=0.4615
=0.4615+0.3077=0.7692
=0.7692+0.1538=0.923
=0.923+0.0769=0.9999
Note: Here we have rounding errors as all the relative frequencies have been
rounded to the fourth decimal place. Had we used the cumulative frequency divided
by the total, we would not have this issue.
Thus, we can conclude from the cumulative relative frequency that 46.15% of the
outcomes in the experiment will be less than or equal to 3, whereas 92.3% of the out-
comes are less than or equal to 5 and 100%, that is, all the data are less than or equal to 6.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
8.1.1. What is always the last entry in the cumulative frequency column? What is the last entry in the cumulative relative
frequency column?
8.1.2. Distinguish between a frequency table and a stem-and-leaf plot.
8.1.3. Distinguish between a stem-and-leaf plot and a back-to-back stem-and-leaf plot.
8.1.4. Distinguish between a frequency table and a frequency distribution.
8.1.5. Distinguish between a frequency distribution and a probability distribution.
8.1.6. Distinguish between frequency and relative frequency.
8.1.7. Distinguish between frequency and cumulative frequency.
8.1.8. Distinguish between the relative frequency and the cumulative relative frequency.
Basic Problems
8.1.9. You are going to hold an ice cream party for the people in this survey.
Favorite ice cream flavor
Flavor
Pistachio
Coconut
Chocolate
Vanilla
Banana nut
Number
a. If you can have three flavors of ice cream at your party, which flavors of ice cream would you bring?
b. What is the least popular ice cream flavor?
272
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.1.10. You are going to hold a bake sale, so you take the following survey.
Favorite cookie
Cookie
Peanut butter
Chocolate chip
Animal crackers
Ginger snaps
Oatmeal
Number
a. How many people chose either animal crackers or chocolate chip?
b. What is the least popular cookie flavor?
c. How many people chose oatmeal as their favorite cookie?
8.1.11. You are interested in which animals are a favorite in your local zoo and take the following survey.
Favorite zoo animals
Animal
Peafowl
Woodpecker
Kangaroo
Panda
Elephant
Cobra
10
4
7
9
6
5
Number
a. How many people chose a mammal as their favorite animal?
b. List the zoo animals in order from the zoo animal with the fewest votes to the zoo animal with the most votes.
c. List the zoo animals in order from the zoo animal with the most votes to the zoo animal with the fewest votes.
8.1.12. You are going to hold an ice cream party for the people in this survey.
Favorite beverage
Beverage
Number
Lemonade
Root beer
Orange soda
Punch
Milk
Cola
12
10
5
9
2
4
a. How many people answered the survey?
b. List the beverages in order from the beverage with the fewest votes to the beverage with the most votes.
c. How many fewer people chose punch than chose root beer?
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
8.1.13. According to the dot plot above, what is the greatest number of games won?
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
8.1.14. According to the dot plot above, what is the most frequent number of e-mails sent today?
9
10
11
12
13
Exercises
273

8.1.15. Given the data in the dot plot above, what is the most frequently occurring data value?
8.1.16. Construct a dot plot for the following data on number of games won by students: 1, 8, 2, 6, 1, 2, 3, and 1. How many
students won more than three games?
8.1.17. Construct a dot plot for the following data on number of games won by students: 4, 2, 5, 7, 8, 6, 7, 5, 4, 5, and 2. What
is the greatest number of games won?
8.1.18. Given the following stem-and-leaf for temperatures recorded in October.
Stem
(tens)
4
8
1
0
4
5
0
2
2
2
3
5
0 1
7 4
5
6
7
Leaves
(units)
a. How many temperatures are recorded?
b. What was the highest temperature recorded?
c. What is the coldest (lowest) temperature recorded?
8.1.19. This stem-and-leaf plot shows Madison’s scores from a video game.
19
Stem
Leaves
Game scores
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
2
2
2
4
2
0
0
8
6
6 3 1
5
6
a. How many games scored at least 223?
b. What is the range of the data set?
c. What was the highest score?
8.1.20. Construct a back-to-back stem-and-leaf plot for the given data.
Group A
95
85
97
84
91
93
82
97
101
107
89
72
77
87
91
84
81
79
Group B
8.1.21. Given the data in listed form, create a frequency table:
4
1
0
4
9
3
9
5
3
0
3
6
4
1
4
6
8
7
6
4
3
8
3
0
6
9
2
6
4
9
8
7
5
6
6
1
8
5
2
1
What can you learn from the frequency table?
8.1.22. Draw the dot plot for the given listed data:
1
3
7
1
1
7
0
8
0
8
3
6
7
9
3
3
5
7
2
4
3
1
5
4
3
2
9
5
1
5
2
7
8
1
6
8
5
7
7
9
Can you obtain any useful information from the dot plot?
274
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.1.23. Put the given data into a stem-and-leaf form using the tens and hundreds as the stem and the units and tenths as
the leaf.
104
128.2
93
88.5
92
113.2
98.5
89.9
90.5
96.5
104.7
70.8
124.5
86.6
77.2
102.6
101
101
93.4
99.7
94.7
87.6
106.9
111.5
92.9
102.8
129.4
99
88.6
117.2
What does the stem and leaf diagram tell you about the data? Can you recover the original data from the stem and
leaf form?
8.1.24. Construct a frequency table for the listed data given below. Include the relative frequency, cumulative frequency,
and cumulative relative frequency.
80
67
51
82
57
80
71
82
52
75
58
62
63
51
77
85
91
97
59
61
99
70
86
98
88
87
92
66
64
61
What information does the relative frequency with solution frequency and cumulative solutions frequency
convey to you?
8.2
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIVE OF
QUALITATIVE INFORMATION
We shall use the graphical and numerical techniques we learned in the previous
section to introduce other useful graphical methods.
In the this section, the visual representations of the given information from
a frequency table or relative frequency table are used for qualitative data
and include such graphics as bar charts, circle graphs, and contingency
tables.
One of the first ways to graphically illustrate qualitative data is using
various forms of a bar chart. This can be done from listed data organized into
a frequency table; the only difference is that this is not quantitative data, it is
categorical.
Definition 8.2.1 Bar Chart
A bar chart is representation of a frequency distribution of a qualitative variable by
way of rectangles whose heights are proportional to relative frequencies placed over
each category.
When the categories are sorted by descending frequencies, the graph is a
special form of the bar chart called a Pareto Chart.
Given below are three stages to obtaining a bar chart (bar graph).
8.2 Graphical Representative of Qualitative Information
275

Step-by-Step Bar Chart
Step 1.
Organize the data values into a frequency table based on the outlined cate-
gories. Note: the data need to belong to one and only category. Determine
relative frequency as needed.
Step 2.
Place the class marks on a horizontal line; that is, mark out all the categories
with tick marks as the categories. Then draw a perpendicular to the horizontal
axis, draw a vertical axis and taking into consideration the maximum
frequency or relative frequency and using a consistent scale mark out the
frequencies or relative frequency.
Step 3.
Finally, construct a bar (rectangular boxes) for each class, leaving gaps
between the different categories as there are no boundaries between the
various qualities characterized by the defined outcomes.
Example 8.2.1 Bar Chart
Consider a survey consisting of 129 people indicating their favorite fruit/snack summa-
rized in the frequency table below. Graphically illustrate this information in a bar
chart in terms of frequencies and discuss what this subject chart conveys.
Outcome
A—Apples
B—Banana
C—Cantaloupes
D—Dole pineapple
F—Fruit & nut mix
Frequency
32
24.8
39.5
20.2
8.5
7.0
51
26
11
9
Relative
frequency (%)
Solution
Step 1.
The frequency table is given.
Step 2.
As the maximum frequency is 51, we have chosen a 10 point scale with a
maximum count of 60 with the categories listed on the horizontal axis.
A—Apples
B—Banana C—Cantaloupes
Fruits
D—Dole
pineapple
F—Fruit & nut
mix
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Frequency
276
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
Step 3.
Using the information given above, the bar chart is given by:
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
A—Apples B—Banana C—Cantaloupes
Fruits
Frequency
D—Dole
pineapple
F—Fruit & nut
mix
Thus, the bar chart illustrates that bananas represented by the largest bar is the most
favored followed by the second largest bar that represents apples, etc. The least favored
fruit is Fruit and Nut mix.
An alternative form of the bar chart is the Pareto chart.
Definition 8.2.2 Pareto Chart
A Pareto chart is a bar chart such that the categories have been sorted according to
frequency (in descending order).
Given below is a step-by-step procedure to develop the Pareto chart.
Step-by-Step Pareto Chart
Step 1.
Organize the data values into a frequency table based on the outlined cate-
gories. Note: the data needs to belong to one and only one category. Determine
relative frequency as needed.
Step 2.
Sort the categories by frequency, from highest to lowest count.
Step 3.
Place the class marks on a horizontal line; that is, mark out all the categories
with tick marks as the class marks. Then draw a line perpendicular to the
horizontal axis, draw a vertical axis taking into consideration the maximum
frequency or relative frequency and using a consistent scale mark out the
frequencies or relative frequency.
Step 4. Finally, construct a bar (rectangular boxes) for each class leaving gaps
between the different categories as there are no boundaries between the
various qualities characterized by the defined outcomes.
Example 8.2.2 Pareto Chart
Consider the survey that consisted of 129 individuals in the previous example. Graph-
ically illustrate this information in a Pareto chart in terms of frequencies and discuss
what this subject chart conveys.
Outcome
Frequency
51
39.5
24.8
8.5
7.0
20.2
32
26
11
9
Relative
frequency (%)
B—Banana
A—Apples
C—Cantaloupes
D—Dole pineapple
F—Fruit & nut mix
8.2 Graphical Representative of Qualitative Information
277

Solution
Step 1.
The frequency table is given; therefore we must simply sort them by frequency
(shown above).
Step 2.
As the maximum frequency is still 51; hence we have the same scale as when
we developed the bar chart.
A—Apples
B—Banana C—Cantaloupes
Fruits
D—Dole
pineapple
F—Fruit & nut
mix
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Frequency
Step 3.
Using the information given above, the Pareto chart is given by:
A—Apples
B—Banana
C—Cantaloupes
Fruits
D—Dole
pineapple
F—Fruit & nut
mix
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Frequency
Thus, the Pareto chart more clearly illustrates that bananas represented by the
largest bar is the most favored followed by the second largest bar that represents apples,
etc. The least favored snack is Fruit and Nut mix.
The difference between a general bar chart and a Pareto chart is that the categories
are re-organized in order of descending frequencies.
We encounter several real world problems that we are concerned with more
than our qualitative variable. Data with more than one qualitative variable can
be summarized in a contingency table.
278
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Definition 8.2.3 Contingency Table
A contingency table is a frequency distribution for a two-way statistical classification;
that is a matrix of information where one factor is represented by the row and the second
factor is represented by the column and the count of individuals that belong to exactly
one cell within the matrix that is one row and one column.
Below are three steps that we can follow in developing a contingency table
for a given set of information.
Step-by-Step Contingency Table
Step 1.
Organize the data values into a table which indicate the outcome for each indi-
vidual as matched pairs.
Step 2.
For each data value, count the number of times each of the possible matched
pairs value occurs.
Step 3.
Using these counts create a contingency table with the first outcome in the row
and the second outcome in the column.
Example 8.2.4 Contingency Table
In a recent graduating class, we randomly selected 10 graduates and recorded their
gender and type of degree they received. The information is given in the table bleow.
Create a contingency table for the degree by gender.
Gender
F
BA
MA
BA
PhD
MA
MA
MA
MA
MA
BA
F
F
F
M
M
F
M
F
M
Degree
Solution
Step 1.
As there are two genders and three possible degrees, there are 2×356 pos-
sible outcomes: namely, female with a BA, female with a MA, female with a
PhD, male with a BA, male with a MA, and male with a PhD.
Gender
Degree
F
BA
MA
PhD
PhD
BA
MA
F
F
M
M
M
Continued
8.2 Graphical Representative of Qualitative Information
279

Solution—cont’d
Step 2.
Then create a table which indicates the frequency of the possible outcomes.
Gender
F
BA
2
3
1
1
3
0
BA
MA
MA
PhD
PhD
F
F
M
M
M
Degree
Frequency
Step 3.
Then construct the contingency table with one factor (gender) in the rows and
the second factor (degree) in the columns:
BA
F
M
Column
totals
2
3
1
0
3
1
3
6
1
MA
PhD
Row totals
6
4
Total
10
Note: the total rows and the total columns is the same as shown above by the
contingency table.
Thus, there are 6 females: 2 with a BA, 3 with an MA, and 1 with a PhD degree; there
are 4 males: 1 with a BA, 3 with an MA, and 0 with a PhD degree, shown in the double
bar chart below.
BA
Female
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Male
MA
Degree
Frequency
PhD
Example 8.2.5 Contingency Table
We conducted a survey that included the two qualitative variables: eye color and
gender. The following contingency table below gives a summary of the information
gathered.
Column
totals
Male
Female
Row
totals
Total
19
29
48
Brown
9
3
7
8
4
7
15
17
26
Blue
Green
In this contingency table, we see that the majority of the females have brown eyes.
Very few people have blue eyes, in fact, only 7 out of a total of 48. Brown eyes (with 26)
appear to be more common than both blue eyes and green eyes combined (22), shown in
the double bar chart below.
280
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Example 8.2.5 Contingency Table—cont’d
Brown
Blue
Green
Eye color
Frequency
Female
Male
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Another commonly used graphical display of qualitative data is using a
circle graph (pie chart). This can be created from listed data organized into
a frequency table, then the relative frequency is computed and then the
measure of the angle in degrees is determined.
Definition 8.2.4 Circle Graph (Pie Chart)
A circle graph is a circle is divided into categories C1, C2, C3, …, Cm where the size of
each partition is proportional to the relative frequency (Figure 8.1).
We can easily structure a pie chart by following these steps.
Step-by-Step Contingency Table
Step 1.
Construct a column of the different data values.
Step 2.
For each data value, count the number of times each value occurs.
Step 3.
Using the sum of the frequencies, we can verify that we have included all the
data points as well as create a column for relative frequencies.
Step 4.
Given that the frequency of a given outcome is f and the sample size (sum of
frequencies) is n, the relative frequency is p5 f
n. Apportion the circle using
Continued
C1
C2
C3
Cm
.
.
.
FIGURE 8.1
Circle graph with m categories.
8.2 Graphical Representative of Qualitative Information
281

Step-by-Step Contingency Table—cont’d
wedges to indicate the proportion, divide the circle by the same proportion.
That is, given fi is the frequency of the ith outcome and the sample size
n5
X
k
i51
f i, then relative frequency of the ith outcome is pi5 f i
n and the
measure of the angle in degrees is αi5pi×360°.
Example 8.2.6 Circle Graph
Develop a pie chart of the data given in Example 8.2.2. Extend the given frequency
table and develop a circle graph.
Solution
Step 1.
ﬂ
Step 2.
ﬂ
Step 4.
ﬂ
Step 5
ﬂ
Outcome
Count
Relative 
Frequency
Degree 
A
32
32/129 = 0.248
0.248 × 360° = 89.3°
B
51
51/129 = 0.395
0.395 × 360° = 142.3°
C
26
26/129 = 0.202
0.202 × 360° = 72.6°
D
11
11/129 = 0.085
0.085 × 360° = 30.7°
F
9
9/129 = 0.070
0.070 × 360° = 25.1°
Step 3.
f
     = 129 
Σ
n =
The five steps outlined in the chart above are used to construct the following circle
graph.
Fruit
A—Apples
B—Banana
C—Cantaloupes
D—Dole pineapple
F—Fruit & nut mix
Here we clearly see that bananas are the most favored of all fruits in the sample.
Coming in second is apples with cantaloupes a close third; followed by Dole
pineapple and lastly, fruit and nut mix.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
8.2.1. Distinguish between a bar chart and a Pareto chart.
8.2.2. Distinguish between a bar chart and a circle graph.
8.2.3. Distinguish between a frequency table and a contingency table.
8.2.4. Distinguish between a contingency table and a tree diagram.
282
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Basic Problems
8.2.5. First construct a frequency table for the data and then construct a bar chart for the qualitative data. Construct a
Pareto chart.
C
B
C
B
E
B
C
C
A
C
A
E
D
E
A
A
B
C
C
D
B
D
A
B
D
D
E
B
D
A
E
A
D
B
C
D
C
C
E
A
B
D
B
D
B
C
A
D
A
C
A
E
A
D
A
A
A
E
B
E
What useful information can be obtained by reading the bar chart and the Pareto chart?
8.2.6. First construct a frequency table for the given data obtained from tossing a die 25 times; then construct a bar chart for
the discrete data that represents the number of dots uppermost on a die.
4
1
3
3
5
2
3
4
1
2
4
2
5
2
2
4
1
5
2
3
1
1
6
6
1
1
3
4
4
1
Does this die appear to be fair? What would be expected for a fair die?
8.2.7. Given the following bar chart for color of cars observed in a parking lot.
28
21
14
7
0
Red
White
Color
Number of cars
Black
Blue
a. Which color has the least amount of cars in the parking lot?
b. How many more red cars are there than blue cars?
c. How many cars are there in the parking lot?
d. Construct the Pareto Chart.
e. What is the relative frequency of blue cars?
Exercises
283

8.2.8. Given the following bar chart for points earned an a math test.
Savannah
Hannah
Kevin
Alexis
Aaron
Alyssa
Luis
0
10 20 30 40 50
Grade
Name
60 70 80 90 100
a. Who had the highest grade?
b. Which student(s) had a grade of a least 75 points?
8.2.9. Given the following bar chart for the number of minutes spent talking on the telephone by each child,
Kaitlyn
Andrew
Steven
Ashley
Natalie
0
6
12
18
24
Minutes
Name
30
36
42
48
a. How much longer did Andrew talk on the telephone than Kaitlin?
b. Who was on the telephone for more than one-fourth of an hour?
8.2.10. Given the following pie chart for favorite season,
B
C
D
A
A
Winter 30%
Fall 29%
Spring 15%
Summer 26%
B
C
D
a. If 300 individuals voted, how many people chose winter as their favorite season?
b. What is the least popular season?
c. Assuming 300 individuals voted, construct a bar chart using this information.
8.2.11. Given the following pie chart for how students get to school,
C
D
B
A
C
D
B
A
Bike 9%
Drive 26%
Walk 19%
Take the bus 46%
a. If the school has 600 students, how many students walk to school?
b. What fraction of the students drive to school?
284
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.2.12. Given the following pie chart for how many books each student read this year,
A
4 books 21%
2 books 17%
3 books 30%
5 books 32%
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
a. If 379 students were surveyed, how many students read exactly 3 books?
b. What fraction of the students read at least 3 books?
8.2.13. Given the following pie chart for what students drank for breakfast,
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
Orange juice 18%
Water 34%
Soda 8%
Milk 40%
a. What is the most popular drink?
b. What fraction of the students drank milk for breakfast?
Contingency tables
8.2.14. Complete the following contingency table
No
effect
55
15
100
100
100
300
31
40
160
33
Drug A
Drug B
Placebo
Positive
effect
Negative
effect
Total
8.2.15. Complete the following contingency table
President
Freshman
Junior
Senior
Vice
president
Treasure
Total
11
24
60
20
20
11
4
7
13
5
8.2.16. Construct a contingency table for the following survey data:
Favorite colors
Males
Red
Purple
Green
Orange
Blue
Blue
Yellow
Red
Blue
Green
Orange
Green
Green
Red
Purple
Purple
Blue
Females
Using the constructed contingency table, answer the following questions:
a) How many individuals where included in the survey?
b) How many males? How many females?
c) What is the most favored color?
d) What is the least favored color?
e) How many individuals favor red?
Exercises
285

8.3
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF
QUANTITATIVE INFORMATION
Visual representations information from a frequency table or relative fre-
quency table for quantitative data include histograms and frequency
polygons for continuous and discretized data.
We shall start discussing the concept of histograms, how we develop them
and the visual interpretation it conveys to us about the phenomenon we are
studying.
One of the first ways to graphically illustrate quantitative data is using
various forms of a histogram. This can be done from listed data organized into
a frequency table or with summaries information in the form of grouped data.
Definition 8.3.1 Histogram
A histogram is representation of a frequency distribution by way of rectangles whose
width represents the class width (CW; class interval) and whose heights are proportional
to relative frequencies.
Example 8.3.1 Histogram
Given the listed data: 1, 4, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 3 and the associated frequency table,
illustrate the associated histogram:
Outcome
2
1
5
4
2
1
3
4
5
6
Frequency
Solution
As these are single digits, the digit is the class mark and the boundaries are half way
between each set of digits as given in the table below.
Outcome
2
1
5
4
2
1
13
3
4
5
6
Frequency
Boundaries
(1.5, 2.5)
(2.5, 3.5)
(3.5, 4.5)
(4.5, 5.5)
(5.5, 6.5)
Hence, the histogram (similar to the dot plot) includes a real number line with a
scale that includes the minimum and maximum data values, and then place a box above
each observed class mark spanning the CW (the distance between class boundaries).
We proceed to put the information given in the above table into a sequence of rect-
angles as show on the next page. The rectangular base span one-half a unit to the left and
one-half a unit to the right of the observed value, thus the base of each rectangle is one.
The height is represented by the frequency of the observed outcome and hence, the area
of the rectangle represents the proportion of times the observed outcome occurred. In
terms of frequency, the height is number of times the class of outcomes occurs.
286
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
Frequency
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2
3
4
Outcome
5
6
Here we see the tallest rectangle occurs for the data value 2; that is, the mode is 3.
Moreover, we see that the distribution is not symmetric.
Recall: Listed data is a sequence of information presented as singletons; usually
denoted: x1,x2,…,xn where n is the sample size which is organized into a frequency
table; however, when the sample size is large, we may not want to use each singleton,
but rather use grouped data.
Grouped Data is data grouped into categories (discretized) by creating different
classes based on the range of data values and a prior number of classes. These class
intervals consist of a lower class limit (LCL) and an upper class limit (UCL); that
is, a class interval is an open interval on the real number line.
Definition 8.3.2 Class Limits
Given a class interval is an open interval on the real number line, each class interval
consist of a lower value called the LCL and an upper value called the UCL.
By necessity, the class limits rounded to a given tolerance, that is, the
decimal to which the data will be taken.
Definition 8.3.3 Class Width
CW is length of the class interval given by the UCL minus the LCL, plus one
tolerance.
CW5 UCL2LCL
ð
Þ + T;
where T is the tolerance; that is, the unit to which data will be rounded before being
placed in the various class intervals.
However, we are not given the LCL and UCL. Hence, to determine an
approximate CW, use the range divided by a preset number of classes and
round up. In general, given the number of classes, m, determine the CW; this
CW must be such that the following rules are upheld.
Rule 8.3.1 Class Width
When determining the CW, follow these simple rules:
1.
m×class width>Range where m is the number of intervals; that is, CW≥R
m.
2.
The first LCL<minimum.
3.
The last UCL>maximum.
4.
The tolerance is the difference between the UCL for one class and the LCL for the
next class; the tolerance can be defined as the unit to which the CW is rounded.
Continued
8.3 Graphical Representation of Quantitative Information
287

Rule 8.3.1 Class Width—cont’d
5.
There are no gaps between consecutive intervals; gaps may only exist if there is an
interval with frequency zero.
6.
The CWs are consistent in length.
Class
Lower class limit
Upper class limit
1
2
3
m
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
LCL1 < Minimum
LCL1=LCL1+CW
UCL1=LCL1+CW–T
UCL2=LCL2+CW–T
UCL3=LCL3+CW–T
LCL3=LCL2+CW
LCLm=LCL(m–1)+CW
UCLm=LCL(m–1)+CW–T > Maximum
Definition 8.3.4 Class Boundaries
Class boundaries are the end points of an open interval which contains the class
interval such that the lower class boundary (LCB) is the LCL minus one-half the tol-
erance and the upper class boundary (UCB) is the UCL plus one-half the tolerance.
Hence, from boundary to boundary is the full CW
LCB5LCL20:5T
and
UCB5UCL + 0:5T:
Class
1
LCB1= LCL1-0.5T
UCB1=UCL1+0.5T
UCB2=UCL2+0.5T
UCB3=UCL3+0.5T
LCB2= LCL2-0.5T
LCBm= LCL(m-1)-0.5T
UCBm= UCL(m-1)+0.5T
LCB3= LCL3-0.5T
2
3
m
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Lower class boundary
Upper class boundary
Once these boundaries are established, we can determine the frequency
table and then for graphical purposes, determine where to mark the horizontal
axis of the histogram. These values will be either the class boundaries or the
class marks, which are the midpoints of the class intervals.
Definition 8.3.5 Class Mark
Given a class interval, (LCL, UCL), the class mark is the value in the middle, in the
center below the rectangle which represents the frequency of the various class
intervals.
Class
Class mark
1
CM1= (UCL1+LCL1)/2
CM2= (UCL2+LCL2)/2
CM3= (UCL3+LCL3)/2
CMm= (UCLm+LCLm)/2
2
3
-
-
-
-
-
-
m
288
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Now we have all the necessary information to graph the histogram.
CM1
Max fi
.
.
.
3
2
1
CM2
CM3
CMm
.
Measure
Frequency
.
.
Step-by-Step Histogram
Step 1.
Determine the minimum (Min) and maximum (Max) value of the given data
and compute the range:
Range5MaxMin
Step 2.
When constructing a histogram by hand, the easiest way to determine CW is:
Classwidth CW
ð
Þ ¼ Round Range=m
ð
Þ up to tolerance, where m is the desired number
of classes. The degree to which you round is called the tolerance; hence, if you round
to the integer then the tolerance is one whereas if you round to the first decimal
place, the tolerance is 0.1.
Step 3.
For convenience sake, let the first LCL be the minimum, the second LCL be
the first LCL plus the CW, etc. The UCLs are the LCLs plus the CW minus
the tolerance.
Step 4.
Once the class intervals are defined, determine the midpoints of the intervals,
these are the class marks. This information is for graphing the histogram and
may be done after step 6.
Step 5.
Next, the class boundaries are the LCLs minus half the tolerance and the
UCL plus half the tolerance.
Step 6.
Organize the data values into a frequency table based out the outlined class
intervals. Determine relative frequency, cumulative frequency, and cumu-
lative relative frequency as needed.
Step 7.
Place the class marks on a real number line; to the left of all the class marks,
perpendicular to the real line (horizontal axis), draw a vertical axis and taking
into consideration the maximum frequency or relative frequency and using
a consistent scale mark out the frequencies.
Step 8.
Finally, using the class boundaries as the base and the frequency or relative
frequency as the height, construct a bar (rectangular box) for each class.
Example 8.3.2 Histogram
A random sample of 50 pieces of 6 mm nylon rope are being used to measure breaking
strength (kN). The resulting measurements are given in the table below. Develop a rep-
resentative histogram with five classes and interpret it in context.
Data set
10.4
12.1
8.7
6.8
10.6
13
11.3
7.1
8.7
12
11.1
9.4
9.3
9.6
10.9
8.5
11.7
10.1
8.3
9.6
8.8
10.9
9.5
13.7
10.3
9.7
9.8
8.8
7.9
10.7
11
11.5
7.7
10.2
12.6
9.2
7.9
9.7
8.8
9.4
11.3
8.5
8.5
10
12.9
7.8
10.1
9.6
11.5
9
8.3 Graphical Representation of Quantitative Information
289

Solution
Step 1.
With a minimum of 6.8 and a maximum of 13.7, the range is (13.7–6.8)¼6.9.
Step 2.
With five classes, the CW must be greater than (6.9/5)¼1.38. Hence, with a
tolerance of 0.1, let the CW be 1.4. Note: 51.4¼7>6.9, the histogram will
more than cover the range of information.
Lower limit
Upper limit
6.8
Step 3.
For convenience sake, let the first LCL be the minimum, 6.8.
Lower limit
Upper limit
6.8
8.2
9.6
11
=11 + 1.4
Then using the CW, we can create the remaining lower limits: 6.8+1.4¼8.2,
8.2+1.4¼9.6, 9.6+1.4¼11 and 11+1.4¼12.4.
Lower limit
Upper limit
6.8
=8.2 – 0.1
8.2
9.6
11
12.4
The upper limits are off by 0.1, the tolerance and hence, we have the first upper
limit as 8.1, which is the lower limit plus the CW minus the tolerance.
Lower limit Upper limit
6.8
8.1
9.5
10.9
12.3
=12.3+1.4
8.2
9.6
11
12.4
From this point on, we can use the CW. Thus, the last entry for upper limits is
13.7. Note: the minimum is included in the first interval and the maximum of
13.7 is included in the last interval.
Step 4.
The midpoints of these intervals is simply the average of each lower and upper
limit, for example,
12:4 + 13:7
ð
Þ5 13:05:
6.8
8.1
7.45
8.85
10.25
11.65
=(12.4+13.7)/2
9.5
10.9
12.3
13.7
8.2
9.6
11
12.4
Lower limit Upper limit
Class mark
290
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
Step 5.
Next, the class boundaries are the limits plus or minus half the tolerance. For
example, for the last interval, the LCB is 12.40.1/2¼12.35, etc.
6.8
8.1
7.45
6.75
8.15
9.55
10.95
12.35
13.75
8.15
9.55
10.95
=12.4 −0.1/2
8.85
10.25
11.65
13.05
9.5
10.9
12.3
13.7
8.2
9.6
11
12.4
Lower limit
Upper limit Class mark
Lower boundary
Upper boundary
Step 6.
Organize the data values into a frequency table based on the outlined class
intervals. This is a matter of simply counting the number of data points that
fall within each interval.
Lower boundary Upper boundary Frequency
6.75
8.15
6
15
16
9
4
9.55
10.95
12.35
13.75
8.15
9.55
10.95
12.35
Determine relative frequency, cumulative frequency, and cumulative rel-
ative frequency as needed.
Step 7.
Place the class marks on a real number line; and taking into consideration the
maximum frequency or relative frequency and using a consistent scale mark
out the frequencies.
Frequency
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Breaking strength
7.45
8.85
10.25
11.65
13.05
Step 8.
Finally, using the class boundaries as the base and the frequency or relative
frequency as the height, construct a bar (rectangular boxes) for each class.
Frequency
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Breaking strength
7.45
8.85
10.25
11.65
13.05
Continued
8.3 Graphical Representation of Quantitative Information
291

Solution—cont’d
A CW of 2 might also have sufficed—however, if you round too
much, then there may be fewer classes than initially intended as well
as
the
intervals
should be
centered
over
the
full
range
of data
values; therefore, the first LCL would not be the minimum observed
data value.
Interpreting this graph we see the most frequently occurring interval is
(9.6,10.9) with 16 data values falling within this class interval. However,
with a count of 15, the interval (8.2,9.5) is also quite frequent. The least
frequently occurring interval is (12.4,13.7), that is, a breaking strength
greater than 12.4 is not as likely to occur as breaking strengths between
8.2 and 10.9. This data is somewhat symmetric, however, with only five
classes, there does appear to be a skew to the right. The larger less likely
values are pulling the mean greater than the median. Note: for this data set,
the mean is 9.93 and the median is 9.7, which is consistent with what the
data’s graphical distribution implies.
Often, instead of constructing a histogram by hand calculations, modern
day technology can be used for this purpose. For example, using the same
data set illustrated in Example 2.10 with 8 classes; here the CW is taken to
be approximately 1 which is greater than simply taking the range divided by
the number of classes, rounded up; that is, (6.9/8)¼0.8625 which is
approximately 0.9. Moreover, this computer-generated histogram did not
clearly label the vertical axis as frequency; this will need to be edited.
However, this is still a valid histogram.
Frequency
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
6.8
7.8
8.8
9.8
10.7
11.7
12.7
13.7
Breaking strength
Finally, what is a good looking histogram—bell shaped, skewed
to the left, skewed to the right, no gaps! These graphics where created in
Excel, for more detail about using Excel to create graphics, see
Using Technology in Graphical Representations at the end of the chapter.
292
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

EXERCISES
8.3.1. Given the minimum value observed is 12.7, the maximum value observed is 72.4, with a tolerance of 1 and five
classes, what is the minimal CW required to construct a histogram. What are the class limits? What are the class
boundaries?
8.3.2. Given the minimum value observed is 12.7, the maximum value observed is 72.4, with a tolerance of 0.1 and five
classes, what is the minimal CW required to construct a histogram. What are the class limits? What are the class
boundaries?
8.3.3. Given the minimum value observed is 12.7, the maximum value observed is 72.4, with a tolerance of 1 and six
classes, what is the minimal CW required to construct a histogram. What are the class limits? What are the class
boundaries?
8.3.4. First construct a frequency table for the data given below with five class intervals, include the class limits, the class
boundaries, the class midpoints (marks) and then construct a histogram for the grouped data.
102.9
91.1
84.8
82.7
87.5
91.6
83.8
98.7
118
93.2
77.4
105
83.5
111
103.8
105
80.2
128.1
77.6
108
99.7
97.8
78.1
120.3
103.9
107.3
86.1
75.2
92
115
93.8
113.1
80.3
113
113.1
76.5
83.8
112.2
92
92.8
105.1
97.3
95.7
89.9
102.4
102.7
113.2
98.9
69.3
84.5
91
113
103
97.8
112.2
81.7
126.1
93.7
85.9
95.1
82.5
113.5
111.3
99.1
90.7
105.2
88.4
98.4
78.7
113
97.5
104.1
109.9
115.6
109.2
91.4
81.6
97.6
99.4
103.8
96.1
86.4
93.5
108.9
82
107.9
93
111
111.8
115
a) What useful information we can read from the histogram?
b) Can you recover the original data from the histogram?
8.3.5. First construct a frequency table for the given data using the singletons as the class marks, including the class bound-
aries and then construct a histogram for the listed data.
1
7
9
6
2
2
1
6
1
6
3
4
9
3
7
3
9
6
5
0
7
7
1
5
3
4
0
6
2
7
2
7
8
0
1
9
0
1
1
8
5
5
3
8
5
2
3
6
0
3
4
1
6
0
6
1
9
4
3
9
a) Discuss the useful information we can obtain from the histogram of the given data.
b) Can you recover the original data from the histogram?
c) What is the most frequent data observed?
8.3.6. First construct a frequency table for the given data using the singletons as the class marks, including the class bound-
aries and then construct a frequency polygon for the listed data.
6
9
2
8
1
1
5
8
9
9
2
3
2
5
4
2
7
0
6
8
9
1
9
9
4
9
3
9
7
7
1
0
9
2
9
3
0
2
0
6
7
5
5
8
0
6
8
2
9
0
Discuss the useful information we can obtain from the histogram of the given data.
Exercises
293

8.3.7. First construct a frequency table for given data with five class intervals, include the class limits, the class boundaries,
the class midpoints (marks) and then construct an ogive graph for the grouped data.
102.9
91.1
84.8
82.7
87.5
83.8
98.7
118
93.2
105
83.5
111
103.8
108
99.7
120.3
103.9
107.3
86.1
92
115
93.8
113.1
83.8
112.2
105.1
97.3
95.7
89.9
102.7
113.2
98.9
69.3
97.8
96.6
93.7
85.9
95.1
82.5
111.3
99.1
90.7
105.2
97.5
104.1
109.2
91.4
81.6
97.6
103.8
96.1
86.4
93.5
111
111.8
What useful information can we obtain from the ogive graph? Do you feel that five class intervals is the best number
of intervals? If not, would you recommend more or less?
8.4
MEASURING CENTRAL TENDENCIES
Common central measures generically referred to as central tendencies or
averages for continuous measures included the mode, the median, and
mean. The mode of a measured variable in a sample is the value or outcome
with the highest frequency.
Common Central Tendencies
Mode—the most frequent value.
Median—the middle of the ordered values.
Mean (Standard Arithmetic Mean)—the sum of the values divided by the number of
values.
Expected Value—the mean evaluated using probabilities.
Trimmed Mean—the mean evaluated trimming off the extremes.
Weighted Mean—the mean evaluated using weights.
Definition 8.4.1 Mode (M)
The mode of data is the data value that occurs most frequently. We shall denote the
mode by lowercase English letter m. As a measure of tendency in qualitative data,
the mode is the most frequently occurring category.
Example 8.4.1 Mode
Given the listed data: 1, 4, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 3 and the associated Frequency Table, the
mode of the data set is 3 with the highest frequency of occurrence, 4.
Outcome
1
1
1
4
3
mode
1
2
3
4
5
Frequency
The mode is the one central tendency that may fail to exist; however, it is the only
measure of central tendencies that can be extended to qualitative data. To determine
the mode of a sample data set, the data must first be sorted and associated frequencies
must be considered. Note: the mode may fail to exist, such as with uniform data or with
data where more than one data value occurs with maximum frequencies.
294
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Step-by-Step Mode (m)
Step 1.
Determine the associated frequencies of the observed outcomes.
Step 2.
The mode is the most frequent data to model the center; that is, the most fre-
quent data is the mode (if such values exist.)
Example 8.4.2 Tumor Size
In the Breast Cancer data set: 0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.7, 0.8, 0.8, 0.8, 0.9, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1.1, 1.1,
1.1, 1.2, 1.2, 1.2, 1.3, 1.3, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.5, 1.7, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2,
2.2, 2.4, 2.5, 2.5, 2.5, 3, 3, 3, 3.5, 3.8, 4; what is the mode of the tumor size?
Solution
First, there are eighteen distinct observations ranging from 0.5 to 4 cm.
Step 1.
Next, we construct the frequency table for these tumor sizes:
Tumor size
0.5
3
1
3
1
6
3
3
2
10
mode
1
6
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
2
2.2
2.4
2.5
3
3.5
3.8
4
Frequency
Step 2.
Reading the frequency table to the left, it is clear that 1.5 cm is the most fre-
quently observed tumor size.
In exploratory data analysis, multiple modes can indicate lurking variables and
mixed probability distributions; that is, the quantities may depend on a variable that
has not been taken into account when the data was observed.
Continued
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
295

Solution—cont’d
As the mode may fail to exist, a second measure of central tendency is the median.
The median defined to be a value such that 50% of the data is to the left of this value
(that is, less than or equal to) and 50% of the data is to the right of this value (that is,
greater than or equal to.)
Definition 8.4.2 Median (M)
The median of data set is a data value such that 50% of the information lies to the left
and 50% of the information lies to the right. We shall denote the median by capital
English letter M.
Note: This measure always exists and is not affected by outliers; that is, this
measure is not sensitive to changes in the data or extremes.
In data sets, this number exists and is unique, but in the sample is only esti-
mated and there this number need not be unique.
Example 8.4.3 Estimate of Median not Unique
Given a simple data set: 1, 2, 3, 4. Here, we would estimate the median to be 2.5;
however, 50% of the data lies to the left and right of 2.4 as well. In fact, we can estimate
the median to be any value between 2 and 3. Moreover, how accurate are the measures;
if the data is more accurately, 1.2, 2.4, 2.8, and 3.9, then we would estimate the mean as
2.6. If the data is even more accurately, 1.24, 2.39, 2.84, and 3.87, then we would
estimate the mean as 2.615. Hence, the more information that is given, the easier it
is to determine the median.
Rule 8.4.1 Median
In general, to determine an estimate of the true median:
1.
If there is an odd number of data values then take the middle of the order data.
2.
If there is an even number of data values then trim all but the middle two values and
take the midpoint, that is, the sum divided by two.
Given below is a two-step procedure for calculating the median.
Step-by-Step Median (M)
Step 1.
Order the observed data in ascending order. Symbolically we shall distinguish
the raw (original) data, xi, from the ordered data, x(i) by using the grouping
symbols (parenthesis) to indicate that this is position in the ordered data
set as opposed to the observation order. Hence,
min5x 1
ð Þ ≤x 2
ð Þ ≤⋯≤x n
ð Þ5max:
Step 2.
Take the middle value or the sum of the two central values divided by two. That
is, if there are an odd number of data, then a single data point will exist in the
ordered data set; namely the data value in the
n + 1
2


th position.
x 1
ð Þ ≤⋯≤x n + 1
2

 ≤⋯≤x n
ð Þ
↑
M
296
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Step-by-Step Median (M)—cont’d
M5x n + 1
2

:
For data sets with even sample size, this is the sum of the data in the
n
2
 
th
position and the data in the
n
2 + 1


th position divided by two:
x 1
ð Þ ≤⋯≤x n
2
  ≤x n
2 + 1

 ≤⋯≤x n
ð Þ
↑
M
M5
x n
2
  + x n
2 + 1


2
:
Step 3.
Determine the associated frequencies of the observed outcomes
Step 4.
The mode is the most frequent data to model the center; that is, the most fre-
quent data is the mode (if such values exist.)
If fact, this value is such that at least 50% is greater than or equal to this
value and at least 50% of the data is less than or equal to this value.
Example 8.4.4 Median with Odd Sample Size
In a given experiment we have observed the following data: 9, 8, 11, 7, 10, 9, 9, 7, and
19. Determine the median of the observed data set.
Solution
Step 1.
First, this data must be put into ascending (descending) order:
7,7,8,9,9,9,10,11,19
↑
M
Step 2.
Since there are nine data points (odd sample size), the middle value is the fifth
position which is nine (9). Thus, the median is the value 9. Moreover, nine (9)
is also the mode and hence 2/3rds of the data are greater than or equal to this
value as well as 2/3rds of the data are less than or equal to this value.
Example 8.4.5 Median with Even Sample Size
The results of a given experiment are:
12,12,5,13,11,4,10, and 9:
Calculate the median.
Solution
Step 1.
First this data must be put into ascending (descending) order:
4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 12, 13
↑
M510:5
Step 2.
Since there are eight data points (even sample size), the middle value is between
the fourth and fifth position which is between 10 and 11; while any value
between 10 and 11 would suffice, standard practice is to take the midpoint
10.5 (that is, the sum of 10 and 11 divided by 2). Here, the median 10.5 is a value
such that exactly 50% of the observed data is greater than this value and exactly
50% of the observed data is less than this value.
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
297

Example 8.4.6 Median Tumor Size
In the Breast Cancer data set provided below, what is the median of the tumor size?
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
2
2.2
2.4
2.5
3
3.5
3.8
4
3
1
3
1
6
3
3
2
10
1
6
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
Tumor size
Frequency
Solution
First, using the frequency table constructed, we can locate the middle data values by
viewing the cumulative frequency.
Step 1.
In constructing the frequency table for these tumor sizes, we have the data in
ascending order.
Step 2.
0.5
3
3
4
7
8
14
17
20
22
32
33
39
40
41
44
47
48
49
50
1
3
1
6
3
3
2
10
1
6
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
Tumor size
Frequency
Cumulative frequency
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
2
2.2
2.4
2.5
3
3.5
3.8
4
298
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
Step 3.
Now, using cumulative frequencies, we can locate the 25th and 26th data
value, as there is an even number of observations. Here, the 22nd thru the
31st data value are 1.5; hence, the median is
M51:5 + 1:5
2
51:5:
Returning to averages in general, the standard mean gives each data value
equal weight.
Definition 8.4.3 Standard Mean
The standard mean or sample mean of data is the sum of all data values divided by the
total number of data values, denoted x.
Using the capital Greek letter Sigma (∑) to mean “the sum,” we have
x51
n
X
n
i51
xi
where n is the sample size.
Note: This measure is the most sensitive.
While this measure is the most subject to change as it takes into account all
the available information, for this reason, it is also the most important.
Whereas the mode only considers the most frequent data value and it may fail
to exist, the median uses one or two central data values; it is the (sample)
mean that gives equal weight to each data value.
Given below is a two step procedure in calculating the sample
mean, x.
Step-by-Step Standard Mean
Step 1.
Sum the values observed in a sample of size n.
Step 2.
The mean is the sum divided by the total number of data points, n.
Using the capital Greek letter Sigma (∑) to mean “the sum,” these steps are
commonly abbreviated by
x5
X
x
n
which reads “the sample mean
x
ð Þ is the sum of the listed data
∑x
ð
Þ
divided by


 
the sample size (n)”; hence, part of statistics is learning to
understand the underlying language of Math upon which Statistics is built.
This notation can be further elaborated on by including the counter; that is,
the original data set is usually denoted by xi for i51,2,3,…,n which extends
the formulation to
x51
n
X
n
i51
xi
where the under-script is the starting point for the counter i and the upper-script
is the ending point, namely the sample size n.
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
299

Notation
This formulation for the arithmetic mean can be manipulated and re-written
x5
X
n
i51
xi
n
5x1 + x2 + ⋯+ xn
n
;
for those who do not like summation notation or alternatively,
x5
X
n
i51
xi
n
5x1 + x2 + ⋯+ xn
n
51
nx1 + 1
nx2 + ⋯+ 1
nxn;
which illustrates that in the standard mean, each data points carries equal weight. This
idea will be further discussed in weighted means.
Example 8.4.7 Standard Mean
Given four exams scores (listed): 98, 77, 72, and 94. Determine the sample mean of the
given data.
Solution
Step 1.
∑x598 + 77 + 72 + 945341
Step 2.
x5341
4 582:25:
Hence, the samples mean (average test score) is 82.25.
Note: Throughout our study of statistics we shall use the sample mean, x, to estimate
the population mean. However, this is just one estimate of the population mean. In general,
a statistical estimate of the population mean μ will be denoted μ^. The use of the specific
notation of the variable x coupled with the upper-script, namely the bar, is indicative not
only that this is a statistical estimate (as it is English and not Greek) but also how the
estimate was computed—that is, the sum of the data divided by the number of data.
We will not extend this notation to that of grouped data. In certain problems, we are
given the data in the form of a frequency table. The sample mean is computed in the
same way, however, as the organization of the information is no longer listed, but rather
grouped, the notation changes.
Outcome
...
...
xi
x1
f1
f2
fk
x2
xk
fi
Frequency
Definition 8.4.4 Standard Mean (Frequency Data)
For data that has been grouped in terms of frequencies, the sample mean appears
weighted as by the associated frequencies. Given the frequency table of k distinct out-
comes: x1,x2,…,xk with associated observed frequencies: f1,f2,…,fk in a sample of size
n5
Xk
i51 f i is given in the frequency table above. Thus the formulation for the sample
mean for grouped data becomes
x51
n
X
k
i51
xif i5x1f 1 + x2f 2 + ⋯+ xkf k
n
;
where
n5
X
k
i51
f i:
300
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Step-by-Step Standard Mean (Frequency Data)
Step 1. Organize the listed data into a frequency table.
Step 2. Compute the sum of the frequencies; this should sum to the total number of
data values.
Step 3. Compute the products of the data value times the associated frequency. It might
be helpful to create a new column in which to place this information.
Step 4. Sum the products.
Step 5. The mean is the sum of the products divided by the total number of data values.
Example 8.4.8 Mean using Frequency Table
In a rating poll, on a scale from 1 to 4, the question “How would you rate your senator?”
was asked to a sample of 18 voters and the following information is obtained: 1, 2, 3, 1,
2, 4, 2, 4, 1, 1, 3, and 2. First place the information into a frequency table and then
compute the sample mean.
Solution
Step 1.
The frequency table is
xi
1
2
3
4
fi
4
3
3
2
Step 2.
The total number of data points is given to be
n5
X
4
i51
f i54 + 3 + 3 + 2512
Step 3.
Compute the products:
xi
1
2
3
4
fi
4
3
3
2
xifi
4
6
9
8
Step 4.
Sum the products:
X
4
i51
xif i54 + 6 + 9 + 8527
Step 5.
Calculate the mean:
x527
1852:25
That is, the sample mean of the given data is x52:25. On a scale from 1 to 4, the
rating of this senator is 2.25; if 2 is average, this senator rating is slightly above average.
Example 8.4.9 Mean Tumor Size in Breast Cancer
In the Breast Cancer data set (see Example 8.4.6), what is the sample mean of tumor size
using frequented data?
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
301

Definition 8.4.5 Expected Value
For data that has been grouped in terms of proportions, the sample mean appears
weighted as by the associated proportions.
Given the probability distribution of the k distinct outcomes: x1,x2,…,xk namely:
p1,p2,…,pk in a sample of size n, where
X
k
i51
pi51. Thus the formulation for the
expected value becomes
x5
X
k
i51
xipi5x1p1 + x2p2 + ⋯+ xkpk;
where
Xk
i51 pi51.
Notation
The formulation for grouped data can be further manipulated in terms of proportions;
recall, pi5f i
n hence
Solution
Step 1.
The first step, the frequency table is given in illustrated in the table, Step 3.
Step 2.
The total number of data points is given as
n5
X
18
i51
f i550:
Step 3
Tumor size
Tumor size
Frequency
Frequency
xi fi
xi fi
xi fi
Compute the products:
Compute the sum:
Sum divided by n.
Step 4
Step 5
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
2
2.2
2.4
2.5
3
3.5
3.8
4
Sum
Sum
Mean
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.7
2
2.2
2.4
2.5
3
3.5
3.8
4
3
1.5
0.7
2.4
0.9
6
3.3
3.6
2.6
15
1.7
12
2.2
2.4
7.5
9
3.5
3.8
4
1.5
0.7
2.4
0.9
6
3.3
3.6
2.6
15
1.7
12
2.2
2.4
7.5
9
3.5
3.8
4
1.5
0.7
2.4
0.9
6
3.3
3.6
2.6
15
1.7
12
2.2
2.4
7.5
9
3.5
3.8
4
82.1
50
82.1
1.642
1
3
1
6
3
3
2
10
1
6
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
50
3
1
3
1
6
3
3
2
10
1
6
1
1
3
3
1
1
1
Thus, the average (standard mean) is approximately 1.642 cm. This is skewed right by the value 4;
that is, recall the median is 1.5 cm (as was the mode), however, the mean is greater than the median (to the
right of) and hence, the distribution of tumor size in breast cancer is skewed.
302
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Notation—cont’d
x5
X
k
i51
xi  f i
ð
Þ
n
5x1  f 1 + x2  f 2 + ⋯+ xk  f k
n
5f 1
n  x1 + f 2
n  x2 + ⋯+ f k
n xk
5p1  x1 + p2  x2 + ⋯+ pk  xk
:
However, in this form the mean is referred to as the expected value (E) of the var-
iable (x); writing symbolically, this is
E x
ð Þ5
X
k
i51
xi  pi
or more simplistically,
E x
ð Þ5
X
xp;
where it is understood that this summation is over all observed values of the variable x.
Step-by-Step Expected Value
Step 1.
Treating the relative frequencies as weights, organize the listed data into a
“frequency” table as when computing a weighted mean.
Step 2.
Compute the products of the data value times the associated relative fre-
quency. It might be helpful to create a new column in which to place this
information.
Step 3.
Sum the products. The expected value is the sum of the products.
Example 8.4.10 Expected Age of Binge Drinkers
In the data set: Binge Drinking, what is the expected drinking age in the United States?
Solution
Step 1.
The data is given in such a way that we have grouped data; that is, age is given
as 12 or younger, 13 to 17, 18 to 25, and 26 or older. This is summary infor-
mation, however, treating the relative frequencies as the weights, we can
estimate the ages using the class marks, assuming the youngest possible age
is 0 year (new born) and max 80 years old.
Total U.S.
22.82
12 or younger
13 to 17
18 to 25
26 or older
10.1
42.02
21.2
Step 2.
Therefore, we will use the ages: 6, 15, 21.5, and 53 to represent each group.
6
1.3692
1.515
9.0343
11.236
0.2282
0.1010
0.4202
0.2120
xi
xipi
pi
15
21.5
53
Step 3.
The sum is therefore 23.1514 years of age.
That is, under the assumption that the minimum age is 0 years old and the maximum
is 80 years old, we can estimate the expected age of a binge drinker is about 23 years old.
This seems to reason as 42.02% of all binge drinkers in the United States are between 18
and 25 years of age.
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
303

In the standard mean, all the information is included. Other measure of
central tendency that does not use all the information is a trimmed mean. This
measure is an extension of the median where a given percent of the central data
is retained and the remaining outlining data values are trimmed.
Definition 8.4.6 p% Trimmed Mean
The p% trimmed mean is the sum of the remaining data values once p% of the infor-
mation from the upper data values and the lower data values, divided by the remaining
number of data values.
Let x(i) represent the ordered data, then
x 1
ð Þ,…, x j
ð Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
p%
, x j + 1
ð
Þ,…, x n2j
ð
Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
⇓
, x n2j + 1
ð
Þ,…,x n
ð Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
p%
and
^μ5x j + 1
ð
Þ + x j + 2
ð
Þ + ⋯+ x n2j
ð
Þ
n22j
;
where j5p×n.
Here, the notation, ^μ is an estimate of the population mean.
For example, a 10% trimmed mean is an average where within the ordered
data, the center 80% of the data carry equal weights and the outer 10%’s (the
lower 10% of the data values and the upper 10% of the data values)
are trimmed, that is assigned zero weight. Note: only when j is an integer is
this estimate easy to calculate; most software packages will compute this
measure when j is not an integer apportion the information; however, this
concept is higher than the material covered in this text.
Step-by-Step Trimmed Mean
Step 1.
Order the observed data in ascending order as with the median.
Step 2.
Trim the given percent of the information from each end. If this percent of the
total is not exact, apportioning methods can be used or duplicate information.
Step 3.
The trimmed mean is the sum of the remaining data divided by the number of
remaining data values.
Example 8.4.11 25% Trimmed Mean
In a Statistics class, a quiz was given out of 15 possible points, a sample of 8 students is
taken, and the following information is gathered: 12, 12, 5, 13, 11, 4, 10, and 9.
Determine the 25% trimmed mean.
Solution
Step 1.
As with the median, the data must be ordered:
4,5,9,10,11,12,12,13:
Step 2.
As there are eight data values, 25% of the data is two and hence the lower two
data values will be removed as well as the upper two data values:
4,5,9,10,11,12,12,13:
304
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Solution—cont’d
Step 3.
This leaves four values which will be assigned equal weight; this is the same as
summing the values and dividing by 4. Therefore we have,
^μ59 + 10 + 11 + 12
4
510:5;
where ^μ is a statistical estimate of the true population mean μ.
One estimate of the central tendency is 10.5. Note: this is also the value of the
median; however, it is not the same as the standard arithmetic mean and the mode does
not exist.
Example 8.4.12 25% Trimmed Mean
In a large class, a sample of four exams scores: 98, 77, 72, and 94 are taken; determine
the 25% trimmed mean.
Note: since there are only four data values, the 25% trimmed mean is also the
median.
Solution
Step 1.
As with the median, the data must be ordered:
72,77,94,98:
Step 2.
As there are four values, 25% of the data is one and hence the minimum data
value will be removed as well as the maximum data value:
72,77,94,98:
Step 3.
This leaves two data values which will be assigned equal weight; this is the
same as the median,
^μ577 + 94
2
585:5;
where ^μ is a statistical estimate of the true population mean μ. Moreover, as
there where only four data values to start, the 25% trimmed mean is the median.
This idea of summing the middle values and taking an average can be
extended to general means using various weights. Weights are numerical factors
assigned to each observed value to make that outcomes effect on the measure
representative of its importance or relevance of that observation as an estimate of
the population mean, μ. The median is a weighted mean in that the median
gives all the weight to a single value (when there is an odd number of data) or
equally divides the weights fifty-fifty (when there is an even number of data);
that is, the median is given by
M5x n + 1
2

51:0x n + 1
2


or
M5
x n
2
  + x n
2 + 1


2
50:5x n
2
  + 0:5x n
2 + 1

;
respectively.
Recall, bias is a consistent deviation of the statistics to one side of the
parameter; hence, an unbiased estimator is a statistic that does not deviate
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
305

from the parameter. That is, E ^θ
 
5θ. We shall now prove that weighted
means are unbiased estimators of the population mean.
That is, given that the expected value of the data is the population mean,
E x
ð Þ5μ, prove that the statistic ^μ5
X
x  w
X
w
is an unbiased estimator of μ,
where x is the variable of interest, the weights, w are fixed constants and hence
X
w is also a constant.
Mathematical Reasoning
Let W5
X
w, then we have:
E ^μ
ð Þ5E
X
k
i51
xi  wi
W
0
B
B
B
B
@
1
C
C
C
C
A
5
E
X
k
i51
xi  wi
 
!
W
5
X
k
i51
E xi  wi
ð
Þ
W
5
X
k
i51
E xi
ð Þ  wi
W
5
X
k
i51
μ  wi
W
5μ  w1 + μ  w2 + ⋯+ μ  wk
W
5μ  w1 + w2 + ⋯+ wk
ð
Þ
W
5
μ 
X
k
i51
wi
W
5μ  W
W 5μ:
In general, given a set of data values: x1,x2,…,xk, an unbiased estimator of the mean
is any weighted mean
^μ5
X
x  w
X
w
or
^μ5
X
x  q;
where
X
q51.
In certain situations it calls for us to weight a certain observation more than the
others because of its importance. Thus, we introduce the weighted sample mean that
will be used to estimate the true state of nature.
Definition 8.4.7 Weighted Mean
The weighted mean, ^μ, is an estimate of the population mean by which more relevant
information is counted more frequently then less relevant information. Let wi be the
weight assigned to the data value xi, then
^μ5
Xn
i51 xiwi
W
5x1w1 + x2w2 + ⋯+ xnwn
W
,
where W5
Xn
i51 wi5w1 + w2 + ⋯+ wn.
The five step procedure we use to calculate the weighted mean, ^μ, is given
below.
Outcome
...
...
xi
x1
x2
xn
wn
w2
w1
wi
Weights
306
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Step-by-Step Weighted Mean
Step 1.
Determine the associated frequencies of the observed outcomes.
Step 2.
The mode is the most frequent data to model the center; that is, the most fre-
quent data is the mode (if such values exist).
Step 3.
Treating the weights as frequencies, organize the listed data into a
“frequency” table.
Step 4.
Compute the sum of the weights:
W5
X
n
i51
wi:
Step 5.
Compute the products of the data value times the associated weight. It might be
helpful to create a new column in which to place this information.
x1w1,x2w2,…,xnwn
Step 6.
Sum the products
X
n
i51
xiwi
Step 7.
The weighted mean is the sum of the products divided by the total sum of the
weights.
^μ5
X
n
i51
xiwi
W
Solution
That is, weighting the later information more than the first creates an estimate of the true
population mean of 84.4; comparing this to the trimmed mean and the median of 84.5.
Recall that the sample mean was 85.25, whereas this weighted mean is 84.4, fairly close.
Which of the two point estimates is better to estimate the true population mean, μ? This
is a subject in inferential statistics.
In estimating the true mean, μ, of a given population of size N from a
random sample of size n taken from the population with the sample mean
or other weighted mean, we wish to determine how close is the statistic to
the parameter; that is, how close is x or ^μ to μ. This closeness we call the
margin of error, and it is defined below.
Example 8.4.13 Weighted Mean
Given four exam scores (listed): 98, 77, 72, and 94, determine a sample weighted mean using weights (linear weights):
1,2,3, and 4:
x
w
x
x
x
x
w
Âw
Âxw
w
w
w
xw
xw
xw
mˆ
8.4 Measuring Central Tendencies
307

Definition 8.4.8 Margin of Error
The margin of error is a statistical measure of amount of random sampling error,
denoted by the capital Greek letter Epsilon
Ε5j^θ2θj;
wherethiscapitalletterEreads“marginoferror”andnot“expectedvalue”;however,these
symbols look very much alike, for this reason, the margin of error may by denoted ME,
ME5j^θ2θj:
Regardless of the notation used, the larger issue with the margin of error is
that without the unknown parameter, it too must be estimated. However, this
will be the subject of confidence intervals.
Example 8.4.14 Margin of Error
Let us assume that the true tumor size in breast cancer is μ51:5 cm. The random
sample, n550, reveals a sample mean of x51:642 cm. Determine the margin of error,
ME.
Solution
The margin of error here is ME5jx2μj; hence, we have
ME5j1:64221:5j50:142:
Thus, even with 50 pieces of information, we are off by 0.142 cm. However, is this
significantly different?
EXERCISES
Basic Problems
Find the (a) mean, (b) median, and (c) mode of the following data sets.
8.4.1. 5.04, 1.10, 3.21, 0.57, 2.41, and 3.21.
8.4.2. 21, 21, 21, 51, 51, 51, 57, 57, and 81.
8.4.3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9.
8.4.4. 23, 18, 23, 10, and 11.
8.4.5. 3, 24, 26, 26, and 21.
8.4.6. 21, 1, 21, 22, and 22.
8.4.7. 12, 5, 6, 5, and 12.
8.4.8. 16, 21, 22, 22, 10, and 29.
8.4.9. 96, 70, 60, 67, 55, 98, 62, 90, 90, and 90.
8.4.10. 37, 6, 70, 29, 42, 29, 14, 70, 37, and 81.
8.4.11.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
8.4.12.
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
308
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.4.13.
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
8.4.14.
34
35
36
37
38
39
8.4.15.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
8.4.16.
Stem
Leaves
5
3 1 4 8 9 4 2 7
6
8 5 0
7
9 2
8
7 5 1 7
8.4.17.
Stem
Leaves
12
7 2 7 3
13
6 2 9
14
15
7 1
16
0
17
7 3 4
8.4.18.
Stem
Leaves
5
3 1 4 8 9 4 2 7
6
8 5 0
7
9 2
8
7 5 1 7
8.4.19.
Stem
Leaves
4
8 8 3
5
7 8
6
7 3 6
7
0 5 7 6 9
8
6 0 1 2
8.4.20.
Stem
Leaves
0
6
1
5 8 3
Find x.
8.4.21. x, 13, 14, 12, 6, and 21, given the mean is 13.
8.4.22. 21, x, 10, 9, 9, and 14, given the mean is 11.
8.4.23. 24, 16, 18, 24, 2, x, and 24, given the mean is 18.
8.4.24. 5, 13, 26, 13, 22, 21, and x, given the mean is 17.
Exercises
309

8.4.25. x, 20, 20, 20, and 20, given the mean is 20.
8.4.26. 3, 10, x, 11, 8, 4, and 3, given the sample mean is 6 and the mode is 3.
8.4.27. 7, x, 24, 8, 5, 26, and 9, given the mode is 26 and the median is 9.
8.4.28. x, 12, 15, 8, 2, 12, and 15, given the mean is 11 and there are two modes: 12 and 15.
8.4.29. 11, 21, 17, x, 20, and 18, given the mode is 21 and the median is 19.
8.4.30. 47, 24, 190, 73, 13, 123, x, 139, 175, 83, 80, 97, and 38, given the mean is 94.
8.4.31. This stem-and-leaf shows the number of sit-ups each student did in class,
Stem
Leaves
0
7 7
1
9 8 4 7 8
2
1 6 2 5 6
3
5 9
4
6 6 4 6
5
6 1
a. How many students are in the class?
b. What is the median of the number of sit-up recorded? That is, the middle of the ordered data.
c. What is the mode of the data; that is, the most frequently occurring data value.
d. What is the mean of the data? Is the mean greater than or less than the sample mean; is the data skewed left,
skewed right or symmetric?
e. What is the range of the data; that is, the difference between the maximum and minimum data.
8.4.32. Given the following stem-and-leaf for Dana’s scores from a video game,
Stem (hundreds and tens)
Leaves (units)
19
7 7
20
6 5
21
1
22
3 9
23
8 0 8
24
25
2
a. List the original data represented by the given stem-and-leaf plot.
b. What is the mode of the data?
c. What is the average of the scores recorded?
d. What is the median of the scores recorded?
8.4.33. Given the following bar chart for points earned an a math test,
90
80
70
60
50
40
Grade
Name
30
20
10
0
Hannah
Connor
Samuel
Jennifer
Jonathan
Jasmine
310
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

a. What is the average grade? Round your answer to the nearest tenth.
b. Who had the highest grade?
c. What is the median of the data?
Critical Thinking
8.4.34. Distinguish between the mean, median, and mode.
8.4.35. Distinguish between the population mean and the sample mean.
8.4.36. Distinguish between the standard mean and a weighted mean.
8.4.37. Distinguish between a weighted mean and a trimmed mean.
8.4.38. Distinguish between sample mean for listed data and the sample mean for grouped data in a frequency table.
8.4.39. Distinguish between the expected value and the margin of error.
8.4.40. Distinguish between the mean for grouped data in a frequency table and the expected value.
8.4.41. Find the mean, median, and mode of the given data.
a) 5, 7, 6, 9, 11, 6, 18.
b) 15, 17, 16, 19, 21, 16, 28.
c) 15, 21, 18, 27, 33, 18, 54.
What do all these estimates tell us about the central tendency?
8.4.42. First create a frequency table and the compute the mean, median, and mode.
a) 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4.
b) 12, 12, 12, 13, 15, 15, 15, 15, 17, 19.
What is the usefulness of these estimates? Discuss.
8.4.43. Find the weighted mean, where the weights are: w51,2,3; and 4, respectively.
a) 79, 82, 67, 89
b) 91, 78, 72, 92
c) 90, 92, 94, 98
8.4.44. In problem 8.4.41-8.4.43 above, find the weighted mean and the standard mean and compare your results.
Weights: w51,2,2; and 1, respectively.
Compute the 25% trimmed mean for the following sets of data:
8.4.45. 52, 84, 67, 85, 58, 49, 65, and 75.
8.4.46. 2, 8, 4, 9, 5, 7, 6, 4, 5, 8, 4, 5, 7, 6, 5, and 9.
8.4.47. 82, 76, 85, 56, 74, 87, 87, 95, 72, 59, 72, and 95.
8.4.48. Given the following annual mutual fund returns:
–49.59
35.54
1.83
34.72
29.62
0.69
0.69
5.53
10.55
–42.33
–42.79
12.12
35.54
35.54
35.54
20.45
–44.21
–41.05
10.64
14.8
Compute the 10% trimmed mean for the following sets of data:
8.4.49. 68, 24, 52, 84, 67, 85, 58, 49, 65, and 75.
8.4.50. 8, 4, 9, 7, 6, 4, 5, 8, 4, 5, 7, 6, 5, and 9.
8.4.51. 85, 56, 74, 87, 87, 95, 72, 59, 72, and 95.
Compute the weighted mean for the following sets of data and associated weights:
8.4.52. Data: 5, 7, 9, 4; Weights: 1, 2, 3, 4.
8.4.53. Data: 5, 7, 9, 4; Weights: 1, 2, 2, 1.
8.4.54. Data: 5, 7, 9, 4; Weights: 1, 4, 9, 16.
8.4.55. Data: 4, 5, 7, 9; Weights: 1, 2, 3, 4.
8.4.56. Data: 4, 5, 7, 9; Weights: 1, 2, 2, 1.
8.4.57. Data: 4, 5, 7, 9; Weights: 1, 4, 9, 16.
8.4.58. Compare the weighted means in Exercises 3.52 through 3.54.
8.4.59. Compare the weighted means in Exercises 3.55 and 3.57.
Exercises
311

Given the true mean is 6, determine the margin of error for the exercise indicated.
8.4.60. Exercise 8.4.52
8.4.61. Exercise 8.4.53
8.4.62. Exercise 8.4.54
8.4.63. Exercise 8.4.55
8.4.64. Exercise 8.4.56
8.4.65. Exercise 8.4.57
Mean of Means:
8.4.66. Compute the means of the various weighted means in Exercises 8.4.52–8.4.54: 6.2, 6.833, and 5.933. Compare this
to the standard mean.
8.4.67. Compute the means of the various weighted means in Exercises 8.4.52–8.4.57: 6.2, 6.833, 5.933, 7.1, 6.167, and 7.7.
Compare this to the standard mean. Discuss the effects of ordering the data before weighting the mean. What effect
does this have on such weighted means?
8.5
MEASURING DEVIATION FROM THE CENTER
In estimating the true mean of a certain phenomenon of interest from a random
sample, the quality of the estimate depends on how close or far the observa-
tions from a given experiment. The measure we used to measure these dis-
tances are called deviations. Thus, deviations are a measure of differences,
for interval and ratio data, between the observed value and the population
(true) mean.
Definition 8.5.1 Deviation
Deviation is a measure of differences between a set of data values and some fixed point
such as the mean.
Common Deviations
Range—the difference between the minimum and maximum observed values.
Inner-quartile Range—the difference between the third and first quartile.
Mean Deviation—for comparison only.
Population Variance—true measure of variance.
Population Standard Deviation—true measure of deviation.
Sample Variance—the expected value of the differences observed between each
observed value and the central tendency, squared. That is, this measure is the mean error
squared.
Sample Standard Deviation—there are several measures of deviations, but the one
used as the standard is the square root of the variance.
We have several measures of deviations; we begin with the most simplistic
measure, the range.
Definition 8.5.2 Range (R)
The extent to which variation is possible; in a data set, this is defined to be the distance
between the extremes;
Range5R5x n
ð Þ2x 1
ð Þ;
where x(1) is the minimum and x(n) is the maximum data value; that is, the maximum
minus the minimum.
312
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

We can use two steps to determine the range.
Step-by-Step Range (R)
Step 1.
Determine the maximum data value, x(n), and the minimum data value, x(1).
Step 2.
Compute the range, R5x n
ð Þ2x 1
ð Þ.
Special Case
In any symmetric data set, the maximum deviation in both directions from the popu-
lation mean would be half the range.
min=x(1)
m
R/2
R/2
max= x(n)
Hence, the most simplistic estimate of the population’s deviation, σ is one-fourth of
the range; that is, in a sample with at least two distinct observed values, an estimate of
the population’s deviation is given by
^σ5R
4 5x n
ð Þ2x 1
ð Þ
4
min=x(1)
max=x(n)
m
m
m−s
m+s
This estimate ensures that 100% of the data values fall within two deviations of
the mean.
Example 8.5.1 Estimating Deviation Using R
Given the listed data: 7, 9, 10, 11, and 13, with a mean of 10; estimate the population’s
deviation.
Solution
^σ51327
4
51:5
However, this measure is extremely sensitive to outliers; hence, for com-
parison a mean deviation is a statistically valid measure which becomes more
reliable as the sample size increase.
8.5 Measuring Deviation from the Center
313

Definition 8.5.3 Mean Deviation
The mean deviation is the averages of the absolute differences between a set of data
values and the mean, that is,
^σ5
X
n
i51
di
n
;
where di5 xi2xj
j
.
Step-by-Step Mean Deviation
Step 1.
Given a sample of size n:x1,x2,…,xn, where the true population mean μ is
known or specified, determine the deviation di5 xi2μ
j
j.
Step 2.
Sum the absolute differences:
X
n
i51
di
Step 3.
Then take the mean deviation:
^σ5
X
n
i51
di
n
Example 8.5.2 Mean Deviation
Using the listed data from Example 8.5.1, calculate the mean deviation.
Solution
Step 1.
First, determine the differences:
23, 21, 0, 1 and 3;
which illustrates why the absolute values must be taken—as otherwise, the sum
of the deviation would be zero, indicating no deviation which is clearly not the
case as there is deviation within this small sample and determining the abso-
lution value of these differences, the deviations are:
3, 1, 0, 1 and 3;
Step 2.
3 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 358
Step 3.
Then, the mean deviation is
^σ53 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 3
5
58
551:6
While unrealistic for comparison consider the mathematically defined def-
inition of the population variance. Using the range, we estimated the deviation
to be 1.5, using the mean deviation we estimated the deviation to be 1.6. Note,
this point estimate is only slightly larger than the first estimate of the popula-
tion’s deviation; however, these first two estimates do not allow much leeway.
314
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Hence, as an overestimate of the deviation ensures confidences in the
measure as well as this measure is the maximum likelihood estimate of the
population’s variance (the mean deviation-squared).
Definition 8.5.4 Standard Population Variance
The standard population variance is the mean deviation-squared, given by
σ25
X
N
i51
xi2μ
ð
Þ2
N
:
Note: Here it is assumed that the population mean, μ, is known; therefore,
this measure assumes all information is known and hence, this is the true
population variance denoted by the lowercase Greek letter sigma (squared).
From which, the population standard deviation can be estimated by taking
the square-root of the variance.
Definition 8.5.5 Standard Population Deviation
The standard population deviation is the square-root of the standard population var-
iance; that is,
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
N
i51
xi2μ
ð
Þ2
N
v
u
u
u
u
t
:
Step-by-Step Population Deviation
Step 1.
Given a sample of size n:x1,x2,…,xn, where the true population mean μ is
known or specified, determine the deviation or error εi5 xi2μ
j
j
Step 2.
Determine the error squared for each deviation found in step 1: εi
2
Step 3.
Sum the square differences: ∑
n
i51
ε2
i
Step 4.
Then take the mean square error:
σ25
X
N
i51
ε2
i
N
Step 5.
Finally, take the square root of the mean square error:
σ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
N
i51
ε2
i
N
v
u
u
u
u
t
Example 8.5.3 Population Deviation
For the sake of comparison, calculate the population variance and determine the pop-
ulation standard deviation using the listed data in Example 8.5.1.
8.5 Measuring Deviation from the Center
315

Solution
Step 1. Determine the differences: –3, –1, 0, 1, 3.
Step 2. Then square these deviations, 9, 1, 0, 1, 9, which over emphasize larger
deviations.
Step 3. Summing these values we get the sum of square errors, SS59+1+0+1
+9518.
Step 4. Thus, the deviation-squared referred to as the population variance is
σ2520
5 54.
Step 5. Hence, an estimate of the population standard deviation is given by σ5
ﬃﬃﬃ
4
p
52.
Note: this measure gives more leeway then either of the first two; however, this
measure relies on several assumptions. The most unrealistic of which is that the true
population mean is known. This measure is more likely to apply to a sample of size
n and not the entire population. Hence, the variance or deviations can be estimated by:
1.
The range over four—little to know leeway.
2.
The mean deviation—some leeway, but is not the most likely estimate.
3.
The standard population deviation—more leeway, but unrealistic due to required
assumptions. Moreover, when we use the sample mean to estimate the true popula-
tions mean, this violation of the assumptions causes the statistic to be a biased
estimate.
As we have mentioned in real world problems we do not know σ2 or σ because it
requires we known the actual value of N. Thus, from the random sample n from N
we estimate σ2 with the sample variance s2 and σ with s.
Definition 8.5.6 Standard Sample Variance
The standard sample variance is the averages of the square differences between a set
of data values and the mean accounting the degree of freedom, that is,
s25
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
:
Definition 8.5.7 Standard Sample Deviation
The standard sample deviation is the square-root of the standard sample variance; that is,
s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
s
:
Note that in defining s2 and s we have divided by n21
ð
Þ rather than n. The reason for
this is to ensure that we have an unbiased estimate of σ. This fact will become more
evident as we proceed to study inferential statistics. Given below is a six step procedure
for calculating the sample variance, s2, and sample standard deviation, s.
Step-by-Step Sample Deviation
Step 1.
Given a sample of size n:x1,x2,…,xn, first determine an estimate of the
population mean given by the standard sample mean: x5
X
n
i51
xi
n
.
Step 2.
Then, estimate the differences (residual error):
εi5xi2x:
316
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Step-by-Step Sample Deviation—cont’d
Step 3.
Determine the estimated deviations-squared using the differences-squared:
ε2
i 5 xi2x
ð
Þ2
Step 4.
Calculate the sum of square error:
SS5
X
n
i51
ε2
i
Step 5.
Then take the mean of these estimated deviation squared:
s25
X
n
i51
ε2
i
n21 5
X
n
i51
xi2x
ð
Þ2
n21
Step 6.
Finally, the sample standard deviation is:
s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
n
i51
xi2x
ð
Þ2
n21
v
u
u
u
t
:
Example 8.5.4 Sample Deviation
Using the listed data from Example 8.5.1, calculate the sample variance and determine
the sample standard deviation.
Solution
Step 1.
Determine the sample mean:
x57 + 9 + 10 + 11 + 13
5
510:
Step 2. Determine the differences: 23, 21, 0, 1, 3. Determine the absolute value of
these differences, the deviations are: 3, 1, 0, 1, 3.
Step 3. Then square these deviations, 9, 1, 0, 1, 9, which over emphasize larger
deviations.
Step 4. Summing these values we get the sum of square errors,
SS59 + 1 + 0 + 1 + 95 20.
Step 5.
Thus, the deviation-squared referred to as the sample variance is s2520
4 55.
Hence, an estimate of the population standard deviation is given by
s5
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
ª2:24>2:
Note, this measure gives the most leeway in that
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
>2. Moreover, this measure is an
unbiased estimate of the population variance; that is, we expect the statistic to estimate the
parameter with bias. For this reason, the standard sample deviation is the most common
measures of deviation used in exploratory data analysis.
We have four measures of deviations to compare that we use in determining
the variability of a given real world problem. Here we have listed them in order
of increased variability as illustrated in the previous, we have four calculations
or estimations of the population deviation.
1. The range over four—little to no leeway was 1.5.
2. ⌖The mean deviation—some leeway was 1.6.
8.5 Measuring Deviation from the Center
317

3. The standard population deviation—more leeway but unrealistic, is 2.
4. The standard sample deviation—most leeway, and an unbiased estimate
is 2.24.
The following illustrate the three measure of variability in order of importance.
Important Deviations
1.
The sample variance, s2, that measures the variability with respect to the sample
mean.
2.
The sample standard deviation, s, is simply the square-root of the variance.
3.
The range of the data in a given random sample, n, is the maximum observed value
(largest) minus the minimum observed value (smallest).
Formulations
As with the sample mean, there are slight variations in the formulas depending on if the
data is listed, grouped in terms of frequency or grouped in terms of proportions or
probabilities.
The following diagram illustrates the key parameters within a population of size N
and their corresponding estimated for the random sample of size n.
Population
Population (N)
Parameters:
m, s2, s
Sample
Sample (n)
Statistics:
x, s2, s
The table below summarizes the key formulas with respect to the population param-
eters with N and the corresponding estimates from the random sample, n taken from N.
318
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

Formulations—cont’d
Alternative View
Another way to define variance is in terms of expected values; the variance is the dif-
ference between the expected value of the data-squared and the expected value of the
data, squared. That is, the variance is a measure between the two operators, summing
and squaring; that is, squared and then averaging versus averaging and then squaring:
V x
ð Þ5E x2


2 E x
ð Þ
½
2
Thus, the expected value of the data-squared:
E x2


5x2
1 + x2
2 + ⋯+ x2
n
n
;
minus the expected value of the data, squared:
E x
ð Þ
½
25 x1 + x2 + ⋯+ xn
n
h
i2
:
This variance is the difference between squaring then averaging and averaging fol-
lowed by squaring.
One useful measure of the variability of a given set of data that charac-
terizes a certain phenomenon is the coefficient of variation (CV).
Definition 8.5.8 Coefficient of Variation
The coefficient of variation (CV or CV) is a dimensionless measure, the ratio of the
standard deviation to the mean; the coefficient of variation is an indication of the reli-
ability of the measure, a measure of the dispersion of the data about the sample mean.
CV5 s
x,
where x is the sample mean and s is the sample standard deviation.
Discrete Data
Listed Data
Grouped Data
with Frequencies
Grouped
Data with
Proportions
Population mean
μ5
X
x
N
μ5∑ðxfÞ
n
, n ¼N5
X
f
μ5
X
x  p
ð
Þ, p ¼ f
n, and
X
p51
Sample mean
x ¼
X
x
n
x5∑ðxfÞ
n
, n5
X
f
x5E x
ð Þ5
X
x  p
ð
Þ, p5 f
n,
and
X
p51
Population
variance
σ25
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2
N
σ25
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2  f
h
i
n
,
n5N5
X
f
σ25
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2  p
h
i
, p5 f
n,
and
X
p51
Population
standard deviation
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2
N
s
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2  f
h
i
n
s
,
n5N5
X
f
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2μ
ð
Þ2  p
h
i
r
,
p5f
n, and
X
p51
Sample variance
s25
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
ð
Þ
s25
X
x2x
ð
Þ2  f
h
i
n21
ð
Þ
,
n5
X
f
s25 n
n21
X
x2x
ð
Þ2  p
h
i
,
p5 f
n, and
X
p51
Sample standard
deviation
s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
ð
Þ
s
s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2x
ð
Þ2  f
h
i
n21
ð
Þ
v
u
u
t
, n5
X
f
s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n
n21
q
X
x2x
ð
Þ2  p
h
i
,
p5 f
n, and
X
p51
8.5 Measuring Deviation from the Center
319

If the sample mean is dominated by the standard deviation, then sample mean
will not be reliable (good) estimate of the true mean. Thus, small values of CV
will mean that the sample mean is a good estimate of the population mean.
Also, large values of the CV can lead to the inability to place any reliable
assurance in your sample mean. A desirable CV value would be less than one,
if greater than one it may indicate that our random sample n was not large
enough to obtain a good estimate of μ.
Example 8.5.5 Lightning
When measuring the number of lightning strikes from a cloud to the ground, the
sample mean was approximately 90,000 strikes a month and the standard sample
deviation was approximately 100,000 strikes. This means within one standard devi-
ation we expect between 210,000 and 190,000 lightning strikes. However, the
210,000 number of lightning strikes has no interpretation. Here, the CV is 1.11,
which
means
that
the
deviation
is
larger
than
the
value
of
the
mean.
Furthermore, this indicates that the data we are analyzing is “difficult data.”
The CV is also useful in comparing the degree of variation between two data sets.
Example 8.5.6 CO2 in the Atmosphere
When measuring the amount of carbon dioxide, CO2 in the atmosphere, measurements
are taken in 10 locations ranging from Alert, Alaska to the South Pole.
However, if you look at the time series graph, shown below, it is clear that there is
greater variation in locations further north.
390
385
1: Alert
2: Point barrow
3: La Jolla Pier
4: Mauna Loa
5: Kumukahi
6: Christmas Island
7: Samoa
8: Kermadec
9: Baring head
10: South pole
380
375
370
365
360
355
350
Timeline (days past 01/01/90)
Carbon dioxide (ppm)
345
340
0
212
424
638
851
1065
1277
1492
1704
1916
2130
2343
2557
2769
2981
3195
3407
3621
3834
4049
4261
4473
4687
4899
5113
5326
If we compare the CVs for Alert, Alaska, it is 0.0154, to that of the South Pole,
0.003774, there is four times the amount of variability; this is also seen in the range.
The range of readings in Alert, Alaska is 17.52 and at the South Pole, 4.97. That is,
carbon dioxide in Alert, Alaska has three-and-a-half times the range as those measured
in the South Pole. This means that the data with smallest CV and range is the more
reliable data for us to further analyze in determining the true mean.
320
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

EXERCISES
Basic Problems
Find n.
8.5.1. 11, 11, n, 13, 11, and 13, given the range is 2 and the median is 12.
8.5.2. 16, 9, 19, n, and 8, given the range is 16 and the mean is 10.
Find the range for the given set of data. Use the range to estimate the standard deviation using ^σ5R
4.
8.5.3.
Stem
Leaves
10
6 1 5 1 1 4
11
3 1
12
0
13
3 6 7
8.5.4.
Stem
Leaves
7
5 7 9 6 1 4 9
8
7 1 4 2 3 4
9
7 6 0 6
8.5.5.
Stem
Leaves
40
4 5
41
6 2 0 7
42
2 4 6 0
43
9 8 3 0
44
5
45
9
Find the range, sample variance and sample standard deviations for the given data. Use the range to estimate the standard
deviation using ^σ5R
4 and compare to ^σ5s.
8.5.6. 3, 15, 15, 15, 13, 26, and 18.
8.5.7. 12, 8, 16, 28, 18, 2, and 14.
8.5.8. 21, 28, 20, 24, 24, and 15.
8.5.9. 29, 15, 23, 25, 15, 22, and 18.
8.5.10. 20, 12, 24, 7, 28, and 11.
Find the range, variance, and standard deviations for the exercise indicated.
8.5.11. Exercise 8.5.6
8.5.12. Exercise 8.5.8
8.5.13. Exercise 8.5.10
8.5.14. Find the range and sample standard deviation for the following data sets:
a) 5, 7, 6, 9, 11, 6, 18
b) 15, 17, 16, 19, 21, 16, 28
c) 15, 21, 18, 27, 33, 18, 54
Compare the results in each case. What you conclude from each of the comparisons?
Exercises
321

8.5.15. Find the range and sample variance and standard deviation for the following data sets:
a) 1,1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4
b) 12, 12, 12, 13, 15, 15, 15, 15, 17, 19
Compare the results for (a) and (b) and what do you conclude from this comparison.
8.5.16. Find the range and sample variance and standard deviation for the following data sets:
a) 79, 82, 67, 89
b) 91, 78, 72, 92
c) 90, 92, 94, 98
Compare the results of ^R and s for each case and discuss their meaning.
Critical Thinking
8.5.17. Distinguish between the ranged and the standard deviation.
8.5.18. Distinguish between the range divided by four and the mean deviation.
8.5.19. Distinguish between the standard sample deviation and the population deviation.
8.5.20. Distinguish between the sample variance and the population variance.
8.5.21. Distinguish between sample size and degree of freedom.
8.5.22. Distinguish between the standard deviation and the CV.
8.5.23. Degree of Freedom: The mean of ten values is 75.0. Nine of the values are given to be 72, 75, 79, 81, 57, 98, 100, 76,
and 65.
Given Two Data Sets: find the sample mean and sample standard deviation for each of the two samples, then
compare the two sets of results. Peter and Paul live in different cities. Each first Sunday of the month for 10 months,
they recorded the temperature, in Fahrenheit, in their respective city. The temperatures that they recorded are given
below.
Peter’s data: 50, 51, 50, 66, 60, 66, 71, 70, 72, 65, and 70.
Paul’s data: 72, 82, 76, 84, 77, 73, 70, 67, 67, 56, and 65.
8.5.24. What is the range of temperatures in Peter’s data?
8.5.25. What is the mean, median, and mode for Peter’s data? For Paul’s data?
8.5.26. If you combined the data for both cities, what would be the mean, median, and mode for the combined data?
8.5.27. Peter added one more week to his data. The median of all of his data is now 62.8, rounded to the nearest tenth. What
was the new temperature value that Peter added to the data?
8.5.28. Using Paul’s data, what was the mean temperature in Celsius?
8.5.29. Paul calculated the median to be 71, however he forgot to include one number when calculating the median. Which
number did Matthew forget?
8.5.30. What is the variance and standard deviation of Peter’s data?
8.5.31. What is the variance and standard deviation of Paul’s data?
8.5.32. What would be a good prediction for the temperature the next two months in Paul’s city? Why?
8.5.33. If you could spend the next month in either city, whom would you want to visit? Why?
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
Basic Problems
8.1. Compute the mean, median, and mode of the following data:
3
9
4
3
7
7
7
7
8
9
3
3
5
4
9
2
4
9
9
8
2
5
6
6
9
3
2
3
3
5
4
6
6
4
5
8
2
6
6
4
9
4
7
4
2
0
2
6
3
4
9
3
1
9
8
5
4
2
8
8
If you had to choose one of the three, which would you select to estimate μ?
322
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.2. Compute the linear weighted mean of the data: 70, 79, 83, and 97 with weight, weights: 1, 2, 3, and 4. Compare this to
the standard sample mean and the 25% trimmed mean. In this example there is an obvious increase in the data values,
how does this show in the three measures? Explain.
8.3. Compute the linear weighted mean of the data: 97, 79, 83, and 70, with weights: 1, 2, 3, and 4. Compare this to the
standard sample mean and the 25% trimmed mean. In this example there is a relative decrease in the data values, how
does this show up in the three measures, explain.
Critical Thinking
8.4. The standard sample mean, the 25% trimmed mean, the minimum, the maximum, the quartiles, and the percentiles are
all types of what type of average? Which one do you believe is the best to estimate the true mean μ.
8.5. Compute the standard arithmetic mean for the data given in the frequency table below.
Outcome
0
7
2
4
7
9
5
1
2
3
5
7
Frequency
Explain the meaning and usefulness of the results.
8.6. Compute the standard sample variance and deviation for the data: 70, 79, 83, and 97.
Discuss their meaning and usefulness.
8.7. Compute the sample variance and standard deviation for the data: 40, 49, 53, and 80.
Explain their usefulness.
8.8. Compute the expected value for the data given in the relative frequency table below.
Outcome
1.5
10%
34%
42%
11%
3%
2.2
2.7
3.4
4.1
Relative frequency
Explain what the expected value means with respect to the given data.
8.9. Show that the standard sample mean is an unbiased estimator of the population mean; that is, given E x
ð Þ5μ and using
summation notation prove that E x
ð Þ5μ.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
8.1.1. A dot plot is one of the simplest ways to determine the distribution of numerical data—using a real number line,
create a scale that includes the minimum and maximum data values, and then place a dot above each observed
data point.
8.1.2. A stem-and-leaf plot is completed in two stages, first the basic stem and leaf are constructed by breaking the
observed data values into categories such as tens and hundreds (the stem) and then units digits or the remaining
associated information (the leaves). This initial sort does give the overall distribution, but it is common practice
to then sort the leaves. The range of a data set is the difference between the minimum and maximum value; or
maximum minus minimum.
8.1.3. A frequency table is simply a “t-chart” or two-column table which outlines the various possible outcomes and the
associated frequencies observed in a sample.
8.1.4. A frequency distribution is a tabulation of the values that one or more variables take in a sample which can be
organized in a frequency table or illustrated graphically.
8.1.5. A relative frequency is a measure between 0 and 1 that describes the frequency with which the values of the variable
take relative to the sample size, n.
Summary of Important Concepts
323

pi5f i
n
where
n5
X
k
i51
f i
and k is the distinct number of outcomes.
8.1.6. A probability distribution is a tabulation of the values that one or more variables take in a sample written in terms of
relative frequency, percentages or proportions. If these values follow a formula, then this formula will be denoted
as f(x).
8.2.1. A bar chart is representation of a frequency distribution of a qualitative variable by way of rectangles whose heights
are proportional to relative frequencies placed over each category.
8.2.2. A Pareto chart is a bar chart such that the categories have been sorted according to frequency (in descending order).
8.2.3. A contingency table is frequency distribution for a two-way statistical classification; that is a matrix of information
where one factor is represented by the row and the second factor is represented by the column and the count of indi-
viduals that belong to exactly one cell within the matrix that is one row and one column.
8.2.4. A circle graph is comparable to the divided bar chart however, instead of a bar divided into categories where the
size of each partition is proportional to the relative frequency; a circle is divided into categories C1,C2,C3,…,Cm,
where the size of each partition is proportional to the relative frequency.
8.3.1. A histogram is representation of a frequency distribution by way of rectangles whose width represents the CW (class
interval) and whose heights are proportional to relative frequencies.
8.3.2. Given a class interval is an open interval on the real number line, each class interval consist of a lower value called
the LCL and an upper value called the UCL.
8.3.3. CW is length of the class interval given by the UCL minus the LCL, plus one tolerance; CW5 UCL2LCL
ð
Þ + T;
where T is the tolerance; that is, the unit to which data will be rounded before being placed in the various class
intervals.
8.3.4. Class boundaries are the end points of an open interval which contains the class interval such that the LCB is the
LCL minus one-half the tolerance and the UCB is the LCL minus one-half the tolerance. Hence, from boundary to
boundary is the full CW LCB5LCL20:5T and UCB5UCL + 0:5T.
8.3.5. Given a class interval, (LCL,UCL), the class mark is the value in the middle, in the center below the rectangle
which represents the frequency of the various class intervals.
8.4.1. The mode of data is the data value that occurs most frequently. We shall denote the mode by lowercase English letter
m. As a measure of tendency in qualitative data, the mode is the most frequently occurring category.
8.4.2. The median of data set is a data value such that 50% of the information lies to the left and 50% of the information lies
to the right. We shall denote the median by capital English letter M.
8.4.3. The standard mean or sample mean of data is the sum of all data values divided by the total number of data values,
denoted x. Using the capital Greek letter Sigma (∑) to mean “the sum,” we have x5 1
n
X
n
i51
xi, where n is the
sample size.
8.4.4. For data that has been grouped in terms of frequencies, the sample mean appears weighted as by the associated
frequencies. Given the frequency table of k distinct outcomes: x1,x2,…,xk with associated observed frequencies:
f1,f2,…,fk in a sample of size n5
X
k
i¼1
f i is given in the frequency table above. Thus the formulation for the sample
mean for grouped data becomes x5 1
n
X
k
i51
xi f i5x1 f 1 + x2 f 2 + ⋯+ xk f k
n
, where n5
X
k
i51
f i:
324
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

8.4.5. For data that has been grouped in terms of proportions, the sample mean appears weighted as by the associated
proportions. Given the probability distribution of the k distinct outcomes: x1,x2,…,xk namely: p1,p2,…,pk
in
a
sample
of
size
n,
where
X
k
i51
pi51.
Thus
the
formulation
for
the
expected
value
becomes
x5
X
k
i51
xipi5x1p1 + x2p2 + ⋯+ xkpk, where
X
k
i51
pi51.
8.4.6. The p% trimmed mean is the sum of the remaining data values once p% of the information from the upper data
values and the lower data values, divided by the remaining number of data values. Let x(i) represent the ordered data,
then x 1
ð Þ,…, x j
ð Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
p%
, x j + 1
ð
Þ,…, x n2j
ð
Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
⇓
, x n2j + 1
ð
Þ,…,x n
ð Þ
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
p%
and ^μ5
X
x  w
W
, where j5p×n.
8.4.7. The weighted mean, ^μ, is an estimate of the population mean by which more relevant information is counted more
frequently then less relevant information. Let wi be the weight assigned to the data value xi, then
^μ5
Xn
i51xiwi
W
5x1w1 + x2w2 + ⋯+ xnwn
W
, where W5
X
n
i51
wi5w1 + w2 + ⋯+ wn.
8.4.8. The margin of error is a statistical measure of amount of random sampling error, denoted by the capital Greek letter
Epsilon Ε5j^θ2θj, where this capital letter E reads “margin of error” and not “expected value”; however, these
symbols look very much alike, for this reason, the margin of error may be denoted ME, ME5j^θ2θj.
8.5.1. Deviation is a measure of differences between a set of data values and some fixed point such as the mean.
8.5.2. The extent to which variation is possible; in a data set, this is defined to be the distance between the extremes;
Range5R5x n
ð Þ2x 1
ð Þ, where x(1) is the minimum and x(n) is the maximum data value; that is, the maximum minus
the minimum.
8.5.3. The mean deviation is the averages of the absolute differences between a set of data values and the mean, that is,
^σ5
X
n
i51
di
n
, where di5jxi2xj.
8.5.4. The standard population variance is the mean deviation-squared, given by σ25
X
N
i51
xi2μ
ð
Þ2
N
.
8.5.5. The standard population deviation is the square-root of the standard population variance; that is,
σ5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
N
i51
xi2μ
ð
Þ2
N
v
u
u
u
t
.
8.5.6. The standard sample variance is the averages of the square differences between a set of data values and the mean
accounting the degree of freedom, that is, s25
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
.
8.5.7. The standard sample deviation is the square-root of the standard sample variance; that is, s5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
x2x
ð
Þ2
n21
r
.
8.5.8. The CV or CV is a dimensionless measure, the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean; the CV is an indication of
the reliability of the measure, a measure of the dispersion of the data about the sample mean. CV5 s
x where x is the
sample mean and s is the sample standard deviation.
Rules:
8.1.1. A stem-and-leaf plot must follow the following rules:
4. The defined stems and leaves must be based on equal intervals.
5. All intermediate categories must be included even though there might be zero data values in a given category.
6. Including empty categories within the outlined range of data values appear as gaps and these gaps are indicative of
variability in the data.
8.3.1. When determine the CW, follow these simple rules:
7. m×CW×Range where m is the number of intervals; that is, CW≥R
m.
8. The first LCL≤minimum.
9. The last UCL≥maximum.
Summary of Important Concepts
325

10. The tolerance is the difference between the UCL for one class and the LCL for the next class; the tolerance can
be defined as the unit to which the CW is rounded.
11. There are no gaps between consecutive intervals; gaps may only exist if there is an interval with frequency zero.
12. The CWs are consistent in length.
8.4.1. In general, to determine an estimate of the true median:
3. If there is an odd number of data values then take the middle of the order data.
4. If there is an even number of data values then trim all but the middle two values and take the midpoint, that is, the
sum divided by two.
Common: Central Tendencies
❑Mode—the most frequent value.
❑Median—the middle of the ordered values.
❑Mean (Standard Arithmetic Mean)—the sum of the values divided by the number of values.
❑Expected Value—the mean evaluated using probabilities.
❑Trimmed Mean—the mean evaluated trimming off the extremes.
❑Weighted Mean—the mean evaluated using weights.
Common: Deviations
❑Range—the difference between the minimum and maximum observed values.
❑Inner-quartile Range—the difference between the third and first quartile.
❑Mean Deviation—for comparison only.
❑Population Variance—true measure of variance.
❑Population Standard Deviation—true measure of deviation.
❑Sample Variance—the expected value of the differences observed between each observed value and the central ten-
dency, squared. That is, this measure is the mean error squared.
❑Sample Standard Deviation—there are several measures of deviations, but the one used as the standard is the square
root of the variance.
REVIEW TEST
1. A student spends $975 on rent, $75 on utilities, $200 on food and $100 on entertainment. In a circle graph showing this
budget, how many degrees would there be in the section representing utilities?
For problems 2-6, consider the following set to tests scores:
70,70,71,72,74,74,75,76,76,77,78,78,78,78,79,79,79,80,80:
2. What is the mode?
3. What is the median?
4. What is the mean?
5. What is the range?
6. What is the standard deviation?
7. Which kind of average my fail to exist for a given data set?
8. Which kind of average is sensitive and would change for a given data set if one item in the set changed value?
Practice problems for the CLAST exam.
9. In a statistics class, half the students scored 78, most of the remaining students scored 92 except a few who scored 100.
Which of the following statements is true about the distribution of scores?
a. The mode equals the median
b. The mean is less than the mode
c. The mean equals the median
d. The mean is greater than the median
326
Chapter 8
Basic Statistics

10. Thirty students take a quiz and all score greater than a 5, but less than a 25. Which of the following is a reasonable
estimate of the average score of the students?
a. 25
b. 30
c. 4
d. 18
11. A survey is done to determine how well people like Barbeque. Which of the following procedure would be most appro-
priate for selecting a statistically unbiased sample?
a. Survey a barbeque restaurant
b. Survey a burger joint
c. Survey a college campus
d. Survey a food court in a single mall
12. Forty individuals work for a company with salaries ranging from $400 per week to $1250 per week. Which of the fol-
lowing amounts is a reasonable estimate of the total weekly payroll?
a. $1650
b. $15,000
c. $32,000
d. $52,000
13. What is the mean of the data: 9, 4, 13, 8, 11, 2, 12, 9, and 4.
a. 4
b. 8
c. 9
d. 12
14. For each of the data sets, the given value of ^μ represents the same type of measure of central tendency.
x :5, 10, 15, 20, 25
^μ515
x :5, 7, 10, 16, 29, 35 ^μ513
x :8, 9, 9, 9, 15
^μ59
What is the value of for the following data set?
x :5, 5, 5, 7, 9, 11 ^μ5
a. 5
b. 6
c. 7
d. 11
REFERENCES
Blackwell, D., 1969. Basic Statistics. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Brei man, L., 1973. Statistics: With a View Toward Applications. Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
Freund, J.E., 1964. Modern Elementary Statistics, 2nd ed. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Li, Jerome C.R., 1968. Statistical Inference, vol. 1. Edwards Brothers, Ann Arbor, MI.
Lindgren, B.W., McElroth, G.W., 1966. Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 2nd ed. MacMillan, New York.
Mendenhall, W., 1971b. Introduction to Probability and Statistics, 3rd ed. Wadsworth, Belmont, CA.
Meyer, P.L., 1965b. Introduction to Probability and Statistical Applications. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978g. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
Tsokos, C.P., Wooten, R.D., 2011d. The Joy of Statistics Using Real-World Data. Kendall Hunt, Florida.
References
327

Chapter 9
Geometry
Fundamental Axioms
330
9.1 Introduction to Geometry
330
9.2 Measurements
331
9.3 Properties of Lines
333
9.4 Properties of Angles
338
9.5 Properties of Triangles
340
9.6 Properties of Quadrilaterals
344
9.7 Properties of Polygons
351
9.8 Areas and Surface Area
354
9.9 Volumes
363
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
367
Summary of Important Concept
370
Review Test
374
Reference
375
There is no royal road to geometry.
EUCLID
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
329

Euclid was a Greek mathematician who is believed to have taught at Alexandria in Egypt during the time of Ptolemy. He was
a contemporary of Archimedes (c. 287 BCE) and Plato (c. 347 BCE). A prominent mathematician, Euclid wrote the Ele-
ments, a treatise on geometry. Elements included compilations of works of earlier mathematicians resulting in Euclidian
Geometry.
The Axiomatic methods outlined in depth by Euclid’s Elements for proofs were threefold: clearly state the definitions of
the underlying terms, give rules for the logical outcomes, and then judge the validity of the argument based on these assump-
tions or axioms.
Euclidian Geometry is the study of lines, angles, shapes, and areas in a plane and volume solids figures based on axioms
and theorems.
FUNDAMENTAL AXIOMS
1. For any two points in a plane, there exists one and only one straight line between them.
2. A straight line can be indefinitely long.
3. A circle is all points equidistant from its center; the distance between the center and any point on the circle is the radius of
the circle.
4. All right angles are equal (to 90°).
5. For any line L and point p not on the line, there exists one and only one line through p parallel (not intersecting) line L.
.
9.1
INTRODUCTION TO GEOMETRY
The concept of geometry originated from the word “geo” which means earth
and “metric” meaning to measure. Thus, the main focus in geometry is to
learn about measurement. For example, we need to measure length, angles,
area, and volume, among other attributes. To accomplish this task, we shall
begin by introducing several definitions that will be represented symbolically
along with their interpretations. The table below summarizes the symbols that
we will be using along with their description, meaning, and examples.
“geo” + “metric”
#
Geometry
330
Chapter 9
Geometry

9.2
MEASUREMENTS
Measurement methods and skills have a variety of important uses in everyday
life. Here we shall define four types of measurements: distance, one-
dimensional object in one direction—lines or linear; degree or radian, turns
made in an orientated two-dimensional object—measurement of the angle;
area, surface contained in two-dimensional objects—measured in square
units; and volume, three-dimensional objects—measured in cubic units.
Definition 9.2.1 Distance
On a straight line in one-dimensional space, the distance is the amount of space between
two points.
Distance is used when measuring lines or one-sided figures (one
dimension). Lines are measured linearly: in inches, feet, miles, or meters;
abbreviated in, ft, mi, and m. Other names used to represent linear distance
Symbol
(abbr.)
Name
Meaning/
read as
Description
Example/description
li or Li
ith line
“Line i”
A given line
l1
jj
Parallel bars
“Is parallel to”
Used to relate lines
l1jjl2
⊥
Perpendicular
“Is perpendicular
to”
Used to relate lines
l1 ⊥l2
∠
Angle
“The angle”
Used to indicate an
angle
∠A
m
Measure of
“The measure
of”
Used to indicate
measure
m∠A
π
Greek letter lowercase
“pi”
Pronounced
“pie”
π5 C
d or π5 A
r2
In the none repeating decimal that we named:
approx. 3.14
°
Degree
“In degrees”
An angular
measurement
m∠A590°
rad
Radian
“In radians”
An angular
measurement
π rad≡180°
d
“Distance”
A linear
measurement
Length l, width w, height h, base b; one
dimension
A
Area
“Area”
A square
measurement
Area, A; surface area, SA; two dimensions
V
Volume
“Volume”
A cubic
measurement
Three dimensions
9.2 Measurements
331

are: length, width, height, base, depth, and perimeter. Written mathemati-
cally, these words are abbreviated as follows: l, w, h, b, d, and P. Note: All of
these lines are one-dimensional and are measured linearly.
Definition 9.2.2 Angle
In two-dimensional space, an angle is the amount of space between two intersecting
lines or surfaces that meet.
Angles are two-sided figures measured in degrees (where 360° is a full
rotation) or radians (where 2π is a full rotation). Angles measured in degrees
are measured more like an idea rather than an object—it is between one-sided
figures (one dimension) and three-sided figures (in two dimensions). Whereas
angles measure in radians is equivalent to half the parameter (one-
dimensional) of a unit circle (two-dimensional).
Definition 9.2.3 Area
In two-dimensional space, the area is the amount of space covered by a surface.
Moving into two dimensions, three-sided figures in a two-dimensional
plane are measured in square units or area. In fact, this is true for all polygons
(many sided objects) in two-dimensional space. Three and more-sided figures
such as triangles (tri or three-sided figures), quadrilaterals (four-sided
figures): trapezoids, parallelograms, rectangles, rhombi, squares are mea-
sured in terms of number of squares contained within each figure: inches
squared, square feet, square miles, and meters squared; abbreviated in2, ft2,
mi2, and m2. Here, area is abbreviated A and is two-dimensional. Each A will
be formulated using the two perpendicular one-dimensional distances: length
and width, base and height, etc. We will come back to this later and draw some
pictures, but remember the key idea behind area is perpendiculars; which will
be seen again in three-dimensional space and volume.
Definition 9.2.4 Volume
In three-dimensional space, the volume is the amount of space occupied by an object.
Volume is a measure in three-dimensional space. Objects such as pyramids,
rectangular solids, and cubes are measured in terms of the number of cubes
they contain: inches cubed, cubic feet, cubic miles, and meters cubed; abbre-
viated in3, ft3, mi3, and m3. In this text, volume is abbreviated V and will be for-
mulated using the three individual one-dimensional distances; or in terms of a
single one-dimensional distance and an orthogonal plane-area. (Orthogonal in
multiple-dimensions is comparable to perpendicular in two dimensions.)
The accuracy of these measures is usually rounded to a specific decimal
place using the conventional method. Rounding conventionally means if
the digit to the left of the desired decimal is less than 5, then round down;
otherwise, round up.
acute
right
obtuse
straight
triangle
quadrilateral
trapezoid
parallelogram
rectangle
rhombi
square
cube
cylinder
332
Chapter 9
Geometry

EXERCISES
Round the following to the indicated place value conventionally.
9.2.1. 1.42417 to the hundredths place
9.2.2. 2.71 to the units place
9.2.3. 3.1415 to the thousandths place
9.2.4. π Round to the second decimal place
9.2.5. e Round to the first decimal place
9.2.6.
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
Round to the tenths place
9.2.7.
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
Round to the third decimal place
Types of measurement
9.2.8. What unit of measurement would you use to measure a football field?
9.2.9. What unit of measurement would you use to measure a peanut?
9.2.10. What unit of measurement would you use to measure a pencil?
9.2.11. What unit of measurement would you use to measure a car?
9.2.12. What unit of measurement would you use to measure a penny?
Circle the correct answer
Length
Area
Volume
9.2.13. The distance from here to France is measured in:
miles
square miles
cubic miles
9.2.14. The area of a wall is measured in:
feet
square feet
cubic feet
9.2.15. The volume of a rectangular solid is measured in:
inches
square inches
cubic inches
9.2.16. The length of a line segment is measured in:
cm
square cm
cubic cm
9.2.17. The amount of water in a pool is measured in:
feet
square feet
cubic feet
9.2.18. The amount of space on a sheet of paper is measured in:
inches
square inches
cubic inches
9.3
PROPERTIES OF LINES
If you start with one line, there is not much of interest other than to describe it.
It looks like a real number line but without the little hash marks: a one-
dimensional movement: either forward or backward from any point.
Definition 9.3.1 Line
In one-dimensional space, a line is the long narrow mark or band. A straight line is a
line that is true to its course and does not deviate or curve.
One-Sided Figures: Lines
Placing a dot at an arbitrary point creates orientation; from this point there is forward and
backwards. If each directional ray is considered individually, then this figure is a two-
sided figure called a straight angle: two rays orientated as direct opposites. The type
of angle always measures 180°, and graphically illustrated below.
A point
A line
180
The type of angle always measures 180°.
You can’t criticize geometry. It is never wrong.
Paul Reand
9.3 Properties of Lines
333

Two-Sided Figures: Angles
In general, an angle is formed by two rays from a given point in any two directions and
is denoted by ∠; be careful, this symbol looks a lot like the inequality <, but their inter-
pretations are very different.
Definition 9.3.2 Supplementary
Two adjacent angles (or linear pairs) are supplementary if they sum to 180°.
Therefore when you include the idea of angles we have that two angles—
drawn adjacent—form a line, then these angles form linear pairs. Concep-
tually, such angles are call supplementary and quantitatively the sum of
the measures of these two angles is the linear 180°. The point is now called
the vertex. The diagram given below illustrates this concept.
A
B
The vertex
Thus we can write it symbolically as
m∠A + m∠B5180° or simply, A + B5180°.
The idea behind the second notation is that we know we are talking about
“measuring angles,” and we know we are measuring these angles in degrees; if
you don’t know this, the first notation is more descriptive.
In studying the behavior of straight lines, we focus on two main categories:
intersecting and non-intersecting.
Definition 9.3.3 Intersecting Lines
Non-parallel lines, lines that cross paths at exactly one point are intersecting lines.
Intersecting lines create four circular angles around the vertex; angles
which form a full revolution or 360°. Idea: if you turn around once and you
turn around again, then you are facing forward and the measure is twice that
of turning around once: 2×180°.
The angles, which are adjacent, form linear pairs and the opposite angles
(sometimes called the “vertical angles”) are equal. This relationship is
illustrated graphically below.
A
C
B
The vertex
Human knowledge in dark and uncertain;
philosophy is dark, astrology is dark, and geometry
is dark.
John Jewel
334
Chapter 9
Geometry

Thus, we can write this relationship as
A + B5A + C5180° and B5C
or
m∠A + m∠B5m∠A + m∠C5180° and m∠B5m∠C:
Definition 9.3.4 Perpendicular
Special cases of intersecting lines, lines are perpendicular if they form four right
angles.
If these two lines intersect exactly at a 90° then these two lines are said to be per-
pendicular; abbreviated ⊥.
In this specific type of intersection, these angles are equal; that is, if one of
two angles that form a straight line is 90° and they are linear pairs then all four
angles created are 90°. We illustrate it graphically by
A
l1
l2
B
The vertex
Thus, we can express this relationship as
A + B5180°, A5B590°, and l1 ⊥l2
or
m∠A + m∠B5180°, m∠A5m∠B590°, and l1 ⊥l2
Therefore when you include the idea of right angles, 90°, when we have
two angles—drawn adjacent—which form a right angle, then these angles are
complementary. Conceptually, such angles are called complementary and
quantitatively the sum of the measures of these two angles is the linear 90°.
Definition 9.3.5 Complementary
Two adjacent angles are complementary if they sum to 90°.
Non-intersecting lines are called parallel lines.
Definition 9.3.6 Parallel
Two lines are parallel if they never intersect.
They are called parallel lines and are abbreviated by two non-intersecting bars: jj.
A
C
B
9.3 Properties of Lines
335

When we are given two parallel lines what happens when there is a third
line which “cuts across” or “goes against”? Using the words “trans” as across
and “verse” as against, we call this third line the transverse line.
Definition 9.3.7 Transverse
A transverse line is a line that cuts across other lines.
Illustrated below are two parallel lines and one transverse line which create
eight angles labeled 1 through 8.
Written symbolically, we have l1jjl2 and l3 is the transverse.
From these three lines we can draw several relationships.
Property 9.3.1 Corresponding Angles
Corresponding angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines, and the
corresponding incident angles are equal:
m∠15m∠5,
m∠25m∠6,
m∠35m∠7,
m∠45m∠8:
Property 9.3.2 Consecutive Angles
Consecutive angles are supplementary. This is clear with adjacent angles which form
linear pairs:
m∠1 + m∠25180°, m∠1 + m∠35180°,etc:
and incorporating property 9.3.1, consecutive angles between the two parallel lines are
supplementary:
m∠3 + m∠55180°,etc:
4
6
8
5
7
3
1
2
l3
l1
l2
FIGURE 9.1
Two parallel lines and one transverse.
336
Chapter 9
Geometry

Property 9.3.3 Alternative Interior Angles
Alternate interior angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines and
we consider the angles on opposite sides of the transverse line and interior to the par-
allels. Alternate interior angles are equal:
m∠35m∠6 and m∠45m∠5:
Property 9.3.4 Alternative Exterior Angles
Alternate exterior angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines and
we consider the angles on opposite sides of the transverse line and external to the par-
allels. Alternate exterior angles are equal:
m∠15m∠8 and m∠25m∠7:
Note here, we can rename the numbers with letters.
Four or more lines do not bring any more interesting properties, but we
sometimes use four lines to illustrate slightly more involved relationships.
Illustrated below are two parallel lines and two transverse lines which
create 14 angles labeled a through n (Figure 9.2).
Written symbolically, we have l1jjl2 and both l3 and l4 are transverses.
The above picture of four straight lines with 14 angles; given two of these
angles we determine the remaining value using what might be classed the
trickle effect: that is using the properties for a few lines and with a very limited
amount of information, evaluate all measurements.
Example 9.3.1 Trickle Effect
Given that n562° and c548°, what are the remaining values and why?
Lead One: given n562°→i562° (opposite angles are equal)→f562° (alternate
interior angles are equal)→a562° (opposite angles are equal)
Another lead: given n562° and c548° and a+b+c5180°→b570° (property of
addition)→e570° (opposite angles are equal).
Moreover: given c548°→d548° (opposite angles are equal)→h548° (alternate
interior angles are equal)→k548° (opposite angles are equal)→g5132° (linear
pairs)→l5132° (opposite angles are equal).
Redraw this figure and label the measurements interpreted in the trickle effect.
l2
l1
l4
a
b
c
f
e
d
h
g
l
i
m
j
n
k
l3
FIGURE 9.2
Two parallel lines and two transverse lines.
9.3 Properties of Lines
337

EXERCISES
Answer TRUE/FALSE to the following: if false, give corrected statement(s).
9.3.1. The angle measuring 180° forms a straight line and is therefore called a straight angle.
9.3.2. Two angles which form a linear pair are supplementary and sum to 90°.
9.3.3. Two lines that intersect are perpendicular.
9.3.4. Two lines that intersect form equal opposite angles and consecutive angles form a linear pair.
9.3.5. Two parallel lines intersect exactly once.
9.3.6. Two angles are complementary if they form a right angle
9.3.7. The line that cuts across two parallel lines is called the transverse line.
9.4
PROPERTIES OF ANGLES
Measuring angles accurately is quite important in several applications that we
experience in life. A single angle by itself is created by two lines (rays) leaving
a vertex (point of origin) in two different directions. As the rays need not form a
straight line, angles have a two-dimensional characterization of an object with
two sides radiating for a vertex. The most commonly used directions are pos-
itive and negative on the real number line, north-south-east-west on maps,
forward-backwards-up-down on Cartesians planes (positives and negatives
again representing opposite directions), and clock-wise and counter-clock-
wise on a polar plane. For example, consider a clock face: there are three radii,
one length each for the seconds-minutes-hours (a completely different type of
orientation—not in space, but in time). This polar plane has a vertex as the pole
and consists of all rays with any given direction and magnitude—normally not
drawn, just estimated. As in our example of a clock, we do have a few specific
directions marked as well as their interpretations—furthermore, the initial
direction from which everything is interpreted is up, marked with a 12. There
is a lot of math involved in telling the time—this is why some people prefer
digital.
For more accurate polar graphs you can purchase special paper, or a pro-
tractor (directions) and ruler (magnitude).
Note: scientists use the orientation of counter-clock-wise as the positive
direction—moreover, the initial direction from which everything is interpreted
is left—because the view from left to right looks like the horizon. Note: first,
our orientation is the exact opposite orientation of what is assumed when
telling time and second, our initial position is indicated as 0°—we consider
looking up from the horizon as positive and looking down off the horizon
as negative. We can illustrate this movement by the following diagram.
A
The vertex
or mathematically by m∠A>0°
In practice, we work with only four possible categories of angles excluding
orientation. The categories are: acute, right, obtuse, and straight.
One of the great challenges of modern cosmology is
to discover what the geometry of the universe really
is.
Margaret Gellar
338
Chapter 9
Geometry

Common Types of Angles
Acute
like a cute kid is small, this type of angle measures such that: 0°<m∠A<90°.
Right
which stand “right” on its own and right in the middle of the line, this type of
angle measures m∠A590°.
Obtuse
meaning large, think of the word obese—this type of angle measures such
that: 90°<m∠A<180°.
Straight
this type of angle is the same as a line and measures m∠A5180∘.
You recall that if there is more than one angle, then their angular sum may
be supplementary or complimentary—or maybe not.
One interesting aspect is that when angles are considered in two or more
dimensions. In two dimensions, all directional rays are perpendicular and in
three dimensions, all directional rays are renamed vectors and each pair of
vectors are perpendicular to each other. This perpendicular aspect in three
or more dimensions is referred to as orthogonal, 90° between each intersecting
lines.
Property 9.4.1 0° Angle
Two rays pointing in the same direction from the same initial point form a 0° angle.
Property 9.4.2 180° Angle
Two rays pointing in opposite directions from the same initial point appearing as a
straight line form a 180° angle.
Property 9.4.3 90° Angle
A right angle is exactly 90° angle.
Property 9.4.4 Complementary Angles
Two adjacent angles that when combined form 90°, then the angles are comple-
mentary.
9.4 Properties of Angles
339

Property 9.4.5 Supplementary Angles
Two adjacent angles that when combined form 180°, then the angles are supple-
mentary.
EXERCISES
Fill in the blank.
9.4.1. Acute measures between ____ and ____ degrees
9.4.2. Right measures exactly ____ degrees
9.4.3. Obtuse measures between ____ and ____ degrees
9.4.4. Straight measures exactly ____ degrees
Determine if the given angles are complementary, supplementary, or neither.
9.4.1. 45°, 50°
9.4.2. 45°, 45°
9.4.3. 45°, 150°
9.4.4. 145°, 35°
9.4.5. 25°, 65°
Determine the complementary angle to the given angle:
9.4.1. 70°
9.4.2. 45°
9.4.3. 15°
9.4.4. 5°
9.4.5. 25°
Determine the supplementary angle to the given angle:
9.4.1. 170°
9.4.2. 45°
9.4.3. 115°
9.4.4. 5°
9.4.5. 25°
9.5
PROPERTIES OF TRIANGLES
Here we shall study the property of figures with three angles that constitute a
triangle.
Definition 9.5.1 Triangle
In two-dimensional space, the triangle is a plane figure with three straight sides and
three angles.
Music is the arithmetic of sounds as optics is the
geometry of light.
Claude Debussy
“Tri” + “angle”
#
Triangle
340
Chapter 9
Geometry

Three-Sided Figures: Triangles
Three angles, three sides—another word for three is “tri”—Tri-angles, abbreviated Δ. A
graphical representation is given by
B
C
A
or we can write it mathematically as ΔABC.
Moreover, it can be proven that the sum of these three angles always equals 180°.
That is,
m∠A + m∠B + m∠C5180°
or
A + B + C5180°
If the triangle has all acute angles, we call it an acute triangle; if it has a right angle,
we call it a right triangle; and if it has an obtuse angle, we call it an obtuse triangle. Of
all three types of triangles, the most important is the right triangle.
Pythagorean Theorem: A triangle is a right triangle if and only the sum of the square
of the shorter sides equals the square of the larger. The shorter sides are called the legs and
the larger (always opposite the right angle) is called the hypotenuse.
According to Pythagorean theorem, if a, b, and c are the lengths of the legs and the
hypotenuse, respectively, then a2 + b2 5c2.
A more interesting way to compare different triangles is in terms of how the angles
relate; quantitatively there are exactly three possibilities: no equal angles, exactly two
equal angles, or three equal angles. These three types of triangles are scalene, isos-
celes, and equiangular, respectively; even though we never use the word equian-
gular—we always say equilateral. “Equi” meaning equal and “angular” meaning
in terms of angles, so why equilateral?
Consider ∠A relative to the line segment between B and C. Note: we have to abbre-
viate this idea—a line segment between—too many words; we abbreviate this idea with
a bar. For example: BC represents the line segment between B and C; illustrated below.
A
B
C
We can write it mathematically as ∠A5 ∠BAC, where rays AB
! and AC
! are the
sides of the angle radiating from the vertex A; indicated by the arc in the drawing above.
Now the question is how does this angle influence the side opposite? How does ∠A
relate to BC. If ∠A were increased, then BC would also increase and if ∠A were
decreased, then BC would also decrease. Hence, ∠A relate to BC in ratio.
Arguably, the angle dictates the sides opposite relative to an internal ratio and hence
equiangular would result in equilateral, “lateral” meaning pertaining to the side.
Properties of these three different types of triangles are as follows.
9.5 Properties of Triangles
341

Common Types of Triangles
❑
Scalene
(i).
No equal angles
(ii).
No equal sides
(iii).
Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms
of sides.
For example, given m∠A<m∠B<m∠C implies that mBC<mAC<mAB, where
m is still read “the measurement of.”
❑
Isosceles
(i).
Two equal angles
(ii).
Two equal sides
(iii).
Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms
of sides.
For example, given m∠A5m∠B implies that mBC 5mAC.
❑
Equilateral
(i).
Three equal angles
(ii).
Three equal sides
(iii).
Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms
of sides.
For example, given m∠A5m∠B5m∠C implies that
mBC 5mAC5mAB:
And moreover, since m∠A + m∠B + m∠C5180°, we have
m∠A5m∠B5m∠C560°
Two triangles are only interesting if they look alike. “Look alike” is two
words, so we use the word similar. Two or more triangles are similar if they
have the same internal ratios.
Thus, we can proceed to state the formal definitions.
Definition 9.5.2 Similar
Triangles are similar if the share the same internal ratios. In terms of angles, this means
that corresponding angles are equal, but in terms of sides, this simply means that the
sides are proportional; like an enlargement of a triangle on a copier.
ΔABC∼ΔDEF is read “triangle ABC is similar to triangle DEF.”
The rules that govern similar triangles are given below.
Rule 9.5.1 Similar Triangles
Triangles are similar if they share these common ratios:
a
y
x
Y
X
z
Z
b
c
B
A
C
342
Chapter 9
Geometry

Rule 9.5.1 Similar Triangles—cont’d
Within triangles:
a
b 5 x
y
a
c 5 x
z
b
c 5 y
z
and between triangles:
a
x 5 b
y
a
x 5 c
z
b
y 5 c
z
If triangles are more than similar, and share all equal sides, then they are
congruent. Congruent is a much stronger word than similar.
Definition 9.5.3 Congruent
Congruent means that corresponding angles are equal, as well as corresponding sides
are equal; like a reproduction or regular copy of your triangle.
More than two triangles can be related in a similar fashion if they are all
similar or congruent. Thus, the rules that drive congruent triangles are summa-
rized below.
Rule 9.5.2 Congruent Triangles
Corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent.
C
b
y
x
z
a
c
Z
A
B
X
Y
Triangles are congruent under the following conditions:
Side-side-side
corresponding sides are equal
a5x, b5y, c5z
Angle-side-angle
m∡A5m∡X,
c5z, m∡B5m∡Y
m∡B5m∡Y,
a5x, m∡C5m∡Z
m∡C5m∡Z,
b5y, m∡A5m∡X
where m∡is read “the measure of the angle.”
Side-angle-side
a5x, ∡B5 ∡Y, c5z
b5y,
∡C5 ∡Z, a5x
c5z,
∡A5 ∡X, b5y
9.5 Properties of Triangles
343

EXERCISES
For the following questions, define according to angle type: Acute, Right, and Obtuse
9.5.1. A triangle with interior angles measuring 60°, 30°, 90°.
9.5.2. A triangle with interior angles measuring 80°, 20°, 80°.
9.5.3. A triangle with interior angles measuring 45°, 20°, 115°.
9.5.4. A triangle with interior angles measuring 120°, 50°, 10°.
9.5.5. A triangle with interior angles measuring 45°, 45°, 90°.
For the following questions, define the above triangles in terms of: Scalene, Isosceles, and Equilateral.
9.5.6. Using the triangle in problem (9.5.2) above, if the shortest side measures 1 and the longest side measures 2, what is
the middle side, the second leg?
9.5.7. Using the triangle in problem (9.5.5) above, if the shorter sides measures 1 what is the longest side—the hypotenuse.
For the following questions refer to the figure below ΔABC∼ΔDEF
A
C
D
E
F
B
9.5.8. Given AB56, BC510, and DE55, find EF.
9.5.9. Given AB56, BC510, and DE53, find EF.
For the following questions, TRUE/FALSE.
9.5.10. AB
BC 5 DE
EF
9.5.11. AB
DE 5 BC
EF
9.5.12. AB
BC 5 EF
DE
9.5.13. AB
AC 5 DE
DF
9.5.14. AB
BC 5 DE
DF
For the following questions, fill in the inequality or equality, assuming
m∠A>m∠B>m∠C
9.5.15. m∠F____m∠E____m∠D
9.5.16. AB____AC
9.5.17. DE____DF
9.5.18. AB____BC
9.5.19. FE____DF
9.5.20. If AB5DE, then these triangles are more than just similar, they are __________________.
9.6
PROPERTIES OF QUADRILATERALS
We have learned about three-sided figures; now we shall study four-sided
figures. The word “quad” meaning four and “lateral” again meaning pertaining
to the sides; thus a four-sided figure is referred to as a quadrilateral.
344
Chapter 9
Geometry

Definition 9.6.1 Quadrilaterals
In two-dimensional space, the quadrilateral is a plane figure with four straight sides
and four angles.
Four-Sided Figures
General quadrilaterals are not very useful, in that we don’t divide land this way and we
don’t build functional structures this way. Only an artist would utilize such shapes and
figures, and even then they are subject to different interpretations.
A typical quadrilateral is shown here:
B
A
D
C
Unfortunately, we don’t have an abbreviation for general quadrilateral;
however, we should note that that the sum of the interior angles always equals
360°. The idea is that if you draw a line from A to C, there are two triangles:
hence 2×180°.
However, let’s consider something a little more functional.
Definition 9.6.2 Trapezoid
In two-dimensional space, the trapezoid is a plane figure with four straight sides and
four angles such that exactly one set of opposite sides are parallel.
Trapezoids are more interesting because two sides are parallel and their
areas are easier to measure, but in terms of angles and sides, there are no other
restrictions.
A trapezoid will look as shown below:
B
A
D
C
We can express this mathematically by ADjjBC.
Definition 9.6.3 Parallelogram
In two-dimensional space, the parallelogram is a plane figure with four straight sides
and four angles such that both sets of opposite sides are parallel.
Quadrilaterals
#
Four straight sides
&
Four angles
9.6 Properties of Quadrilaterals
345

Extending this idea to both sets of opposite sides parallel, a typical paral-
lelogram is as shown below.
B
A
D
C
We can represent this using mathematical symbols as ADjjBC and
ABjjDC.
Given below are two properties of a parallelogram.
Property 9.6.1 Angles in Parallelograms
With respect to the angles in a parallelogram, opposite angles are equal:
∠A5 ∠C and ∠B5 ∠D:
In the illustration below, we have used like markings to indicate which
angles are equal.
B
A
D
C
Property 9.6.2 Sides in Parallelograms
With respect to the sides in a parallelogram, opposite sides are parallel:
ADjjBC and ABjjDC ;
and opposite sides are equal:
AD5BC and AB5DC :
In the illustration below, we have used equal number of markings to
indicate which sides are equal and directional arrows to demonstrate which
lines move in that direction and are parallel.
B
A
D
C
Opposite angles in a parallelogram are equal and opposite sides in a par-
allelogram are equal.
Extending the restrictions to include sides of equal length, the figure
becomes a rhombus. A baseball diamond is shaped like a rhombus—the dis-
tance between bases is equal even if the field is not perfectly square.
Definition 9.6.4 Rhombus
In two-dimensional space, a rhombus is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides
and four angles such that both sets of opposite sides are parallel and all sides are equal.
346
Chapter 9
Geometry

A rhombus can be graphically illustrated by
B
A
D
C
Property 9.6.3 Angles in a Rhombus
With respect to the angles in a rhombus, opposite angles are equal:
∠A5 ∠B and ∠C5 ∠D:
B
A
D
C
Property 9.6.4 Sides in a Rhombus
With respect to the sides in a rhombus, all sides are equal; that is,
AD5BC 5AB5DC;
and opposite sides are parallel:
ADjjBC and ABjjDC :
B
A
D
C
Opposite angles in a rhombus are equal and all sides in a rhombus are
equal.
However, the diagonals of a rhombus are not equal; but they are
perpendicular.
Property 9.6.5 Diagonals in a Rhombus
With respect to the diagonals in a rhombus, they are perpendicular to each other; that
is,
AC⊥BD:
We now study the case when a figure consists of all right (equal) angles.
Equiangular is all equal angles, and in the case of a four-sided figure, the four
interior angles must all be right. Linguistically, saying “right-angles” is very
close to “rect-angles” or rectangle.
9.6 Properties of Quadrilaterals
347

Definition 9.6.6 Rectangle
In two-dimensional space, a rectangle is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides
and four angles such that both sets of opposite sides are parallel and all angles are equal.
A schematic diagram of a rectangle is as shown below:
B
C
A
D
Property 9.6.6 Angles in a Rectangle
With respect to the angles in a rectangle, they are all equal to 90°; that is,
∠A5 ∠B5 ∠C5 ∠D590°:
D
C
B
A
Property 9.6.7 Sides in a Rectangle
With respect to the sides in a rectangle, opposite sides are equal; that is,
AD5BC and AB5DC ;
and opposite sides are parallel:
ADjjBC and ABjjDC :
D
A
B
C
Because we have all angles are equal, each diagonal can be related to the
sides by the Pythagorean Theorem, showing the diagonals are equal.
Property 9.6.8 Diagonals in a Rectangle
With respect to the diagonals in a rectangle, they are equal to each other; that is,
AC5BD:
A
D
C
B
348
Chapter 9
Geometry

In summary, all angles in a rectangle are equal and opposite sides in a rect-
angle are equal and diagonals in a rectangle are equal.
A geometrical figure with both equal angles and equal sides is a square. A
square is what we will base area—it is the perfect representation of
perpendiculars.
Definition 9.6.6 Square
In two-dimensional space, a square is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides
and four angles such that both sets of all sides are parallel and all sides are equal.
A graphical illustration of a square is given below:
D
C
B
A
Property 9.6.9 Angles in a Square
With respect to the angles in a square, they are all equal to 90°; that is,
∠A5 ∠B5 ∠C5 ∠D590°:
D
C
B
A
Property 9.6.10 Sides in a Square
With respect to the sides in a square, all sides are equal; that is,
AD5BC 5AB5DC;
and opposite sides are parallel:
ADjjBC and ABjjDC :
D
C
B
A
Furthermore, not only are the diagonals equal, they are also perpendicular.
Property 9.6.11 Diagonals in a Square
With respect to the diagonals in a square, they are equal to each other and perpen-
dicular; that is,
AC5BD and AC⊥BD :
9.6 Properties of Quadrilaterals
349

D
C
B
A
Definition 9.6.7 Kite
In two-dimensional space, a kite is a type of quadrilateral with four straight sides
and four angles such that the two upper sides are equal and the two lower sides
are equal.
A kite can be graphically illustrated by
B
C
D
A
EXERCISES
TRUE/FALSE: if false, then give correct statement.
9.6.1. A general quadrilateral has four sides, with opposite sides parallel.
9.6.2. A trapezoid has four sides with exactly two parallel sides.
9.6.3. In a parallelogram, opposite angles and sides, respectively, are equal.
9.6.4. In a parallelogram, consecutive angles are complementary.
9.6.5. An equiangular quadrilateral is more commonly called a rectangle.
9.6.6. In a rectangle, the diagonals are perpendicular bisectors but are not equal.
9.6.7. In a rhombus, the diagonals are perpendicular bisectors and all sides are equal.
9.6.8. If the figure is a rhombus, then the figure is a parallelogram.
9.6.9. In a square, diagonals are not equal.
9.6.10. In a square, all angles and sides, respectively, are equal.
Name all four-sided figures with the following description:
9.6.11. Equal angles, but only opposite sides are equal
9.6.12. Opposite angles equal only and all equal sides
9.6.13. Opposite sides are parallel
9.6.14. All angles are equal
9.6.15. All sides are equal
9.6.16. Unequal sides
9.6.17. Unequal sides and one set of parallel sides
9.6.18. Equal diagonals
9.6.19. Unequal diagonals
9.6.20. Perpendicular diagonal
350
Chapter 9
Geometry

9.7
PROPERTIES OF POLYGONS
So far we have studied three and four-sided geometrical figures and now we
wish to generalize this to figures with more than four sides. These figures are
called polygons; this word is made up of the words “poly” meaning many and
“gon” meaning sides.
Definition 9.7.1 Polygons
In two-dimensional space, the polygon is a plane figure with more than four straight
sides with an equal number of angles.
Example 9.7.1 Pentagon
A pentagon—“pent” meaning five—is a five-sided figure. Note: not all sides are equal,
nor are the interior angles.
Pentagon
Example 9.7.2 Hexagon
A hexagon—“hex” meaning six—is a six-sided figure.
Hexagon
Others include the heptagon, octagon, nonagon, and decagon; seven, eight, nine, and
ten-sided figures, respectively.
Definition 9.7.2 Regular Polygon
In two-dimensional space, the regular polygon is a polygon with all equal sides and all
equal interior angles.
Example 9.7.3 Regular Pentagon
A regular pentagon is a five-sided figure with all equal sides.
Regular
pentagon
Pentagon
Washington, D.C.
9.7 Properties of Polygons
351

Example 9.7.4 Regular Hexagon
A regular hexagon is a six-sided figure with all equal sides.
Regular
hexagon
Note: a polygon with n sides produces n22
ð
Þ triangles, illustrated below. A
five-sided figure produces three internal triangles.
We have already studied sums of interior angles for three- and four-sided
figures and the total measure of the interior angles. Recall, a triangle has total
interior measure of 180° and any quadrilateral—being two triangles has a total
interior measure of 360°.
Property 9.7.1 Sum of Interior Angles
In general, there will also be n22
ð
Þ triangles when there are n sides in a figure; therefore
since each triangle measures 180°, we can formulate the total interior measure for any
polygon with n sides, Sn. That is, the sum of interior angles is given by
Sn 5 n22
ð
Þ×180°:
Definition 9.7.3 Perimeter
The distance around such straight edged figures is simply the sum of the individual dis-
tances and is called the perimeter and is abbreviated P.
Example 9.7.5 Perimeter
If there are three sides in a figure, then the perimeter is the sum of the three sides.
B
A
c
b
a
C
Then, by the definition the perimeter is P5a + b + c.
352
Chapter 9
Geometry

Example 9.7.5 Perimeter—cont’d
If the figure had four sides, then the perimeter is the sum of the four sides. That is,
a
b
C
B
A
d
D
c
Then, by the definition the perimeter is P5a + b + c + d.
Thus finding perimeter of a figure depends on the number of straight edge sides.
Notice, that we are writing straight-edged—if the figure is not straight edged, then it
could be any smooth curve such as a circle. The distance around such a circle is called
the circumference.
If finding the circumference of a circle, we need to first introduce the Greek letter π,
used to represent the constant that is the ratio of a circles circumference to its diameter
and is commonly approximated as 3.14159 and is sometimes referred to as “pi.” It is an
irrational number and it cannot be expressed exactly and consequently its decimal rep-
resentation never ends. A formal definition of π is
π5 Circumference of acircle
diameter of the circle
5 C
d ;
as shown by
c
d
The circumference of a circle is slightly more than three times as long as its
diameter.
Definition 9.7.4 Circumference
The distance around smooth curves is called the circumference; since these curve’s
perfection depends on it radiating the same in all directions from a centering point, cir-
cumference is often formulated in terms of the radius and is abbreviated C.
The circumference of a circle with fixed radius r is
C52πr;
where and π is approximately 3.1415.
Another way to formulate the circumference is in terms of the diameter; the
diameter is the longest cord in a circle and measures twice the radius. That is,
C5πd and d52r
Note that everything is measured in distance or in one direction at a time.
9.7 Properties of Polygons
353

EXERCISES
Distance: One-dimensional measurement
9.7.1. Find the perimeter of a square with sides measuring 6.
9.7.2. Find the perimeter of a square with sides measuring x.
9.7.3. Find the perimeter of a rectangle with length 2 and width 3.
9.7.4. Find the perimeter of a rectangle with length x and width y.
9.7.5. Find the perimeter of an equilateral triangle with side measuring 6.
9.7.6. Find the perimeter of an equilateral triangle with sides measuring s.
9.7.7. Find the perimeter of a quadrilateral with sides measuring 2, 4, 8, and 6.
9.7.8. Find the perimeter of a quadrilateral with sides measuring x1,x2,x3,x4.
9.7.9. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 7 ft.
9.7.10. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 12 cm.
9.7.11. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 15 mm.
9.7.12. Find the circumference of a circle with radius 40 in.
9.7.13. Find the circumference of a circle with diameter 7 ft.
9.7.14. Find the circumference of a circle with diameter 12 cm.
9.7.15. Find the circumference of a circle with diameter 15 mm.
9.7.16. Find the circumference of a circle with diameter 40 in.
9.8
AREAS AND SURFACE AREA
Recall that area measures the number of squares contained within each figure:
inches square, square feet, square miles, and meters squared; abbreviated in2,
ft2, mi2, and m2. Here, area is abbreviated as A and is two-dimensional.
Moreover, each area will be formulated using the two perpendicular one-
dimensional distances. We shall illustrate the learning about area with several
pictures below.
Let’s begin with learning how to find areas of commonly used geometric
figures: squares, rectangles, rhombus, parallelogram, trapezoid, quadri-
lateral, and triangles. Then include circles.
Rule 9.8.1 Area of Square
A square of any size is self-defining—if we stack s squares s times, then the area is s×s.
Therefore, if A is the area of a square with side length s then A is s2; that is,
s
s
A5s2:
Example 9.8.1 Area of Square
The area of a square that is 2 cm×2 cm is A54 cm2. That is, there are four squares in
the figure.
2
2
Area
Square
A52 cm×2 cm54 cm2
354
Chapter 9
Geometry

Rule 9.8.2 Area of Rectangle
This idea can easily be extended to rectangles—if we stack (a base) b of squares h times
to create a specific height, then the area of a rectangle is b×h; therefore, if A is the area
of a rectangle then it measures base times height. That is,
b
h
A5bh:
Example 9.8.2 Area of Rectangle
The area of a square that is 5 in×2 in is A510 in2. That is, there are 10 squares in the
figure.
2
5
Note: sometimes we use length and width of a rectangle and not base and
height. Using the abbreviations for length and width, l and w, respectively, the
formula for the area of a rectangle is simply A5lw.
This idea can further be extended to the rhombus—since the side is the
average width of the figure, on average it is a rectangle.
Rule 9.8.3 Area of Rhombus
The average width is b and h is perpendicular to the upper and lower base; therefore, the
area of a rhombus is b×h. Therefore, if A is the area of a rhombus then it is measured
base times height. That is,
h
s
b = s
A ¼ bh
Example 9.8.3 Area of Rhombus
The area of a rhombus with side 4 ft and height 5 ft is A520 ft2.
4
4
5
Continued
Rectangle
A52 in×5 in510 in2
9.8 Areas and Surface Area
355

Example 9.8.3 Area of Rhombus—cont’d
Think of moving the triangle.
4
5
4 - x
x
Resulting in a rectangle that is 4×5520.
5
4 - x
4
x
We can further visualize this in terms of averages—if we take a pair of scissors, then
whatever we cut off, we will add it back in as shown by the diagram below.
h
b=s
This idea can further be extended in the same way to the parallelogram. If A is the
area of a parallelogram, then it is again measured base times height. That is,
h
b
This approach of finding areas can be extended to the area of a trapezoid, then it is
again measured average base times height.
Rule 9.8.4 Area of Trapezoid
In a trapezoid, the average base is the average of the lower base b and the upper base B;
that is,
Average base5 b + B
2
5 b + B
2
h
b
B
and the area of a trapezoid is obtained by
A5 1
2 b + B
ð
Þh:
356
Chapter 9
Geometry

Example 9.8.4 Area of Trapezoid
The
area
of
a
trapezoid
with
bases
10 in
and
4 in,
and
height
5 in
is
A5 1
2 10 + 4
ð
Þ×5535 in2.
We proceed to study the area of a triangle.
Rule 9.8.5 Area of Triangle
The formula above directly leads to the formula for the area of any general triangle.
From the diagram below, the average base is the average of the lower base b and the
upper base 0; that is,
Average base5 b + 0
2
5 1
2
h
b
0
The area of a triangle is
A51
2 bh:
Another way to visualize this is: we have congruent triangles and therefore,
the triangle contained in the rectangle b by h, is exactly half the rectangle itself.
That is, the area of a triangle is one-half the rectangle that contains it; one-half
the base times the height.
b
0
h
Either way, the formula is the same.
A5 1
2 bh:
Example 9.8.5 Area of Triangle
The area of a triangle with base 5 mm height 5 mm is
A5 1
2 ×5×5512:5 mm2
Another approach to obtaining the area of any triangle is by using Heron’s Method.
=
a triangle is half the
rectangle that contains it
1
2
9.8 Areas and Surface Area
357

Rule 9.8.6 Heron’s Method
Heron’s method for computing the area of any triangle with known sides a, b, and c can
be computed as follows
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s s2a
ð
Þ s2b
ð
Þ s2c
ð
Þ
p
where s5 a + b + c
2
.
If in a triangle, the height is not given, but the three sides, a, b, and c are
known, we use the following approach to obtain the area. For a given triangle
with sides a, b, and c, we calculate the perimeter P and let s be half the
perimeter, s5 1
2P; then the area is given by Heron’s formula. That is, given
a triangle
c
a
b
the area is given by
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s s2a
ð
Þ s2b
ð
Þ s2c
ð
Þ
p
, s5 1
2P and P5a + b + c
Therefore, if you have a general quadrilateral, you can then survey your
figure and determine the various lengths, including the diagonal distance.
Heron’s formula can then be used twice and the areas then summed.
b1
b2
a2
a1
c
Example 9.8.6 Heron’s Method
The area of a triangle with sides measuring 4 in, 7 in, and 5 in is determined by first
calculating the perimeter, P54 + 7 + 5516 inches and half the perimeter is
s5 16
2 58; hence the area using Heron’s method is
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
8× 824
ð
Þ× 827
ð
Þ× 825
ð
Þ
p
59:8 in2:
Rule 9.8.7 Area of a Circle
Area is measured using two perpendicular measurements. In general, the area of a
circle is defined as its radius
d
2
 
squared times π. That is,
A5πr2:
If you find this hard to remember, consider it this way: a perfect circle, the
general information given is the radius, but to compute area, we need a perpen-
dicular and perpendicular to the radius is another radius. So we start with the
radius square.
358
Chapter 9
Geometry

r
r
However, this is obviously more than one-fourth the area of the entire
circle; four squares would more than cover circle, illustrated below. So take
the scissors and cut off the four corners, leaving about three squares to fill
the circle. That is the area of a circle is about three squares. About three is
3.1415… and the square area is r2.
r
r
A5πr2
Example 9.8.7 Area of a Circle
The area of a circle with radius of 6 mm is
A5π×62 536πª104 mm
Next we study surface areas on three-dimensional objects. The areas are measured in
the same fashion, but you have to use the scissors; for example, a rectangular solid has
front and back, sides, a top, and bottom.
Rule 9.8.8 Surface Area
The surface area of flat-sided object in three-dimensional space is the sum of the areas
present on each flat surface.
Three dimensions are very difficult to draw on paper because paper is only
two-dimensional. So, we have to be a human camera—we have to imagine
what a picture of a three-dimensional object might look like and draw it.
Or, we could take two-dimensional paper and create a third-dimension by
folding it. We will come back to this as well and draw visualized pictures
A square with side r has area r 2
9.8 Areas and Surface Area
359

of objects—that is, draw what a picture of the object might look like—and
maybe build a few objects like origami. You will need tape with your scissors!
How to draw a rectangular solid: A rectangular solid looks like a shoebox
and the picture of a shoebox is basically a rectangle with extended parallels to
indicate the depth of the box and finally more parallels toward the back of the
solid. Thus, we have parallels and perpendiculars to measure as shown below.
Rectangle
Extended parallels
More parallels
The surface of a rectangular solid consist of the front (rectangle drawn) and
the back (which is implied), it could also be illustrated, but would have to be
dotted since it is not visible from our point of view, but if you pick up the
shoebox, it’s there. Illustrated below are all six surfaces.
Hidden surfaces
Thus, we have the front and the back that have the same dimensions (height-
length), two sides that have the same dimensions (height-width) and the top and
the bottom, which again have the same dimensions (length-width); these areas
on the surface additively are called the surface area: abbreviated by SA.
Furthermore, when we refer to these dimensions, we are talking about rect-
angles—all rectangles. They appear as parallelograms in the drawing, but
remember this is a visual representation of a shoebox. If we take our scissors
to it, the surface is as shown below. Create this illustration on a piece of paper
and cut it out; then fold it and shape it to be the surface area of a rectangular solid.
This approach is referred to as Origami Design I:
Top
Front
Side
Bottom
Back
Side
Thus, the surface area of a rectangular solid, SA, is given by
SA52lw + 2lh + 2wh:
l
w
h
360
Chapter 9
Geometry

Example 9.8.8 Surface Area
The
surface
area
of
a
rectangular
solid
that
is
5 in×2 in×3 in
is
SA5 2×5×3 + 2×5×2 + 2×3×2
ð
Þin2 562 in2. That is, there are 62 squares cov-
ering the surface of the figure.
2
5
3
How would this change if we lost the lid of our shoebox? It is still surface
area, but with only the bottom and not the top. The method should follow
directly. If you would like to see it, fine but there should be no need to mem-
orize it—knowing the area of the individual rectangles and how many we need
is enough information. That is,
SA5lw + 2lh + 2wh
h
l
w
(Open box)
Definition 9.8.1 Right Circular Cylinder
A right circular cylinder is a cylinder with circular bases parallel to each other.
How to draw a right circular cylinder: We can visualize the geometry of
a right circular cylinder by starting with two lines for the cylinder together with
a circle drawn in perspective, which looks like an ellipse or oval as shown
below.
Two parallel lines
Two ovals or ellipse
The surface of a right circular cylinder is a single rectangle wrapped around
to form the cylinder and two circles, one on top and bottom. It could also have
been illustrated with half the oval dotted since it is not visible from our point of
view, but if it were a clear can you would see it there.
9.8 Areas and Surface Area
361

Rule 9.8.9 Surface of a Right Circular Cylinder
When we refer to the dimensions we have the base radius and the height. These circles
appear as ellipses in the drawing; but remember this because it is our representation of a
clear can. If we take our scissors to it, the surfaces are as shown below. Create this illus-
tration on a piece of paper and cut it out. Then fold it and shape it to be the surface area
of a right circular cylinder.
The surface area, SA, of a right circular cylinder is given by
SA52 πr2


+ 2πr
ð
Þh:
This approach is referred to as Origami Design II:
h
r
C = 2pr
Example 9.8.9 Surface of a Right Circular Cylinder
The surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius 2 in and height 3 in is
SA52π×22 + 2π×2×3520πª62:8 in2:
The surface area of a sphere is also easy to calculate.
Rule 9.8.10 Surface of a Sphere
A sphere is a round ball. From the center, there is a fixed radius. Therefore, in all three
perpendicular directions, the dimension is the same: r. And while this shape is easy to
visualize, it is not easily constructed. It’s like paint on a marble—smooth but not flat—
so, no origami. But let’s take a snapshot and at least write the formulated surface area.
That is, the surface area of a sphere is given by
SA54πr2:
362
Chapter 9
Geometry

Example 9.8.10 Surface of a Sphere
The surface area of a sphere with radius 2 in is
SA54π×22 58πª25:12 in2:
Common Measures of Area
Square
A5s3
Rectangle
A5lw
Surface of a rectangular solid
SA52lw + 2lh + 2wh
Triangle
A5 1
2bh
Heron’s formula
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s s2a
ð
Þ s2b
ð
Þ s2c
ð
Þ
p
s5 a + b + c
2
Surface of a right circular cylinder
SA52πr2 + 2πrh
Surface of a sphere
SA54πr2
EXERCISES
Area: Two-dimensional measurement
9.8.1. Find the area of a square with sides measuring 6 in.
9.8.2. Find the area of a square with sides measuring x cm.
9.8.3. Find the area of a rectangle with length 2 ft and width 3 ft.
9.8.4. Find the area of a rectangle with length x cm and width y cm.
9.8.5. Find the area of a rectangle with length x cm and width y cm.
9.8.6. Find the area of a triangle with base x cm and height y cm.
9.8.7. Find the area of an equilateral with side measuring 6.2 mm.
9.8.8. Find the area of an equilateral with sides measuring s units.
9.8.9. Find the area of a quadrilateral with sides measuring 2 in, 4 in, 8 in, and 6 in.
9.8.10. Find the area of a quadrilateral with sides measuring x1,x2,x3,x4 measured in ft.
Surface area: Three-dimensional constructions
9.8.11. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length 4 units, width 13 units, and height 9 units.
9.8.12. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length 5 in, width 7 in, and height 8 in.
9.8.13. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length l ft, width w ft, and height h ft.
9.8.14. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius 2 mm and height 5 mm.
9.8.15. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius 4 units and height 7 units.
9.8.16. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius r cm and height h cm.
9.9
VOLUMES
In the final section of the basic aspects of geometry, we will learn how to find
volumes of cubes, rectangular solids, right circular cylinders, cones, and
spheres.
Recall, volume measures the number of cubes contained within each fig-
urative space: inches cubed, cube feet, and meters cubed; abbreviated as
in3, ft3, and m3. Here, volume is abbreviated V and is three-dimensional.
Moreover, each area will be formulated using the three perpendicular one-
dimensional distances or a single one-dimensional object and an orthogonal
two-dimensional object. Three-dimensional objects such as pyramids,
9.9 Volumes
363

rectangular solids, and cubes are measured in terms of the number of cubes
contained.
Here, volume V will be formulated using the three individual one-
dimensional distances; or in terms of a single one-dimensional distance and
an orthogonal plane-area. Note that orthogonal in multiple-dimensions is com-
parable to perpendicular in two dimensions.
Let’s first extend a square to a cube—like a die. Then extend a rectangle to
a rectangular solid and finally a circle to a sphere.
The basic cube will be the units by which we measure volume.
Rule 9.9.1 Volume of a Cube
A square of any size is self-defining—if we stack s squares s times, then the area is s×s.
When we stack these squares s deep, if V is the volume of the cube with side length s
then V is s3. That is,
s
s
s
V 5s3:
Example 9.9.1 Volume of a Cube
The volume of a cube with side 5 ft is
V 553 5125 ft3:
This idea can easily be extended to rectangles.
Rule 9.9.2 Volume of a Rectangle Solid
By stacking (a base layer) l×w of rectangles h times to create a specific height, then the
volume of a rectangular solid is l×w×h. That is,
l
w
h
V 5lwh
Example 9.9.2 Volume of a Solid
The volume of a rectangular solid that is 5 in×2 in×3 in is
V 55×2×3530 in3:
364
Chapter 9
Geometry

Example 9.9.2 Volume of a Solid—cont’d
Note: the volume of a cube and of the rectangular solid is the base area times the
height. This idea can also be extended to shape with right side—this is what can be
called the cookie cutter effect.
B
h
Rule 9.9.3 Volume of a Cookie Cutter Shape
Given the base area, B, of a figure with vertical height, h, a cookie cutter shape;
the formula for the volume of a cookie cutter shape is the base area times the height;
that is,
V 5Bh
Example 9.9.3 Volume of a Solid
The volume of a cookie cut with a heart shape with base 16 cm2 and a 1.5 cm depth is
V 516×1:5524 cm3:
Rule 9.9.4 Volume of a Right Circular Cylinder
Similar to the volume of a cookie cutter shape, the base area of a right circular cylinder
is a circle and therefore we can formulate the volume of a right circular cylinder
written as
V 5πr2h:
Example 9.9.4 Volume of a Cylinder
The volume of a right circular cylinder with radius 2 in and height 3 in is
V 5π×22 ×3512πª37:58 in3:
This formulated volume comes from the fact that a cone fits into a right circular cyl-
inder—this is not a cookie cutter shape, but is part of the right circular cylinder.
Rule 9.9.5 Volume of a Cone
In fact, the volume of a cone is exactly one-third of the right circular cylinder; that is,
V 5 1
3πr2h:
9.9 Volumes
365

Example 9.9.5 Volume of a Cone
The volume of a right circular cone with radius 2 in and height 3 in is
V 5 1
3π×22 ×354πª12:56 in3:
This volume comes from the fact that a sphere has only one measurement—the
radius—this is not a cookie cutter shape, but is related to the radius cubed.
Rule 9.9.6 Volume of a Sphere
The volume of a sphere is about four cubes; that is,
V 5 4
3πr3:
Example 9.9.6 Volume of a Sphere
The volume of a sphere with radius 2 in is
v5 4
3π×23 5 64
3 πª66:99 in3:
Common Measures of Volume
EXERCISES
Volume: Three-dimensional measurement
9.9.1. Find the volume of a cube with side edges measuring 6 mm.
9.9.2. Find the volume of a cube with side edges measuring x units.
9.9.3. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length 2 in, width 3 in, and height 5 in.
9.9.4. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length x units, width y units, and height z units.
9.9.5. Find the volume of an equilateral cookie with side measuring 6, see below.
Equilateral
Cookie cutter
9.9.6. Find the volume of an equilateral cookie with sides measuring s cm, see above.
9.9.7. Find the volume of a right circular cylinder with radius 2 mm and height 5 mm.
Circular
Cylinder
Cookie cutter
(Right)
9.9.8. Find the volume of a right circular cylinder with radius r units and height h units.
Cube
V5s3
Rectangular solid
V5lwh
Right circular cylinder
V5πr2h
Circular cone
V51
3 πr2h
Sphere
V54
3 πr3
r
366
Chapter 9
Geometry

CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
9.1. Definitions: Define the following terms: Area, Distance, Measurements, Pi, and Volume.
Round the following to the indicated place value
9.2. 1.121314 to the hundredths place
9.3. 2.22222 to the units place
9.4. 7.13131313 to the thousandths place
9.5. 1.4197 to the second decimal place
Distance: One-dimensional measurement
9.6. Find the perimeter of a square with sides measuring 4 in.
9.7. Find the perimeter of a square with sides measuring y units.
9.8. Find the perimeter of a rectangle with length 5 cm and width 8 cm.
9.9. Find the perimeter of a rectangle with length l mm and width w mm.
9.10. Find the perimeter of an equilateral with side measuring 9 units.
9.11. Find the perimeter of an equilateral with sides measuring x ft.
9.12. Find the perimeter of a quadrilateral with sides measuring 1, 4, 9, and 12 measured in centimeters.
9.13. Find the perimeter of a quadrilateral with sides measuring a,b,c,d.
Area: Two-dimensional measurement
9.14. Find the area of a square with sides measuring 4 in.
9.15. Find the area of a square with sides measuring y units.
9.16. Find the area of a rectangle with length 5 mm and width 8 mm.
9.17. Find the area of a rectangle with length l units and width w units.
9.18. Find the area of an equilateral with side measuring 9 ft.
9.19. Find the area of an equilateral with sides measuring x units.
9.20. Find the area of a quadrilateral with sides measuring 1, 4, 9, and 12 measured in inches.
9.21. Find the area of a quadrilateral with sides measuring a,b,c,d measured in inches.
Surface area: Three-dimensional constructions
9.22. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length 3 in, width 11 in, and height 10 in.
9.23. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length 6, width 7, and height 9 units.
9.24. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length l, width w, and height h feet.
9.25. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius 3 mm and height 5 mm.
9.26. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius 4 in and height 10 in.
9.27. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius r and height h units.
Volume: three-dimensional measurement
9.28. Find the volume of a cube with side edges measuring 4 in.
9.29. Find the volume of a cube with side edges measuring s units.
9.30. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length 12, width 13, and height 15 measured in inches.
9.31. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length x, width y and height z measured in inches.
9.32. Find the volume of an equilateral cookie with side measuring 5 in and height of 4 in, see below.
Equilateral
Cookie cutter
9.33. Find the volume of an equilateral cookie with sides measuring x, see above.
9.34. Find the volume of a right circular cylinder with radius 3 and height 7.
Circular
Cylinder
Cookie cutter
(Right)
9.35. Find the volume of a right circular cylinder with radius r and height h.
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
367

Properties of Lines: One-Sided Figures
TRUE/FALSE: if false, give corrected statement(s).
9.36. The angle measuring 90° forms a straight line and is therefore called a straight angle.
9.37. Two angles which form a linear pair are supplementary and sum to 180°.
9.38. Two lines that are perpendicular must intersect.
9.39. Two lines that intersect form equal opposite angles and consecutive angles form a linear pair.
9.40. Two parallel lines never intersect
9.41. Two angles are complementary if form a straight angle (line)
9.42. The line that cuts across two parallel lines is called the transverse line.
Properties of Angles: Two-Sided Figures
Name the angle as Acute, Right, Obtuse, or Straight.
9.43. 90°
9.44. 70°
9.45. 135°
9.46. 180°
Properties of Triangles: Three-Sided Figures
For the following set of questions, define the triangle according to angle type: Acute, Right, and Obtuse
9.47. A triangle with interior angles measuring 45°, 45°, 90°.
9.48. A triangle with interior angles measuring 120°, 20°, 40°.
9.49. A triangle with interior angles measuring 30°, 120°, 30°.
9.50. A triangle with interior angles measuring 70°, 50°, 60°.
9.51. A triangle with interior angles measuring 60°, 60°, 96°.
For the following set of questions, define the above triangles in terms of: Scalene, Isosceles, and Equilateral.
9.52. A triangle with interior angles measuring 45°, 45°, 90°.
9.53. A triangle with interior angles measuring 120°, 20°, 40°.
9.54. A triangle with interior angles measuring 30°, 120°, 30°.
9.55. A triangle with interior angles measuring 70°, 50°, 60°.
9.56. A triangle with interior angles measuring 60°, 60°, 96°.
For the following set of questions refer to the figure below ΔABC∼ΔDEF
A
C
D
E
F
B
9.57. Given AB54, BC55, and DE52, find EF.
9.58. Given AB56, BC57, and DE53, find EF.
For questions 9.148 thru 9.152, TRUE/FALSE
9.59. BC
AB 5 DE
EF
9.60. AC
AB 5 DF
DE
9.61. DE
AB 5 EF
BC
9.62. AB
BC 5 DF
EF
9.63. AB
BC 5 EF
DE
368
Chapter 9
Geometry

For the following set of question, fill in the inequality or equality, assuming
m∠A>m∠B>m∠C
9.64. m∠F____m∠E____m∠D
9.65. AB____AC
9.66. DE____DF
9.67. AB____BC
9.68. FE____DF
9.69. If AB5DE, then these triangles are more than just similar, they are __________________.
Properties of Quadrilaterals: Four-Sided Figures
TRUE/FALSE: if false, then give correct statement
9.70. A general quadrilateral has four sides.
9.71. A trapezoid has four sides with two sets of parallel sides.
9.72. In a parallelogram, opposite angles and sides, respectively, are equal.
9.73. In a parallelogram, consecutive angles are supplementary.
9.74. An equiangular quadrilateral is more commonly called a square.
9.75. In a rectangle, the diagonals are perpendicular bisectors and are equal.
9.76. In a rhombus, the diagonals are perpendicular bisectors and all sides are equal.
9.77. If the figure is a square, then the figure is a rhombus.
9.78. In a square, diagonals are equal.
9.79. In a square, all angles are right angles.
9.80. In a general polygon, the interior angles is n22
ð
Þ×180°
n
, where n is the number of sides.
Properties of Polygons: More One-Dimensional Objects—Include Units
9.81. Find the sum of the interior angles of a regular polygon with eight sides; an octagon.
9.82. Find the number of sides in a regular polygon where each interior angle measures 120°.
9.83. Find the measure of each interior angle of a six-sided polygon; a hexagon.
9.84. Find the perimeter of a regular eight-sided polygon; an octagon with side measuring 10 m.
9.85. Find the perimeter of regular hexagon with side measuring 5 ft.
9.86. Find the perimeter of rectangle with length measuring 7 ft and height measuring 9 ft.
9.87. Find the perimeter of a square with side measuring 7 yards.
9.88. Find the circumference of a circle with radius measuring 3 in.
9.89. Find the circumference of a circle with diameter measuring 12 cm.
9.90. If the side of a square is increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the perimeter increase?
9.91. If the side of a triangle is increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the perimeter increase?
9.92. If the radius of a circle is increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the circumference increase?
9.93. If the side of a general polygon is increased by a multiple of m, by what multiple does the perimeter increase?
Area/Surface Area: More Two-Dimensional Objects—Include Units
9.94. Find the area of a quadrilateral with sides measuring 4 m, 3 m, 5 m, and 8 m. Hint: Use Heron’s Formula
9.95. Find the area of the right triangle with sides measuring 3 km, 4 km, and 5 km.
9.96. Find the area of a triangle with base measuring 17 in and height measuring 20 in.
9.97. Find the area of a rectangle with length measuring 8 ft and height measuring 5 ft.
9.98. Find the area of a circle with radius 5 in.
9.99. If the sides of a square are increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the area increase?
9.100. If the sides of a rectangle are increased by a multiple of 6, by what multiple does the area increase?
9.101. If the radius of a circle is increased by a multiple of 10, by what multiple does the area increase?
9.102. If any polygon is magnified by a multiple of m, by what multiple does the area increase?
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
369

9.103. Find the surface area of the rectangular solid with length measuring 4 in, width measuring 10 in, and height mea-
suring 5 in.
9.104. Find the surface area of the rectangular solid with length measuring 8 cm, width measuring 1 cm, and height mea-
suring 6 cm.
9.105. Find the surface area of an open box with length measuring 8 cm, width measuring 1 cm, and height measuring 6 cm.
9.106. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with radius measuring 4 units and height measuring 10 units.
9.107. Find the surface area of a right circular cylinder with both the diameter and the height measuring 8 units.
9.108. Find the surface area of a sphere with radius measuring 3 yards.
Volume: More Three-Dimensional Objects—Include Units
9.109. Find the volume of a cube with edges measuring 5 cm.
9.110. Find the volume of a cube with edges measuring 3 in.
9.111. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length measuring 8 cm, width measuring 11 cm, and height measuring
16 cm.
9.112. Find the volume of a rectangular solid with length measuring 28 cm, width measuring 15 cm, and height measuring
6 cm.
9.113. Find the volume of a right circular cylinder with diameter measuring 14 units and height measuring 7 units.
9.114. If the sides of a cube are increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the volume increase?
9.115. If the sides of a rectangular solid are increased by a multiple of 3, by what multiple does the volume increase?
9.116. If the sides of a rectangular solid are increased by a multiple of m, by what multiple does the volume increase?
Project
9.117. Make your rectangular solid using the Origami Design I layout. You will need scissors, but don’t tape it yet.
9.118. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length l, width w, and height h. Label each length, width, and height
in your rectangular origami design and give the formula for the surface area of this rectangular solid.
9.119. Find the surface area of a rectangular solid with length l, width w, and height h. Label each length, width, and height
in your rectangular origami design and give the formula for the surface area of this rectangular solid.
9.120. If removing the top alters this box, then how does this affect the formula; that is, what is the surface area of a box
without a top.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPT
Definitions
9.2.1. On a straight line in one-dimensional space, the distance is the amount of space between two points.
9.2.2. In two-dimensional space, an angle is the amount of space between two intersecting lines or surfaces that meet.
9.2.3. In two-dimensional space, the area is the amount of space covered by a surface.
9.2.4. In three-dimensional space, the volume is the amount of space occupied by an object.
9.3.1. In one-dimensional space, a line is the long narrow mark or band. A straight line is a line that is true to its course and
does not deviate or curve.
9.3.2. Two adjacent angles (or linear pairs) are supplementary if they sum to 180°.
9.3.3. Non-parallel lines, lines that cross paths at exactly one point are intersecting lines.
9.3.4. Special cases of intersecting lines, lines are perpendicular if they form four right angles.
9.3.5. Two adjacent angles are complementary if they sum to 90°.
9.3.6. Two lines are parallel if they never intersect. They are called parallel lines and are abbreviated by two non-
intersecting bars: jj.
9.3.7. A transverse line is a line that cuts across other lines.
9.5.1. In two-dimensional space, the triangle is a plane figure with three straight sides and three angles.
9.5.2. Triangles are similar if the share the same internal ratios. In terms of angles, this means that corresponding angles
are equal, but in terms of sides, this simply means that the sides are proportional; like an enlargement of a triangle on
a copier. ΔABC∼ΔDEF is read “triangle ABC is similar to triangle XYZ.”
370
Chapter 9
Geometry

9.5.3. Congruent means that corresponding angles are equal, as well as corresponding sides are equal; like a reproduction
or regular copy of your triangle.
9.6.1. In two-dimensional space, the quadrilateral is a plane figure with four straight sides and four angles.
9.6.2. In two-dimensional space, the trapezoid is a plane figure with four straight sides and four angles such that exactly
one set of opposite sides are parallel.
9.6.3. In two-dimensional space, the parallelogram is a plane figure with four straight sides and four angles such that both
sets of opposite sides are parallel.
9.6.4. In two-dimensional space, a rhombus is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides and four angles such that
both sets of opposite sides are parallel and all sides are equal.
9.6.5. In two-dimensional space, a rectangle is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides and four angles such that
both sets of opposite sides are parallel and all angles are equal.
9.6.6. In two-dimensional space, a square is a type of parallelogram with four straight sides and four angles such that both
sets of all sides are parallel and all sides are equal.
9.6.7. In two-dimensional space, a kite is a type of quadrilateral with four straight sides and four angles such that the two
upper sides are equal and the two lower sides are equal.
9.7.1. In two-dimensional space, the polygon is a plane figure with more than four straight sides with an equal number of
angles.
9.7.2. In two-dimensional space, the regular polygon is a plane figure is a polygon with all equal sides and all equal
interior angles.
9.7.3. The distance around such straight edged figures is simply the sum of the individual distances and is called the
perimeter and is abbreviated P.
9.7.4. The distance around smooth curves is called the circumference; since these curve’s perfection depends on it
radiating the same in all directions from a centering point, circumference is often formulated in terms of the radius
and is abbreviated C. The circumference of a circle with fixed radius r is C52πr, where and π is approximately
3.1415.
9.8.1. A right circular cylinder is a cylinder with circular bases parallel to each other.
Properties
9.3.1. Corresponding angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines, and the corresponding incident
angles are equal m∠15m∠5, m∠25m∠6, m∠35m∠7, and m∠45m∠8, Figure 9.1.
9.3.2. Consecutive angles are supplementary. This is clear with adjacent angles which form linear pairs:
m∠1 + m∠25180°, m∠1 + m∠35180°, etc.; and incorporating property 9.3.1, consecutive angles between
the two parallel lines are supplementary m∠3 + m∠55180°, etc., Figure 9.1.
9.3.3. Alternate interior angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines and we consider the angles on
opposite sides of the transverse line and interior to the parallels. Alternate interior angles are equal: m∠35m∠6
and m∠45m∠5, Figure 9.1.
9.3.4. Alternate exterior angles are formed when a transversal line crosses parallel lines and we consider the angles on
opposite sides of the transverse line and external to the parallels. Alternate exterior angles are equal: m∠15m∠8
and m∠25m∠7, Figure 9.1.
9.4.1. Two rays pointing in the same direction from the same initial point form a 0° angle.
9.4.2. Two rays pointing in opposite directions from the same initial point appearing as a straight line form a 180° angle.
9.4.3. A right angle is exactly 90° angle.
9.4.4. Two adjacent angles that when combined form 90°, then the angles are complementary.
9.4.5. Two adjacent angles that when combined form 180°, then the angles are supplementary.
9.6.1. With respect to the angles in a parallelogram, opposite angles are equal: ∠A5 ∠B and ∠C5 ∠D.
9.6.2. With respect to the sides in a parallelogram, opposite sides are parallel: ADjjBC and ABjjDC; and opposite sides
are equal: AD5BC and AB5DC.
9.6.3. With respect to the angles in a rhombus, opposite angles are equal: ∠A5 ∠B and ∠C5 ∠D.
9.6.4. With respect to the sides in a rhombus, all sides are equal; that is, AD5BC 5AB5DC; and opposite sides are
parallel: ADjjBC and ABjjDC.
9.6.5. With respect to the diagonals in a rhombus, they are perpendicular to each other; that is, AC⊥BD.
9.6.6. With respect to the angles in a rectangle, they are all equal to 90°; that is, ∠A5 ∠B5 ∠C5 ∠D590°:
Summary of Important Concept
371

9.6.7. With respect to the sides in a rectangle, opposite sides are equal; that is, AD5BC and AB5DC; and opposite sides
are parallel: ADjjBC and ABjjDC.
9.6.8. With respect to the diagonals in a rectangle, they are equal to each other; that is, AC5BD.
9.6.9. With respect to the angles in a square, they are all equal to 90°; that is, ∠A5 ∠B5 ∠C5 ∠D590°:
9.6.10. With respect to the sides in a square, all sides are equal; that is, AD5BC 5AB5DC; and opposite sides are par-
allel: ADjjBC and ABjjDC.
9.6.11. With respect to the diagonals in a square, they are equal to each other and perpendicular; that is, AC5BD and
AC⊥BD.
9.7.1. In general, there will also be n22
ð
Þ triangles when there are n sides in a figure, therefore since each triangle mea-
sures 180°, we can formulate the total interior measure for any polygon with n sides, Sn. That is, the sum of interior
angels is given by Sn 5 n22
ð
Þ×180°.
Rules
9.5.1. Triangles are similar if they share these common ratios:
a
y
x
Y
X
z
Z
b
c
B
A
C
Within triangles:
a
b 5 x
y
a
c 5 x
z
b
c 5 y
z
and between triangles:
a
x 5 b
y
a
x 5 c
z
b
y 5 c
z
9.5.2. Corresponding parts of congruent triangles are congruent.
C
b
y
x
z
a
c
Z
A
B
X
Y
Triangles are congruent under the following conditions:
Side-Side-Side
corresponding sides are equal
a5x, b5y, c5z
Angle-Side-Angle
m∡A5m∡X,
c5z, m∡B5m∡Y
m∡B5m∡Y,
a5x, m∡C5m∡Z
m∡C5m∡Z,
b5y, m∡A5m∡X
where m∡is read “the measure of the angle.”
Side-Angle-Side
a5x,
∡B5 ∡Y, c5z
b5y, ∡C5 ∡Z, a5x
c5z, ∡A5 ∡X, b5y
372
Chapter 9
Geometry

9.8.1. A square of any size is self-defining—if we stack s squares s times, then the area is s×s. Therefore, if A is the area of
a square with side length s then A is s2; that is, A5s2.
9.8.2. This idea can easily be extended to rectangles—if we stack (a base) b of squares h times to create a specific height,
then the area of a rectangle is b×h; therefore, if A is the area of a rectangle then it measures base times height. That
is, A5bh.
9.8.3. The average width is b and h is perpendicular to the upper and lower base; therefore, the area of a rhombus is b×h.
Therefore, if A is the area of a rhombus then it is measured base times height. That is, A5bh:
9.8.4. In a trapezoid, the average base is the average of the lower base b and the upper base B; that is, average base 5 b + B
2 ;
and the area of a trapezoid is obtained by A5 1
2 b + B
ð
Þh:
9.8.5. The formula above directly leads to the formula for the area of any general triangle. From the diagram below, the
average base is the average of the lower base b and the upper base 0; that is, average base 5 b + 0
2
5 1
2. The area of a
triangle is A5 1
2bh.
9.8.6. Heron’s method for computing the area of any triangle with known sides a, b, and c can be computed as follows
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s s2a
ð
Þ s2b
ð
Þ s2c
ð
Þ
p
, where s5 a + b + c
2
.
9.8.7. Area is measured using two perpendicular measurements. In general, the area of a circle is defined as its radius
d
2
 
squared times π. That is, A5πr2:
9.8.8. The surface area of flat-sided object in three-dimensional space is the sum of the areas present on each flat surface.
9.8.9. The surface area, SA, of a right circular cylinder is given by SA52 πr2


+ 2πr
ð
Þh:
9.8.10. The surface area of a sphere is given by SA54πr2
9.9.1. A square of any size is self-defining—if we stack s squares s times, then the area is s×s. When we stack these
squares s deep, if V is the volume of the cube with side length s then V is s3. That is, V 5s3:
9.9.2. By stacking (a base layer) l×w of rectangles h times to create a specific height, then the volume of a rectangular
solid is l×w×h. That is, V5lwh.
9.9.3. Given the base area, B, of a figure with vertical height, h, a cookie cutter shape; the formula the volume of a cookie
cutter shape is the base area times the height; that is, V 5Bh.
9.9.4. Similar to the volume of a cookie cutter shape, the base area of a right circular cylinder is a circle and therefore we
can formula the volume of a right circular cylinder written as V 5πr2h:
9.9.5. In fact, the volume of a cone is exactly one-third of the right circular cylinder; that is, V5 1
3πr2h.
9.9.6. The volume of a sphere is about four cubes; that is, V 5 4
3πr3.
Common: Types of Angles
Acute a cute kid is small, so this type of angle measures such that: 0°<m∠A<90°:
Right which stand right on its own and right in the middle of the line, this type of angle measures m∠A590°.
Obtuse meaning large, think of the word obese—this type of angle measures such that: 90°<m∠A<180°.
Straight this type of angle is the same as a line and measures m∠A5180°.
Common: Types of Triangles
Scalene
i. No equal angles
ii. No equal sides
iii. Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms of sides
Isosceles
i. Two equal angles
ii. Two equal sides
iii. Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms of sides
Equilateral
i. Three equal angles
ii. Three equal sides
iii. Comparisons in terms of angles are the same as comparisons in terms of sides
Summary of Important Concept
373

Common: Measures of Distance
Common: Measures of Area
Common: Measures of Volume
REVIEW TEST
1. Round the measurement 52.49 in to the nearest inch.
2. Round the measurement 3847 pounds to the nearest ten pounds.
3. Round the measure of the line segment AB to the nearest 1/4 in. A
B
4. What is the perimeter of the right triangle with legs length 6 and 8 cm.
5. A spherical tank of radius 2 yards can be filled for $100. How much would it cost to fill a spherical tank of radius
6 yards?
Cube
V5s3
Rectangular solid
V5lwh
Right circular cylinder
V5πr2h
Circular cone
V51
3 πr2h
Sphere
V54
3 πr3
Perimeter of triangle
P5a + b + c
Perimeter of rectangle
P52b + 2h
Circumference
C52πr
Square
A5s3
Rectangle
A5lw
Surface of a rectangular solid
SA52lw + 2lh + 2wh
Trapezoid
A5 1
2 B + bÞh
ð
Triangle
A5 1
2bh
Heron’s formula
A5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s s2a
ð
Þ s2b
ð
Þ s2c
ð
Þ
p
s5 a + b + c
2
Surface of a right circular cylinder
SA52πr2 + 2πrh
Surface of a sphere
SA54πr2
374
Chapter 9
Geometry

6. The lines shown in the diagram below lie in the same plane. TRUE/FALSE
l4
l3
l1
l2
i. Lines l1 and l2 are horizontal and parallel
ii. Lines l1 and l3 are horizontal and parallel
iii. Lines l1 and l3 are perpendicular
iv. Lines l3 and l4 are intersecting lines
7. Determine the angles in the given diagram.
A
B
C
D
F
H
G
6
6
E
125
8. Determine the angles in the given diagram. Lines l1 and l2 are parallel.
l1
l2
A
D
E
B
C
K
J
L
G
I
F
H
60
45
9. Can the sides of a right triangle be 6, 8, and 11?
10. Find the measure of angle A.
60
112
A
11. Name the geometric figure(s) that possesses all of the following characteristics:
i. quadrilateral
ii. opposite sides are parallel
iii. diagonals are not equal
12. Name the geometric figure(s) that possesses all of the following characteristics:
i. quadrilateral
ii. opposite sides are parallel
iii. all angles equal
REFERENCE
Miller, D., 1942a. Popular Mathematics: The Understanding and Enjoyment of Mathematics. WM. H. Wise & CO., INC, New York.
Reference
375

Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
379
Field Axioms of Addition and Multiplication
385
Field Axioms for Subtraction and Division
389
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
398
10.3 Pattern Recognition
410
10.4 Algebraic Expressions and Relationships
416
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
423
10.6 Functions: Linear & Quadratic
443
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercises
447
Summary of Important Concepts
449
Review Test
456
References
456
Knowledge is a subset of both that which is true and believed.
PLATO
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
377

Diophantus (200 AD)
Diophantus, 3rd Century AD, an Alexandrian Greek mathematician, is called the father of algebra. He has written a series of
thirteen (13) books called “Arithmetica” that deals in solving algebraic equations. He studied at the University of Alex-
andria where he introduced the syncopated style of algebraic writing, he would write complex algebraic problems in sym-
bolic form with one equation and several unknowns.
Diophantine equations are equations where the unknowns are restricted to integer values. Diophantus asked, given a
value of n, how many distinct integer solutions exist?
In the equation below, for n54, there are three distinct solutions: (5, 20), (6, 12) and (8, 8).
1
x + 1
y51
n
The Diophantine equation below was the subject of Fermat’s Last Theorem.
xn + yn5zn
When n52, the above equation is equivalent to the Pythagorean theorem which holds many solutions; however, for
other values of n, are there infinitely many solutions, a finite solution, or none at all.
Epitaph:
“Here lies Diophantus.
God gave him his boyhood one-sixth of his life;
One twelfth more as youth while whiskers grew rife;
And then yet one-seventh ‘ere marriage begun.
In five years there came a bouncing new son;
Alas, the dear child of master and sage,
After attaining half the measure of his father’s life, chill fate took him.
After consoling his fate by the science of numbers for four years, he ended his life.”
378
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.1
INTRODUCTION TO THE REAL NUMBER
SYSTEM
The real number system is a subset of the complex number system shown
below:
C
R
Q
Z
W
N
Complex numbers: a+ bi
Real numbers:
                  √2, e, p
(Quotient)
Ratio numbers:
1/2, –3/5, √9
integers:
..., –2, –1, ...
Natural
(counting)
numbers:
1, 2, 3, ...
Whole numbers:
              0, ...
A real number is a value that represents a quantity along a continuum; that is,
ℝ, the set of real numbers, consist of all values or points on an infinitely long
number line.
–20
–10
0
Real number line
10
20
This number line can be broken down to the various subsets: Rational, ℚ,
and Irrational, ℚ. The Rational numbers are divided into Integers, ℤ, and Frac-
tional or non-Integers, ℤ. Integers are divided into Natural numbers, ℕ, and
negative Integers including zero, ℕ. However, the creation of this number
system was created in reverse.
Natural numbers are numbers used for counting. In ancient times, shep-
herds would send their sheep out to pasture and as the sheep exited the pens
into the fields, the shepherd would tie a knot in a piece of rope. Then, when
the sheep were gathered at the end of the day, the knots would be removed
one by one and if there were any knots remaining at the end of the day, there
were sheep lost in the thicket that needed to be found. Therefore, it is natural to
state counting with one.
Definition 10.1.1 Natural Numbers
Natural numbers are numbers used for counting and ordering objects.
ℕ5 1, 2, 3, 4, …
f
g
Number
 One of a series of things distinguished by
quantity or marked with numerals
 To count over one by one
Archival Note
A stone carving from Karnack dating about 1500
BC and on display at the Louvre in Paris, is one
of the first known uses of a numeral system.
Archival Note
The use of a zero digit in place-value notation
dates back to the Babylonians in 700 BC.
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
379

Returning to our shepherds, if there were no knots left in the rope, then it
was safe to assume that there were no lost sheep. This is the idea of zero. Both a
number and a numerical digit, zero fills several central roles in arithmetic and
algebra; in arithmetic, zero is used as a placeholder and in algebra it is the
additive identity.
Definition 10.1.2 Zero
The word zero has had many derivations, but comes from the Arabic word sifr meaning
“nothing” or “empty.”
0
The natural numbers in conjunctions with zero constitute the set of whole
numbers.
Definition 10.1.3 Whole Numbers
Whole numbers are numbers used for counting objects in a given set including the
empty set, i.e., zero.
W5 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, …
f
g
Some say that whole numbers may refer to the natural numbers, the
natural numbers including zero or possibly the natural numbers, zero
and the negatives of all natural numbers. However, all distinguish whole
numbers form fractions or fractional numbers such as 5.2.
The idea of positive and negatives numbers includes direction and mag-
nitude. Magnitude is the numerical value or distance from the zero and
direction is either to the left or right of zero. With positive values showing
to the right of zero and negative numbers appearing to the left of zero; these
whole numbers to the left and right of zero, including zero, are referred to as
the integers.
Definition 10.1.4 Integers
The word integer comes from Latin meaning ‘untouched’. Integers are positive or neg-
ative whole numbers or natural numbers including zero.
ℤ5 …,23,22,21,0,1,2,3,4,…
f
g
The set of integers, while having many uses, is incomplete since fractions
and fractional (non-whole) numbers are not included; the set of integers does
not cover the continuum.
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
Real Number Line
1
2
3
4
5
To fill in part of the number line, one set of numbers that can be added to the
integers are all the fractional values; that is, all rational numbers.
0
Zero
Nothing
Nota
Empty
Archival Note
The letter ℤfor Integers stands for Zahlen which
is German for “numbers.”
380
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Definition 10.1.5 Rational Numbers
Rational numbers are the numbers which can be expressed as the quotient or fraction
with integers (with the non-zero denominator) or as the quotient of an integer and a
natural number.
ℚ5
m
n jm∈ℤand n∈ℕ
n
o
However, not all real numbers can be written as a ratio; for example,
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
.
Proof that
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
is irrational:
Assume to the contrary that
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
is rational and there exist m and n such that
the fractional expression m
n is in reduced form. Hence, we have
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
5m
n ;
which implies (by squaring both sides and multiply both sides by n2) that
m252n2. Which means that m2 is even, and therefore, it can be shown that
m is also even. Let m52k, then we also have (using substitution and simpli-
fication) that 2n254k2. Therefore, if
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
is rational, then both m and n are even
and will reduce; a contradiction to the fact that m
n is in reduced form. Hence,
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
is not rational or is irrational.
Definition 10.1.6 Irrational Numbers
Irrational numbers are the numbers which cannot be expressed as a ratio or rational
number. The irrational numbers include transcendental numbers that cannot be repre-
sented as terminating or repeating decimals.
All these values in union form the set of Real numbers.
Definition 10.1.7 Reals
The set of real numbers are those rational and irrational numbers which constitute the
continuum from 2∞to ∞. That is, the union of the sets ℝ5ℚ∪ℚ
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
Real Number Line
1
2
3
4
5
Example 10.1.1 Natural Numbers
Determine which set each number belongs to the various sets and complete the fol-
lowing chart:
Real
Rational
Irrational
Integer
Whole
Natural
5
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
π
e
0:1234
2
7
ℕ¼{1,2,3,…}
W¼{0,1,2,3,…}
ℤ¼{…3,2,1,0,1,2,3}
ℚ¼{m/njm …SEE DEFINITION
Irrationals¼ℚ’
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
381

Solution
5
The first number 5 is one of the counting numbers, therefore, since 5 is a natural
number, it is also a whole number, and an integer and a rational number as
555
1510
2 5….
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
The second number
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
is actually equal to 3, which is one of the counting numbers,
therefore, since 3 is a natural number,
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
is also a whole number, an integer and a
rational number as
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
5353
156
25….
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
The third number
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
ª2:64575…, a non-terminating and non-repeating decimal;
therefore,
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
is irrational.
π
The fourth number πª3:1415…, a non-terminating and non-repeating decimal;
therefore, π is irrational.
e
The fifth number eª2:71…, Euler’s number, is a non-terminating and non-repeating
decimal; therefore, e is irrational.
x
The sixth number x50:1234, is a repeating decimal and is therefore rational.
Proof that 0:1234 is rational:
Consider the value x50:1234 and (since there are four repeating decimals),
104x:
10,000x51234:1234
2x52 0:1234
9999x51234
x51234
9999:
The last number 2
7, is an already written as a ratio and is therefore rational.
Real
Rational
Irrational
Integer
Whole
Natural
5
✓
✓
✓
✓
ﬃﬃﬃ
9
p
✓
✓
✓
✓
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
✓
π
✓
e
✓
0:1234
✓
2
7
✓
Now that we have our real number system, there are several basic operations that can
be performed on this system. For example, addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, etc.
Definition 10.1.8 Operators
An operator is a function representing a mathematical operation. This can range from
conjunction and disjunction in logic, to intersection and union in sets, to addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponentiation in algebra.
Addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponentiation in
algebra are all binary operations; that is, they take two values form the real
number system and manipulate these numbers to create another real number.
Definition 10.1.9 Addition
Addition is the mathematical operator that represents combining collections or sets of
objects together into a larger collection or set; signified by the plus sign ( + ).
3 + 2 = 5
382
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

However, everything that can be done algebraically should be able to be
undone. In mathematics, every operation we perform, can be inverted and
the action undone. For addition, this operator is subtraction.
Definition 10.1.10 Subtraction
Subtraction is the inverse operation of addition; signified by the minus sign (2).
In general, the use of a dash or a negative sign indicates the inverse oper-
ation. We will see various forms of this sign in division (the inverse operation
of multiplication) and with roots (the inverse operation of power or
exponentiation).
Now we return to addition, in that addition leads directly to multiplication.
For example, instead of writing 2 + 2 + 2 + 2, that is, 2 added to itself four times,
becomes 4×2.
Definition 10.1.11 Multiplication
Multiplication is the mathematical operation of scaling one number by another; sig-
nified by the cross symbol or multiplication sign (×).
This idea is readily seen when we are scaling by whole numbers as multi-
plication can be thought of as copies of the original set; however, we will
extend this idea to fractions in the next section.
Definition 10.1.12 Division
Division is the inverse operation of addition; signified by the division sign (÷) or (as the
division sign is not readily available on the keyboard), the backslash (/) or more appro-
priately, a division line as used in fraction; for example, 1÷251
2 is used.
Note: 2, ÷; the backslash (/) and the division bar are all forms of the dash.
Returning to multiplication, as addition leads to multiplication, multipli-
cation leads to exponentiation. For example, instead of writing 2×2×2×2, that
is, 2 multiplied by itself four times, becomes 24. Note: whereas addition and mul-
tiplication have unique symbols, exponentiation is signified by its location, a
superscript to the right of the base value.
Definition 10.1.13 Exponentiation
Exponentiation is the mathematical operation involving two numbers, the base value,
b, and the exponent, n. This heading covers both powers (n is a positive integer) and
roots (n is one over a positive integer). Written bn, when n is a positive integer, we have
a power of the base,
bn5b×b×⋯×b
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
n times
:
4 3=3+3+3+3
=4+4+4=12
5 - 2 = 3
204= =5
20
4
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
383

Note: the symbol √is a radical sign; it is NOT the square root sign. In
general, if a number is placed on the radical sign such as m, as in our chart
above this sign is read the mth root. Only if no number is written is this radical
sign assumed to mean square root; the opposite of squaring.
Example 10.1.2 Basic Operators
Simplify the following operations:
a)
6 + 2
b)
622
c)
6×2
d)
6÷2
e)
62
Solution
a)
6 + 258
+
=
b)
62254
-
=
c)
6×2512
×
=
d)
6÷256
253
e)
6256×6536
We like the set of real numbers because they hold very specific properties called
Field Axioms; axioms is just a fancy word for properties.
Hierarchy of Basic Operations (Including Powers).
Addition
→
Multiplication
→
Powers
Notation
+
×, , () or
positional
Strictly
positional
⇓
⇓
⇓
Inverse
operation
Subtraction
–
Division
, ÷
Roots
=,
ﬃ
mp
Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and
Division can also be written in stack notation:
6
+2
6
x2
6
22
6
/ 2 (BUT USE DIVISION SIGN)
384
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Rule 10.1.1 Sign Effects in +
When adding real numbers the sign effect on positive and negative values is as follows:
Like signs: Add and keep like sign.
+ 4
ð
Þ + + 5
ð
Þ5 + 4 + 5
ð
Þ5 + 9
24
ð
Þ + 25
ð
Þ52 4 + 5
ð
Þ529
Opposite signs: Subtract and keep sign of larger absolute value
+ 4
ð
Þ + 25
ð
Þ52 524
ð
Þ521
24
ð
Þ + + 5
ð
Þ5 + 524
ð
Þ5 + 1
Note: when you have opposite signs, you always subtract the smaller value
from the larger value and follow the rule for the sign of the resulting value.
Rule 10.1.2 Sign Effects in ×
When multiplying positive and negatives real numbers the sign effect on positive and
negative values is as follows:
Interpreting to the right as forward and to the left as negative, multiplying or
dividing by a negative is like turning round 180°.
21
ð
Þ× + 1
ð
Þ521
Continuing with this geometric description, multiplying by a negative twice is that
same as doing a 360 turn, facing the same (positive direction) as you started.
21
ð
Þ× 21
ð
Þ5 + 1
Hence, an even number of negatives multiply to be positive and an odd number of
negatives multiply to be negative.
Using the two rules above, one can consider direction (positive or negative)
to be separate from magnitude (value or distance from zero).
Field Axioms of Addition and Multiplication
1. Closure
2. Associative
3. Communicative
4. Identity
5. Inverse
6. Distributive
1. Closure
The set of real numbers are closed. That is if you take any two real numbers and
add or multiply them, the resulting number is still a real number. Note: not all
set or collections of numbers have this property.
Property 10.1.1 Closure
A set has closure if a and b are real numbers, then a + b and a×b are also real numbers. If
we let the symbol ∈stand for “is an element of” then this idea can be abbreviated
further mathematically as follows:
if a,b∈ℝ, then a + b∈ℝand a×b∈ℝ.
1
1
-1
-1
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
385

Example 10.1.3 Closure
The real numbers are closed under addition; for example, 2 is an element of the real
numbers and 3 is an element of the real numbers, in addition, 2 + 355 is also an element
of the real numbers. The real numbers are closed under multiplication; for example, 2 is
an element of the real numbers and 3 is an element of the real numbers, in addition,
2×356 is also an element of the real numbers.
2. Association
In English, to associate means to connect with or keep company with, to relate
to: under addition and multiplication, real numbers can also choose whom they
keep company with or relate to; they can also re-associate at any time.
Property 10.1.2 Associative
In the additive expression: a + b
ð
Þ + c, the number a is associating with the number b, but
in the expression: a + b + c
ð
Þ, the number b as been re-associated with the number c. And
these associations are equivalent; similarly with multiplication, the expression a×b
ð
Þ×c
is equivalent to a× b×c
ð
Þ; the associative properties are written mathematically:
a + b
ð
Þ + c5a + b + c
ð
Þ
and
a×b
ð
Þ×c5a× b×c
ð
Þ
Note: In the multiplication above the operation of multiplication could
have been written:
ab
ð
Þc5a bc
ð
Þ, where the multiplication is understood
because of the positional notation used: a written next to b, as well as the
by the use of parenthesis.
Example 10.1.4 Associative
The operators, addition and multiplication, are associative; (2+5)+452+(5+4), they
both simplify down to 11. This ability to re-associate is also true for multiplication;
(2×5)×452×(4×5), the multiply out to be 10, 10×4 or 2×20.
3. Communicative
In English, commute means to exchange one with another or to move, to go
back and forth as in the word commuter: under addition and multiplication,
real numbers can also commute or move.
Property 10.1.3 Commutative
In the additive expression: a + b, the number a is in the first position with the number b in the
second position, but in the expression: b + a, the number a as been commuted with the
number b. And these expressions are equivalent; similarly with multiplication a×b is equiv-
alent to b×a; the commutative properties are written mathematically:
a + b5b + a
and
a×b5b×a:
a, b ∈ℝ
a +b ∈ℝ
ab ∈ℝ
386
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.1.5 Commutative
Under addition, 2 + 353 + 255 and under multiplication, 2×353×256.
4. Identity
In English, identity means to make the same, and is related to the word identify
meaning to recognize or point out: under addition and multiplication, real
numbers can also be identified. Under addition, the identity is zero or 0;
and under multiplication, this is unity or 1.
Property 10.1.4 Identity
In the additive expression: a + 0, when nothing is added to the number a, the number is
not changed; it is the same number a and therefore 0 is the additive identity; similarly
with multiplication, a×1 is just one number a, which is equivalent to a and therefore 1 is
the multiplicative identity; the identity properties are written mathematically:
a + 050 + a5a
and
a×151×a5a:
Example 10.1.6 Identity
Under addition, 2 + 050 + 252 and under multiplication, 2×151×252.
5. Inverse
In English, inverse means opposite in order or relation: under addition and mul-
tiplication, real numbers can be inverted or taken back to their identity. Under
addition, the identity is 0; hence the inverse is the negative of the value. Under
multiplication, the identity is 1 hence the inverse is the reciprocal of the value.
Property 10.1.5 Inverse
In the additive expression: a + 2a
ð
Þ,
2a
ð
Þ is the opposite (additive inverse) of
a, which means if you add both a and 2a
ð
Þ, you have in essence have added nothing.
Equivalently since subtraction is the opposite of addition, in the expression a2a if it is
understood that you added a and then subtracted a, you have in essence have added
nothing. Hence, both of these expressions are equivalent to adding 0.
Similarly with multiplication, in the expression a× 1
a,
1
a is the recipro-
cal (multiplicative inverse) of a, which means multiplying by both is in essence
just identifying a given expression. Equivalently, since using power notation a5a1
and division is the opposite of multiplication, the reciprocal can be denoted by
1
a5a21; that is in the expression a×a21, if it is understood that you multiplied
and divided by a, you have in essence multiplied by 1.
Therefore, the inverse properties are written mathematically:
a + 2a
ð
Þ5a2a50
and
a×1
a5a×a2151:
a, b 2 ℝ
then a+b 5 b+a
ab 5 ba
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
387

Example 10.1.7 Identity
Under addition, 2 + 22
ð
Þ522250 and under multiplication,
2×1
251:
Example 10.1.8 Identity
Under addition, 25 + 2 25
ð
Þ
½
525 + 550 and under multiplication,
1
5× 1
1=551
5×551:
6. Distributive
In English, to distribute means to issue or dispense equally: in terms of addition
and multiplication, since addition leads to multiplication, multiplication can be
distributed equally over addition.
Property 10.1.6 Distribution
In the expression a× b + c
ð
Þ the parentheses indicate that the multiplication by the
number a is affecting both the number b in addition to number c; that is, this expression
is equivalent to a×b in addition to a×c. The number a needs to be distributed to both
the number b in addition to the number c.
Similarly, this relation of distribution can also be seen between multiplication and
powers: since multiplication leads to powers, powers can be distributed equally over
multiplication. In the expression a×b
ð
Þn the parentheses indicate that the power on n
is affecting both the number a and the number b. We will learn in counting that
“and” means “multiply” and therefore this expression is equivalent to an and bn. The
power b needs to be distributed to both the number a and the number b.
That is, the distributive properties are written mathematically:
a× b + c
ð
Þ5a×b + a×c
and
a×b
ð
Þn5an×bn:
Example 10.1.9 Distribute
Multiplication over addition,
5× 7 + 2
ð
Þ55×7 + 5×2
and powers over multiplication,
3×11
ð
Þ2532×112:
We have discussed entirely the operations of addition and multiplication
and their properties. We have also briefly introduced subtraction and division.
a +2b 5 a 2b
2(2a) 5 a
388
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Rule 10.1.3 Subtractions vs Addition
Subtraction is the addition of the negative; written mathematically:
a2b5a + 2b
ð
Þ
Example 10.1.10 – vs +
Subtraction as addition:
52355 + 23
ð
Þ52:
Rule 10.1.4 Division vs Multiplication
Division is the multiplication of the reciprocal; written mathematically:
a÷b5a×1
b:
Example 10.1.11 ÷ vs ×
Division as multiplication:
16÷4516×1
454:
Therefore, the properties of addition and multiplication can be extended to
that of subtraction and division. Just be careful of what is being undone and
realize that double negatives (just like in English) are a positive.
Field Axioms for Subtraction and Division
1. Closure: if a,b∈R, then a2b,a÷b∈R.
2. Associative
Subtraction
a2b
ð
Þ2c5 a + 2b
ð
Þ
½
 + 2c
ð
Þ5a +
2b
ð
Þ + 2c
ð
Þ
½
5a2 b + c
ð
Þ
The number a is subtracting b and then subtracting c, that is the number a is
subtracting b in addition to c.
Division
a÷b
ð
Þ÷c5a÷ b×c
ð
Þ
The number a is being divided by b and then divided by c, that is the
number a is being divided by b and c. Recall, “and” means “multiply.”
3. Commutative
Subtraction
a2b5a + 2b
ð
Þ5 2b
ð
Þ + a52b + a
Be careful when playing with subtraction, if it helps, always write as
addition of the negative or opposite.
Division
a÷b5a×1
b51
b×a:
Be careful when playing with division, if it helps, remember that division is
multiplication by the reciprocal.
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
389

4. Identity
Subtraction
Since 05 + 0520, we have a + 05a205a
Division
Since 1
151, we have a÷15a×15a:
5. Inverse
Subtraction
Since subtraction is adding the opposite, we have
a2a5a + 2a
ð
Þ50:
Division
Since dividing is multiplying by the reciprocal, we have
a÷a5a×1
a51:
6. Distributive
Subtraction
Multiplication distributes over subtraction the same as over addition;
that is,
a× b2c
ð
Þ5a×b2a×c:
Division
Powers distribute over division the same as over multiplication; that is,
a÷b
ð
Þn5an ÷bn:
We have already introduced powers and the distributive property of powers
over multiplication and division; we have also briefly discussed the inverse
operation of powers, namely roots: collectively these operations are called
exponentials. Recall also, that we discuss powers and roots of an arbitrary
number a, this number is call the base of the exponential and for this reason
is often abbreviated as b instead of a.
Recall: powers describe the number of times n a number a is multiplied by
itself. For example: 4354  4  4, the power of 3 describes the number of
times that the number 4 is multiplied by itself. And roots, the inverse operation
of powers asks the reverse question: what number multiplied by itself m times
(the root) is the number a; for example: 641=354, since 4 multiplied by itself 3
times is 64. Note: the 1 on the top of the bar or dash is simply a placeholder, just
like 1 is used as a placeholder when taking the reciprocal of an integer.
And just as there are rational numbers that are not simple reciprocals of
integers, we can have exponentials that are not just powers or roots, but a com-
bination of both. For example, 642/3 means the third (or cube) root as well as
the power of two (or square.) In general, just as in multiplication by a fraction,
it does not matter which is preformed first.
For example, written mathematically: in multiplication by a fraction, we see
12×5
4512
1 ×5
4560
4 515
or
12×5
4512
4 ×553×5515:
And with an exponential, we have
82=35 82

1=35641=354
Zero exist between the positive and negatives
and can be consider both + and 2.
390
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

or
82=35 8
1
3
 
!2
52254:
In some case one order is easier to perform than the other: for example in
the example 642/3, 64 squared is a large number and the cube root of large
numbers are not easy to see. However, the cube root of 64 is 4 and 4 squared
is 16; this is much easier to compute without a calculator. The can be expressed
mathematically as
642=35 64
1
3
 
!2
542516
Property 10.1.7 Exponentials
The exponential properties reduce multiplication between like bases to addition in the
exponent:
ax×ay5ax + y;
reduces division between like base to subtraction:
ax
ay 5ax2y;
reduces powers of a base to a power to multiplication:
ax
ð
Þy5ax×y:
Moreover, a15a and a051:
In the table below, find a comparison of properties between exponentials/
multiplication and multiplication/addition.
Property of
exponentials with
like bases
Comments regarding
exponential properties
Comparative
property of
multiplication
an  am5an + m
a
1
q  a
1
m5a
1
q + 1
m
a
p
q  a
n
m5a
p
q + n
m
Multiplication of (exponentials)
taken down a level to addition
n  a + m  a5 n + m
ð
Þ  a
1
q  a + 1
m  a5
1
q + 1
m


 a
p
q  a + n
m  a5
p
q + n
m


 a
an
am 5an2m
a
1
q
a
1
m 5a
1
q 21
m
a
p
q
a
n
m 5a
p
q 2n
m
Division (of exponentials) taken
down a level to subtraction
n  a2m  a5 n2m
ð
Þ  a
1
q  a21
m  a5
1
q 21
m


 a
p
q  a2n
m  a5
p
q 2n
m


 a
an
ð
Þm5an  m
a
1
q
 1
m5a
1
q  m
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃa
qp
mp
5
ﬃﬃﬃa
mqp
a
p
q
ð Þ
n
m5a
p  n
q  m
Exponentials (of exponentials)
taken down a level to
multiplication
10.1 Introduction to the Real Number System
391

In the table below, find a comparison of properties between exponentials/
multiplication and multiplication/addition.
Property 10.1.8 Order of Operation
The order of operation is the order in which the operations are performed in an
expression. This is done in order of complexity from the most complex operations down
to addition and subtraction: parenthesis, exponents, multiplication, division,
addition, and subtraction.
Example 10.1.12 Order of Operations
Compute 2× 523
ð
Þ + 42× 4÷2
ð
Þ.
Solution
2× 523
ð
Þ + 42× 4÷2
ð
Þ52×2 + 42×2
52×2 + 16×254 + 32536:
Property of
exponentials with
unlike bases
Comments regarding
exponential properties
Comparative property
of multiplication/
exponentials
a  b
ð
Þn5an  bn
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a  b
mp
5
ﬃﬃﬃa
mp 
ﬃﬃﬃ
b
mp
a  b
ð
Þ
n
m5a
n
m  b
n
m
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
an  bn
mp
5
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
an
mp

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
bn
mp
Distributive property of
powers over multiplication
n  a + b
ð
Þ5n  a + n  b
a
b
 n5an
bn
Distributive property of
powers over division
n  a2b
ð
Þ5n  a2n  b
Property of
Exponentials Defined
Properties
Comments Regarding
Exponential Properties
Comparative
a15a
Exponential Identity
Multiplication of one a is a
a051
Extension of Multiplicative
Identity
Multiplication of zero a’s is
like multiplication by 1
392
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

EXERCISES
10.1.1. Determine which set each number belongs to the various sets and complete the following chart:
Real
Rational
Irrational
Integer
Whole
Natural
3
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
25
p
π
2
e2
0:12
2ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
10.1.2. Solve each of the following problems. Show your work.
a. Roy planted 45 acres of wheat, 52 acres of corn, and 37 acres of peas. How many acres did he plant altogether?
b. In the first five games of a football season, Chris gained 251 yards, 145 yards, 121 yards, 163 yards, and 164
yards. What is his total yardage?
10.1.3. Addition:
a. 7 + 85
+
=
b. 1 + 65
+
=
c. 2 + 75
+
=
d. 9 + 45
10.1.4. Addition:
a.
h h
h 6
+ 7
b.
h h
1
5
+ 8
c.
h h
1
3
+ 9
d.
h h
2
6
+ 7
e.
h h
1
8
+ 7
Exercises
393

10.1.5. Addition:
a.
h h
5
6
+ 7
b.
h h
7
5
+ 8
c.
h h h
h 5 9
+ 7 4
d.
h h h
h 4 6
+ 5 9
e.
h h
9
8
+ 7
10.1.6. Addition:
a.
h h h
1
5 9
+ 7 4
b.
h h h
6
4 6
+ 5 9
c.
h h h
3
4 7
+ 7 7
d.
h h h
7
0 9
+ 9 6
e.
h h h
6
5 9
+ 7 4
10.1.7. Solve each of the following problems. Show your work.
a. A family started a trip with a full tank of gas and an odometer reading of 45,021. At the end of the trip, the
odometer read 46,321. How many miles was the trip?
b. A box of printer ink contains 12 cartridges. There are 7 cartridges left. How many cartridges have been used?
c. A board 33
4 feet long was cut from a 12-foot board. How many feet were left?
d. How much change do you receive from a $20 bill if the purchase totals $13.14?
10.1.8. Subtraction:
a.
h h h
h 5 9
2 3 4
b.
h h h
h 4 6
2 3 9
c.
h h h
h 7 7
2 7 7
d.
h h h
h 8 9
2 9 6
e.
h h h
h 5 9
2 7 4
394
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.1.9. Subtraction:
a.
h h h
1 5 9
2 7 4
b.
h h h
6 4 6
2 5 9
c.
h h h
3 4 7
2 7 7
d.
h h h
7 0 9
2 9 6
e.
h h h
6 5 9
2 7 4
10.1.10. Solve each of the following problems. Show your work.
a. A mess sergeant wants to serve 1
42 pound hamburgers to 30 soldiers. How many pounds of hamburger
are needed?
b. A copy of a figure 3 inches wide and 4 inches long is enlarged to 15 inches wide. How long is the enlargement?
c. Todd’s car cost $9780. If his insurance company insures the car for 90% of its cost, how much will he receive for
the car if it is totaled?
d. A cab company has 12 cars that need tunes-ups. Each car requires 8 spark plugs. How many spark plugs are
required to complete the task at hand?
10.1.11. Multiplication:
a.
h h
h 6
× 7
b.
h h
1 5
× 8
c.
h h
1 3
× 9
d.
h h
2 6
× 7
e.
h h
1 8
× 7
10.1.12. Multiplication:
a.
h h
5 6
× 7
b.
h h
7 5
× 8
c.
h h h
h 5 9
× 7 4
d.
h h h
h 4 6
× 5 9
e.
h h
9 8
× 7
Exercises
395

10.1.13. Solve each of the following problems. Show your work.
a. Deb wants to save $360 this year for holiday presents. How much should she save each month?
b. One inch is approximately 2.54 cm. How many inches are in 6 cm?
c. If pens cost $2.50 for 10, how much will 130 pens cost?
10.1.14. Division:
a. Divide 25 dots into groups of 5.
Determine the number of groups: _____ 25÷55
b. Divide 24 raindrops into groups of 4.
Determine the number of groups: _____ 24÷45
c. Divide 17 dots into groups of 3.
Determine the number of groups: _____ and the number of snowflakes left over _____17÷35_____R_____
10.1.15. Division: Fill in the missing numbers
a. 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 2 + 25____ ____ groups of the number ____ ____÷652
b. 8 + 85_____
____ groups of the number ____ _____ ÷258
c. 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 + 75_____
____ groups of the number
____ _____ ÷557
10.1.16. Division: Solve
a. Samuel saw 12 bicycles parked at school in three equal groups locked to bike racks. How many bicycles are in
each group?
b. There are 48 apples in a bucket and you pull them out into 6 equal groups. How many apples are there in
each group?
c. Kaitlin stacked 35 library books into 7 equal stacks; how many books are in each stack?
10.1.17. Division: Divisibility by 2—a number is divisible by 2 if the number ends in an even number: 2, 4, 6, 8, or 0; that is,
even. Determine if the given numbers are even.
a. 52
b. 81
c. 24
d. 17
e. 125
f. 44
10.1.18. Division: Divisibility by 3—a number is divisible by 3 if the digits’ sum is divisible by 3. Determine if the numbers
in the Problem 10.1.17 are multiples of three.
10.1.19. Division: Divisibility by 4—a number is divisible by 4 if the last two digits are divisible by 4. Determine if the
numbers in the exercise Problem 10.1.17 are multiples of four.
10.1.20. Division: Divisibility by 5—a number is divisible by 5 if the number ends in a 5 or 0. Determine if the numbers in
the exercise Problem 10.1.17 are multiples of 5.
10.1.21. Division: Divisibility by 9—a number is divisible by 9 if the digits sum is divisible by 9. Determine if the numbers
in the exercise Problem 10.1.17 are multiples of three.
10.1.22. Simplify
a. 21022
b. 2152 22
ð
Þ
c. 22
ð
Þ 17
ð
Þ
d. 2 144
26
396
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.1.23. Powers: Simplify
a. 90
b. 92
c. 921
d.
29
ð
Þ3
e.
1
9
 2
f. 93/2
10.1.24. Powers: Simplify
a. 40
b. 42
c. 421
d.
24
ð
Þ3
e.
1
4
 2
f. 43/2
10.1.25. Powers: Simplify
a. 50
b. 72
c. 221
d.
26
ð
Þ2
e.
3
7
 2
f. 643/2
10.1.26. Powers: Simplify
a. a0
b. anbn
c. a2a5
d.
2x
ð
Þ3
e.
3
b
 2
f. x6/2
10.1.27. Roots: Write each perfect square using the power 2.
a. 169
b. 361
c. 25
d. 529
e. 121
f. 400
10.1.28. Roots: Find the square root of each value given in exercise 11.22.
10.1.29. Roots: Find the square root.
a.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
144
p
b.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
36
p
c.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
49
p
d.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
900
p
e.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
324
p
f.
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
841
p
10.1.30. Roots: Find the value of n.
a.
ﬃﬃﬃn
p 51
b.
ﬃﬃﬃn
p 511
c.
ﬃﬃﬃn
p 59
d. n2549
e. n25225
f. n25256
10.1.31. Complete each of the equation: Simplify.
a. 4 + 4 + 4 + 45
b. e + e + e + e + e5
c. 3×325
d. a×a35
e. 9g + 7g + 6g5
f. 9f× 4f×6f
ð
Þ5
10.1.32. Complete each of the equation: Simplify.
a. 3×32×335
b. a×a3×a55
c. 7j + 7j + 6j
ð
Þ5
d. 5ab× 4a×6b
ð
Þ5
10.1.33. Determine which operation is being performed:
a. 9× 4×5
ð
Þ5 9×4
ð
Þ×5
b. 6×12512×6
c. 10 + 252 + 10
d. 2×10 + 5×105 2 + 5
ð
Þ×10
e. 7 + 8 + 3
ð
Þ5 7 + 8
ð
Þ + 3
f. 23×4511×4 + 12×4
10.1.34. Determine which operation is being performed:
a. 10×1125×115 1025
ð
Þ×11
b. 7×353×7
c. 8×11 + 3×115 8 + 3
ð
Þ×11
d. 12 + 858 + 12
e. 6×923×95 623
ð
Þ×9
f. 12 + 9
ð
Þ + 2512 + 9 + 2
ð
Þ
Exercises
397

10.2
BASIC ARITHMETIC
Now that we have introduced the basic idea of a base number and its properties,
we will introduce several uses for various bases; the most common base being
base 10. In general, we have ten fingers, we have ten toes, and we count in base
10; base 10 is the common base. However we use a variety of bases every day:
computers use base two (sequences of zeros and ones or charges and non-
charges); minutes and seconds are base 60 (60 seconds is a minute and
60 minutes is an hour, but then the base number changes when changing hours
to days, days to weeks, weeks to months and months to years). This progression
concludes with base 10 again, when going from years to decades (10 years), to
centuries (100 years) to millenniums (1000 years.)
Note in the above discussion of various bases, it is assumed that you are
familiar with the base ten notation. We abbreviated sixty as 60, assuming
you understand that the zero is a place holder describing the number of sin-
gletons and the position of the 6 indicated groups of ten; that is 60 is the abbre-
viation for 6 groups of ten. Similarly, 10 (ten) is the abbreviation for 1 group of
ten, 100 (a hundred) is the abbreviation for 10 groups of ten (or 102) and 1000
(a thousand) is the abbreviation for 100 groups of ten (or equivalently 10
groups of a hundred or 103)
Conversely, if we wanted to represent a fraction in terms of base ten, we
will need to indicate that we do not have multiples of ten, but pieces of a sin-
gleton. In base ten, these pieces are described with “th” as a suffix. That is one
out of ten pieces is a tenth, one out of a hundred pieces is a hundredth, and one
out of a thousand pieces is a thousandth. But how do we abbreviate this idea?
Definition 10.2.1 Place Value
Positional notation or place-value notation is a method of representing numbers. A
form of coding, this is part of the number system that uses symbols or position for
the different orders of magnitude. In the decimal system, we have the “ones place,”
“tens place,” “hundreds place,” etc. (all powers of base 10).
There are many different coding systems for numbers as illustrated below.
Modern day mathematics uses the Arabic numeral system with base 10 in con-
junction with a decimal system. That is, the coding system has ten symbols
known as digits: namely, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The decimal in this
system will indicate the power of the base by its relative position to the decimal
point.
Counting
English
Arabic
Mayan
Roman
Chinese rods
Chinese
Hindi
Babylonian
Egyptian
Zero
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
One Two Three Four Five Six Seven
Eight Nine
Arithmetic
Archival Note
Not all number systems use a decimal; Roman
and Chinese numerals (also based on powers of
ten) are not positional.
Roman Numerals:
I
One
X
Ten
Note: Half of X is V (Five)
C
Hundred
Note: Half of C is L (Fifty)
M or Θ
Thousand
Note: Half of M is D (five hundred)
398
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

In base ten, this distinction between the powers of ten and the fractions of
ten is a decimal point. It looks like a period, similar to the dot used to indicate
multiplication; however, it is written on the lower line and the dot used to
indicate multiplication is written above the line toward the middle of the line
or median of the number. Remember, this is an abbreviated language; if you
write a symbol in the wrong position, you may inadvertently write something
incorrectly.
Example 10.2.1 5468.125 Base 10
The value 5468.125 can be written as
5000 + 400 + 60 + 8 + 0:1 + 0:02 + 0:05
55×103 + 4×102 + 6×101 + 8×100
+ 1×1021 + 2×1022 + 5×1023
103
51000
102
5100
101
510
100
51

1021
5 1
10
50:1
1022
5 1
100
50:01
1023
5
1
1000
50:001
5
4
6
8

1
2
5
An older computer base system is “octal,” or base eight. As only eight
symbols are required to write a number in base 8, we will use the first eight
digits: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8.
Example 10.2.2 5258 Base 10
Convert the value 5258 (base 10) into base 8.
Solution
To remove the powers of 8, divide the number by 8 until you have a remainder less than
8.
5258÷85657R2
657÷8582R1
82÷8510R2
10÷851R2
5258 base10
ð
Þ51×84 + 2×83 + 2×82 + 1×81 + 2×80512,212 base8
ð
Þ
Example 10.2.3 1258.12 Base 8
Determine the value 1258.12(base8) as base10.
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
399

Solution
83
5512
82
564
81
58
80
51
821
51
8
822
5 1
64
823
5 1
512
1
2
5
8
1
2
0
1×512 + 2×64 + 5×8 + 8×1 + 1×1
8 + 2× 1
64
5512 + 128 + 40 + 8 + 1
8 + 1
325688 + 0:125 + 0:03125
5688:1575 base10
ð
Þ
Another common base used in computer program (computer engineering and com-
puter graphics) is hexadecimal or base sixteen. As sixteen symbols are required to write
a number in base 16 and we need a single solitary “digit” that stands for “ten,” “eleven,”
“twelve,” “thirteen,” “fourteen,” and “fifteen”; hence, we will use the first ten digits: 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 as well as the letters: A (10), B (11), C (12), D (13), E (14) and
F (15).
Example 10.2.4 6283 Base 16
Convert the value 7258(base10) into base16.
Solution
To remove the powers of 16, divide the number by 16 until you have a remainder less
than 16.
7258÷165392R11
392÷16524R8
24÷1651R8
5258 base10
ð
Þ51×163 + 8×162 + 8×161 + B×1605188B base16
ð
Þ
Example 10.2.5 A258 Base 16
Determine the value A258(base16) as base10.
Solution
163
54096
162
5256
161
516
160
51
1621
5 1
16
A
2
5
8
0
10×4096 + 2×256 + 5×16 + 8×1
540,960 + 512 + 80 + 8541,560 base10
ð
Þ
As a convention, we will use base 10 and decimal notation. However, this number
system has its drawbacks. For example, extremely large numbers or very small numbers
such as 0.00000000000016; such numbers can be more easily be written in scientific
notation.
400
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Definition 10.2.2 Scientific Notation
A number is said to be in scientific notation if there is one non-zero number before the
decimal, times a power of the base 10.
Scientific notation is an alternative way to write extremely large or
extremely small numbers and is commonly used by mathematicians, engi-
neers, and scientists (among others) and is an optional setting on most
calculators.
Example 10.2.6 Scientific Notation
Write the given values in scientific notation:
a.
200
b.
5000
c.
254,000
d.
7,250,000
e.
0.000000000015
Solution
a.
20052:0×102
b.
5,00055:0×103
c.
254,000525:4×104
d.
7,250,00057:25×106
e.
0:00000000001551:5×10211
An alternative to decimals are fractions.
Definition 10.2.3 Fraction
A fraction is a part of a whole or ratio of two numbers, the numerator (number of parts)
divided by the denominator (how many parts in a whole).
 A proper fraction is one such that the numerator is less than the denominator.
 An improper fraction is one such that the numerator is greater than or equal to
the denominator.
 Proper fractions added to whole numbers are called mixed numbers or mixed
fractions.
A fraction in proper form represents a rational number between zero and
one; x∈ℚ∩0, 1
ð
Þ. To put this proper fraction into reduced form, divide
the numerator and denominator by the greatest common factor. This can
be done in stages if the larger number is not initially recognized or used, con-
tinue dividing until the numerator and denominator are relatively prime.
Definition 10.2.4 Greatest Common Factor
The greatest common factor (GCF) or greatest common divisor (GCD) is the largest
possible positive integer that divides evenly into the numerator and the denominator.
Example 10.2.7 GFC Between 8 and 12
As 854×2 and 1254×3, therefore the GCF is 4.
Fractions can be represented several ways:
a/b
ab
or
b
ﬃﬃﬃa
p
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
401

To determine the GCF, we can use the prime factorization of the number
and consider the common factors.
Definition 10.2.5 Prime/Composite
A prime number is a natural number greater than 1 that has 1 as its only positive
divisor.
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 23, …
f
g
The opposite of a prime number is a composite number:
452×2,652×3,852×2×2,…
f
g
Hence, prime factorization is the decomposition of a composite number into
smaller primes.
All primes less than 1000:
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47, 53, 59, 61, 67, 71, 73, 79, 83,
89, 97, 101, 103, 107, 109, 113, 127, 131, 137, 139, 149, 151, 157, 163, 167,
173, 179, 181, 191, 193, 197, 199, 211, 223, 227, 229, 233, 239, 241, 251, 257,
263, 269, 271, 277, 281, 283, 293, 307, 311, 313, 317, 331, 337, 347, 349, 353,
359, 367, 373, 379, 383, 389, 397, 401, 409, 419, 421, 431, 433, 439, 443, 449,
457, 461, 463, 467, 479, 487, 491, 499, 503, 509, 521, 523, 541, 547, 557, 563,
569, 571, 577, 587, 593, 599, 601, 607, 613, 617, 619, 631, 641, 643, 647, 653,
659, 661, 673, 677, 683, 691, 701, 709, 719, 727, 733, 739, 743, 751, 757, 761,
769, 773, 787, 797, 809, 811, 821, 823, 827, 829, 839, 853, 857, 859, 863, 877,
881, 883, 887, 907, 911, 919, 929, 937, 941, 947, 953, 967, 971, 977, 983, 991,
997
Example 10.2.8 GCF Using PF
As 852×2×2 and 1252×2×3, therefore the prime factorizations have two 2’s in
common and therefore the GCF is 2×254.
Example 10.2.9 Reduce Fractions
Write the numerator and detonator in terms of its prime factorization and reduce the
fraction.
a.
15
48
b.
15
42
c.
15
25
d.
5
14
e.
16
20
Solution
a.
15
485
3×5
2×2×2×2×35 5
24 5 5
16
b.
15
425 3×5
2×3×75 5
2×75 5
14
c.
15
2553×5
5×553
5
d.
5
145 5
2×75 5
14 is in reduced form.
e.
16
2052×2×2×2
2×2×5 52×2
5 54
5
402
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution—cont’d
This process can be done in reverse to create fractions in higher terms; instead of
dividing numerator and denominators by a positive integer, we can simply multiply
by any number. This is useful when finding a common denominator.
Definition 10.2.6 Common Multiples
A common denominator (CD) is a common multiple of the denominator; the least
common denominator is the least common multiple (LCM) between the given
numbers.
Example 10.2.10 LCM Between 8 and 12
The multiples of 8 are 8,16,24,32,… and the multiples of 12 are 24,48,72,…, therefore
the LCM is 24.
Example 10.2.11 Summing Fractions
Two-thirds of a cheese pizza and half a pepperoni pizza remain. How much pizza is left?
Solution
As a third of a cheese pizza is 1
3 and half a pepperoni pizza is 1
2, the total amount of pizza
remaining is
2
3 + 1
254
6 + 3
657
6:
That is, there is more than one full pizza remaining; one full pizza (6/6) and one-
sixth of a full pizza (1/6) assuming the pizza was cut into six equally-sized pieces.
The above answer is in improper form. To change an improper fraction to a whole
number or mixed number, divide the denominator into the numerator and write the
whole number with the remainder over the original denominator and reduce if
necessary.
Example 10.2.12 Mixed Form
Write the following numbers in mixed form.
a.
12
7
b.
15
9
c.
27
9
Solution
a.
12
7 515
7
1 R5
7 12
7
5
Continued
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
403

Solution—cont’d
b.
15
9 516
9512
3
1 R6
9 15
–9
6
c.
27
9 530
953
3 R0
9 27
–27
0
Rule 10.2.1 Operators in Fractions
Operators in Fractions: When adding fractions, the fractions must have a common
denominator.
a
b + c
d5ad
bd + bc
bd5ad + bc
bd
However, when multiply we multiply top to top and bottom to bottom; that is,
a
b×c
d5ac
bd:
When divided by a fraction, we multiply by the reciprocal,
a
b ÷ c
d5a
b×d
c5ad
bc:
Example 10.2.13 × & ÷ Fractions
Simplify.
a.
3
4×1
2
b.
32
5×17
8
c.
2
7 ÷ 5
6
d.
61
2 ÷ 5
8
Solution
a.
3
4×1
253×1
4×253
8
b.
32
5×17
8517
5 ×15
8 517
1 ×3
8551
8 563
8
c.
2
7 ÷ 5
652
7×6
5512
35
d.
61
2 ÷ 5
8513
2 ÷ 5
8513
2 ×8
5513
1 ×4
5552
5 5102
5
Note: all fractions can be written as a decimal. This can be done readily when the
denominator is 10; 100; 1000, etc. The number of decimal places is given by the power
of ten in the denominator. For example,
“four-tenths” is equivalent to 4
1050:4
“five-hundredths” is equivalent to 5
10050:05
404
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution—cont’d
“42-thousandths” is equivalent to 42
100050:042:
Otherwise, fractions can be divided out to find their decimal equivalent. For
example,
3
45 75
10050:75
or
1
350:33333350:3:
The second fraction shown above is a repeating decimal as indicated by the bar over the
three in the second expression.
Rule 10.2.2 Operators in Decimals
Operators in Decimals:
 When adding or subtracting decimals, first line up the decimal points underneath
each other; add or subtract decimals in the same way as with whole numbers; then
bring down the decimal point straight down into the answer.
 When multiplying, perform the operation without the consideration of the decimal,
as if the numbers are whole and then count over the total number of decimals in each
number combined in the final result.
 When dividing decimals, move the decimal place to the left the same number of
places in the numerator as the denominator; or use scientific notation.
Example 10.2.14 × & ÷ Decimals
Simplify.
a.
0:75×0:5
b.
5:15×1:2
c.
0:45÷0:15
d.
7:5÷0:25
Solution
a.
0:75×0:5
¥
7
7
3
3
5
5
5
5
2
5
Hence, since there are two decimals in the first number and one is the second; there are a
total of three in the final answer, 0.375.
b.
5:15×1:2
¥

5
5
6
1
8
5
1
0
0
3
0
1
2
5
1
1
1
Continued
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
405

Solution—cont’d
Hence, since there are two decimals in the first number and one is the second; there are a
total of three in the final answer, 6.18.
c.
0:45÷0:15
0:45
0:15545
1553
d.
7:5÷0:25
7:5
0:255750
25 530
Definition 10.2.6 Ratio/Proportion
A ratio is a comparison of two numbers (preferably whole numbers) by division. Ratios
can be expressed in three distinct ways:
a
b or a to b or a : b;
where a and b are in reduced form.
A proportion is a statement that two ratios are equal.
Example 10.2.15 Using Ratios
The scale on a road map is 1 inch for every 80 miles. If the distance between two towns
measures 1.75 inches; how many miles apart are the towns?
Solution
1
80
inch
miles ¼ 0:25
20
inches
miles ¼ 1:75
140
inches
miles
The towns are 140 miles apart.
As rational numbers are real numbers, they can be represented in base 10 in decimal
form or fraction; however, when measuring ratios between 0 and 1, we might give the
number as a percentage instead.
Definition 10.2.8 Percent
Percent means “hundredth” and is denoted by the percent sign %.
To change a number written in decimal form into a percentage, move the decimal
point two places to the right and include the percent sign to the right of the new number.
To change a number written in percentage form into a decimal, move the decimal point
two places to the left and remove the percent sign.
Example 10.2.16 Percentages
Change the given decimal to a percent or percent to decimal:
a.
0.67
b.
0.002
c.
5
d.
1.2%
e.
5%
f.
51
2%
406
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution
a.
0:67567%
b.
0:00250:2%
c.
55500%
d.
1:2%50:012
e.
5%50:05
f.
51
2%55:5%50:055
Example 10.2.17 Fraction to Percent
Change the given fraction to a percent or percent to fraction:
a.
3
4
b.
2
3
c.
5
2
d.
1:5%
e.
3%
f.
21
2%
Solution
a.
3
453
4×100
1 %575%
or 3
450:75575%
b.
2
352
3×100
1 %566:6%ª66:7% or 2
350:666 ª66:7%
c.
5
255
2×100
1 %5250%
or 5
252:55250%
d.
1:5%5 1:5
10050:015
e.
3%5 3
10050:03
f.
21
2%52:5%5 2:5
10050:025
Example 10.2.18 Using Percentages
The Thompson family owns a restaurant with a market value of $225,500. Property in
the area is assessed at 75% of the market value and the tax rate is $3 per $100 assessed
value. How much is the tax on the property?
Solution
Assessed value575%of Marketvalue
Assessed value50:75×$225,5005$169,125
$169,125× $3
$1005$5073:75
That is, the property tax in this area for a restaurant worth $225,500 is $5073.75.
10.2 Basic Arithmetic
407

EXERCISES
10.2.1. Write the value of the underlined digit in words.
a. 30:5
b. 1:62
c. 181:2
d. 9:31
e. 32:9
f. 8215:125
10.2.2. Write each number in standard form.
a. 8 hundred+4 tens+2 ones
b. Eighty
c. Three hundred five
d. four-tenths
e. 500+50+0.1
10.2.3. Write each decimal in words.
a. 0.3
b. 57.80
c. 4.4
d. 0.89
e. 13.75
10.2.4. Convert the given number to base 10
a. 1053(base6)
b. 27,510(base8)
c. 324(base5)
d. AB5(base16)
10.2.5. Convert the given number to base 8
a. 1053(base10)
b. 27,510(base10)
c. 324(base5)
d. AB5(base16)
10.2.6. Write the given number to scientific notation
a. 1015,000
b. 0.05
c. 19.521
d. 125.45
e. 7451.25
10.2.7. Write the given number in standard decimal form:
a. 1:24×104
b. 3:54×1022
c. 7:4×1021
d. 1:2×105
e. 3:42×1027
10.2.8. Give the GCF for the following sets of numbers.
a. 24, 15
b. 24, 60
c. 15, 60
d. 12, 18, 36
e. 100, 400, 750
10.2.9. Give the reduced form of the fraction.
a. 12
48
b. 15
90
c. 18
21
d. 5
13
e. 62
93
10.2.10. Sum and simplify.
a. 1
2 + 4
7
b. 7
9 + 4
6
c. 12
17 + 9
17
d. 2
9 + 4
12
e. 21
3 + 4
9
10.2.11. Add 3
8, 5
12, and 7
16.
10.2.12. Add 151
2 and 35
9.
408
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.2.13. Subtract and simplify.
a. 1
224
7
b. 7
924
6
c. 12
172 9
17
d. 2
92 4
12
e. 21
324
9
10.2.14. Subtract 2 5
12 from 5.
10.2.15. Subtract 24
9 from 67
9.
10.2.16. Solve the following problems. Show your work.
a. An electrician needs 203
4 feet of wiring for one job and 323
8 feet for another job. How many feet of wiring are
needed for both jobs?
b. Michael worked 83
4 hours on Monday, 73
8 hours on Tuesday, 8 1
4 hours on Wednesday, 9 hours on Thursday
and 71
2 hours on Friday. How many hours did he work during the week?
c. Mrs.Millerissewing4costumesfor a schoolplay. Eachcostumerequires13
4 yards offabric.How muchfabricdid
Mrs. Miller use in all?
10.2.17. Multiply or divide.
a. 2
3×5
6
b. 31
2 ÷13
4
c. 4
9×3
4
d. 21
8 ÷11
2
e. 7÷ 7
9
f. 11
5×23
4
10.2.18. Solve the following problems. Show your work.
a. A recipe for meat loaf serving 8 people calls for 2 pounds of hamburger. How much hamburger is needed to
serve a family of 4?
b. A cookie recipe calls for 2 1/2 cup of sugar and makes 120 mini cookies. How much brown sugar is needed for
360 mini cookies?
c. Given wooden floorboards come in widths of 1/2 foot (6 inches), how many floorboards will be need to cover a
hallway that is 66 inches wide?
10.2.19. Add or Subtract.
a. 0:9 + 0:7
b. 0:5 + 0:9 + 0:7
c. 1:78 + 0:154 + 5 + 1:05
d. 1.420.7
e. 6.5422.345
f. 3.7421.154
10.2.20. Multiply or Divide.
a. 0:9×0:7
b. 0:5×0:9×0:7
c. 1:78÷5
d. 1:4÷0:7
e. 6:54×2:345
f. 3:74÷1:154
10.2.21. Solve the following problems.
a. Danielle purchased 6 shirts that were on sale for $12.49 each. What was the total purchase price?
b. Ben earned $380.25 for working 39 hours last week. What was his rate per hour?
c. Boxes of macaroni and cheese are on sale 5 for $1. How much do 12 boxes cost?
d. Paint is on sale for $8.79, regular $10.99 per gallon; how much money is saved on 4 gallons of paint?
10.2.22. Solve the following problems:
a. If a flash drive cost $9.75 per gigabit, how much do 4 gigabits cost?
b. Nicholas can type 65 words per minute. How long will it take him to type a 1000 word report?
c. How much paint is needed for 3200 square feet if one gallon covers 800 square feet?
Exercises
409

10.2.23. Complete the chart. Reduce fraction to lowest terms.
10.2.24. Solve.
a. 9 is what percent of 45?
b. 36 is what percent of 72?
c. What is 4% of 400?
d. What is 12% of 108?
e. 12 is what percent of 72?
f. 25% of what number is 80?
10.2.25. Solve the following problems.
a. Of 120,000 eggs in a chicken coop, 97% are not expected to hatch but rather be eaten. How many of the eggs are
expect to be eaten?
b. There are 140 new jobs available in Tampa this month. Thirty-two percent of these jobs are blue collar jobs.
How many blue collar jobs are available in Tampa this month?
c. How much money do you save on a lawn chair originally priced at $22.50 if you purchase this item on sale at
30% off?
d. A flat screen TV was $2545 and is now selling for $1875. What is the percent saving?
e. An item is marked as 33% off, and is now selling for $5.28. What was the original price?
10.2.26. The Carter family owns an orange groove with a market value of $275,000. Land in the area is assessed to be 45%
of market value. The tax rate is $1.65 per $100 assessed value. How much is the tax on the land?
10.3
PATTERN RECOGNITION
Pattern recognition is the first step in solving many various problems. As with
machine learning, pattern recognition assigns labels to input values, such as
classification, in order to better understand the nature and order of things.
Pattern recognition is based on logic. In logic, there are two methods of rea-
soning: deductive and inductive.
Deductive reasoning starts with the theory, followed by the construction
of a hypothesis which is then tested by making observation and drawing a con-
clusion possibly confirming the initial hypothesis. By contrast inductive rea-
soning starts with making observations, then determining a pattern which in
turn leads to a hypothesis which results in theory, moving from specific obser-
vations to broader generalities.
Definition 10.3.1 Inductive Reasoning
Inductive reasoning or induction is a kind of reasoning in which a small set of obser-
vations is used to infer a larger theory.
Fraction
Decimal
Percent
a.
1
5
b.
1
3
c.
0.25
d.
2.75
e.
9%
f.
0.5%
g.
2.25%
h.
13
8
i.
0.375
j.
250%
410
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.3.1 Number of Squares
In a grid of squares n×n, how many perfect squares are there of any size, P(n)?
Solution
The process starts with making observations with smaller values of n.
Whenn51,wehaveonlyonesquareofsize1,hencePð1Þ51:
When n52, we have one square of size 2 in addition to the
four squares of size 1; hence Pð2Þ51 + 455:
When n53, we have one square of size 3 in addition to the
four squares of size 2 and nine squares of size 1; hence
P 3
ð Þ51 + 4 + 9515:
If you have not noticed the pattern yet, these are the sums of the square integers:
P n
ð Þ512 + 22 + ⋯+ n25n n + 1
ð
Þ 2n + 1
ð
Þ
6
:
Therefore, a 4×4 square has 30 squares of various sizes.
P 4
ð Þ51 + 4 + 9 + 1654×5×9
6
530
In ordering the possible number of squares as a function of the size of the largest
square we have created a sequence.
Definition 10.3.2 Sequence
A sequence is an ordered list of objects, events or outcomes,
a1,a2,…,an:
In the context of this chapter, a sequence will refer to an arrangement of numbers.
A sequence consists of a list of outcomes, each individual outcome is a term
in the sequence.
Definition 10.3.3 Term
A term is an individual outcome in a sequence enumerated as a function of the position
in the sequence
an5P n
ð Þ:
Sequence
 A following of one outcome after another
10.3 Pattern Recognition
411

Example 10.3.2 Finding Terms
Identify the pattern in the sequence 1, 4, 7, 10, … and find the next three terms and the
11th term.
Solution
Consider the differences between each term in the sequence: from 1 to 4, there is a dif-
ference of 3, from 4 to 7, again there is a difference of 3 and from 7 to 10 there is a
difference of three. Hence, we have that any term is 3 more than the previous term:
an5an21 + 3;
and therefore the next three terms are 13, 16, and 19.
A sequence with common differences is called an arithmetic sequence and be
written in recursive notation as above or in terms of the value n. As the difference
of 3 is added (n21) times to the first term 1, we have that an can be expressed as
an51 + 3 n21
ð
Þ53n22:
Therefore, a1153×1022528.
Definition 10.3.4 Arithmetic Sequence
An arithmetic sequence is a sequence of numbers such that there is a common dif-
ference between consecutive terms.
Recursive notation: an5an21 + d
Non-recursive notation: an5a1 + d n21
ð
Þ
If instead of adding a common difference to create the next consecutive
term, you multiplied, then this would be a geometric sequence.
Definition 10.3.5 Geometric Sequence
A geometric sequence is a sequence of numbers such that there is a common ratio
between consecutive terms.
Recursive notation: an5an21×r
Non-recursive notation: an5a1×rn21
Example 10.3.3 Finding Terms
Identify the pattern in the sequence 1, 2, 4, 8, … and find the next three terms.
Solution
Consider the ratio between each term in the sequence: between 2 and 1, there is a ratio of
2, between 4 and 2 there is a ratio of 2, and between 8 and 4 there is a ratio of 2. Hence,
we have that any term is twice the previous term:
an52×an21;
and therefore the next three terms are 16, 32 and 64; or we could have written
an51×2n2152n21;
and therefore we have a5524516, a6525532 and a7526564.
WARNING: There are many sequences that follow more complicated patterns;
some even follow more than one.
an 5 an 2 1 + 3
1
1 + 3 5 4
4 + 3 5 7
7 + 3 5 10
an 5 3n 22
3(1) 2 2 5 1
3(2) 2 2 5 4
3(3) 2 2 5 7
3(4) 2 2 5 10
an 5 2×an21
1
2×1 5 2
2×2 5 4
2×4 5 8
an 5 2n21
2121 5 20 5 1
2221 5 21 5 2
2321 5 22 5 4
2421 5 23 5 8
412
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.3.4 Double Pattern
Identify the pattern in the sequence 10, 5, 9, 4, 8, 3, … and find the next three terms.
Solution
This pattern is neither arithmetic nor geometric as there is no common difference or
ratio; however, if you view every other number, there is a pattern. That is, the differ-
ences alternate between 5 and +4 for the sequence, but from 10 to 9 to 8 is a difference
of 1 and from 5 to 4 to 3 there is a difference of one. Therefore, the next three terms in
the sequence are 7, 2, and 6.
10
5
–5
4
–5
4
–5
4
9
4
8
3
10
5
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
9
4
8
3
Example 10.3.5 Complex Pattern
Identify the pattern in the sequence 1, 2, 8, 22, 47, … and find the next term.
Solution
The first differences between the terms is not common: 1, 6, 14, 25, … and the second
set of differences is not constant 5, 8, 11, …; however, the third differences are a con-
stant 3.
1
2
8
22
47
1
6
14
25
39
5
8
11
14
17
3
3
3
3
3
Hence, in the third row, the next number is 14, which would sum to 25 (row 2);
therefore, the next number on the second row is 39 (25+14) and finally the next number
in the first row is 86 (47+39).
Definition 10.3.6 Series
A series is the sum of the terms in a sequence,
s15a1,s25a1 + a2,…,sn5a1 + a2 + ⋯+ an:
In general, we have
sn5
X
n
i51
ai:
In constructing a series by adding on term at a time, a new sequence of partial sums
is generated:
s1,s2,s3,…,sn:
10.3 Pattern Recognition
413

Example 10.3.6 Series 1+2+3+⋯
Identify the series generated by in the sequence 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5; find the sum of the
series for n510.
Solution
Consider the partial sums:
s151
s251 + 253
s351 + 2 + 355
s451 + 2 + 3 + 4510
s551 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5515
Therefore, we see that the series for the given sequence of five numbers is 15;
however, there is a pattern in that if you write the series backwards and forwards,
we have
2s556 + 6 + 6 + 6 + 6
2s555×6530
s5515:
s551 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
s555 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1
Extending this idea to sn, we have
2sn5 n + 1
ð
Þ + n + 1
ð
Þ + ⋯+ n + 1
ð
Þ + n + 1
ð
Þ
2s55n× n + 1
ð
Þ
sn5n n + 1
ð
Þ
2
:
sn51 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + ⋯+ n21
ð
Þ + n
sn5n + n21
ð
Þ + ⋯+ 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1
Using this formula, we have
s1051 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6 + 7 + 8 + 9 + 10 510 10 + 1
ð
Þ
2
555:
Rule 10.3.1 Arithmetic Series
Given an arithmetic sequence, an5a1 + d n21
ð
Þ, the series is the average of the first
and last term times the number of terms:
sn5a1 + an
2
×n;
or equivalently, by substitution,
sn5n 2a1 + n21
ð
Þ
½

2
:
Example 10.3.7 Series 4+2+1+⋯
Identify the series generated by in the sequence 4, 2, 1, 0.5, and 0.25; find the sum of the
series for n56.
414
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution
Consider the partial sums:
s154
s254 + 256
s354 + 2 + 157
s454 + 2 + 1 + 0:557:5
s554 + 2 + 1 + 0:5 + 0:2557:75:
Therefore, we see that the series for the given sequence of five numbers is 7.75;
however, there is a pattern in that if you write the series and subtract the series times
the common ratio r, we have
0:5×s55420:125
0:5×s553:875
s557:25
s554 + 2 + 1 + 0:5 + 0:25
2 0:5×s5
½
52 2 + 1 + 0:5 + 0:25 + 0:125
½

Extending this idea to sn, we have
sn2rsn5a12a1rn + 1
12r
ð
Þsn5a1 12rn + 1


sn5a1 12rn + 1


12r
:
sn5a1 + a1r + a1r2 + ⋯+ a1r n21
ð
Þ + a1rn
rsn5a1r + a1r2 + a1r3 + ⋯+ a1rn + a1rn + 1
Using this formula, we have
s654 + 2 + 1 + 0:5 + 0:25 + 0:125 + 0:062554 120:57


120:5
57:9375:
Rule 10.3.2 Geometric Series
Given an geometric sequence, an5a1×rn21, the series is the given by
sn5a1 12rn + 1


12r
:
If the absolute value of the ratio is less than 1, then the infinite sum is given by
s∞5 a1
12r:
Example 10.3.8 Series 4+2+1+⋯
Identify the series generated by in the sequence 4, 2, 1, 0.5, and 0.25; find the sum of the
series for n→∞.
Solution
s∞5 a1
12r5
4
121
2
58
10.3 Pattern Recognition
415

EXERCISES
10.3.1. Identify the pattern and find the next three terms.
a. 1, 6, 11, 16, …
b. 2, 5, 4, 7, 6, 9, …
c. 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, …
d. 1, 4, 9, 16, …
e. 1, 1, 1, 1, …
10.3.2. Identify the pattern and find the next three terms.
a. 1, 2, 4, 7, …
b. 2, 5, 10, 17,
c. 1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, …
d. 1, 3, 6, 10, …
e. 1,1, 2, 3, 5, …
10.3.3. Give the following arithmetic sequence in non-recursive form. What is the tenth term in the sequence?
a. an5an21 + 4
b. an5an2124
c. an5an21 + 5
d. an5an21 + 1
2
10.3.4. Give the following geometric sequence in non-recursive form. What are the first five terms?
a. an52×an21
b. an51
2×an21
c. an522×an21
d. an55×an21
10.3.5. Write the first five terms of the sequence and determine an alternative way of written the general term.
a. an5 1 + 2 + 3 + ⋯+ n
ð
Þ2
b. an51 + 3 + 5 + ⋯+ 2n21
ð
Þ
10.3.6. Determine the series for the given sequence.
a. 1, 3, 5, 7, 9
b. 2, 8, 14, 20, 24
c. 2, 4, 8, 16
d. 1, 1, 1, 1, 1
10.4
ALGEBRAIC EXPRESSIONS AND
RELATIONSHIPS
Notice that we abbreviate everything into a form of short hand. In the times of
Plato, to express simple summation, one would write something like “five plus
seven”; that is, 13 symbols to express three ideas; hence, if we use the Arabic
symbol 5 for “five,” the plus sign “ + ” and 7 for “seven,” we have an algebraic
expression 5 + 7. If there are unknowns in a mathematical statement, we would
abbreviate this to a single letter such a or x, and these single expressions can be
combined to create more complicated algebraic expressions.
Definition 10.4.1 Algebraic Expression
An algebraic expression is a mathematical statement which contains numbers, vari-
ables and arithmetic operators.
Example 10.4.1 Algebraic Expressions
Write the algebraic expression “the sum of eleven and a number, all divided by five.”
416
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution
11 + n
ð
Þ÷5
or
11 + n
5
Example 10.4.2 Algebraic Expressions
Write the algebraic expression “twelve decreased by four times a number.”
Solution
1224×n
or
51224n
Use of such notations makes it easier to determine and combine like terms.
Example 10.4.3 Apples and Oranges
Write the algebraic expression “in one box there are three apples and four pears in
addition to two apples and one pear in other box” and simplify.
Solution
Let a represent apples and p represent pears, then we have
3a + 4p
ð
Þ + 2a + p
ð
Þ
which is equivalent to
5a + 5p:
Common Algebraic Expressions
+
Plus, addition, sum, added to, increased by, more than
2
Minus, subtraction, difference, less, decreased by, less than, subtracted from
×
Product, multiplication, times, of
÷
Quotient, division, divided by, ratio of, per
□2
Squared, the power of two indicated by position of the two
0
Zero, nothing, none
1
One
2
Two
3
Three
4
Four
5
Five
6
Six
7
Seven
8
Eight
9
Nine
10.4 Algebraic Expressions and Relationships
417

Example 10.4.4 Writing Expressions
Write the algebraic expression for each of the following statements.
a.
A number increased by two
b.
Six less than a number
c.
The product of three and a number
d.
Two-thirds of a number
Solution
Write the algebraic expression for each of the following statements.
a.
n + 2
b.
n26
Note: This is not “six less a number” which would be 62n.
c.
3×n or 3n
d.
2
3n or 2n
3 .
These algebraic expressions can be broken down in to algebraic terms with
numerical coefficients and unknown variables (letters).
Definition 10.4.2 Algebraic Term
An algebraic term is an expression where numbers and unknowns (letters) are com-
bined in multiplication or division.
Algebraic terms come be combined in summation or differencing to create
larger expressions and expressions with like terms can be simplified into
equivalent expressions by combining the coefficients of like terms.
Definition 10.4.3 Coefficient
The coefficient in an expression is the numerical value and is written before any letters
in the expression.
Example 10.4.5 Coefficients
List the numerical coefficient for each term.
a.
5x b.
0.2d c.
4xy d.
23pq
Solution
a.
5 b.
0.2 c.
4 d.
23
In the above examples, the expressions are all monomials; that is, the each
contain one unique term. However, algebraic expressions can be the sum of
many distinct terms. Terms that are not distinct are like terms which can be
combined and simplified.
Definition 10.4.4 Like Terms
In an expression, like terms are terms that have all the same unknowns with the same
exponents with different coefficients.
In general we will use ‘n’ for number.
418
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.4.6 Like Terms
Combine like terms in each group.
2x
5y
25x
3ab
5abc
22ab
2x2y
5x2y
23x2y
xyz
xy
z
Solution
a.
2x and 25x are like terms:
2x + 25x
ð
Þ
225
ð
Þx
23x
b.
3ab and 22ab are like terms:
3ab + 22ab
ð
Þ
322
ð
Þab
1ab
ab
c.
2x2y, 5x2y, and 23x2y are all like terms:
2x2y + 5x2y + 23x2y


2 + 53
ð
Þx2y
4x2y
d.
xyz, xy, and z are distinct terms; that is, there are no like terms.
Algebraic expressions can be evaluated for various values of the unknown
or variables in each term.
Example 10.4.7 Evaluation
Evaluate the following expressions. Let x52 and y55.
a.
x + y
b.
5x2y
c.
y
x
d.
x + y
x2y
Solution
a.
x + y is equivalent to 2 + 557
b.
5x2y is equivalent to 5×2255102555
c.
y
x is equivalent to 5
252:5
d.
x + y
x2y is equivalent to 2 + 5
2255 7
235221
3.
The ideas indicated by these expressions can lead to formulas for such
things as perimeters and areas in geometry; as well as in computing interest
and profits in finance.
Definition 10.4.5 Formula
A formula is an expression constructed using symbols to represent numerical values
that related expressions in equality. Formulas are mathematical sentences which related
underlying mathematical expressions.
x + y
" "
2 5
10.4 Algebraic Expressions and Relationships
419

Example 10.4.8 Formulations
Write an expression for the total length of lumber needed to cut 3 pieces of
wood x inches in length if y inches are wasted on each cut the thickness of the saw blade.
Solution
As between each of the three pieces of wood there is a cut, there are two cuts and hence
the total length, L, of the lumber needs to be
L53x + 2y:
Many such formulations come from direct or indirect variation between
the unknowns or variables.
Definition 10.4.6 Direct Variation
Direct variation between two variables is such that their values always maintain a con-
stant ratio:
y
x5k:
This relationship can also be written in terms of y varying directly as a multiple of
x:
y5kx:
Given x and y vary directly, we might state that y is directly proportional to x. In
this case, k is referred to as the constant of proportionality.
Example 10.4.9 Direct Variation
The total amount that Bob earns in a week, W, is directly proportional to the number of
hours he works per week, h. Express this direct variation in a formula. Given that one
week Bob earned $147.25 for 19 hours of work, what is his hourly rate (the constant of
proportionality)? How much would Bob make if he worked 40 hours a week?
Solution
The total amount of money Bob earns in a week, W, is given by
W5kh:
Using the information regarding one week’s pay, we have
$147:255k 19hours
ð
Þ;
hence, we have that the hourly rate is
k ¼ $147:25
19hours ¼ 7:75$=hour:
Moreover, now that we have
W ¼ 7:75hours;
if Bob works a 40-hour week, his total amount earned is
W57:75
$
hour×40 hour5$310:
According to the given information, we can determine that Bob gets paid $7.75 per
hour and would make $310 in a week if he worked 40 hours that week.
420
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Definition 10.4.7 Indirect Variation
Indirect variation between two variables is such that their values always maintain a
constant product:
xy5k:
This relationship can also be written in terms of y varying inversely as a multiple of
x:
y5k
x:
Give x and y vary indirectly, we might state that y is inversely proportional to x. In
this case, k is referred to as the constant of proportionality.
Example 10.4.10 Indirect Variation
The total amount of time it takes a team to finish pressure washing a building, T, is
inversely proportional to the number of people, n, on the team. Express this indirect
variation in a formula. Given that a team of 4 can finish the job in 8 hours, what is time
it would take a single worker (the constant of proportionality)? How long would it take a
team of 6?
Solution
The total amount of time, T, needed to complete the job is given by
T5k
n:
Using the information given, we have
85k
4;
hence, we have that the constant of proportionality is
k532:
Moreover, now that we have
T532
n ;
if a team of 6 works to complete the job, it would take a total of
T532
6 55:333 hours or 5 hours 20 minutes:
According to the given information, this job would take one person 32 hours to finish
whereas a team of 6 could complete it in 5 hours and 20 minutes.
EXERCISES
10.4.1. Write the algebraic expression.
a. The sum of five and a number, quantity squared.
b. Fifty decreased by twice a number.
c. The difference between two and a number.
d. Twice a number increased by nine.
Exercises
421

10.4.2. Combine like terms.
a. 4x + x
22x
b. 5 + 3b
2 + 7b
c. 2Δ + 4Δ20:1Δ
d. 9x2213x + 7x2 + 5x22
10.4.3. Write the algebraic expression.
a. Seventeen plus twice a number.
b. Fifteen times a number less five.
c. The sum of ten and three times a number.
d. Seven more than three-fourths of a number.
e. Twice the product of two and a number squared
10.4.4. Write the statement (in words) for each of the following algebraic expressions.
a. n÷12
b. 5x
c. 3(2y)
d. 52n
e. 5 + n
10.4.5. Set up the following relationship.
a. The length of a room is 5 feet longer than the width.
b. If four tires cost d dollars, write an algebraic expression for the cost of each tire.
c. Three shirts cost x dollars, write an algebraic expression for the cost of five shirts.
10.4.6. List the numerical coefficient for each term.
a. 2r
b. 9xy
c. 23abc
d. x
e. 1
2x2
10.4.7. Combine like terms to simplify the expression.
a. 5x + 7x
b. 6r23r
c. 21
2f + 3c + 5f
d. 5t22t + 4t
e. 6h27h
10.4.8. Combine like terms to simplify the expression.
a. a + a
b. 2e2e + 1
c. 5 + 2w21 + 3w
d. 4u20:5u + u2
e. 1
2x + x2 + 12x
10.4.9. Evaluate the following:
a. If x512 and y 522, find x + 2y
b. If c52 and d53, find cd23
c. If h51 and j55, find j22h2
d. If n522 and m523, find nm + m2
10.4.10. Evaluate the following expressions when x525, y52, and z53.
a. x2 + 2y2z
b. 2x + 3 y + z
ð
Þ2
c. xyz
d. x2 + y2 + z2
e. x
y + z
f. x + y
z2x
422
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.4.11. The dimension of a room is w feet wide and l feet in length. Solve.
a. If the length of a room is 5 feet longer than the width, write an expression for the length of the room in terms of
the width, w.
b. Evaluate the expression for length above for a width of 10 feet.
c. Give the area of the room in terms of the width of the room.
10.4.12. Profit is revenue minus cost. Solve.
a. Write an expression showing this relationship. Let R be the revenue and C be the cost.
b. Given the revenue is $15 per item sold and the cost is $3 per item plus $240 in over head, write the above
expression in terms of number of items sold, x.
c. How much profit is made when 50 items are sold?
d. What is the breakeven point; that is, how many items must be sold to ensure that the revenues cover the cost,
R5C.
10.4.13. Distance traveled varies directly travel time based on the rate of travel.
a. Write an expression showing this relationship between distance, d, the constant of proportionality (rate), r, and
the travel time, t.
b. Given a car traveled 360 miles in 5 hours, what is the rate of travel, r?
c. How far would this car travel in 7 hours?
10.5
EQUATIONS: EQUALITIES & SYSTEMS OF
EQUATIONS
Formulas are distinct from expressions in that they contain an equal sign
relating two or more expressions. To better understand how to use such equa-
tions, it is important that you can solve simple equalities.
Definition 10.5.1 Equation
An equation is a mathematical sentence that asserts the equality of two expressions.
There are several properties of equality:
Property 10.51 Equality
These mathematical sentences are reflective, symmetric and transitive; that is,
Reflective
a5a
Symmetric
If a5b, then b5a.
Transitive
If a5b and b5c, then a5c.
Example 10.5.1 Equations
Solve.
a.
x + 5513
b.
y23:755:9
c.
355y + 17
d.
22 + z512
Equality
 The state of being equal.
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
423

Solution
Step 1
x + 5513
x + 5513
x + 52551325
x58
Step 2
y23:755:9
y23:755:9
y23:7 + 3:755:9 + 3:7
y59:6
Step 3
355y + 17
355y + 17
352175y + 17217
185y
y518
Step 4
22 + z512
22 + z222512222
z5210
Example 10.5.2 Two-Step Equations
Solve the equation in two-steps: 5x7 ¼ 18:
Solution
5x27518
5x27 + 7518 + 7
5x525
5x
5 525
5
x55
Example 10.5.3 Three-Step Equations
Solve the equation in three-steps: 22x25513x + 25:
Solution
22x25513x + 25
+ 2x22x255 + 2x + 13x + 25
25515x + 25
25225515x + 25225
230515x
230
15515x
15
225x
x522:
Recall that parentheses and brackets indicate multiplication or emphasis to be
distributed first.
424
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.5.4 Solving Equations
Solve the equation: 22 x25
ð
Þ513x + 25:
Solution
22 x25
ð
Þ513x + 25
22x + 10513x + 25
+ 2x22x + 1052x + 13x + 25
10515x + 25
10225515x + 25225
215515x
215
15515x
15
215x
x521:
Definition 10.5.2 Literal Equation
A literal equation is an equation that contains letters such a,b,c in place of constants
and letters such as x,y,z for the unknowns (variables).
Literal equations can be used to illustrate an equation in general such as a
form, ax2b5c, or formula such as those used to define area of a rectangle in
terms of the base and height, A5bh or distance in terms of rate and time, d5rt.
Example 10.5.5 Literal Equations
Solve the equation in terms of x: x :w5xy + z:
Solution
w5xy + z
w2z5xy + z2z
w2z5xy
w2z
y
5xy
y
w2z
y
5x
x5w2z
y
:
We can use the equations to solve for unknowns once a problem has been translated
from English to Math.
Example 10.5.6 Solving Equations
Eight times a number is 72. Find the number.
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
425

Solution
Eight
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ}
8
times
|ﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄ}
×
anumber
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
n
is
|{z}
5
72
|{z}
72
8×n572
8n572
8n
8 572
8
n59
This technique offers use a shorthand language which can be used to solve everyday
problems.
Example 10.5.7 Word Problems
June has a board 15 feet long. She must cut the board so that one piece is 3 feet longer
than twice the length of the other. What will be the length of each board?
Solution
Let the length of the shorter piece be represented by x; than the longer piece is 3 feet
longer than twice the value of x. Then in total, there are 15 feet.
2X+3
15
X
Hence, we have
2x + 3
ð
Þ + x515
2x + 3 + x515
3x + 3515
3x + 32351523
3x512
3x
3 512
3
x54:
The length of the shorter board is 4 feet and that of the longer board is 11 feet.
Definition 10.5.3 Inequality
An inequality is a mathematical sentence that asserts the two expressions are related,
but not necessarily equal.
These mathematical sentences are less than, less than or equal to, greater than and
greater than or equal to.
The strict inequalities are not reflective or symmetric; however, they are tran-
sitive; that is,
Not Reflective
a≤a, but NOT a<a.
Not Symmetric
If a<b, then NOT b>a.
Transitive
If a<b and b<c, then a<c.
Example 10.5.8 Inequalities
Solve the equation: 22 x25
ð
Þ<3x + 25:
426
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution
22x + 10<3x + 25
23x22x + 10<23x + 3x + 25
25x + 10<25
25x + 10210<25210
25x<15
25x
25 > 15
25
x>23:
Rule 10.5.1 Elementary Operations
Given an equation
a5b
the following elementary operations yield equivalent expressions:
a + c5b + c,
a2c5b2c,
a×c5b×c,
a÷c5b÷c,c≠0
Given an equation
a<b
the following elementary operations yield equivalent expressions:
a + c<b + c and a2c>b2c;
a×c>b×c,c>0
a×c<b×c,c<0
a÷c>b÷c,c>0
a÷c<b÷c,c<0
There are three ways to write inequalities: inequality notation, interval
notation and graphic notation. When graphing inequalities on a real number
line, there are several conventions. There are open intervals and there are
closed intervals, and there are intervals which are closed on one end and open
on the other end.
Inequality Notation
Interval Notation
Graphic Notation
x≥a
[a, ∞)
a
x<b
(2∞,b)
b
a<x<b
(a,b)
a
b
a≤x≤b
[a,b]
a
b
a≤x<b
[a,b)
a
b
a<x≤b
(a,b]
a
b
x5a
a
x≠a
a
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
427

Example 10.5.9 Various Notations
Write the inequality in interval notation and illustrate graphically: x>22:
Solution
In inequality notation,
x>22
can be read backwards and written
22<x
which indicates the lower limit (not included) is –2 and has not upper bound; hence, in
interval notation we have
22, ∞
ð
Þ:
Graphically, 22 is open (not included) and extends to the right (to infinity).
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
As this interval implies x can take on an infinitely large number (positive), this
interval is unbounded.
Definition 10.5.4 Unbounded Interval
An unbounded interval is an interval which does not include a finite end point; there
are several possible forms of an unbounded interval:
(2∞, + ∞),
(2∞,b),
(2∞,b],
(a, + ∞),
[a, + ∞).
When an unbounded interval is written in inequality notation, we have:
(2∞, + ∞) is any real number, x∈ℝ,
(2∞,b) is any real number less than b, x<b;
(2∞,b} is any real number less than or equal to b, x≤b;
(a, + ∞) is any real number greater than a, x>a;
[a, + ∞) is any real number greater than a, x≥a:
When unbounded intervals are written in inequality notation, there is only
one or no boundaries on the value of x whereas bounded intervals are such
that both ends are finite values.
Definition 10.5.5 Bounded Interval
A bounded interval is an interval which does have finite end points; there are several
possible forms of an bounded interval:
a.
(a,b),
b.
(a,b],
c.
[a,b),
d.
[a,b].
When a bounded interval is written in inequality notation, we have:
(a,b) is any real number, a<x<b;
(a,b) is any real number, a<x<b;
(a,b] is any real number, a<x≤b;
[a,b) is any real number, a≤x<b;
[a,b] is any real number, a≤x≤b:
428
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.5.10 Bounded
Write the inequality in interval notation and illustrate graphically: x>22.
Solution
In inequality notation,
x>22
can be read backwards and written
22<x
which indicates the lower limit (not included) is 22 and has not upper bound; hence, in
interval notation we have
22, ∞
ð
Þ:
Graphically, 22 is open (not included) and extends to the right (to infinity).
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Example 10.5.11 Integers
Take x to be an integer and graph the solution set for x≥22.
Solution
In inequality notation,
x≥22
can be read backwards and written
22≤x
which indicates the lower limit (included) is 22 and has not upper bound; hence, in
interval notation we have
22, ∞
ð
Þ∩ℤ;
however, we are restricted to the integers and not the real number line in its entirety.
Graphically, 22 is close (included) and extends to the right ever integer point (to
infinity).
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
Recall from Chapter 3, in set notation, we can list this solution set in roster
notation:
22,21,0,1,2,3,…
f
g:
Other equations and inequalities include absolute values.
Definition 10.5.6 Absolute Value
The absolute value of a number x, denoted by jxj, is the numerical value (magnitude of
the value) without the sign (direction on the real number line). It is the distance between
the value on the number line and zero.
xj j5
x
x≥0
2x x<0

10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
429

Example 10.5.12 Absolute Values
Take x to be a real number, solve the equation xj j52.
Solution
Either x52 or 2x52; that is, x52 or x522.
Example 10.5.13 Solving Absolute Values
Take x to be a real number, solve the equation jx + 1j55.
Solution
Either x + 155 or 2 x + 1
ð
Þ55; that is, x + 155 or (dividing both sides by the 21)
x + 1525. Solving these two equations, we have x54 or x527.
Example 10.5.14 Inequalities with jxj
Take x to be a real number, solve the equation jxj<3.
Solution
First, we need to consider the boundaries: xj j53. Here the solutions are 3 and 23 (not
included).
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0 1 2 3 4 5
Now we must verify which intervals work, and in this case, it is the center interval.
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0 1 2 3 4 5
We can verify this as 24
j
j54<3 is not true and therefore we do not include
2∞,23
ð
 as with 4j j54<3, this is not true and therefore we do not include the interval
3, ∞
½
Þ; however, 2j j5 22
j
j52<3, and therefore, we keep the interval 23,3
ð
Þ.
Note: there are many points that we could have tested; however, you should test one
in each interval created by the boundary points.
Rule 10.5.2 Absolute Values
In general, if a is any positive value, then we have the following equivalences with
respect to absolute values:
xj j5a
x52a,x5a
xj j<a
2a<x<a
xj j≤a
2a≤x≤a
xj j>a
x<2a or x>a
xj j≥a
x<2a or x>a
We are now in a position to discuss linear inequalities.
Example 10.5.15 Linear Inequalities
Find the solution set of the inequality 2x + 3y>6.
430
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution
Weshallfirstconsidertheinequalityintermsoftheboundary,when2x + 3y56,whichhasan
infinite number of solutions. Every point on the line is a solution to the equation. However,
since this boundary is not included, we use a dashed line, see Figure 10.1.
To solve the original inequality we need to find a set consisting of values (x,y) that
make the expression 2x + 3y greater than 6. This solution can be obtained by solving for
y in the inequality to determine y relationship with the line: y>222
3x, so the solution set
is above the line. Or you can test a point in each region to determine which set works: try
(0,0) in the inequality, 2×0 + 3×0>6 is not true. Hence, the points below the line do not
work; try (3,2) above the line, 2×3 + 3×2>6 is true and so the solution set is above the
line, Figure 10.2.
Another common type of equation is the quadratic equation.
2
0
2x+3y=6
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.1
Boundary line for the linear inequality 2x+3y>6.
2
0
2x+3y<6
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.2
Scatter plot of the solution set for the linear inequality
2x+3y>6.
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
431

Definition 10.5.7 Quadratic Equation
A quadratic equation is a second-degree expression with standard form of
ax2 + bx + c50
where a, b and c are real numbers and a≠0.
If the quadratic equation is factorable, then we can use the property that if
ab50, then either a50 or b50 to solve the equation.
Example 10.5.16 Factoring Quadratics
Factor and solve the equation 2x223x2550.
Solution
First, we need to factor the left hand side of the equation to be
2x223x255 2x25
ð
Þ x + 1
ð
Þ;
hence, we have that either 2x2550 or x + 150. Solving these two linear equations, we
have
x55
252:5 or x51:
The key to factoring this quadratic equation lies in the product ac; we need factors of
the product ac that sum to be the middle term b. Here ac5210 and factors of 210 that
sum to 23 are 25 and 2. That is, 25x is the product of the inner terms (or outer terms)
and 2x is the product of the outer terms (or vice versa).
In fact, when the lead coefficient is one, then the key is the solution.
Example 10.5.17 Factoring Quadratics
Factor and solve the equation x225x2650.
Solution
First, the key to factoring this quadratic equation ac526 and factors of 26 that sum to
25 are 26 and 1. That is, 26x is the product of the inner terms and 1x5x is the product of
the outer terms:
x225x265 x26
ð
Þ x + 1
ð
Þ;
hence, we have that either x2650 or x + 150. Solving these two linear equations, we
have
x56 or x51:
However, not all quadratics factor nicely, in which case one can use the quadratic
formula. Using a technique call completing the square, we get the following formulation
of the solutions.
Rule 10.5.3 Quadratic Formula
In general, the solutions to a quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c50; where a, b and c are
real numbers and a≠0 can be obtained from the quadratic formula
x52b∓
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
b224ac
p
2a
:
432
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Example 10.5.18 Quadratic Inequality
Graph the solution set to the equation x22x26≥y.
Solution
We first start with the boundary x22x265y, which has infinitely many solutions
which, in this case, are included in the solution set. To assist in graph, we can use
the quadratic equation to find the zeros: x22x2650:
x5
2 21
ð
Þ∓
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
21
ð
Þ224×1× 26
ð
Þ
q
2×1
↓
x51∓
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
25
p
2
↓
x522,3
Hence, the graph is a parabola (second-degree) in the upward direction (lead coefficient
is positive) and y-intercept at y526, Figure 10.3.
Furthermore, since y≤x22x26, it is the region below the curve that is the solution
set, Figure 10.4.
Now we will study systems of equations.
2
0
y=x2–x–6
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.3
Scatter plot of the included boundary in the
inequality y x22x26.
2
0
y≤x2–x–6
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.4
Scatter plot of the solution set for the
inequality y x22x26.
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
433

Definition 10.5.8 System Equations
A system of equations is a set of equations to be solved simultaneously using the pro-
cesses of elimination, substitution, matrix manipulation or other iterative method.
In our studies we will consider a system of two linear equations:
ax + by5c
dx + ey5f

where a, b, c, d, e and f are known constants, and solve for the variables x and y.
There are three ways we will study to solve such systems are: elimination,
substitution and using determinates of matrices (Cramer’s Rule).
Common Solution Methods
Elimination—a process by which equations are manipulated in pairs to reduce the
system by one variable; in a system of two equations and two unknowns, this is a simple
equation.
Substitution—a process by which one equation is manipulated, solving for one var-
iable that then can be substituted into the remaining equations
Determines of Matrices—a process by which the information contained in the
equations are re-organized to determine the solution to the equation.
Using elimination, both equations may need to be multiplied by a constant:
Step-by-Step Elimination
Step 1.
Select a variable and find the least common multiple of the coefficients.
Step 2.
Determine the multiples needed for each equation and multiply the equations,
respectively, except make one of the multiples the opposite sign.
Step 3.
Add resulting equations reducing the number of unknowns.
Step 4.
Repeat Steps 1–3 as needed and finish by plugging in the answer to the last
equation to the previous equation until you have solved the system of
equations.
Example 10.5.19 Elimination
Solve the system of equations below using elimination:
3x + 5y521
4x23y521

Solution
Step 1.
The least common denominator for coefficients on x is 12 and for the coeffi-
cients on y is 15; therefore, arbitrarily choosing the minimum, 12, we will
eliminate x.
Step 2.
The multiple needed for the first equation is 4 and the second is 3; hence, we
will multiply by 4 and 3, respectively.
3x + 5y521
ð
Þ×4
4x23y521
ð
Þ×23

434
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution—cont’d
Resulting in the following:
12x + 20y584
212x + 9y53

Step 3.
Adding the resulting equations we have one equation with one unknown.
29y587
Hence, y53; and given this information and the first original equation
we get
3x + 5×3521
↓
3x + 15521
↓
3x + 15215521215
↓
3x56
↓
3x
3 56
3
↓
x52
The solution to the system of equations is (2,3).
Using substitution, only one equation initial manipulated:
Step-by-Step Elimination
Step 1.
Select a variable and solve for that variable in one of the equations.
Step 2.
Substitute the resulting expression in for that variable in all remaining
equations.
Step 3.
Repeating steps 1–2 as needed and finish by plugging in the answer to the last
equation to the previous equation until you have solved the system of
equations.
Example 10.5.20 Substitution
Solve the system of equations below using substitution:
3x + 5y520
4x23y517

Solution
Step 1
The coefficients are not one and therefore, arbitrarily choosing the first
equation, solve for y (as it is easier to divide by 5 that it is to divide by 3).
3x + 5y520
↓
3x + 5y
ð
Þ23x52023x
↓
5y52023x
↓
5y
5 52023x
5
↓
y5420:6x
Continued
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
435

Solution—cont’d
Step 2
Substituting this into the second equation we get,
4x23y517
↓
4x23 420:6x
ð
Þ517
↓
4x212 + 0:6x517
↓
4:6x212517
↓
4:6x212 + 12517 + 12
↓
4:6x529
↓
4:6x
4:6 5 29
4:6
↓
x55
Step 3
Plugging this into the equation found in step 1, we have
y5420:6×551
Hence, the solution to the system of equations is (5,1).
Before we cover the last procedure, we must first introduce the idea of a matrix.
Definition 10.5.9 Matrix
A matrix is a rectangular array of numbers that has a given number of rows and
columns.
The system of equations below can be considered as two matrices:
ax + by5c
dx + ey5f

;
first the coefficients:
D5 a b
d e
	

;
next are the constants that balance the equations:
A5 c
f
	 
;
and the unknowns:
B5 x
y
	 
:
There are methods for solving the underlying system of equations using
augmented matrices, matrix multiplications and inverse matrices; however,
this is beyond the scope of this text. Here we introduce Cramer’s Rule which
uses determine to solve systems of equations.
Definition 10.5.10 Determinate of 2×2
Given a 2×2 matrix D5 a b
c d
	

, the determinate is a given by
D
j j5ad2bc:
436
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Cramer’s Rule uses determines as follows for a system of two equations
and two unknowns:
Rule 10.5.4 Cramer’s Rule
Given a system of two equations and two unknowns in the following form:
ax + by5c
dx + ey5f

Let D5 a b
d e
	

(the coefficients on x and y), Dx5 c b
f e
	

(the matrix D with the bal-
ancing constants in place of the coefficients on x) and Dy5 a c
d f
	

(the matrix D with the
balancing constants in place of the coefficients on y); then if D
j j≠0; by Cramer’s Rule
x5 Dx
j
j
D
j j ;
and
y5 Dy


D
j j :
Example 10.5.21 Cramer’s Rule
Solve the system of equations below using substitution:
3x25y523
4x23y57

Solution
Setting up the matrices we have:
D5 3 25
4 23
	

,
Dx5 23 25
7
23
	

and Dy5 3 23
4
7
	

:
The determinates of which are:
D
j j5292 220
ð
Þ511;
Dx
j
j592 235
ð
Þ544;
and
Dy

5212 212
ð
Þ533:
Hence, the solution to the system of equations is x544
1154 and y533
1153, or
(4,3).
Just as there are systems of equations, there are systems of inequalities.
Example 10.5.22 System Inequalities
Graph the solution set to the following system of inequalities:
x≥0
y≥0
x + y≤5
8
<
:
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
437

Solution
First graph the inequalities one at a time:
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
x = 0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
x≥0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
y = 0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
y ≥0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
x + y = 5
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
–2
–4
–6
–6 –4 –2
0
x+ y ≤5
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
6
Hence the solution set is given by Figure 10.5.
Now we introduce a function to be optimized limited to given inequalities or con-
strains. In optimization, our primary aim is to find a solution that will maximize or min-
imize the objective function.
2
0
x+y ≤5
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.5
Scatter plot of solution set o x≥0, y≥0 and x+y≤5.
438
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Rule 10.5.5 Optimization
In optimization, the maximum or minimum of the objective function over the feasible
set, assuming it exists, will be attained at least one of the vertices of the feasible set.
Example 10.5.23 Optimization
Minimize the linear function f x, y
ð
Þ52x + 3y, subject to
x + y≥1
x2y≥21
x + 2y≤6
y≥0
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
Solution
First, we graph the solution set to the system of inequalities, Figure 10.6.
Next, solving the pair-wise system of equations we can obtain the points of inter-
section: 1, 0
ð
Þ, 6, 0
ð
Þ,
4
3, 7
3


; and (0,1). Now we consider each value of the objective
function when it is evaluated at the extreme points of the feasible set.
f 1, 0
ð
Þ52×1 + 3×052
f 6, 0
ð
Þ52×6 + 3×0512
f
4
3, 7
3


52×4
3 + 3×7
3529
3 592
3
f 0, 1
ð
Þ52×0 + 3×153
Inspecting the values of the objective function at each point, we see that it will be min-
imized at the point (1,0) with a minimum value of 2.
2
0
x−y=−1
x+y=1
x+2y =6
y =0
0
2
4
4
x
y
6
6
–2
–2
–4
–4
–6
–6
FIGURE 10.6
Scatter plot of the solution set for x+y≥1, x2y>21,
x+2y≤6 and y≥0.
10.5 Equations: Equalities & Systems of Equations
439

EXERCISES
10.5.1. The formula for the area of a triangle is A51
2bh, where b is the base and h is the height. Solve for h.
10.5.2. Solve.
a. 2552 + n
b. x25523
c. 175b217
d. 3
4 + t517
8
e. m + 0:5154:65
10.5.3. Solve the following problems.
a. Deb had $233.54 in her checking account after she deposited $54.14. What was the original balance?
b. Jeffery spent $24.79 on a new video game. If he gave the clerk a ten and a twenty, how much change should he
receive back?
c. Jordan put 5 nickels, 3 dimes and 10 quarters in her piggy bank. She then emptied the bank and found that she
had a total of $6.22. How much was in the bank before she added the change?
10.5.4. Solve these equations.
a. 9b545
b. 213a5104
c. 23
5x512
d. z
551:2
e. 4x2357
10.5.5. Solve these equations.
a. 5b225524b + 11
b. 24210a5100 + 3a
c. 23
5x + 2519
d. z
5 + 0:251:22x
e. 4x2353x + 7
10.5.6. Solve these equations.
a. 2 x + 5
ð
Þ2x54
b. 3 x22
ð
Þ55x26
c. 223 n25
ð
Þ538
d. 3 22x26 11x
ð
Þ
½
526
10.5.7. Solve these equations for the given unknown.
a. ax5b for x.
b. V5lwh for w.
c. d5rt for r.
10.5.8. Solve these equations for x.
a. 4x + 12560
b. 4
7x58
c. 4
9x29511
10.5.9. Solve.
a. The formula used to compute the volume of a circular cylinder is V5πr2h where r is the radius and h is the
height. Solve for h.
b. The formula used to compute the perimeter of a rectangle with base b and height is P52b + 2h. Solve for b.
c. The formula used to compute the area of a circle is A5πr2 where r is the radius. Solve for r.
10.5.10. Solve.
a. Three times the sum of a number and 7 is 6. Find the number.
b. The sum of three consecutive odd integers is 21. What are the numbers?
c. The sum of three consecutive integers is 48. What are the numbers?
d. The product of a number and 5 is equal to 9. What is the number?
e. A number divided by 4 is equal to 7. What is the number?
440
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.5.11. Michael and Rachel agree to split the expenses according to their income. Michael makes twice as much as Rachel.
If the expenses are $954 a month, how much does each per pay?
10.5.12. An artist mixes his own paints. For dark green he uses four times as much blue pigment as yellow. How much
yellow is needed to make 20 ounces of dark green paint?
10.5.13. Solve the given inequality.
a. y + 2≥4
b. 2z25<7
c. x + 2≤2x + 7
d. x>322x
10.5.14. Take x to be a real number, solve, and graph the resulting inequality.
a. 22<x + 1≤7
b. 25≤x22<2
c. x + 151
10.5.15. Take x to be an integer, solve, and graph the resulting inequality.
a. 0<x + 1≤5
b. 21≤x27<6
c. x + 155
10.5.16. Take x to be a real number, solve, and graph the resulting inequality.
a. x22>5
b. x + 3≤25
c. x + 759
10.5.17. Write the given interval in inequality notation and graphic it on the real number line.
a. (20:5,5)
b. (2∞,2)
c. [4, ∞)
10.5.18. Take x to be an integer. Write the given set in roster notation.
a. x≤5 and x22≥21
b. x<0 and x≥23
c. x + 2≥5 and x<8
d. 2x23<1 and x≠0
10.5.19. Graph the solution set, if it is non-empty.
a. x>3 and x25≥1
b. x22≤0 and x + 2≥23
c. x + 2≥0 and x<82x
d. 7x25<9 and x22>25
10.5.20. Write the given intervals in inequality and interval notation.
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
1
2
3
4
5
a.
b.
c.
d.
10.5.21. Use interval notation to write the following:
a.
xjx≥22
f
g
b.
x
f gx<3g
c.
xj21≤x<5
f
g
d.
xjx
f
i2 or x<4
10.5.22. Evaluate the expression.
a. j25j
b. j2j
c. j225j
d. jπ26j
Exercises
441

10.5.23. Solve, given answer in both inequality and graphic notation.
a. xj j<2
b. x22
j
j>3
c. 2x21
j
j≤4
d. xj j>22
e. 2x
j
j≤3
10.5.24. Solve, given answer in both inequality and graphic notation.
a. xj j<22
b. x + 12
j
j≤3
c. 2x211
j
j>5
d. xj j>2
e. 2x23
j
j≤3
10.5.25. Factor each quadratic expression.
a. x2 + 6x + 8
b. x2 + 8x + 15
c. x223x215
d. x2213x + 12
10.5.26. Factor each quadratic expression.
a. 6x225x + 1
b. 3x2 + 10x + 3
c. 16x2 + 4x + 1
d. 2x2226x + 24
10.5.27. Solve the quadratic equation.
a. x2 + 5x + 650
b. x22x2650
c. x2 + x22050
d. x2 + 4x + 855
10.5.28. Solve each equation using the quadratic equation.
a. 2x2 + 7x2550
b. 3x2 + 2x52
c. x2 + 3x2550
10.5.29. Solve the system of equations using process of elimination.
a.
3x22y523
2x + 3y524

b.
x + 7y530
4x23y55

c.
2x2y523
2x + 3y511

10.5.30. Solve the system of equations using process of substitution.
a.
9x22y520
5x + 3y57

b.
x + 7y522
4x23y525

c.
2x2y51
2x + 3y521

10.5.31. Solve the system of equations using Cramer’s Rule.
a.
3x22y51
2x + 3y55

b.
x + y530
x2y55

c.
2x2y52
2x + 3y518

442
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.6
FUNCTIONS: LINEAR & QUADRATIC
Unlike the equations we solved in terms of a single unknown, a relationship is
between two or more variables; when two variables, we usually denoted them x
and y.
Definition 10.6.1 Relationship
A relationship or relation is a set of ordered pairs (x,y).
The largest set of real numbers the variable x takes on is referred to as the
domain of the function and the largest set of real numbers the variable y takes
on is referred to as the range of the function.
Example 10.6.1 Factoring Quadratics
State the domain and range in the given relationship:
4,21
ð
Þ, 3,22
ð
Þ, 4,23
ð
Þ, 5,23
ð
Þ
f
g:
Solution
The domain is x∈3, 4, 5
f
g and the range is y∈21,22,23
f
g:
A special type of relationship is a function which relates two unknowns.
Definition 10.6.2 Function
A function is a relation between two variables, x and y, such that for each value of the
independent variable, usually selected to be x there is at most one value of the dependent
variable, y. That is, “y is a function of x” when for each value of x in the domain, there is
one value of y in the range.
We express this relation by y5f x
ð Þ.
Rule 10.6.1 Domain Restrictions
In general, there are only three restrictions to the domain:
1.
You cannot divide by zero; that is, given an expression
Top
Bottom, the bottom cannot be
zero, Bottom≠0.
2.
You cannot take the square root of a negative value; that is given an expression
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Inside
p
, then the insider is greater than or equal to zero, Inside≥0.
3.
You cannot take the logarithm of a negative value or zero; that is given an
expression logb(Inside), then the inside is greater than zero, Inside>0.
The simplest form of a function is a linear function.
Definition 10.6.3 Linear Function
A linear function is a first-degree relationship between x and y such that
f x
ð Þ5mx + b;
where m is the marginal change (slope) of the line and b is the baseline or y-intercept
(that is, y5b when x50). The graph of this relationship is a line.
Continued
Alternative notation for the pairing of x and y is
as follows:
f :x→y
Read as “the function is such that the value of
x is mapped to the value of y”
10.6 Functions: Linear & Quadratic
443

Definition 10.6.3 Linear Function—cont’d
Two special forms of a linear equation are the vertical line,
x5a
and the horizontal line
y5b:
Given the equation of the line, it is easiest to simply plot points. As for each
value of x there is at most one y, pick values of x in your domain and evaluate
the corresponding values of y.
Example 10.6.2 Linear Functions
Graph the linear function f x
ð Þ52x + 1.
Solution
First, as there are no restriction to the domain, we can pick various values of x, pref-
erably near zero, and evaluate the associated values of y. Starting with the y-intercept,
when x50,
y5f 0
ð Þ52×05151:
Continuing in this fashion, we can recreate a t-chart with the resulting information:
x
y
0
1
1
3
2
5
Then using these three points as a guide, we can draw the linear relationship between
x and y.
–2
–4
–6
–4
–2
0
f(x)=2x
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
In the previous example, we could have plotted the line with just two points;
however, it is better to graph at least three points to verify the scale of the graph. If your
resulting graph does not look like a line, then your axis might be skewed. But to define a
line, all that is required is a minimum of two points: (x1,y1) and (x2,y2). From these two
pieces of information, we can obtain the marginal change or the slope of a line using the
slope formula.
There are only four possibilities when discussing the slope of a line; as we read from
left to right, the line either increase (moves up), decreases (moves down), does not move
up or down (no movement) or movement from left to right is not possible (as the line is
vertical) in which case the slope is undefined.
444
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Solution—cont’d
–4
–6 –4 –2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m > 0
–4
–6 –4 –2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m < 0
–4
–6 –4 –2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m = 0
–4
–6 –4 –2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m undefined
The idea of slope at first is a general assignment: upward movement will be positive,
downward movement will be negative, no movement (up or down) will be zero
movement, and if the line is vertical and you cannot read or move from left to right,
the movement is undefined. However, the specifics need to address the magnitude of
the slope; there are steep slopes and shallow slopes.
–4
–6
–4
–2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m>1
–4
–6
–4
–2
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
2
4
m>1
We will define steeps slopes as being greater than 1 and shallow slopes as being less
than one. Therefore, one way to express the magnitude of a slope is the ratio of the rise to
the run. That, the change is y over the change in x.
Definition 10.6.4 Slope Formula
The marginal change in a line is a indication of the slope of a line. Given two points on a
line, (x1,y1) and (x2,y2), the slope formula is given by
m5Δy
Δx5 y22y1
x22x1
;
where Δ is read “the change in.”
Once you know a point and the slope of a line, we can then manipulate this
equation (slope formula) and solve for y as a function of x.
First, given the slope m and a point (x1,y1), we have
m5 y2y1
x2x1
:
where (x,y) is an arbitrary point on the line. Note: we do not need to worry
about when x5x1 as we the associated value of y for this value of x and
therefore, given x≠x1, we have
m x2x1
ð
Þ5 y2y1
ð
Þ
or equivalently,
y2y15m x2x1
ð
Þ:
In this form, we need a point and the slope; hence this form is referred to as
the point-slope form of a line.
Simplifying this further, we get
y5mx + mx1 + y1;
where mx1 + y1 is just one big constant, so using b or big, we have
y5mx + b;
10.6 Functions: Linear & Quadratic
445

where m is the slope and b is the y-intercept; hence, this form is referred to as
the slope-intercept form of a line.
Once last form of a line is to manipulate the equation so that both x and y are
on the same side and the coefficient on x is a positive integer. However, this is a
general form and is not written in the form of a function.
Common Forms of a Line
Point-slope form
y2y15m x2x1
ð
Þ
Slope-intercept form
y5mx + b
General form
ax + by5c
Horizontal line
x5a
Vertical line
y5b
Two lines are considered parallel if they have the same slope and perpen-
dicular if the product of the slopes is negative one, or one is the negative recip-
rocal of the other.
Property 10.6.1 Lines
Two lines, y5m1x + b1 and y5m2x + b2 are parallel if
m15m2:
Two lines, y5m1x + b1 and y5m2x + b2 are perpendicular if
m1×m2521
or
m252 1
m1
:
Once we have an understanding of lines, we turn out attention to quadratics.
Definition 10.6.5 Quadratic Function
A quadratic function is a second-degree relationship between x and y such that
f x
ð Þ5ax2 + bx + c;
where a≠0 (otherwise it is linear function) and c is the y-intercept (that is, y5c when
x50). The graph of this relationship is a parabola.
Property 10.6.2 Quadratic Function
Given f x
ð Þ5ax2 + bx + c where a≠0, when a>0 then the parabola is cupping upward
and when a<0, the parabola is cupping downward.
–4
–2
0
x
0
y
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
4
a>0
a<0
–4
–2
0
x
y
2
4
a<0
a>0
446
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Common Forms of a Quadratic
Standard form
y5ax2 + bx + c
Graphic form
y5a x2h
ð
Þ2 + k
where (h,k) is the vertex of the parabola.
EXERCISES
10.6.1. State the domain and range in the given relationship. Determine if the relationship is a function. If not, discuss why.
a. {(1,2),(2,3),(3,1)}
b. {(1,2),(1,5),(1,7)}
c. {(2,2),(3,3),(4,4)}
d. {(2,2),(2,3),(2,3)}
10.6.2. Find the slope of the line that passes through the given two points.
a. (1,2) and (4, 5)
b. 21,1
ð
Þ and (1,4)
c. 21,2
ð
Þ and 21,5
ð
Þ
d. (2,7) and (3,7)
10.6.3. Use the point-slope form of the equation of the line and simplify into slope-intercept form.
a. Passes through (2,1) with a slope of 4.
b. Passes through (4,2) with a slope of 22.
c. Passes through 21,0
ð
Þ with a slope of 3.
d. Passes through (0,5) with a slope of 24.
10.6.4. Find the slope and the y-intercept of the linear function and graph the equation.
a. 2x + y56
b. y522x + 1
c. x + y55
d. 2x58
10.6.5. Determine if the lines are parallel, perpendicular, or neither.
a. y52x + 5 and 2x2y53
b. y52x + 4 and x + 2y53
c. y53x + 5 and x23y53
d. y50:4x22 and 2x25y53
10.6.6. Find the equation of the line parallel to y522x + 5 passing through the point (1,5).
10.6.7. Find the equation of the line perpendicular to y5x + 5 passing through the point (3,5).
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISES
10.1. Determine which set each number belongs to the various sets and complete the following chart:
Real
Rational
Irrational
Integer
Whole
Natural
2
ﬃﬃﬃ
5
p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
π
4
e5
0:112
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
28
p
ﬃﬃﬃ
7
p
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercises
447

10.2. Addition:
a.
h h
3
6
+ 7
b.
h h
1
5
+ 3
c.
h h
4
3
+ 7
d.
h h
5
8
+ 7
e.
h h h
6
5 9
+ 7 4
10.3. Subtract:
a.
h h
3 6
2 7
b.
h h
1 5
2 3
c.
h h
4 3
2 7
d.
h h
5 8
2 7
e.
h h h
6 5 9
2 7 4
10.4. Multiply:
a.
h h
3 6
× 7
b.
h h
1 5
× 3
c.
h h
4 3
× 7
d.
h h
5 8
× 7
e.
h h h
6 5 9
× 7 4
10.5. The number 9,125,045 is divisible by which of the following: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, or 9?
10.6. Simplify
a. 20
b. 32
c. 421
d. 25
ð
Þ3
e.
1
6
 2
10.7. Write the value of the underlined digit in words.
a. 102:62
b. 3:5
c. 30:05
d. 10:62
10.8. Convert the given number to base 10: 1157 (base 9).
10.9. Convert the given number to base 8: 2021 (base 10).
10.10. Convert the given number to base 7: 1122 (base 3).
10.11. Give the GCF for the following sets of numbers: 15, 24, 39.
10.12. Multiply or divide.
a. 31
2×13
4
b. 2
3 ÷ 5
6
c. 8
9× 3
42
d. 21
8 ÷11
3
448
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.13. Complete the chart. Reduce fraction to lowest terms.
10.14. Solve.
a. 5 is what percent of 45?
b. 4 is what percent of 72?
c. What is 12% of 300?
10.15. Identify the pattern and find the next three terms:
a. 1, 5, 9, 13, …
b. 1, 5, 25, 125, …
c. 1, 8, 27, 64, …
10.16. Write the algebraic expression: Three more than five times a number.
10.17. Combine like terms: 2x5y212xy + 4x5y + xy
10.18. Solve these equations.
a. 5x545
b. 13b52117
c. 23
5x518
10.19. Take x to be a real number, solve, and graph the resulting inequality:
a. 2<x + 1≤7
10.20. Solve the system of equations
3x22y523
2x + 3y524

.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
10.1.1. Natural numbers are numbers used for counting and ordering objects.
ℕ5 1,2,3,4, …
f
g
10.1.2. The word zero has had many derivations, but comes from the Arabic word sifr meaning “nothing” or “empty.”
0
10.1.3. Whole numbers are numbers used for counting objects in a given set including the empty set, i.e., zero.
W5 0,1,2,3,4,…
f
10.1.4. The word integer comes from Latin meaning “untouched.” Integers are positive or negative whole numbers or
natural numbers including zero.
ℤ5 …,23,22,21,0,1,2,3,4,…
f
g
10.1.5. Rational numbers are the numbers which can be expressed as the quotient or fraction with integers (with the non-
zero denominator) or as the quotient of an integer and a natural number.
ℚ5
m
n jm∈ℤand n∈ℕ
n
o
Fraction
Decimal
Percent
a.
3
7
b.
1
4
c.
0.35
d.
2.5
e.
19%
Summary of Important Concepts
449

10.1.6. Irrational numbers are the numbers which cannot be expressed as a ratio or rational number. The irrational
numbers include transcendental numbers that cannot be represented as terminating or repeating decimals.
10.1.7. The set of real numbers are those rational and irrational numbers which constitute the continuum from 2∞to ∞.
That is, the union of the sets ℝ5ℚ∪ℚ
10.1.8. An operator is a function representing a mathematical operation. This can range from conjunction and dis-
junction in logic, to intersection and union in sets, to addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and expo-
nentiation in algebra.
10.1.9. Addition is the mathematical operator that represents combining collections or sets of objects together into a larger
collection or set; signified by the plus sign ( + ).
10.1.10. Subtraction is the inverse operation of addition; signified by the minus sign (2).
10.1.11. Multiplication is the mathematical operation of scaling one number by another; signified by the cross symbol or
multiplication sign (×).
10.1.12. Division is the inverse operation of addition; signified by the division sign (÷) or (as the division sign is not readily
available on the keyboard), the backslash (/) or more appropriately, a division line as used in fraction; for example,
1÷251
2.
10.1.13. Exponentiation is the mathematical operation involving two numbers, the base value, b, and the exponent, n. This
heading covers both powers (n is a positive integer) and roots (n is one over a positive integer). Written bn, when n
is a positive integer, we have a power of the base, bn5b×b×⋯×b
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
n times
10.2.1. Positional notation or place-value notation is a method of representing numbers. A form of coding, this is part of
the number system that uses symbols or position for the different orders of magnitude. In the decimal system, we
have the “ones place,” “tens place,” “hundreds place,” etc. (all powers of base 10).
10.2.2. A number is said to be in scientific notation if there is one none zero number before the decimal, times a power of
the base 10.
10.2.3. A fraction is a part of a whole or ratio of two numbers, the numerator (number of parts) divided by the denom-
inator (how many parts in a whole). A proper fraction is one such that the numerator is less than the denominator.
An improper fraction is one such that the n numerator is greater than or equal to the denominator. Proper fractions
added to whole numbers are called mixed numbers or mixed fractions.
10.2.4. The greatest common factor (GCF) or greatest common divisor (GCD) is the largest possible positive integer
that divides evenly into the numerator and the denominator.
10.2.5. A prime number
is a natural number greater than 1 that has 1 as its only positive divisor.
{2,3,5,7,11,13,17,23,…}.
The
opposite
of
a
prime
number
is
a
composite
number:
452×2,652×3,852×2×2,…
f
g. Hence, prime factorization is the decomposition of a composite number into
smaller primes.
10.2.6. A common denominator (CD) is a common multiple of the denominator; the least common denominator is the
least common multiple (LCM) between the given numbers.
10.2.7. A ratio is a comparison of two numbers (preferably whole numbers) by division. Ratios can be expressed in three
distinct ways: a
b or a to b or a:b, where a and b are in reduced form. A proportion is a statement that two ratios
are equal.
10.2.8. Percent means “hundredth” and is denoted by the percent sign %. To change a number written in decimal form
into a percentage, move the decimal point two places to the right and include the percent sign to the right of the new
number. To change a number written in percentage form into a decimal, move the decimal point tow places to the
left and remove the percent sign.
10.3.1. Inductive reasoning or induction is a kind of reasoning in which a small set of observations is used to infer a larger
theory.
10.3.2. A sequence is an order list of objects, events or outcomes, a1,a2,….an. In the context of this chapter, a sequence
will refer to an arrangement of numbers.
10.3.3. A term is an individual outcome in a sequence enumerated as a function of the position in the sequence an5P n
ð Þ:
10.3.4. An arithmetic sequence is a sequence of numbers such that there is a common difference between
consecutive terms. Recursive notation: an5an21 + d Non-recursive notation: an5a1 + d n21
ð
Þ
450
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.3.5. A geometric sequence is a sequence of numbers such that there is a common ratio between consecutive terms.
Recursive notation: an5an21×r Non-recursive notation: an5a1×rn21
10.3.6. A series is the sum of the terms in a sequence, s15a1,s25a1 + a2,…,sn5a1 + a2 + ⋯+ an: In general, we have
sn5
Xn
i51ai: In constructing a series by adding on term at a time, a new sequence of partial sums is generated:
s1,s2,s3,…,sn.
10.4.1. An algebraic expression is a mathematical statement which contains numbers, variables and arithmetic operators.
10.4.2. An algebraic term is an expression where numbers and unknowns (letters) are combined in multiplication or
division.
10.4.3. The coefficient in an expression is the numerical value and is written before any letters in the expression.
10.4.4. In an expression, like terms are terms that have all the same unknowns with the same exponents with different
coefficients.
10.4.5. A formula is an expression constructed using symbols to represent numerical values that related expressions in
equality. Formulas are mathematical sentences which related underlying mathematical expressions.
10.4.6. Direct variation between two variables is such that their values always maintain a constant ratio: y
x5k: This rela-
tionship can also be written in terms of y varying directly as a multiple of x: y5kx: Give x and y vary directly, we
might state that y is directly proportional to x. In this case, k is referred to as the constant of proportionality.
10.4.7. Indirect variation between two variables is such that their values always maintain a constant product: xy5k. This
relationship can also be written in terms of y varying inversely as a multiple of x: y5k
x. Give x and y vary indirectly,
we might state that y is inversely proportional to x. In this case, k is referred to as the constant of proportionality.
10.5.1. An equation is a mathematical sentence that asserts the equality of two expressions.
10.5.2. A literal equation is an equation that contains letters such a,b,c in place of constants and letters such as x,y,z for the
unknowns (variables).
10.5.3. An inequality is a mathematical sentence that asserts the two expressions are related, but not necessarily equal.
These mathematical sentences are less than, less than or equal to, greater than an greater than or equal to. The strict
inequalities are not reflective or symmetric; however, they are transitive; that is,
Not Reflective
a≤a, but NOT a<a.
Not Symmetric
If a<b, then NOT b>a.
Transitive
If a<b and b<c, then a<c.
10.5.4. An unbounded interval is an interval which does not include a finite end point; there are several possible forms of
an unbounded interval: 2∞, + ∞
ð
Þ, 2∞,b
ð
Þ, 2∞,b, a, + ∞
ð
Þ and a, + ∞
½
Þ:
10.5.5. A bounded interval is an interval which does have finite end points; there are several possible forms of an bounded
interval: (a,b), a,b
ð
, a,b
½
Þ, and [a,b].
10.5.6. The absolute value of a number x, denoted by jxj, is the numerical value (magnitude of the value) without the sign
(direction on the real number line). It is the distance between the value on the number line and zero.
xj j5
x
x≥0
2x x<0

10.5.7. A quadratic equation is a second-degree expression with standard form of ax2 + bx + c50, where a, b and c are real
numbers and a≠0.
10.6.1. A relationship or relation is a set of ordered pairs (x,y). The largest set of real numbers the variable x takes on is
referred to as the domain of the function and the largest set of real numbers the variable y takes on is referred to as
the range of function.
10.6.2. A function is a relation between two variables, x and y, such that for each value of the independent variable, usually
selected to be x there is at most one value of the dependent variable, y. That is, “y is a function of x” when for each
value of x in the domain, there is one value of y in the range. We express this relation by y5f x
ð Þ.
Summary of Important Concepts
451

10.6.3. A linear function is a first-degree relationship between x and y such that
f x
ð Þ5mx + b;
where m is the marginal change (slope) of the line and b is the baseline or y-intercept (that is, y ¼ b when
x ¼ 0). The graph of this relationship is a line.
Two special forms of a linear equation are the vertical line,
x5a
and the horizontal line
y5b:
10.6.4. The marginal change in a line is a indication of the slope of a line. Given two points on a line, (x1,y1) and (x2,y2),
the slope formula is given by
m5Δy
Δx5 y22y1
x22x1
;
where Δ is read “the change in.”
10.6.5. A quadratic function is a second-degree relationship between x and y such that
f x
ð Þ5ax2 + bx + c;
where a≠0 (otherwise it is linear function) and c is the y-intercept (that is, y5c when x50). The graph of this
relationship is a parabola.
Properties
10.1.1. A set has closure if a and b are real numbers, then a + b and a×b are also real numbers. If we let the symbol ∈stand
for “is an element of” then this idea can be abbreviated further mathematically as follows: if a,b∈ℝ, then a + b∈ℝ
and a×b∈ℝ:
10.1.2. In the additive expression: a + b
ð
Þ + c, the number a is associating with the number b, but in the expression:
a + b + c
ð
Þ, the number b as been re-associated with the number c. And these associations are equivalent; similarly
with multiplication, the expression a×b
ð
Þ×c is equivalent to a× b×c
ð
Þ; the associative properties are mathemat-
ically: a + b
ð
Þ + c5a + b + c
ð
Þ and a×b
ð
Þ×c5a× b×c
ð
Þ:
10.1.3. In the additive expression: a + b, the number a is in the first position with the number b in the second position, but in
the expression: b + a, the number a as been commuted with the number b. And these expressions are equivalent;
similarly with multiplication a×b is equivalent to b×a; the commutative properties are written mathematically:
a + b5b + a and a×b5b×a:
10.1.4. In the additive expression: a + 0, when nothing is added to the number a, the number is not changed; it is the same
number a and therefore 0 is the additive identity; similarly with multiplication, a×1 is just one number a, which is
equivalent to a and therefore 1 is the multiplicative identity; the identity properties are written mathematically:
a + 050 + a5a and a×151×a5a:
10.1.5. In the additive expression: a + 2a
ð
Þ, 2a
ð
Þ is the opposite (additive inverse) of a, which mean if you add both a and
2a
ð
Þ, you have in essence have added nothing. Equivalently since subtraction is the opposite of addition, in the
expression a2a if it is understood that you added a and then subtracted a, you have in essence have added nothing.
Hence, both of these expressions are equivalent to adding 0. Similarly with multiplication, in the expression a×1
a, 1
a
is the reciprocal (multiplicative inverse) of a, which means multiplying by both is in essence just identifying a
given expression. Equivalently since using power notation a5a1 and division is the opposite of multiplication, the
reciprocal can be denoted by 1
a5a21; that is in the expression a×a21, if it is understood that you multiplied and
divided by a, you have in essence multiplied by 1. Therefore, the inverse properties are written mathematically:
a + 2a
ð
Þ5a2a50 and a×1
a5a×a2151:
452
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

10.1.6. In the expression a× b + c
ð
Þ the parentheses indicate that the multiplication by the number a is affecting both the
number b in addition to number c; that is, this expression is equivalent to a×b in addition to a×c. The number a
needs to be distributed to both the number b in addition to the number c. Similarly, this relation of distribution can
also be seen between multiplication and powers: since multiplication leads to powers, powers can be distributed
equally over multiplication. In the expression a×b
ð
Þn the parentheses indicate that the power on n is affecting both
the number a and the number b. We will learn in counting that “and” means “multiply” and therefore this
expression is equivalent to an and bn. The power b needs to be distributed to both the number a and the number
b. That is, the distributive properties are written mathematically: a× b + c
ð
Þ5a×b + a×c and a×b
ð
Þn5an×bn:
10.1.7. The exponential properties reduce multiplication between like bases to addition in the exponent: ax×ay5ax + y;
reduces division between like base to subtraction: ax
ay 5ax2y; reduces powers of a base to a power to multiplication:
ax
ð
Þy5ax×y: Moreover, a15a and a051:
10.1.8. The order of operation is the order in which the operations are performed are in order of complexity from most
complex operations down to addition and subtraction: parenthesis, exponents, multiplication, division,
addition, and subtraction.
10.5.8. These mathematical sentences are reflective, symmetric and transitive; that is,
Reflective
a5a
Symmetric
If a5b, then b5a.
Transitive
If a5b and b5c, then a5c.
10.6.1. Two lines, y5m1x + b1 and y5m2x + b2 are parallel if m15m2. Two lines, y5m1x + b1 and y5m2x + b2 are per-
pendicular if m1×m2521 or m252 1
m1
.
10.6.2. Given f x
ð Þ5ax2 + bx + c where a≠0, when a>0 then the parabola is cupping upward and when a<0, the parabola
is cupping downward.
Rules
10.1.1. When adding real numbers the sign effect on positive and negative values is as follows: Like signs: Add and keep
like sign. Opposite signs: Subtract and keep sign of larger absolute value
10.1.2. When multiplying positive and negatives real numbers the sign effect on positive and negative values is as follows:
Interpreting to the right as forward and to the left as negative, multiplying or dividing by a negative is like turning
round 180°.
21
ð
Þ× + 1
ð
Þ521
Continuing with this geometric description, multiplying by a negative twice is that same as doing a 360 turn,
facing the same (positive direction) as you started.
21
ð
Þ× 21
ð
Þ5 + 1
Hence, an even number of negatives multiply to be positive and an odd number of negatives multiply to be
negative.
10.1.3. Subtraction is the addition of the negative; written mathematically:
a2b5a + 2b
ð
Þ
10.1.4. Division is the multiplication of the reciprocal; written mathematically:
a÷b5a×1
b:
10.2.1. Operators in fractions: When adding fractions, the fractions must have a common denominator.
a
b + c
d5ad
bd + bc
bd5ad + bc
bd
However, when multiply we multiply top to top and bottom to bottom; that is,
a
b×c
d5ac
bd:
Summary of Important Concepts
453

When divided by a fraction, we multiply by the reciprocal,
a
b ÷ c
d5a
b×d
c5ad
bc:
10.2.2. Operators in decimals: When adding or subtracting decimals, first line up the decimal point underneath each
other; add or subtract decimals in the same way as with whole numbers; then bring down the decimal point straight
down into the answer. When multiplication, perform the operation without the consideration of the decimal, as if
the numbers are whole and then count over the total number of decimals in each number combined in the final
result. When dividing decimals, move the decimal place to the left the same number of places in the numerator
as the dominator; or use scientific notation.
10.3.1. Given an arithmetic sequence, an5a1 + d n21
ð
Þ, the series is the average of the first and last term times the
number of terms:
sn5a1 + an
2
×n;
or equivalently, by substitution,
sn5n 2a1 + n21
ð
Þ
½

2
:
10.5.1. Given an equation
a5b
the following elementary operations yield equivalent expressions:
a + c5b + c,
a2c5b2c,
a×c5b×c,
a÷c5b÷c,c≠0
Given an equation
a<b
the following elementary operations yield equivalent expressions: a + c<b + c and a2c>b2c;
a×c>b×c,c>0
a×c<b×c,c<0
a÷c>b÷c,c>0
a÷c<b÷c,c<0
10.5.2. In general, if a is any positive value, then we have the following equivalences with respect to absolute values:
xj j5a
x52a,x5a
xj j<a
2a<x<a
xj j≤a
2a≤x≤a
xj j>a
x<2a or x>a
xj j≥a
x<2a or x>a
10.5.3. In general, the solutions to a quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c50; where a, b and c are real numbers and a≠0 can
be obtained from the quadratic formula
x52b∓
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
b224ac
p
2a
:
10.5.4. Given a system of two equations and two unknowns in the following form:
ax + by5c
dx + ey5f

454
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Let D5 a b
d e
	

(the coefficients on x and y), Dx5 c b
f e
	

(the matrix D with the balancing constants in place of
the coefficients on x) and Dy5 a c
d f
	

(the matrix D with the balancing constants in place of the coefficients on y);
then if D
j j≠0; by Cramer’s Rule
x5 Dx
j
j
D
j j ;
and
y5 Dy


D
j j :
10.5.5. In optimization, the maximum or minimum of the objective function over the feasible set, assuming it exists, will be
attained at least one of the vertices of the feasible set.
10.6.1. In general, there are only three restrictions to the domain:
1. You cannot divide by zero; that is, given an expression
Top
Bottom, the bottom cannot be zero, Bottom≠0.
2. You cannot take the square root of a negative value; that is given an expression
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Inside
p
, then the insider is
greater than or equal to zero, Inside≥0.
3. You cannot take the logarithm of a negative value or zero; that is given an expression logb(Inside), then the
insider is greater than zero, Inside>0.
Common: Algebraic Expressions
+
Plus, addition, sum, added to, increased by, more than
2
Minus, subtraction, difference, less, decreased by, less than, subtracted from
×
Product, multiplication, times, of
÷
Quotient, division, divided by, ratio of, per
□2
Squared, the power of two indicated by position of the two
0
Zero, nothing, none
1
One
2
Two
3
Three
4
Four
5
Five
6
Six
7
Seven
8
Eight
9
Nine
Common: Forms of a Line
Point-slope form
y2y15m x2x1
ð
Þ
Slope-intercept form
y5mx + b
General form
ax + by5c
Horizontal line
x5a
Vertical line
y5b
Common: Forms of a Quadratic
Standard form
y5ax2 + bx + c
Graphic form
y5a x2h
ð
Þ2 + k
where (h,k) is the vertex of the parabola.
Summary of Important Concepts
455

REVIEW TEST
1. A club sells 987 raffle tickets at $4 each. The printing cost of the tickets cost $27 and the prize cost $200. What is the
profit from the raffle?
2. Sort the fractions from smallest to largest: 2
3, 5
8, 3
5, 3
4:5
6:
3. A butcher has 27 pounds 12 ounces of meat and sells 18 pounds 15 ounces. How much meat remains?
4. Subtract: 31
2212
55
5. Divide: 61
3 ÷21
65
6. Put the numbers in ascending order: 0.0505, 0.0408, 0.0410, 0.0590, 0.0480.
7. Give a fraction between 3
7 and 6
11.
8. Determine the correct inequality:
a. 5
9
26
30
b. 5
9
7
8
c. 1
7
5
7
d. 2
3
4
5
9. Simplify: 6× 328
ð
Þ÷15 + 4
10. What is 40% of 75?
11. If 45 is 25% of a number n, find n.
12. A $125 suit is on sale for 20% off. What is the sales price?
13. If there are 45 students in a class and 5 fail, what percent passed?
14. The sales tax is given to be 7%. If a cash register has $266.43 in the drawer including money paid for merchandize plus
the tax, how much was taken in as taxes?
15. Evaluate: 5 + 9×4÷622
16. Evaluate: 5×22245÷32
17. Evaluate: 2152 220
ð
Þ + 325
REFERENCES
Miller, D., 1942b. Popular Mathematics: The Understanding and Enjoyment of Mathematics. WM. H. Wise & CO., Inc, New York.
Hull, 1894. Elementary Arithmetic. E. H. Butler & Co.
456
Chapter 10
Arithmetic and Algebra

Chapter 11
Basic Finance
11.1 Introduction to Basic Financing
458
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
464
11.3 Comparison Shopping
481
Budgeting Scheme I: Cash versus Credit
481
Budgeting Scheme II: Leasing versus Purchasing
485
Budgeting Scheme III: Renting versus Owning
487
11.4 Comparison Using Effective Rates
490
11.5 Personal Finance
492
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercises
498
Summary of Important Concepts
499
Review Test
502
Reference
502
“It takes 20 years to build a reputation and five minutes to ruin it. If you think about that, you’ll do
things differently.”
WARREN BUFFETT
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
457

Warren Edward Buffett was born in Omaha, Nebraska on August 30, 1930. In 2010, his estimated worth was $45 billion.
Called the Oracle of Omaha, Warren Buffett strongly adheres to the value investing philosophy and frugality despite his
growing wealth. As the Chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Investor, Buffet has a yearly salary of $100,000.
However, he has worked as stock broker, purchased Sinclair Texaco gas stations as a side investment, worked with Benjamin
Graham in his partnership—Graham was on the board of directors for GEICO, and by 1957 had three partnerships in
operations. His partnerships continued to grow and by 1962, Buffett was a millionaire, continuing to live in the house
he purchased in 1957 and not spending his money frivolously, but rather investing in stocks including Coca Cola. By
the 1990s, Buffett was a billionaire. In 1999, in a survey by the Carson Group, he was named the top money manager
of the twentieth century. In 2007, he was listed among Time’s 100 Most Influential People and in 2011, President Barack
Obama award him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
11.1
INTRODUCTION TO BASIC FINANCING
Finance is a branch of economics concerned with resource allocation. This
includes resource management, acquisition, and investment. This science of
management of money and other assets started with trade.
Definition 11.1.1 Trade
Trade is the transfer of ownership of goods and services from one individual or party to
another individual or party, also referred to as commerce, financial transaction, or
barter. A network that allows trade is called a market, such as the Stock Market,
Retail Market, Super Market, etc.
There are books and training videos to better teach an individual how to
“trade.” Based on futures and options, one invests in the desired company
through the stock market and hopes that they are able to find stock worth
keeping as the company is growing and share prices are increasing, or to make
a quick turn over by selling the stock at a higher price than it was purchased for.
However, you must know what you are looking for and be cautious with
software packages which monitor the trends and try to predict when to buy
and sell as these applications are often based on incorrect statistics. A wise
man once advised; only purchase stock for a product you use regularly.
With the age of computers, such software packages and online banking are
common place; this has made some question the need for currency. Currency
is standardized money to facilitate a wider exchange of goods and services.
This first stage of currency was metals that were used to represent stored value
with symbols to represent commodities. Such currencies formed the basis of
trade in the Fertile Crescent for over 1500 years.
Definition 11.1.2 Money
Money is a medium of exchange, any object or note that is widely accepted as payment
for goods or services rendered, for the repayment of debt. Money is subject to the given
country or socio-economic content.
Commerce is an interchange of good or
commodities such as eggs and milk.
Commodity is an article of trade, a physical
product as opposed to a service.
A currency is a type of money and medium
of exchange made from paper, cotton, and metal.
458
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Coins and Banknotes—the two most common form of tangible currency
Definition 11.1.3 Debt
Debt is that which is owed; in economics, this refers to assets owed. Debt is created
when a lender agrees to lend a specific amount or asset to the borrower or debtor.
If one gets overwhelmed with debt, then one might consider bankruptcy.
Originally, bankruptcy was to the creditors benefit, allowing them to seize
all the assets of an individual or trader who could not pay his debts. In
addition to losing all of their property, the individual also when to debtor’s
prison. It was the burden of the family to pay the debt to obtain the debtors
release.
Bankruptcy in the United States is permitted by the United States Con-
stitution (Article 1, Section 8, and Clause 4) which authorizes Congress to
enact “uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United
States.” Title 11 of the United States Code is the primary source of Bankruptcy
law statutes in the United States Code which is subdivided into nine remaining
chapters (as many chapters have been repealed).
l
Chapter 1—General Provisions
l
Chapter 3—Case Administration
l
Chapter 5—Creditors, The Debtor, and The Estate
l
Chapter 7—Liquidation
l
Chapter 9—Adjustment of Debts of a Municipality
l
Chapter 11—Reorganization
l
Chapter 12—Adjustment of Debts of a Family Farmer or Fisherman With
Regular Annual Income
l
Chapter 13—Adjustment of Debts of an Individual With Regular Income
l
Chapter 15—Ancillary and Other Cross-Border Cases
The most typical declaration of bankruptcy is
Chapter 7 for individuals who are unable to pay
their existing unsecured debt; Chapter 11
for companies or individuals over the debt
limitations of Chapter 13 which for secured
debts.
11.1 Introduction to Basic Financing
459

Definition 11.1.4 Bankruptcy
Bankruptcy is a legally declared inability or impairment of ability of an individual or
organization to pay its creditors or lenders. Bankruptcy is usually initiated voluntarily
by the insolvent (bust) individual or organization.
Title 11 of the United States Code—Bankruptcy
2007
filings
2008
filings
2009 filings
Chapter 7—Liquidation
413,294
560,015
819,362
Chapter 11—Business
reorganization
5199
6971
11,785
Chapter 12—Family farmers
& fishermen
372
343
367
Chapter 13—Individual
reorganization
276,649
334,551
370,875
Bankruptcy Facts
▪
For a period of time after the filing, you will normally be deprived of access
to consumer loans and credit cards.
▪
If you own a business that files for bankruptcy, your own credit rating will
be damaged.
Bankruptcy Myths
▪
Filing for bankruptcy will cause you to lose your job—this is not true.
▪
Filing for bankruptcy will cause you to lose your Social Security or other
government benefits—not true; in fact, the law provides that the gov-
ernment cannot discriminate against you because you have filed for
bankruptcy.
▪
You will lose all your property—not true. Although you may lose some of
your property, you will not lose all of it. Many people lose little to nothing
because of the bankruptcy exemptions such as your house (for example, in
Florida there is no limit; however, in New Your, the limit is between $50,000
and $150,000), auto (approximately $3450 depending on if the vehicle is a
tool a trade), household goods and furnishings, retirement assets, etc.
▪
Filing for bankruptcy will completely ruin your credit—this is not
completely true, although it will affect your credit for at least 7 years
and sometimes up to 10 years.
Therefore, to avoid such financial difficulties as bankruptcy, in this chapter on
finance we are interested in money—how interest affects our balance and how
There were 936,795 bankruptcy filings in 2014.
460
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

we can earn more interest. In general, money is always abbreviated using
capital letters and other information such as interest rate is represented using
lower case letters.
Below is a list of several basic abbreviations.
Definition 11.1.5 Principal (P)
The principal is the balance of the initial loan.
P
That is, the borrower agrees to pay back this principal amount or proceeds and any
outlined interest on this principal amount depending on the type of interested charged
(simple, compound, or continuous).
The principal amount of a loan is a fixed amount. We assume no additional
monies are borrowed and that a fixed payment will be needed to pay off the
debt in periodic (number of compounds per year) payments made over a spe-
cific amount of time (term of loan) with interest computed at a fixed rate.
When payments are larger than the required amount, some companies will
apply the extra monies to the principal, though many companies require you
specify this on the payment slip.
Definition 11.1.6 Interest Rate (r)
The interest rate is the percent of the initial proceeds to be charged above the principal
amount borrowed.
r
Nominal rate (or interest rate for one year)
The idea of simple interest has long been replaced with compound interest;
that is, interest is charged every pay period which means you pay interest on
previously charged interest, or in terms of savings, earn interest on interest pre-
viously earned.
Definition 11.1.7 Periods per Year (n)
The number of periods per year is the number of times interest is applied to the
remaining principle.
n
Number of times compounded per year (or number of periods per year)
Now that we know the interest rate and number of periods within each year,
the questions becomes, what is the term of the loan?
Definition 11.1.8 Term of Loan (t)
The term of a loan is the number of years outlined in the loan agreement over which the
borrower has to pay off the loan (the principal amount and accrued interest).
t
The amount of time (in years)
Summary of Notation:
P
Principle
r
Interest Rate
n
Number of Periods
t
Term of Payments
i
Periodic Interest Rate
A
Future Amount
ie
Effective Interest Rate
R
Payment
11.1 Introduction to Basic Financing
461

The first question one might be interested in is how many total payments
must be made, or how many payments will it take to save a given amount.
Definition 11.1.9 Periods (m)
Number of periods is given by m5nt; that is, the number of periods per year times the
number of years.
m
The number of periods that interest is applied; that is, the total number of payments to
be made.
When interest is compounded periodically over m payments, we use a
periodic interest rate to determine future amount.
Definition 11.1.10 Periodic Interest (i)
The periodic interest rate is given by i5 r
n; that is, the interest rate per period.
i
Interest rate per period (or period interest rate).
The future amount is the amount of interest that must be paid upon interest
and the interest on top of that interest, etc. over the term of the loan.
Definition 11.1.11 Future Amount (A)
The future amount to be paid off on a loan or a future amount desired in savings.
A
Amount after time t (or future value or future amount)
Effect rates can be evaluated using the following formulas:
Rule 11.1.1 Future Amounts
The following formulas can be used to calculating future amounts under the given
conditions.
A5P 1 + rt
ð
Þ
Simple Interest
A5P 1 + i
ð
Þnt
Compound Interest (compounded periodically)
A5Pert
Compound Interest (compounded continuously)
As interest is accrued periodically, that is, daily, monthly, quarterly, etc., to
compare these various rates, we convert them to an “effective” rate, which is
the rate of yearly interest equivalent to the periodic rate; the “effective rate” is
the equivalent annual rates for the given periodic rate.
Definition 11.1.12 Effective Rate (ie)
Effective rate (annual yield) is the interest amount earned for one year per dollar
amount. Effective interest rates depend on the number of compounds per year and must
be formulated for each different type of interest charge. In general it will be denoted ie.
Given a principle investment of $1, over a period
of five years, see how much money you can earn:
Simple
Simple: $ 2800
Periodic: $ 6036
Continuous: $ 6050
t = 5  years
n = 12
P = $1000
r = 3%
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Periodic
Continuous
462
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Effect rates can be evaluated using the following formulas.
Rule 11.1.2 Effective Rates
Effective rates will depend on how the interest is compounded (if compounded).
ie 5i
Simple Interest
ie 5 1 + r
n

n 21
Compounded Periodically
ie 5er 21
Compounded Continuously
Once all the details are specified, we can compute the necessary payment
depending on the type of loan or savings plan we have.
Definition 11.1.13 Payments (R)
The periodic payment to be made depends on the type of interest (simple or compound),
the term of the loan, and the number of periods per year and if this is a loan to be paid off
or a sinking fund where monies accrue. (This cannot be abbreviated P as this notation
has already been defined as principal, and R resembles P for Payment.)
R
Payment per month
Understanding the minimum required payment amount is extremely
important when working to save up money and when paying off a given
amount of money.
Rule 11.1.3 Payments
Payments will depend on how the principal is earning interest or being charged interest:
(see Section 11.2).
R5
Ai
1 + i
ð
Þnt 21
Sinking Fund when interest is earned
R5
Pi
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt
Amortization when interest is paid
R5P 1 +
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt


Payments need to maintain a credit card
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
11.1.1. Discuss the idea of trade both with and without the use of currency (money).
11.1.2. Is money universal? Discuss.
11.1.3. Is debt a good or bad thing? Explain. How might one avoid debt?
11.1.4. What is the primary source of bankruptcy law statutes in the United States Code? How many subdivisions?
11.1.5. Give the symbolic (shorthand) notation used to represent each of the following financial terms: Principal, Interest
Rate (Nominal Rate), Number of Periods per Year, Term of Loan, Periods, Periodic Interest, Future
Amount, Effective Rates, and Payment.
11.1.6. What type of funds has payments made toward a future amount where interest is earned.
The effective rate depends on the number of
periods per year.
Simple
25%
28.07%
28.4%
t =5
n=12
P=$1000
r=25%
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Periodic
Continuous
Sinking Fund
Future Amount:$100, Principle: $100, Monthy Charges: $100
n=12
r=25%
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Amortization
Credit
Sinking Fund: 
 $3.25  Investment: $78
Amortization: $5.34  Total Invested: $128.16
Principal: $100  Interest Paid: $28.16
Credit:    $105.34  Total Invested: $2528.16
Expenditure: $2400   Interest Paid: $128.16
Interested Earned: $22  Future Amount: $100
Exercises
463

11.1.7. What do you call paying off a debt with accruing interest?
11.1.8. Match the following term to its appropriate shorthanded mathematical notation:
a.
P
1)
Payment
b.
r
2)
Principal
c.
n
3)
Future amount
d.
t
4)
Total number of payments
e.
m
5)
Number of payments per year
f.
i
6)
Effective interest rate
g.
A
7)
Nominal interest rate
h.
ie
8)
Time in years
i.
R
9)
Periodic interest rate
11.1.9. Relate in a mathematical equation the periodic interest rate to the nominal interest rate and the number of
payments per year.
11.1.10. Relate in a mathematical equation the total number of payments to the time in years and the number of pay-
ments per year.
11.2
SAVINGS, SINKING FUNDS, AND
AMORTIZATION
In this section, we will cover sinking funds (where interested is earned) and
amortization (where interest is paid). However, we first discuss the concept
of savings.
Definition 11.2.1 Savings
Savings is income not spent but rather put into a bank (deposit account) or pension fund.
Savings can also be seen when the cost of commonly purchased items is reduced or
moderated. Savings, as opposed to investments, are considered low-risk.
In general, there are three types of personal savings: emergency reserve
fund, accumulation fund, and long-term investments.
Emergency Reserve Funds
▪
Banks—most convenient, but usually pay the least in interest.
▪
Credit Unions—a substitute for a bank, credit unions usually offer better
returns, that is, more in interest.
▪
Money Market Mutual Funds—usually pay 1-2% interest, higher than
most banks and credit unions.
Accumulation Funds
▪
Certificates of Deposit (CDs)—varying among states and nationally, CDs
offer reasonable rates depending on the term. A one or two year CD would
be comparable to a money market account, whereas a five year CD might
offer up to 2.5%.
▪
Ultra short-term Bond Funds—these are mutual funds that offer a six-
month term investment paying a reasonable rate but with higher risk
than CDs.
▪
Short-term Bond Fund—offers a two to three year term with slightly
better returns.
▪
Mortgage-backed Bond Fund—at least a four-year term offering
attractive rates paying monthly dividends.
464
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Long-Range Investments
▪
Tier-one—serve income investments such as Government Securities:
treasury bills, treasury notes, treasury bonds, zero coupon government bonds,
and U.S. Savings bonds. Such U.S. Government Securities are guaranteed by
the U.S. Government and exempt from state and local income taxes.
▪
Tier-two—higher risk investments with higher rates of return.
▪
Tier-three—growth
investments
such
as
undeveloped
properties,
developed properties, or mutual funds.
▪
Tier-four—speculative investments such as stocks, aggressive growth
mutual funds, or precious metal options.
▪
Tier-five—high risk investments, such as gold and silver, oil and gas, com-
modities, collectibles, precious gems, and limited partnerships.
Most Americans find it hard to build up savings; however, with discipline in
spending and in maintaining a budget, having savings is the best way to prevent
being fraught by debt.
Definition 11.2.2 Budgeting
Budgeting is to plan in advance of the expenditure of resources such as time and money.
In personal finances, this is the total sum of monies allocated for a particular purpose or
period of time.
Step 1.
First gather the relevant information: principal amount, rate (annual rate),
term, and periods per years, if applicable.
Step 2.
Determine the appropriate formula needed to compute the future amount.
Step 3.
Perform the necessary calculation.
Once we understand the idea behind saving and budgeting, we need to
discuss taxations and discounts.
Definition 11.2.3 Tax (Markup)
Tax (markup) or taxation is a one-time adjustment to a principal, P, amount based on a
specified rate, r.
Rule 11.2.1 Tax (Markup)
The tax or markup is a percentage (rate) of the total principal:
T5r  P5P  r;
and the future amount (after taxations) is
A5P 1 + r
ð
Þ5P + P  r5P + T:
Example 11.2.1 State Sales Tax
The sales tax in the State of Florida is 6%. Daniel purchases a pair of rollerblades for
$69.99. How much will he pay including tax?
Create a Budget:
Rent or Mortgage
$______
Electricity
$______
Food
$______
Clothing
$______
Phone
$______
Car Payment
$______
Insurance
$______
Credit Card Debt
$______
Entertainment
$______
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
465

Solution
The taxed amount is A5$69:99 1 + 0:06
ð
Þª$74:19. Including tax, Daniel will pay
$74.19 for these rollerblades.
Whereas taxation is a markup in the principal amount, the principal amount can also
be discounted. Discounts are seen from sales items in department stores discounted to
sell to governmental discounts when issuing treasury bills.
Definition 11.2.4 Discount (Markdown)
Discounts (depreciation) or markdowns is a one-time percentage decrease to a prin-
cipal, P, amount based on a specified rate, r, to a principal, P, amount based on a spec-
ified annual rate, r.
Rule 11.2.2 Discount (Markdown)
The depreciation or depreciated amount is
D5r  P5P  r;
and the future amount (after the discount) is
A5P 12r
ð
Þ5P2P  r5P2D:
Example 11.2.2 Sales Discount
Kaitlin is shopping for a new dress. She finds one marked $49.30 and the sign states
10% off all items. How much is the discount and what is the new price of the garment?
What is the cost including 7% sales tax.
Solution
The discounted amount is A5$49:30 120:10
ð
Þª$44:37, a discount of $4.93. Including
tax, Kaitlin will pay A5$44:37 1 + 0:07
ð
Þª$47:48.
Example 11.2.3 Depreciation of Value
Kendra purchased a new car worth $12,000. Given new cars on average lose 30% of
their value the moment they are driven off the lot and an additional 10% each year there-
after, what is the depressed value of a car with an initial cost of $12,000 at the end of the
fourth year?
Solution
After purchasing, the cars value losses 30% of its value, and is now worth [(1–0.3)
$12,000] $8400. Then this amount depreciates or is discounted not just once, but four
times over the next four years; that is,
A5$8400× 120:1
ð
Þ× 120:1
ð
Þ× 120:1
ð
Þ× 120:1
ð
Þ
5$8400 120:1
ð
Þ4
5$5511:24:
:
That is, after four years of use, a car that Kendra paid a total of $12,000 for is now
worth $5511.24; the cost of (or money spent on) the vehicle is ($12,000–$5511.24)
$6488.76. Hence, the average yearly cost is $1622.19.
466
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
The idea of taxations (paying an additional percent) can be extended to earning a
given percent over a specified period of time. An accumulation fund is said to earn
simple interest.
Definition 11.2.5 Simple Interest
Simple interest is interest computed once on the full amount for a given amount of
time, I5Prt.
To evaluate the simple interest charged, the future amount or simple
effective rate, use the following formulas:
Rule 11.2.3 Simple Interest
To compute the future amount in simple interest, first find the interest charge:
I5Prt
Therefore, the future value of a given amount earning simple interest for a given
amount of time is given by
A5P 1 + rt
ð
Þ5P + I:
The simple effective rate is the actual interest rate. We write
ie 5r:
Example 11.2.4 Simple Interest
Chris invests $10,000 in principal and agreed to take 5% simple interest on this amount
in two years. How much money will be earned in interest? What is the total amount that
Chris will get at the end of the term?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$10,000, r50:05, t52. The simple interest
charged over these two years is given by
I5$10,000×0:05×25$1000:
That is, the interest on this principal amount is $1000. The total future amount is
A5P + I5$10,000 + $10005$11,000;
that is, $11,000 is the future value for the principle of $10,000 earning simple interest at
5% annually for two years.
Definition 11.2.6 Certificate of Deposit
A Certificate of Deposit (CD) is a time deposit which bears a maturity date and a spec-
ified fixed interest rate. Generally they range from one to five years; formulated the
same as with a tax or markup. The future amount is the principal invested plus the
simple interest earned:
A5P 1 + r
ð
Þ5P + P  r5P + I
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
467

Example 11.2.5 Investing in a CD
You purchase a $10,000 CD with an interest rate of 5% compounded annually for the
term of one year. If you purchase this CD on January 1, 2012; when will it mature and
how much will the CD be worth? How much is earned in interest?
Solution
This CD will mature after a single year on January 1, 2013, and will be worth
A510,000 1 + 0:05
ð
Þ510,500;
with $500 earned in interest.
These calculations are rather simple; however, in modern society, rarely do credit
card companies or banks use the simple interest method or a rate of interest compounded
once. Most charge interest on unpaid interest, that is, the interest on interest, referred to
as compound interest:
Definition 11.2.7 Compound Interest
Compound interest is interest computed periodically (n times per year.)
To evaluate the future amount owed when the interest is compounded peri-
odically, the resulting compound interest charged, or effective rate, use the fol-
lowing formulas:
Rule 11.2.4 Compound Interest
In compound interest, the amount after time t (or future value) is given by
A5P 1 + r
n

nt
:
The interest earned is given by
I5A2P:
The effective rate when interest is compounded periodically is
ie 5 1 + r
n

n
21:
Example 11.2.6 Compound Interest
Rebecca invests $10,000 in principal and agrees to take 5% in interest compound quar-
terly for two years. What is the total amount that will be due at the end of the term? How
much money will be earned in interest? Compare with earning simple interest. State and
interpret the effective rate.
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$10,000, r50:05, t52, n54. Note: this is
similar information as in the previous example, however, here interest is earned on pre-
viously earned interest. The future value of this investment is
A5$10,000 1 + 0:05
4

	4×2
5$11,044:86;
468
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
The interest earned over these two years is given by
I5$11,044:862$10,0005$1044:86:
Hence, by computing compound interest quarterly over simple interest, we can earn
an additional $44.86. The effective interest rate is given by
ie 5
1 + 0:04
4

	4
2150:050945:
Therefore, we earn slightly more in interest when compounded quarterly; 5.0943%
compared to 5% simple interest.
Example 11.2.7 Savings Account
Many banks only offer 1-2% on savings accounts. On February 17, 2011, Washington
Savings Bank offered 1.5% interest compounded monthly. Assuming your average
balance is $2000, what is your expected dividend earned in a year? How much interest
is earned and what is the effective rate?
Solution
First, we gather the information P5$2000, r50:015, t51, n512
A5$2000 1 + 0:015
12

	12×1
A5$2000 1:015104
ð
Þ
Aª$2030:207
If you can maintain $2000 in your savings account, you will earn $30.20 in divi-
dends and your final balance at the end of the year will be $2030.20. Note: this is
not conventional rounding as the fraction of the cent (0.007) is truncated; the bank will
not pay you more than what they owe and our monetary system is based on the fraction
of a dollar, a cent (0.01).
The interest earned over the year is given by
I5$2030:202$20005$30:20;
and by computing compound interest quarterly over simple interest, we can earn an
additional $30.20. The effective interest rate is given by
ie 5
1 + 0:015
12

	12
2150:015104:
Investing in a savings account paying 1.5% annually with interest compounded
monthly, we earn slightly more in interest; 1.5104% compounded monthly compared
to 1.5% simple interest.
CHALLENGE: Check with your bank and rework the above example with your
bank’s interest rate.
Example 11.2.8 Saving for a Bike
Suppose you wanted to save up enough money to put a down payment on a motor bike in
a year. How much would you need to invest in a savings account paying 3% annually
compounded monthly to ensure you have $5000 in the account in a year? How much
interest is earned and what is the effective rate?
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
469

Solution
r50:03, n512, A5$5000, t51
50005P 1 + 0:03
12

	12×1
500051:030416P
P5
5000
1:030416 ª4852:41
You would need to invest $4852.41 to ensure that in 12 months, you would earn
$147.59 generating a total of $5000.
The interest earned over the year is given by
I5$50002$4852:415$147:59,
Computing compound interest monthly over simple interest; the effective interest
rate is given by
ie 5
1 + 0:03
12

	12
2150:030416:
Investing in a savings account paying 3% annually with interest compounded
monthly, we earn slightly more in interest; 3.0416% compared to 3% simple interest.
Definition 11.2.8 Compounded Continuously
Continuous interest is interest computed continuously (n times per year where n
approaches •.)
To evaluate the future amount owed when interest is compounded contin-
uously, the resulting interest charged, or effective rate, use the following
formulas:
Rule 11.2.5 Compounded Continuously
For the future amount of a principle investment with interest compounded continu-
ously, A5Pert. The interest earned is given by I5A2P. The continuous effective
rate here is ie 5er 21.
Example 11.2.9 Compounded Continuously
Dana invests $10,000 in principal and agrees to take 5% in interest compound contin-
uously for two years. What is the total amount that will be due at the end of the term?
How much money will be earned in interest? What is the effective rate?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$10,000, r50:05, t52, n54. Note: this is
similar information to the previous example; however, here interest is earned on previ-
ously earned interest. The future value of this investment is
A5$10,000e0:05×2 5$11,051:71:
The interest earned over these two years is given by
I5$11,051:712$10,0005$1051:71:
Hence, by computing compound interest continuously, we can earn an additional
$44.86.
470
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
The interest earned over the two years is given by
I5$11,051:702$10,0005$1051:70;
and by computing compound interest continuously, the effective interest rate is given by
ie 5e0:05 2150:051271:
Investing in a savings account paying 3% annually with interest compounded con-
tinuously, we earn more in interest; 5.1271% compared to 5.0945% compounded quar-
terly and 5% simple interest.
The future amounts in simple interest and compound interest is determined
under the assumptions that no additional amounts are invested. However, if
you are seeking to save money, you might consider sinking monies into your
account periodically; that is, put money in the interest-bearing account weekly,
monthly, etc. Here the payments are taken to be made as often as interest is
paid. Such an account is referred to as a sinking fund.
Definition 11.2.9 Sinking Fund
Sinking Fund is when periodic payments are made towards saving up to a future
amount.
To evaluate the future amount owed when money is invested with interest
compounded periodically, the resulting interest earned, or the time necessary
to save up this amount, use the following formulas:
Rule 11.2.6 Sinking Fund
To evaluate the payment needed save up a given future amount and placed in an interest
earning sinking fund, the formula is
R5A
i
1 + i
ð
Þm 21


;
where i5 r
n is the periodic interest rate and m5nt is the total number of compounds. On
the other hand, the future amount based on the periodic payments made is given by
A5R
1 + i
ð
Þm 21
i


:
The total amount sunk into the sinking fund is given by
S5mR5ntR:
The interest earned is given by
I5A2S:
If the future amount is fixed and the payment is known, then the time necessary to
save up this future amount is given by
t5 ln 1 + α
ð
Þ
nln 1 + i
ð
Þ;
where α5 Ai
R is the percent of the total amount paid in interest.
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
471

Example 11.2.10 Sinking Fund
Pete needs to have $3000 worth of work done on his truck. If his bank pays 1% interest
compounded monthly, how much does Pete need to invest into his savings account to
have the full amount of $3000 dollars in six months? How much is invested and how
much is earned in interest?
Solution
First, we gather the information: A5$3000, r50:01, t50:5, n512. The payment
needed to save up this much money in six months is
R5$3000
0:01
12
1 + 0:01
12

	12×0:5
21
2
6664
3
77755$498:96:
Therefore, with six payments of $498.96, a total of ($498.966) $2993.76 has been
invested and ($30002993.76) $6.24 has been earned in interest.
Example 11.2.11 Christmas Fund
Deb needs to have $1000 in the bank by the end of the year to ensure she has enough
money to purchase Christmas presents. If her bank pays 1.5% interest compounded
monthly, how much does Deb need to invest into her Christmas Fund account to have
the full amount of $1000 dollars, assuming she plans one year ahead of time? How much
is invested and how much is earned in interest?
Solution
First, we gather the information: A5$1000, r50:015, t51, n512. The payment
needed to save up this much money in a year is
R5$1000
0:015
12
1 + 0:015
12

	12×1
21
2
6664
3
77755$82:76:
Therefore, with 12 payments of $82.76, a total of ($82.7212)¼$993.14 has been
invested and ($1000993.14) $6.86 has been earned in interest.
Example 11.2.12 Sinking Fund
If Deb can afford $200 a month, how long will it take to save up the $1000 needed for
Christmas assuming that her bank pays 1.5% annual interested compounded monthly.
Solution
First, we gather the information: A5$1000, r50:015, n512, R5$200 and therefore
we have i5 0:015
12
50:00125 and α5 $1000×0:00125
$200
50:00625. The time required to
save up $1000 in a year is
t5 ln 1 + 0:00625
ð
Þ
12 ln 1 + 0:00125
ð
Þ 50:4156;
472
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
approximately 5 months. If Deb can afford $200 a month for the next five months, then
she can go shopping for Christmas early or allow these monies to earn additional
interest.
Now, we switch to paying interest, first on a single principal amount and
then when credit is used periodically with a periodic charge, the first of which
is referred to as amortization.
Definition 11.2.10 Amortization
Amortization is when periodic payments are made toward paying off a principal
amount.
To evaluate the future amount owed when money is paid off over time with
interest compounded periodically, the resulting total amount paid and interest
paid, or the time necessary to pay off this amount given a specified payment,
use the following formulas:
Rule 11.2.7 Amortization
To evaluate the payment needed pay off a principal amount which is amortized
(amortization),
R5P
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2m


;
where i5 r
n is the periodic interest rate and m5nt is the total number of compounds.
The total amount paid to amortize the principal balance is given by
Q5mR5ntR:
The interest paid is given by I5Q2A.
If the principle amount is fixed and the payment is known, then the time necessary to
pay of this principal amount is given by
t5 2 ln 12β
ð
Þ
n ln 1 + i
ð
Þ;
where β5 Pi
R is the percent of the total payment due in interest.
Example 11.2.13 Purchasing a Car
Kendra needs to purchase a new car. She needs $2000 as a down payment on a $12,000
car and the balance of which is to be paid monthly for the next 48 months (4 years) at
3.99%. What are the monthly payments? Given new cars on average lose 30% of their
value and an additional 10% each year thereafter, what is the depressed value of a car
with an initial cost of $12,000?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$1000, r50:0399, t54, n512. The payment
needed to pay off the unpaid balance of ($12,000–$2000) $10,000 in four years is
given by
Continued
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
473

Solution—cont’d
R5$10,000
0:0399
12
12
1 + 0:0399
12

	212×4
2
6664
3
77755225:75:
Therefore, with 48 payments of $225.75, a total of ($225.7548)¼$10,836.00 has
been paid for the car; in addition to the $2000 down, a total of ($10,836.00+2000)¼
$12,836 has been invested into the car.
Example 11.2.14 Paying Over Time
David had a medical lien against him for $10,000, but can only afford to pay $50 a
month toward this lien; assuming that he is charged 1% annual interest, how long will
it take to pay off this lien? How much is eventually paid?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$10,000, R5$50, r50:01
Hence, we have α5
10000× 0:01
12
50
50:16 and
t5 2 ln 120:1666…
ð
Þ
12 ln 1 + 0:01
12

	 ª18:239:
At
this
pace,
it
will
take
18
years
and
(0.23912)¼3
months
and
(18.2395012)¼$10,943.85 total; that is, $943.85 is paid in interest over a period
of 219 months.
The payment needed to pay off an amortized loan is given by
R5
Pi
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt, where P is the principal amount borrowed, i is the periodic
interest rate, n is the number of periods per year, and t is the number of years.
However, this is under the assumption that no additional purchases (principal)
will be added to the balance. This is not exactly how a credit card works, there
is not one fixed principal amount but rather monthly purchases must be
accounted for in the budget; the new balance is the previous balance including
interest charged, additional purchases less payments made.
Definition 11.2.11 Credit
Credit is the ability to obtain goods, money, or services before payment based on a
contract with a credit card company or simply based on the trust that payment will
be made in the future.
To evaluate the future amount owed on a credit card when interest is com-
pounded periodically and periodic charges are made, us the following formula:
Rule 11.2.8 Credit Balance
Given a starting balance, Bn; after interest is accrued compounded periodically with an
periodic rate of i on the previous balance, that is, Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ, plus purchases made, P, and
(minus) a payment, R, is made, the new credit balance, Bn + 1 is given by
Bi + 1 5Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ + P2R:
474
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Example 11.2.15 New Balance
Thomas has $232.23 in debt on a credit card charging an annual rate of 21% with
interest compounded monthly. He makes $141.50 worth of purchases and sent in a
payment of $100 dollars. What will be the starting balance next month?
Solution
First, we gather the information:
B5$232:23, r50:21, n512, P5$141:50, R5$100, and i5 0:21
12 50:0175:
Therefore, the new balance is given by
B5$232:23 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ + $141:502$1005$277:79:
Note here, the new balance is greater than the original balance, creating more debt.
How do you maintain this; that is, constant monthly expenditures on a credit card?
Definition 11.2.12 Credit Maintenance
Credit Maintenance is when periodic payments are made toward paying off a principal
balance where regular purchases (of this principal amount) are made over the same
period.
To evaluate the payment necessary to maintain a credit card when interest
is compounded periodically and periodic charges are made, use the following
formula:
Rule 11.2.9 Credit Maintenance
Computing the payment needed to maintain a credit balance is
R5P 1 +
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt


;
where P is the mean periodic purchase.
The time necessary to pay of this principal amount is given by
t5 2
ln 12
Pi
R2P

	
n ln 1 + i
ð
Þ
:
Note that only if you pay more than your mean monthly purchases, will you ever be
able to get out of debt; this is called living within your means.
It is extremely important to note that as the payment approaches the
monthly average purchase, the time it takes to pay off the debt becomes
extremely large. Moreover, as the implied domain is restricted by
12
Pi
R2P >0, in order to pay off any debt with reoccurring expenditures
requires that R>P 1 + i
ð
Þ; that is, the payment is greater than the average pur-
chases including the interest charged over a single period. If the payment made
is consistently less that the average purchases (including interest paid),
R£P 1 + i
ð
Þ, then the time necessary to pay off this debt is infinite (>100 years)
as the balance simply continues to grow.
In fact, if we let λ be the additional percent of the monthly purchase paid
monthly, then R5 1 + λ
ð
ÞP and
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
475

t5 2
ln 12 i
λ

	
n ln 1 + i
ð
Þ:
Then the number of years one will be indebted is finite when λ>i; when
λ£i then one will be indentured (illustrated in orange in the contour plot
below). The illustration below also shows that if you pay an additional 5%
of the monthly purchases, you will be out of debt within five years. Even at
18% annual interest, paying an additional 5% of the monthly purchases will
take two years to get out of debt.
Duration of loan by interest rate and percent payment
0.0-5.0
15% 16% 17% 18% 19% 20% 21% 22% 23% 24% 25% 26% 27% 28% 29% 30%
2%
3%
4%
5%
5.0-10.0
10.0-15.0
15.0-20.0
20.0-25.0
WARNING: With 18% annual interest compounded monthly, if you pay
what the credit company requires, this is approximately 2% it will take
7.8 years to get out of debt.
Example 11.2.16 Minimum Payment
What is the minimum monthly payment required in order to maintain $100 worth of
monthly purchases on a line of credit charging 21% annual interest compounded
monthly? How long can this line of credit be maintained if this minimum amount is paid
monthly? How much is paid in purchases and how much in interest?
Solution
First, we gather the information:
P5$100, r50:21, n512 and i5 0:21
12 50:0175:
Therefore, the minimum required payment is
R>$100 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ5$101:75;
and hence the minimum required payment is $101.76. Note: this is less than 2% of the
monthly purchases.
t5 2
ln 12 100×0:0175
101:762100

	
12 ln 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ
524:8362:
As computed above, t524:8362ª25; that is, if the minimum payment is made to
“maintain” the line of credit, it will take nearly 25 years to pay off the debt in full.
During this time, nearly 298 payments of $101.76 (the minimum payment as
R>$101:75) have been made for a total of 298$101.75¼$30,327.94 invested to
maintain and payoff (298.03395$100) $29,903.40 of debt made in monthly purchases
of $100, paying a total of ($30,327.94–$29,903.40) $424.54 in interest.
476
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Example 11.2.17 2%, 5%, and 10% Payment
Compare the duration in maintaining $100 worth of monthly purchases on a line of
credit charging 21% annual interest compounded monthly if 2%, 5%, and 10% of
the monthly purchases are made in payment, respectively, in addition to the $100
borrowed.
Solution
Given 2% of the $100 is $2, if the monthly payments are $102, then it will take
t5 2
ln 12 100×0:0175
1022100

	
12 ln 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ
59:9885:
Therefore, if 102% of the monthly purchases are paid each month, $100 in purchases
can be maintained for 10 years before the entire debt is paid off, approximately one-fifth
of the time as when the minimum payments are made. During this time, 120 payments of
$102 have been made for a total of $12,225.92 to maintain and pay off $12,086.19 of
debt made in purchases and $239.72 in interest.
Given 5% of the $100 is $5, if the monthly payments are $105, then it will take
t5 2
ln 12 100×0:0175
1052100

	
12 ln 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ
52:0692
years to pay off this accruing debt. If 105% of the monthly purchases are paid each
month, $100 in monthly purchases can be maintained for 2 years before the entire debt
is paid off, approximately one-fifth of the time as when the 2% above the monthly pur-
chases are made in payment. During this time, 25 payments of $105 have been made for
a total of $2607.25 to maintain and payoff $2583.09 of debt made in purchases and
$124.15 in interest.
Given 10% of the $100 is $10, if the monthly payments are $110, then it will take
t5 2
ln 12 100×0:0175
1102100

	
12 ln 1 + 0:0175
ð
Þ
50:9240
years to pay off this accruing debt. Therefore, if 110% of the monthly purchases are paid
each month, $100 in purchases can be maintained 11 months before the entire debt is
paid off, approximately half of the time as when the 5% above the monthly purchases
are made in payment. During this time, 11 payments of $110 have been made for a total
of $1219.74 to maintain and payoff $1208.86 of debt made in purchases and $10.89 in
interest.
Example 11.2.18 Getting Out of Debt
Rebecca strives to maintain a zero balance on her credit card; however, she presently
has a $500 balance and will need to spend $500 a month on her credit over the next three
months. The interest rate on her credit is 24%, what should be the monthly payment be
to ensure she is out of debt in the fourth month?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$500, r50:24, t50:25, n512 and i50:02.
Continued
11.2 Savings, Sinking Funds, and Amortization
477

Solution—cont’d
R5500 1 +
0:02
12 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ20:25×12
"
#
ª673:38:
That is, if you spend (3$500) $1500 on this credit card in these three months, you
need to make monthly payments of $673.38 to ensure a zero (or negative) balance at the
end of the third month.
Payment
number
Previous
balance
Purchases
Payment
amount
New
balance
1
$500.00
$500.00
$673.38
$336.62
2
$336.62
$500.00
$673.38
$169.98
3
$169.98
$500.00
$673.38
$(0.00)
Note: in the above chart, the new balance is the previous balance including interest
plus the purchases made, minus the payment.
$500:00× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$673:385$336:62
$336:62× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$673:385$169:98
$169:98× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$673:385$0
Example 11.2.19 Getting Out of Debt
In the previous example, how long would it take to pay off $500 worth of monthly
charges if a minimum of $600 is paid monthly? How much interest is accrued during
this time?
Solution
First, we gather the information: P5$500, r50:24, R5$100, n512 and i50:02.
t5 2
ln 12 500×0:02
6002500

	
12ln 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ
50:443377
That is, it will take approximately 6 (120.443377¼5.32) months to reach a zero
balance.
Payment
number
Previous
balance
Purchases
Payment
amount
New
balance
1
$500.00
$500.00
$589.26
$420.74
2
$420.74
$500.00
$589.26
$339.89
3
$339.89
$500.00
$589.26
$257.42
4
$257.42
$500.00
$589.26
$173.31
5
$173.31
$500.00
$589.26
$87.51
6
$87.51
$500.00
$589.26
$0.00
That is, to determine the accounting for the payments made we have the following
calculations:
478
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
$500:00× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$589:265$420:74
$420:74× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$589:265$339:89
$339:89× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$589:265$257:42
$257:42× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$589:265$173:31
$173:31× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$589:265$87:51
$87:51× 1 + 0:02
ð
Þ + $500:002$673:385$0
WARNING: Once I paid off the balance of my debt on the first, the
statement stating a payment was due the 20th was not sent out; however, my
husband made a purchase on the 16th and then, because now there was a
balance and I did not send in a payment (as I was not sent a statement), the credit
card company tried to charge me a late fee. That is, it is sometimes necessary to
call in and verify balances regularly (especially when no statement is received)
or avoid this by not paying off a credit card in full (maybe all but the minimum
payment) as otherwise they might not send you a billing that month.
The primary question, therefore, is “How do you budget your money?”
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
11.2.1. Distinguish between debt and savings.
11.2.2. What are the three types of investments usually used for emergency reserve funds?
11.2.3. What are the three steps in budgeting for a desired item?
11.2.4. Distinguish between a tax and a discount.
Basic Exercises
11.2.5. Compute the sales tax when a $203 item is taxed at 7%.
11.2.6. Compute the sales tax and the final cost of an item on sale for $349 with a 6% sales tax.
11.2.7. What is the discounted price of a $200 bag which is 15% off? What is the discount?
11.2.8. Compute the sales price of an item worth $459, discounted 20%.
11.2.9. Compute the sales price of a pair of jeans marked 25% off the selling price of $120.
11.2.10. Compute the total purchasing cost for a dress marked down 10% off the selling price of $239 with a 7% sales tax.
11.2.11. Bob invests $1200 in principal into an account paying 4% simple interest for six years. How much interest is
earned? What is the future amount in this account?
11.2.12. Fred invests $10,100 in principal into an account paying 1.4% simple interest for two years. How much interest is
earned? What is the future amount in this account?
11.2.13. Greg invests $4200 in principal into an account paying 3.3% simple interest for three years. How much interest is
earned? What is the future amount in this account?
11.2.14. Jerry invests $5000 in principal into an account paying 5% simple interest for one year. How much interest is
earned? What is the future amount in this account?
11.2.15. Frances invests $8000 in principal into an account paying 6.1% simple interest for ten years. How much interest is
earned? What is the future amount in this account?
11.2.16. Jeremiah invests $200 into an account paying 1.5% interest compounded monthly. What is the future amount in
the account after two years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.17. Zeke invests $20,000 into an account paying 1.1% interest compounded quarterly. What is the future amount in
the account after three years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.18. Joel invests $500 into an account paying 2.1% interest compounded daily. What is the future amount in the
account after four years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
Exercises
479

11.2.19. Wanda invests $1000 into an account paying 1.3% interest compounded weekly. What is the future amount in the
account after a year and a half? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.20. Betty invests $200 into an account paying 1.5% interest compounded continuously. What is the future amount in
the account after two years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.21. Dyanne invests $200 into an account paying 2.1% interest compounded continuously. What is the future amount in
the account after two years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.22. Pete invests $2000 into an account paying 1.3% interest compounded continuously. What is the future amount in
the account after two years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.23. Billy invests $100 into an account paying 2.5% interest compounded continuously. What is the future amount in
the account after two years? How much interest is earned? What is the effective rate?
11.2.24. Craig is saving up for a new computer that cost $2480. He is budgeting to ensure that he has the full amount in his
savings in four months. If his savings account pays 1% in interest, how much does Craig need to pay into this
account each month to have enough money saved? How much is invested into the account by Craig? How much
is earned in interest?
11.2.25. In the previous exercise, if Craig could only afford to put $400 in this account each month, how long will it take to
save up for the new computer?
11.2.26. Geoff is saving up for new business equipment that costs $15,400. He is budgeting to ensure that he has the full
amount in his savings in two year. If his savings account pays 1.7% in interest, how much does Geoff need to pay
into this account each month to have enough money saved? How much is invested into the account by Geoff? How
much is earned in interest?
11.2.27. In the previous exercise, what would be the future amount after two years if Geoff could only afford $600 payments
each month? How short is he of his goal?
11.2.28. In exercise 10.26, how long would it take to save up this money if Geoff can only afford $500 monthly?
11.2.29. Kaitlin wants a long engagement and plans to get married in three years. She estimates her wedding will cost
$25,000 and does not plan on putting anything on credit. How much will Kaitlin have to put into an account paying
1.9% each month to accumulate this amount for her wedding?
11.2.30. In the previous exercise, if Kaitlin can only afford $400 a month, how much will she have in this account for her
wedding? How short is Kaitlin of her goal?
11.2.31. In exercise 10.29, if Kaitlin insists on the $25,000 wedding, how long will it take to save this amount of money if
she can only afford $400 a month to put in her sinking fund?
11.2.32. In exercise 10.29, if Kaitlin makes $400 monthly payments into a sinking fund, charges the remaining amount on a
credit card charging 16% in annual interest (compounded monthly) and pays this card off (assuming no additional
purchases) over the next year, compare this to postponing the wedding for a year and sinking monies into the fund
for that additional year.
11.2.33. Wanda has three children and one grandchild, and wants to have saved $100 for each by Christmas, only nine
months away. How much money needs to be sunk into an account paying 1.2% interest compounded monthly
to ensure that the account has $400 by this time?
11.2.34. Donny needs to save $1000 in five months to be able to afford to move when his lease is up. How much money
needs to be sunk into an account paying 0.9% interest compounded monthly to ensure that the account has $1000 at
the end of the fifth month?
11.2.35. If you want to save $10,000 for a down payment and can only afford to pay $250 into a savings account paying
0.8% annual interest compounded monthly, how long will it take to save up this down payment?
11.2.36. In the previous exercise, how much time can you save if you can increase your monthly payments to $300; that is, if
you budget an additional $50 toward getting a house.
11.2.37. Given you have been able to save up the $10,000 needed for the down payment on a $125,000 house, if there is no
closing cost and you are able to get a 30-year fixed mortgage at 5.3%, how much are your monthly payments? How
much is paid in interest?
11.2.38. In the previous exercise, if you can afford to put twice as much down up front, how much money can be saved in
interest?
11.2.39. In exercise 11.2.37, how would your monthly payments change if the term of the loan is decreased to a 15-year term
loan? How much would you save in interest?
11.2.40. In exercise 11.2.37, how would your monthly payments change if the term of the loan is increased to a 40-year term
loan? How much additional interest is paid?
480
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

11.2.41. Otto needs to fix his roof and takes out a loan for $4000 at 2.1% fixed interest. He makes arrangements to pay off
this loan $200 a month. How long will it take Otto to pay off this loan?
11.2.42. Jackson takes out a loan for $500 to go on vacation. If the loan charges 3% annual interest compounded monthly
and Jackson can afford only $50 a month to pay off this debt, how long will it take Jackson to pay off this loan?
11.2.43. Pete has a balance of $432 on his credit card which charges 27% annual interest compounded monthly. He makes
$200 in purchases and makes a $300 payment. What is the new balance of this account?
11.2.44. Natalie has a balance of $32.15 on her credit card which charges 22% annual interest compounded monthly. She
makes $50 in purchases and makes a $30 payment. What is the new balance of this account?
11.2.45. Mary has a balance of $751 on her credit card which charges 18% annual interest compounded monthly. She makes
$100 in purchases and makes a $250 payment. What is the new balance of this account?
11.2.46. Dillon has a balance of $77 on his credit card which charges 17% annual interest compounded monthly. He makes
$52 in purchases and makes a $30 payment. What is the new balance of this account?
11.2.47. Kristin’s average monthly purchases are $225 on a credit card charging 25% annual interest compounded monthly.
Assuming that her previous balance was $225, what should her monthly payments be to maintain this credit card
and pay off all the charges in six months? How much money is paid out? How much for purchases and how much in
interest?
11.2.48. Dana’s average monthly purchases are $150 on a credit card charging 19% annual interest compounded monthly.
Assuming that her previous balance was $150, what should her monthly payments be to maintain this credit card
and pay off all the charges in four months? How much money is paid out? How much for purchases and how much
in interest?
11.2.49. When maintaining credit, it is assumed the average monthly purchases are constant and the starting balance is this
average amount. Discuss the effects of having a starting balance greater than that of the average monthly purchases.
Hint: you need to consider this as credit maintenance in addition to amortizing the difference in the balances, that
is, the starting balances minus the average monthly purchases.
11.2.50. When paying off a credit card charging 15% annual interest compounded monthly where the average monthly
purchases are $100, how long will it take to pay off this amount if the monthly payment is $105? How long will
it take to pay off this amount if the monthly payments are $110?
11.2.51. Discuss what happens at the monthly payment approaches the average monthly purchases.
11.3
COMPARISON SHOPPING
In modern day society, comparison shopping is a necessity.
Budgeting Scheme I: Cash versus Credit
First consider purchasing an item with cash (either making a principal deposit
or saving up for it using a sinking fund) or credit (buy now, pay later). In
general, if you do not have enough cash to pay the incoming bill in its entirety,
then using a credit card will cost you more in the long run.
Definition 11.3.1 Cash
Cash refers to money in the physical form of currency, such as banknotes and coins. In
bookkeeping and finance, cash refers to current liquid assets.
Whereas using cash is good, carrying (excess) cash might not be a good
way to save money as money can “burn a hole in your pocket,” that is, you
are more likely to spend what cash you have on you. However, carrying no
cash might cause you to use your credit more often than you should. Therefore,
if you make such small periodic purchases, you need to compare the cost of
cash versus credit.
11.3 Comparison Shopping
481

Definition 11.3.2 Credit and Debt
Credit is based on trust which allows one party (creditor or lender) to provide
resources to another party (debtor or borrower) where that second party reimburses
the first party in regular payments; all unpaid proportion of the amount provided is
referred to as debt.
Example 11.3.1 Cash vs. Credit
Pete has determined that he will need $498.96 paid into a sinking fund paying 1% for six
months to save up the $3000 for work to be done on his truck. That is an investment of
$2993.76; compare this with charging this amount, the $3000 to a credit card charging
21% interest with no additional charges for six months.
Solution
First, we gather the information: A5$3000, r50:21, t50:5, n512. As no additional
purchases will be made over the next year, this is amortization.
R53000
0:21
12
12
1 + 0:21
12

	212×0:5
2
6664
3
77755531:07
Month
Previous
balance
Purchases
Payment
New
balance
1
$3000.00
$–
$531.07
$2521.43
2
$2521.43
$–
$531.07
$2034.49
3
$2034.49
$–
$531.07
$1539.03
4
$1539.03
$–
$531.07
$1034.89
5
$1034.89
$–
$531.07
$521.93
6
$521.93
$–
$531.07
$0.00
Hence, in the first case where we saved up cash, we paid out $2993.76 and earned
$6.24 in interest. However, we had to wait six months to work on the truck. In the second
case (assuming we can refrain from using this credit card for a full six months), we will
pay out $3186.41 for the $3000 borrowed and $186.41 in interest.
Example 11.3.2 Christmas Shopping
Deb plans on spending $1000 for Christmas; either by savig up the money over the next
year or using credit and paying the balance off over the next year. Her first option is to
put money into a Christmas Fund. Assuming her bank pays 1.5% interest compounded
monthly, we have determined Deb would need to deposit $82.76 dollars a month for a
year to have the full $1000 savings in the bank. Compare this with charging this amount
to a credit card charging 18% interest with no additional charges for a full year.
482
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution
First, we gather the information: A5$1000, r50:18, t51, n512. The payment
needed to pay off $1000 in a year at 18% interest is
R51000
0:18
12
12
1 + 0:18
12

	212×1
2
6664
3
7775591:68:
Therefore, with 12 payments of $91.68, a total of ($91.6812) $1100.16 has been
paid and ($1100.161000)¼$100.16 has been paid in interest.
Month
Previous
balance
Purchases
Payment
New
balance
1
$1000.00
$–
$91.68
$923.32
2
$923.32
$–
$91.68
$845.49
3
$845.49
$–
$91.68
$766.49
4
$766.49
$–
$91.68
$686.31
5
$686.31
$–
$91.68
$604.92
6
$604.92
$–
$91.68
$522.32
7
$522.32
$–
$91.68
$438.47
8
$438.47
$–
$91.68
$353.37
9
$353.37
$–
$91.68
$266.99
10
$266.99
$–
$91.68
$179.32
11
$179.32
$–
$91.68
$90.33
12
$90.33
$–
$91.68
$–
Hence, in the first case where we saved up cash, we paid out $993.12 and earned
$6.88 in interest. However, we had to wait months until Christmas. In the second case
(assuming we can refrain from using this credit card for a full year), we will pay out
$1100.16 for the $1000 borrowed and $100.16 in interest.
Example 11.3.3 Planning a Wedding
Bethany is getting married in two years and has budgeted $6000 for the wedding.
Compare sinking monies into a fund that pays 1.15% for the next two years versus
saving $200 a month and charging the balance onto a credit card charging 23% interest
for two additional years (assuming that no previous balance exists and no additional
purchases will be made for these additional two years).
Solution
Case I: Sinking Fund
First, we gather the information for the sinking fund: A5$6000, r50:0115,
t52, n512:
R5$6000
0:23
12
1 + 0:23
12

	12×2
21
2
6664
3
77755$247:26
Therefore, if you deposit $247.26 in an account each month, then you will have
deposited a total of $5934.14 into savings and with $65.86 earned in interest for a grand
total of $6000.
Continued
11.3 Comparison Shopping
483

Solution—cont’d
Case II: Partial Sinking Fund and Partial Charge
If we can only afford $200 a month, then can solve the equation below to determine the
future value of the account:
A
0:23
12
1 + 0:23
12

	12×2
21
2
6664
3
77755$200
A5$200
1 + 0:23
12

	12×2
21
0:23
12
2
6664
3
77755$4853:27
That is, depositing only $200 per month will allow this bride to save $4853.27
toward the wedding. Therefore, the payment need to pay off the remaining $1146.73
over a two year period at 23% interest is
R51146:73
0:23
12
12
1 + 0:23
12

	212×2
2
6664
3
77755$60:06:
Therefore, with twenty-four payments of $60.06, at total of ($60.0624)¼$
1441.39 has been paid and ($1441.391146.73)¼$294.66 has been paid in interest.
Including the ($20024) $4800 deposited plus the $1441.39 to pay off the credit card;
a total of $6241.39 will be spent during a period of four years, the ($4853.27+$1146.73)
$6000 spent on the wedding and a loss of $241.39 as while we earned $53.27 the first
two years of savings, we paid $294.66 taking two years to pay off the credit card debt.
Case I
Case II
Sinking Fund
$5934.24
$4800.00
Interest Earned
$65.86
$–
Credit Card
$–
$1146.73
Interest Paid
$–
$294.66
TOTAL PAID
$5934.24
$6241.39
Example 11.3.4 Plasma TV
Dana wants to purchase a new Panasonic “VIERA TC-P42C2 42” Plasma TV for
$1332. Assume this price includes sales tax. She can afford to make $300 payments
a month. Compare how long it would take to save up for this item in a savings account
paying 1% versus how long it would take to pay this amount off on a credit card
charging 27% interest.
Solution
First, to determine how long it would take to save up this amount of money,
we
use
the
gathered
information
A5$1332, r50:01, R5$300, n512
and
α5
$1332× 0:01
12
$300
50:004255. Therefore, we have
484
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
t5 ln 1 + 0:004255
ð
Þ
12 ln 1 + 0:01
12

	 50:36939:
At this rate, it will take 0.36939 years or approximately 5 (4.43) months before
enough money is saved to simply purchase this item. However, only $1329.81 is
deposited and the remaining $2.19 is earned in interest.
On the other hand, if we had purchased this item today planning to pay it off
$300 a month, then (assuming no additional purchases are made on this credit
card) we have the gathered information P5$1332, r50:27, R5$300, n512 and
α5
$1332× 0:23
12
$300
50:0851. Therefore, we have
t5 ln 120:0851
ð
Þ
12 ln 1 + 0:23
12

	 50:390392:
At this rate, it will take 0.390392 years or approximately 5 (4.68) months before
enough money is saved to simply purchase this item. However, a total of
(4.68$300)¼$1405.41 is paid out, the $1332 for the TV and $73.41 is paid in interest.
This is a difference of ($1405.41–$1329.81)¼$75.60. Thus, the question becomes,
“Is it worth the additional $75.60 to have the TV today and are you able to (1) maintain
your payments of $300 a month and (2) not make any additional charges to this
account?”
Here it is more efficient to wait and save up for a fixed period of time than it is to
make payments toward a principal amount borrowed. This is also true when looking at
leases. Unless this expense is a tax write off or deductable as a business expense, it is
usually cheaper to purchase rather than lease.
Budgeting Scheme II: Leasing versus Purchasing
Historically, leases have served many purposes with just as many varied legal
policies. One example is in agriculture, during the late 18th and early 19th cen-
turies, where leasing, an important form of landholding, for industrialized
countries to affect less developed regions and urban areas. The modern laws
retain a laissez-faire philosophy that still dominates the law of contract and
property law. The term laissez-faire (English pronunciation: /ˌlεseIˈfεər/,
French: [lεsefεʁ] “describes an environment in which transactions between
private parties are free from state intervention, including restrictive regula-
tions, taxes, tariffs, and enforced monopolies.”
Definition 11.3.3 Contract
A contract is a legally binding agreement between two or more parties with mutual
obligations.
The term contract is best defined as “agreement to be kept” and a breach of
contract can lead to “damages” or monetary compensation detailed in the con-
tract. The contract of interest here is that of a lease. The idea of a lease is that
you only pay the “depreciated value” of the car; however, one you add in
finance charges and possible fees which affect the end cost. On the other hand,
when you buy the car, you pay the full price included the finance charges and
possible fees; unlike with a lease, you also retain possession of the car which
means you still possess value.
11.3 Comparison Shopping
485

Definition 11.3.4 Lease
A lease is a contract calling for the user (lessee) to pay the owner (lessor) for use of
assets; a rental agreement is a lease in which the asset is a tangible property. Other such
leases on intangible property include licensing such as with computer programs or use
of a radio frequency.
Example 11.3.5 Leasing a Honda
In January of 2011, Honda’s current offer is for a 2011 Accord Coupe 5 Speed Auto-
matic LX-S Featured Special Lease with monthly payments of $199 per month with
$3499 due at lease signing for 36 months. How much will you have paid at the end
of this lease before you return this car? What are the retained value and the mean
monthly cost?
Solution
The total payments, T, is $199 per month for 36 months with $3499 at signing is
T5$3499 + 36×$1995$10,663:
With a $0 retained value as car has not been purchased, the average monthly expense
is $296.19.
Example 11.3.6 Alternative Lease
In January of 2011, an alternative offer for the 2011 Accord Coupe 5 Speed Automatic
LX-S Featured Special Lease with $0 due at lease signing and $0 first month’s payment
and then $300 per month for the remaining 35 months. How much will you have paid at
the end of this lease before you return this car? What is the monthly cost and what is the
retained value?
Solution
The total payments, T, is $300 per month for 35 months, for a total of
T5$0 + 35×$3005$10,500:
With a $0 retained value as car has not been purchased, the average monthly expense
is $291.67.
WARNING: Some leases charge additional for excess mileage or wear on
the car.
Definition 11.3.5 Purchase
To purchase is to obtain ownership of a security or other asset in exchange for money or
value; to buy.
The question now is, “Is it better to lease a car or purchase the car?”
Example 11.3.7 Finance a Honda
The same Honda outlined in Example 11.3.5 and 11.3.6, a 2011 Accord Coupe 5 Speed
Automatic LX-S Special APR (annual percentage rate) at 0.9% annual interest, for
486
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Example 11.3.7 Finance a Honda—cont’d
36 months costs $28.16 a month for every $1000 financed of the dealer’s price. With
options, a 2.4 liter engine, 4 cylinder, front wheel drive, 5-speed automatic is $21,383.
How much will you have paid at the end of this lease before you return this car assuming
cars depreciate 30% the first year (70% retained) and 10% thereafter (90% retained)?
Solution
Monthly payments are R5$21,383× $28:16
$1000 5$602:15. Therefore, the total paid is
T536×$602:155$21,677:
However, as this is a purchase, there is retained value, V, in the car: 70% the first
year and 90% thereafter for the remaining two years.
V 5$21,383×0:70×0:902 5$12,124:16:
Hence, the total expenditure, E, is
E5$21,383212,124:165$9258:84;
and, therefore, the mean monthly expenditure is $257.19.
Budgeting Scheme III: Renting versus Owning
You can rent many things, from movies on VHS or DVD to games for PC or
Game Boy; you may rent a hotel room or an umbrella at the beach. Renting is
typically an implied, explicit, or written contract involving specific terms
which regulate and manage the property or asset.
In modern day society, a rite of passage before you get into your own home
may be the rental of an apartment.
Definition 11.3.6 Renting
Renting is an agreement where a payment is made for a temporary use of a good,
service, or property owned by another.
Example 11.3.8 Renting in Tampa
In the college community in Tampa, an apartment with two bedrooms on average will
cost $874. See Figure 11.1 for other rates. How much would it cost to rent this apartment
yearly while you earn a four year degree?
One
Two
Three
Studio
$0
$586
$705
$874
$1143
$750
$1500
FIGURE 11.1
Average Rental Rates near University of South Florida, January 16, 2011,
as reported by www.myapartmentmap.com.
11.3 Comparison Shopping
487

Solution
Four years of monthly payments gives a total of 48 months. Therefore the total amount
paid in rent is
T548×$8745$20,976:
However, instead of renting one may purchase a house in an effort to obtain own-
ership, whether it is a car or a house, to create wealth or establish an estate.
Ownership is the starting point for many other concepts that form the foundations of
ancient and modern societies such as trade, money, debt, bankruptcy, the criminality
of theft and private vs. public property. Ownership is the key building block in the
development of the capitalist socio-economic system.
Definition 11.3.7 Ownership
Ownership is the state or fact of exclusive rights and control over property; either land/
real estate, tangible (objects), or intangible property (intellectual property).
What is the cost of ownership? There is the yard maintenance, plumbing,
electrical, pool maintenance, pest control, home insurance, flood insurance,
water and sewer, etc. and this does not include the purchasing of the home.
Moreover, there are fees and expenses, over and above the price of the property
itself such as inspection fees and closing cost. Closing cost, including the
lawyer’s fees, survey charges, and deed filing fees or settlement costs which
are usually 2-6% of the mortgage amount.
Example 11.3.9 Buying a Home in Tampa
House prices in Tampa, Florida have dropped significantly over the past ten years and it
appears to be a buyer’s market. Rebecca finds a house for $94,500 and has $5000 to put
down. What are the monthly payments (not including home owners insurance), with 3%
in closing costs on a 30 year fixed mortgage at 5.125%.
Solution
First, we need to determine the amount of the mortgage: the purchasing price is $94,500,
minus the $5000 down payment, plus the 3% ($2835) in closing cost—the amount of the
mortgage is
$94,500$5000 + 0:03$94,500 ¼ $92,335:
As this is a single amount to be paid off in monthly installments, this is amortization
of a mortgage loan:
R592,335
0:05125
12
12
1 + 0:05125
12

	212×30
2
6664
3
77755$502:75:
That is, for a 30 year fixed mortgage on a $94,500 down, the monthly payments will
be $502.75 (without property tax and insurance). That is a total of $180,990.74 in
addition to the $7835 paid in closing costs and down payment. That is a grand total
of $188,825.74, nearly twice what the house is worth.
488
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Example 11.3.10 Extra Payments
In the previous example, how much time and interest would you save by paying an extra
$100 a month toward your balance?
Solution
First, we gather the information:
R5$602:75, P5$92,335, r50:05125, t530, n512
and
therefore,
α5 92,335×0:05125
602:75
ª0:65425 and i5 0:05125
12
ª0:00427.
t5 2 ln 120:65425
ð
Þ
12ln 1 + 0:00427
ð
Þ ª20:77:
By paying an additional $100 per month, Rebecca can save approximately 10 years
of payments, paying only $125,688.01 total. Even with the down payment, this is nearly
$50,000 in savings.
Many people wonder if they can afford a house and don’t realize that sometimes
purchasing a home costs less than renting an apartment; it is usually fear of commitment
of making payments for 30 years than the actual cost.
Example 11.3.11 House Payments vs. Rent
Dana pays $885 in rent a month for a two bedroom, two bath apartment. Compare living in
this apartment compared to purchasing a comparable house for $200,000 with 5% down
and 2% closing cost for a 30 year mortgage. Assuming the interest rate for the mortgage
is 6% and closing costs can be included and not paid in cash above and beyond the initial
amount; compare the yearly cost for renting versus owning.
Solution
If you pay $885 a month for 30 years, then you will pay $8851230¼$318,600; that
is, $10,620 a year. Whereas if you purchase a house for $200,000 plus the 5% down
($10,000) and 2% closing cost ($4000), you will need to take out a mortgage for
$194,000 (including the closing cost). The monthly payments work out to be
R5194,000
0:06
12
12
1 + 0:06
12

	212×30
2
6664
3
77755$1163:13:
Therefore, we would spend $432,726.09 total including the down payment over 360
payments, that is, $1202.02 on average monthly. This is more than the monthly cost
of renting; however, you do not have any rights to the apartment and you would
own the house. If you take into account the home’s worth, even if it did not appreciate,
this average cost is significantly reduced. Assuming the house maintains its worth, after
the 30 year mortgage is paid off, you are out ($432,726.09–$200,000)¼ $232,726.09;
however, it is significantly less than the $318,600 paid in rent and reduces the average
monthly cost of owning down to $646.46.
11.3 Comparison Shopping
489

EXERCISES
11.3.1. Distinguish between cash and credit.
11.3.2. Joel needs to purchase a $400 lawn mower. Compare sinking money into an account paying 1.3% annual interest
compounded quarterly for 6 months and purchasing the mower on credit at 19% annual interest compounded
monthly for 6 months.
11.3.3. Tara plans on spending $1400 on her kids for Christmas next year. Compare sinking money into an account paying
1.5% annual interest compounded daily for a year and purchasing the presents on credit at 17% annual interest
compounded monthly for the year.
11.3.4. Kendra needs $250 for a new cell phone. Compare sinking money into an account paying 0.7% annual interest
compounded monthly for four months and purchasing the phone on credit at 27% annual interest compounded
monthly for the year.
11.3.5. Bridget wants to purchase a used car and estimates it will cost $3000. She can only afford to make $300 payments a
month. Compare how long it would take to save up for the car putting monies into a sinking fund earning 2% interest
and how long it would take to pay this amount off on a line of credit charging 16% annual interest compounded
monthly.
11.3.6. Distinguish between leasing and purchasing.
11.3.7. A new car offers a three year lease for $99 dollars a month with $1000 due at signing. If the car would cost $7995 at
7% annual interest compounded monthly, compare leasing versus purchasing. Assume the car depreciates 30%
upon leaving the lot and an additional 10% each year.
11.3.8. Distinguish between renting and owning.
11.3.9. Compare paying rent of $895 a month in an apartment to purchasing a $225,000 house paying 10% down, $0 closing
cost at a fixed rate of 9% for a term of 30 years.
11.4
COMPARISON USING EFFECTIVE RATES
This section concentrates on the effective rates as a way of comparing two or
more accounts or account types. For example, when comparing CD and
Savings; effective rate (annual yield) is the interest amount earned for one
year per dollar amount depending on the number of compounds per year. In
general, there are three types of simple interest used for CDs.
Recall the effective rates are:
ie 5i
Simple Interest
ie 512 1 + r
n

n
Compounded Periodically
ie 512er
Compounded Continuously
Example 11.4.1 CD vs. Savings
You purchase a $5000 CD with an interest rate of 3% compounded annually for the term
of five years. If you purchase this CD on January 1, 2012, using effective rates, compare
this to a savings account paying 1.2% compounded monthly.
Solution
This CD will mature after five years on January 1, 2017, and will be worth
A5$5000 1 + 0:03×5
ð
Þ5$5750;
490
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
with $750 earned in interest. The effective interest rate is the stated 3% annual rate
given. Whereas, for the saving account where interest is earned on interest, for the same
five years, the future amount is given by
A55000 1 + 0:012
12

	12×5
5$5309:02;
with only $309.02 earned in interest.
Hence, a CD can earn an additional $440.98 over the savings account; however,
there are penalties if money is withdrawn from the CD whereas the monies available
in the savings account are liquid (meaning that they can be withdrawn at any time
without penalty).
Example 11.4.2 Comparing Banks
You have researched three banks: the first bank pays 1.5% compounded monthly, the
second pays 1.3% quarterly, and the third pays 1.2% continuously. Use effective rates to
compare these three banks.
Solution
For the first bank, r50:015 and n512. Therefore the effective annual rate is
ie 5
1 + 0:015
12

	12
2150:015104:
For the second bank, r50:013 and n54. Therefore, the effective annual rate is
ie 5
1 + 0:013
4

	4
2150:013064:
For the third bank, r50:012 and n→•. Therefore, the effective annual rate is
ie 512e0:012 50:012072:
Therefore, the effective interest rates depend more on the interest rate and less on the
number of compounds per year. In general, it is usually best to select a higher interest
rate over a larger number of compounds per year. The effective rates are equivalent to
rounding.
Example 11.4.3 Comparing Compounds
Use effective rates to compare the interest rate of 4% compounded quarterly, monthly,
and continuously to four decimals.
Solution
Note: r50:04 for all three effective rates.
For the first number of compounds: n54, the effective annual rate is
ie 5
1 + 0:04
4

	4
2150:0406:
For the second number of compounds: n512, the effective annual rate is
Continued
11.4 Comparison Using Effective Rates
491

Solution—cont’d
ie 5
1 + 0:04
12

	12
2150:0407:
For the third number of compounds: compounded continuously, n→•, the
effective annual rate is
ie 512e0:0124 50:0408:
These rates differ only in the fourth decimal range of 0.0002 between the effective
rates when compounding four times a year and when interest is compounded
continuously.
EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
11.4.1 Distinguish between annual interest rate, periodic interest rate, and effective interest rate.
11.4.2 Distinguish between sinking fund and amortization.
11.4.3 Distinguish between renting, leasing, and owning.
Basic Problems
11.4.4. Find the effective interest rates when interest is compounded periodically given:
(a) r50:24, n512
(b) r50:12, n512
(c) r50:24, n524
(d) r50:12, n524
11.4.5. Find the effective interest rates when interest is compounded continuously given:
(a) r50:24
(b) r50:12
(c) r50:06
(d) r50:01
11.4.6. Compare the effective interest rates compounded monthly versus compounded continuously given:
(a) r50:27
(b) r50:18
(c) r50:16
(d) r50:01
11.5
PERSONAL FINANCE
Important questions you should know the answers to:
▪
Do you know if you earn interest on your savings account, and if so
how much?
▪
Do you have any credit cards? How many? What are your average monthly
purchases?
▪
Do you know what your interest rate is/are on each? Do you know your
current balance?
▪
Did you know that to pay off a credit card by making the minimum
payment you could be making those small payments for up to eight years?
And what do you think about all these new cars offering you a lease. When
would it be feasible to lease or is it just more of a convenient or tax
deductable.
492
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

▪
Have you considered buying a house? How does this compare to renting?
Or should you just live with Mom and Dad? And then there are the neces-
sities: water, food, and the luxuries such as phone, cable, etc.
▪
How do we budget what we want and need into what we have?
▪
Are you insured?
These are questions all adults face. And we have not even mentioned
retirement.
Definition 11.5.1 Insurance
Insurance is a form of risk management used to hedge against the risk of uncertain loss.
The insurance rate is the factored weight used to determine the amount to be charged
for the insurance coverage. This amount is referred to as the premium.
Types of insurance:
Auto insurance protects the policy holder against financial loss in the
event of an incident involving their automotive vehicle. While this type
of insurance is required by law, it is only the third most recommended
insurance behind health and life.
Property Coverage for theft of or damage to one automobile.
Liability Coverage for bodily injury or property damage to others.
Medical Coverage for medical bills accumulated for treatment or reha-
bilitation; this may also include coverage of lost wages or funeral
expenses.
Home insurance provides coverage for destruction or damage of the
policy holder’s home.
Health insurance covers the cost of medical treatments. In 2011, nearly 43
million Americans didn’t have health insurance, yet it is the number one
recommended insurance as medical costs are expected to increase faster
than inflation.
Dental insurance, like medical insurance, covers cost of dental work.
Funeral insurance covers funeral expenses of the insured, a type of
“health” insurance.
Casualty insurance providing coverage for accidents such as career
hazards, sometimes a supplemental medical insurance.
Life insurance provides monetary support to the surviving members of the
family. While this does provide assistance to the descendants, special pro-
visions may apply. Many life insurance companies have a suicide clause.
The policy may not be worth its face value if the policy matures at a spec-
ified age (which could be as high as 100). Life insurance is the second most
recommended insurance after health insurance.
Property insurance provides protection to property, covering fire, theft, or
weather damage. Specialized forms include: flood insurance, earthquake
insurance, etc.
Liability insurance such as public or professional liability insurance.
Credit insurance repays some or all of a loan when the borrower is unable to
pay due to unemployment, injury, disability, or even death.
Definition 11.5.2 Budget
A budget is an itemized list of expected income and expenses for a given period in the
future. This plan of operations can be based on estimates such as for food or clothing, or
fixed such as car payments, rent, insurances, etc.
Archival Note
Funeral Insurance was introduced by the Greeks
and Romans circa 600 AD when benevolent
societies paid the funeral expenses of the
members upon death and cared for the surviving
family.
11.5 Personal Finance
493

Example 11.5.1 First Budget
Kendra has just moved into her new appartment paying $640 a month, has a $225.75 car
payment, $199 for car insurance every four out of six months, and the following
monthly expenses: $400 for food, $50 for water, $142 for electricity, $52 for a mobile
phone, $210 for entertainment, and $150 in clothes. What is Kendra’s average monthly
expense? Working for $10 an hour with a 20% federal income tax, how many hours does
Kendra need to work to make this budget work?
Solution
We can estimate this assuming that the insurance is due monthly and not just eight
months out of the year. This would be $640+$225.75+$199+$400+$50+$142
+$210+$150, which is a total of $2068.75 a month.
More accurately, we have to pay $1869.75 a month not including insurance and
$199 for 8 out of 12 months:
12×$1869:75 + 8×$1995$24,029
a year total, for an average of
$24,029
12
5$2002:42
a month on average.
This amount, $2002.42, needs to be the take home pay; that is, after the federal
income tax is taken out. Hence, the amount needed to be earned is the solution to
the equation
P 120:2
ð
Þ5$2002:42;
and therefore
P5 $2002:42
0:8
5$2503:02:
Kendra needs to earn $2503.02 a month to clear $2002.42 a month take home pay,
and at $10 per hour, she will need to work
h5 $2503:02
$10
5250:302:
Therefore, at this pay rate, Kendra needs to work approximately 250 hours a month
or between 62 and 63 hours a week.
This is rather high as a usual work week is 40 hours. Kendra needs to better budget
her monies.
Example 11.5.2 Living on a Budget
In the previous example, how many hours a week would Kendra need to work if she cut
her entertainment and clothing expenses in half?
Solution
Without the additional expenses for entertainment and clothes, we have to pay $1689.75
a month not including insurance and $199 for 8 out 12 months:
12×$1689:75 + 8×$1995$21,869
a year total, for an average of
$21,869
12
5$1822:42
a month on average.
494
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Solution—cont’d
This amount, $1822.42, needs to be the take home pay, that is, after the federal
income tax is taken out. Hence, the amount needed to be earned is the solution to
the equation
P 120:2
ð
Þ5$1822:42;
and therefore,
P5 $1822:42
0:8
5$2278:02:
Kendra needs to earn $2278.02 a month to clear $1822.42 a month take home pay,
and at $10 per hour, she will need to work
h5 $2278:02
$10
5227:8:
Therefore, at this pay rate, Kendra needs to work approximately 228 hours a month
or approximately 57 hours a week.
In fact, if Kendra completely removes entertainment and clothes from her budget,
she will still have to work 51.4 hours a week.
Example 11.5.3 Living on a Budget
In the previous example, assuming Kendra removes entertainment and clothes from her
budget and has a roommate move in to cut her part of the rent in half, how many hours
will Kendra need to work to make budget?
Solution
Without any expenses for entertainment and clothes, we have to pay $1509.75 a month
not including insurance; however, if she finds a roommate willing to pay half the rent,
this amount drops to $1189.75 and $199 for 8 out 12 months:
12×$1189:75 + 8×$1995$15,869
a year total, for an average of
$15,869
12
5$1322:42
a month on average.
This amount, $1822.42, needs to be the take home pay, that is, after the federal
income tax is taken out. Hence, the amount needed to be earned is the solution to
the equation
P 120:2
ð
Þ5$1322:42;
and therefore,
P5 $1822:42
0:8
5$1653:02:
Kendra needs to earn $1653.02 a month to clear $1322.42 a month take home pay,
and at $10 per hour, she will need to work
h5 $1653:02
$10
5165:3:
Therefore, at this pay rate, Kendra needs to work approximately 166 hours a month
or approximately 42 hours a week.
11.5 Personal Finance
495

Creating a Personal Budget
Should include:
▪
Housing: Rent or House Payment
▪
Car Payment
▪
Auto Insurance
▪
Gas
▪
Renter or Home Owner’s Insurance
▪
Water
▪
Electricity
▪
Food
▪
Clothes
▪
Cable
▪
Home Phone
▪
Cellular Phone
▪
Internet
▪
Creditors
Can also include:
▪
Entertainment
▪
Tuition
▪
Books
▪
School Fees
▪
Computer Expense
It is important to be on top of your budget, especially if you use credit cards.
Everything you do in the financial world is recorded and used to evaluate your
credit in the form of a credit report.
Definition 11.5.3 Credit Report
A credit report is a report containing detailed information on a person’s credit history
(who and how much they owe as well as their payment history: the individual’s past
borrowing and repaying behavior; this report lists personal information, credit lines cur-
rently in that person’s name and other risk factors such as late payments or recent
bankruptcy.
There are three bureaus that provide these scores: Experian, Equifax, and
Trans Union. The U.S. average credit score on February 19, 2011, was 693.
The highest possible FICO score is 850; however, scores usually do not exceed
825. These scores are based on the following six pieces of information:
1. Personal data including current and previous addresses, your social security
number, and employment history.
2. Summary of credit history including the number and type of accounts that
are in good standing or are past-due as well as your payment history.
3. Detailed account information: how long you have had the account, with
which you have the account and balance.
4. The number and type of inquiries into applicant’s credit history report.
That is, having someone check your score can, in and of itself, lower
your score.
5. Details of any accounts turned over to credit agency such as information
about liens, wages garnishments and other federal, state and county
records.
496
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

For this reason, it is important to live within your means. If you make pur-
chases you cannot afford whether or not you take out a loan or purchase it
on credit, you are probably not living within your means. First used in the
1930s, the Means Test is an examination into the financial state of an indi-
vidual to determine the eligibility for public assistance. However, with a good
budget, such assistance can be avoided.
Definition 11.5.4 Means
Means in finance, refers to the resources available for disposal, such as the purchase of
material goods.
The main ways to live within your means is to:
1. Spend less money than you earn or bring into your household.
2. Stop using credit cards, and know how to maintain them when used.
3. Use a sinking fund to save up for large purchases instead of using credit.
4. Don’t compete with the Jones—don’t give into pressure from people
around you.
5. Have a savings account or emergency fund.
6. Find additional work to increase your income.
EXERCISES
11.5.1. Define insurance.
11.5.2. Create a budget for yourself that includes housing, food, and any other bill you pay periodically (say monthly.)
11.5.3. Create a budget for Todd and determine how much he can put in savings a month given Todd makes $3400 monthly
and has the following expenses:
House Payment
$885
Car Payment
$230
Auto Insurance
$200
Gas
$40
Home Owners Insurance
$150
Water
$50
Electric
$125
Food
$400
Clothes
$150
Cable
$65
Cellular Phone
$56
Internet
$35
Creditors
$250
Entertainment
$500
Exercises
497

11.5.4. Create a budget for Jennifer and determine how much she can put in savings a month given Jennifer makes
$5200 monthly and has the following expenses:
House Payment
$1275
Car Payment
$350
Auto Insurance
$220
Gas
$ 80
Home Owners Insurance
$250
Water
$ 78
Electric
$154
Food
$800
Clothes
$250
Cable
$85
Home Phone
$25
Cellular Phone
$45
Internet
$45
Creditors
$500
Entertainment
$1000
11.5.5. Create a budget for Shirley and determine how much more she needs to earn each month to break even given Shirley
makes $1900 monthly and has the following expenses:
Rent
$565
Car Payment
$275
Auto Insurance
$175
Gas
$ 40
Water
$ 50
Electric
$75
Food
$300
Clothes
$150
Cable
$65
Cellular Phone
$56
Internet
$35
Creditors
$275
Entertainment
$100
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISES
Critical Thinking
11.1 Define the following terms: trade, money, debt, bankruptcy, principal, interest rate, term, period, future
amount, effective rate, and payment.
11.2 Distinguish between annual interest rate and periodic interest rate.
11.3 Distinguish between effective interest rate and periodic interest rate.
11.4 Distinguish between effective interest rate and annual interest rate.
11.5 Define the following terms: savings, budgeting, tax, discount, simple interest, compound interest, CD, compound
interest, compounded continuously, sinking fund, amortization, and credit.
498
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

11.6 Distinguish between simple interest and compound interest.
11.7 Distinguish between interest compound periodically and interest compounded continuously.
11.8 Define the following terms: cash, credit, contract, lease, purchase, rent, own, and insurance.
Basic Exercises
11.9
Find the future amount when interest is compounded periodically given
(a) P5$100, r50:23, n512, t52
(b) P5$200, r50:12, n512, t53
(c) P5$1000, r50:17, n524, t55
(d) P5$12,000, r50:08, n512, t55
11.10 In the previous problem, determine the following for each part: the period interest rate, the effective interest rate,
the total number of payments, the total amount paid, and the amount paid in interest.
11.11 Find the future amount when interest is compounded periodically given
(a) P5$500, r50:23, n512, t51
(b) P5$500, r50:23, n512, t52
(c) P5$500, r50:23, n512, t55
(d) P5$500, r50:23, n512, t510
(e) Discuss the various amounts earned over time as computed in parts a-d.
11.12 Find the future amount when interest is compounded periodically given
(a) P5$100, r50:08, n512, t52
(b) P5$100, r50:12, n512, t52
(c) P5$100, r50:18, n512, t52
(d) P5$100, r50:24, n512, t52
(e) Discuss the various amounts earned as computed in parts a-d as a function of interest rate.
SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
11.1.1 Trade is the transfer of ownership of goods and services from one individual or party to another individual or party,
also referred to as commerce, financial transaction, or barter. A network that allows trade is called a market,
such as the Stock Market, Retail Market, Super Market, etc.
11.1.2 Money is a medium of exchange, any object, or note that is widely accepted as payment for goods or services
rendered, for the repayment of debt. Money is subject to the given country or socio-economic content.
11.1.3 Debt is that which is owed; in economics, this refers to assets owed. Debt is created when a lender agrees to lend a
specific amount or asset to the borrower or debtor.
11.1.4 Bankruptcy is a legally declared inability or impairment of ability of an individual or organization to pay its cred-
itors or lenders. Bankruptcy is usually initiated by the debtor voluntarily by the insolvent (bust) individual or
organization.
11.1.5 The principal is the balance of the initial loan. Denoted P; that is, the borrower agrees to pay back this principal
amount or proceeds and any outlined interest on this principal amount depending on the type of interested charged
(simple, compound, or continuous).
11.1.6 The interest rate is the percent of the initial proceeds to be charged above the principal amount borrowed. Denoted
r; this is the nominal rate (or interest rate for one year)
11.1.7 The number of periods per year is the number of times interest is applied to the remaining principal; denoted n.
11.1.8 The term of a loan is the number of years outlined in the loan agreement over which the borrower has to pay off the
loan (the principal amount and accrued interest). Denoted t for the amount of time (in years).
11.1.9 Number of periods is given by m5nt; that is, the number of periods per year times the number of years;
denoted m.
11.1.10 The periodic interest rate is given by i5 r
n; that is, the interest rate per period.
11.1.11 The future amount to be paid off on a loan or a future amount desired in savings.
11.1.12 Effective rate (annual yield) is the interest amount earned for one year per dollar amount. Effective interest rates
depend on the number of compounds per year and must be formulated for each different type of interest charge. In
general it will be denoted ie.
Summary of Important Concepts
499

11.1.13 The periodic payment to be made depends on the type of interest (simple or compound), the term of the loan, and
the number of periods per year and if this is a loan to be paid off or a sinking fund where monies accrue. (This cannot
be abbreviated P as this notation has already been defined as principal, and R resembles P for Payment.)
11.2.1 Savings is income not spent but rather put into a bank (deposit account) or pension fund. Savings can also be seen
when the cost of commonly purchased items is reduced or moderated. Savings, as opposed to investments, are con-
sidered low-risk.
11.2.2 Budgeting is to plan in advance of the expenditure of resources such as time and money. In personal finances, this is
the total sum of monies allocated for a particular purpose or period of time.
11.2.3 Tax (markup) or taxation is a one-time adjustment to a principal, P, amount based on a specified rate, r.
11.2.4 Discounts (depreciation) it is a one-time percentage decrease to a principal, P, amount based on a specified rate, r,
to a principal, P, amount based on a specified annual rate, r.
11.2.5 Simple interest is interest computed once on the full amount for a given amount of time, or written mathematically:
I5Prt.
11.2.6 A Certificate of Deposit (CD) is a time deposit which bears a maturity date, a specified fixed interest rate. Gen-
erally range from one to five years; formulated the same as with a tax or markup. The future amount is the principal
invested plus the simple interest earned: A5P 1 + r
ð
Þ5P + P  r5P + I
11.2.7 Compound interest is interest computed periodically (n times per year.)
11.2.8 Continuous interest is interest computed continuously (n times per year where n approaches •.)
11.2.9 Sinking Fund is when periodic payments are made towards saving up to a future amount.
11.2.10 Amortization is when periodic payments are made toward paying off a principal amount.
11.2.11 Given a starting balance, Bn; after interest is accrued compounded periodically with an periodic rate of i on the
previous balance, that is, Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ, plus purchases made, P, and (minus) a payment, R, is made, the new credit
balance, Bn + 1 is given by Bi + 1 5Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ + P2R.
11.2.12 Credit Maintenance is when periodic payments are made toward paying off a principal balance where regular
purchases (of this principal amount) are made over the same period.
11.3.1 Cash refers to money in the physical form of currency, such as banknotes and coins. In bookkeeping and finance,
cash refers to current liquid assets.
11.3.2 Credit is based on trust which allows one party (creditor or lender) to provide resources to another party (debtor or
borrower) where that second party reimburses the first party in regular payments; all unpaid proportion of the
amount provided is referred to as debt.
11.3.3 A contract is a legally binding agreement between two or more parties with mutual obligations.
11.3.4 A lease is a contract calling for the user (lessee) to pay the owner (lessor) for use of assets; a rental agreement is a lease
in which the asset is a tangible property. Other such leases on intangible property include licensing such as with com-
puter programs or use of a radio frequency.
11.3.5 To purchase is to obtain ownership of a security or other asset in exchange for money or value; to buy.
11.3.6 Renting is an agreement where a payment is made for a temporary use of a good, service, or property owned by
another.
11.3.7 Ownership is the state or fact of exclusive rights and control over property; either land/real estate, tangible (objects),
or intangible property (intellectual property).
11.5.1 Insurance is a form of risk management used to hedge against the risk of uncertain loss. The insurance rate is the
factored weight used to determine the amount to be charged for the insurance coverage. This amount is referred to as
the premium.
11.5.2 A budget is an itemized list of expected income and expenses for a given period in the future. This plan of operations
can be based on estimates such as for food or clothing, or fixed such as car payments, rent, insurances, etc.
11.5.3 A credit report is a report containing detailed information on a person’s credit history (who and how much they owe as
well as their payment history: the individual’s past borrowing and repaying behavior; this report lists personal infor-
mation, credit lines currently in that person’s name and other risk factors such as late payments or recent bankruptcy.
11.5.4 Means in finance, refers to the resources available for disposal, such as the purchase of material goods.
500
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Rules
11.1.1
The following formulas can be used to calculating future amounts under the
given conditions.
A5P 1 + rt
ð
Þ
Simple Interest
A5P 1 + i
ð
Þnt
Compound Interest (compounded periodically)
A5Pert
Compound Interest (compounded continuously)
11.1.2
Effective rates will depend on how the interest is compounded (if
compounded).
ie 5i
Simple Interest
ie 5 1 + r
n

n 21
Compounded Periodically
ie 5er 21
Compounded Continuously
11.1.3
Payments will depend on how the principle is earning interest or being charged
interest:
R5
Ai
1 + i
ð
Þnt 21
Sinking Fund when interest is earned
R5
Pi
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt
Amortization when interest is paid
R5P 1 +
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt
h
i
Maintaining
11.2.1.
The tax or markup is a percentage (rate) of the total principal: T5r  P5P  r,
and the future amount (after taxations) is A5P 1 + r
ð
Þ5P + P  r5P + T.
11.2.2.
The depreciation or depreciated amount is D5r  P5P  r, and the future
amount (after the discount) is A5P 12r
ð
Þ5P2P  r5P2D.
11.2.3.
To compute the future amount in simple interest, first find the interest charge:
I5Prt. Therefore, the future value of a given amount earning simple interest
for a given amount of time is given by A5P 1 + rt
ð
Þ5P + I. The simple
effective rate is the actual interest rate. We write ie 5r.
11.2.4.
Therefore, the amount after time t (or future value) is given by A5P 1 + r
n

nt.
The interest earned is given by I5A2P. The effective rate when interest is
compounded periodically is ie 5 1 + r
n

n 21.
11.2.5.
For the future amount of a principle investment with interest compounded
continuously, A5Pert. The interest earned is given by I5A2P. The con-
tinuous effective rate here is ie 5er 21.
11.2.6.
To evaluate the payment needed save up a given future amount and placed in
an interest earning sinking fund, the formula is R5A
i
1 + i
ð
Þm 21
h
i
; where i5 r
n is
the periodic interest rate and m5nt is the total number of compounds. On the
other hand, the future amount based on the periodic payments made is given
by A5R
1 + i
ð
Þm 21
i
h
i
. The total amount sunk into the sinking fund is given by
S5mR5ntR. The interest earned is given by I5A2S. If the future amount
is fixed and the payment is known, then the time necessary to save up this
future amount is given by t5 ln 1 + α
ð
Þ
nln 1 + i
ð
Þ, where α5 Ai
R is the percent of the total
amount paid in interest.
Continued
Summary of Important Concepts
501

Rules—cont’d
11.2.7.
To evaluate the payment needed pay off a principal amount which is amor-
tized (amortization), R5P
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2m
h
i
, where i5 r
n is the periodic interest rate
and m5nt is the total number of compounds. The total amount paid to
amortize the principal balance is given by Q5mR5ntR. The interest paid
is given by I5Q2A. If the principal amount is fixed and the payment is
known, then the time necessary to pay of this principal amount is given by
t5 2 ln 12β
ð
Þ
n ln 1 + i
ð
Þ, where β5 Pi
R is the percent of the total payment due in interest.
11.2.8.
Given a starting balance, Bn; after interest is accrued compounded periodically
with an periodic rate of i on the previous balance, that is, Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ, plus pur-
chases made, P, and (minus) a payment, R, is made, the new credit balance,
Bn + 1 is given by Bi + 1 5Bi 1 + i
ð
Þ + P2R.
11.2.9.
Computing
the
payment
needed
to
maintain
a
credit
balance
is
R5P 1 +
i
12 1 + i
ð
Þ2nt
h
i
; where P is the mean periodic purchase. The time nec-
essary to pay of this principal amount is given by t5 2
ln
12
Pi
R2P

	
n ln 1 + i
ð
Þ
. Note
that only if you pay more than your mean monthly purchases, will you ever
be able to get out of debt; this is called, living within your means.
REVIEW TEST
1. What is the transfer of ownership of goods and services from one individual or party to another individual or party?
2. Name a medium of exchange, any object or note that is widely accepted as payment for goods or services rendered, for
the repayment of debt.
3. Another word for that which is owed.
4. How much is a 7% tax on an item selling for $15.45?
5. What is the discount rate for a television set selling for $975 with an original price of $1250?
6. Compute the effective interest rate when interest is compounded monthly with an annual rate of 7%.
7. Compute the effective interest rate when interest is compounded continuously with an annual rate of 12%.
8. Which is the better interest rate on a loan: 5% compounded monthly or 4.95% compounded daily?
9. A principal of $100 is deposited into an account paying 3% interest compounded monthly. What is the future amount
after 2 years?
10. A principal of $100 is deposited into an account paying 3% interest compounded continuously. What is the future
amount after 2 years?
11. A principal of $100 is deposited into an account paying 3% interest compounded monthly. How much time would it take
for this amount to double?
12. How much money needs to be invested into a sinking fund weekly to save $1000 in six months if the fund pays 2.7%
interest?
13. What are the monthly payments for a 30 year mortgage with a principle amount of $165,000 and 9% annual
interest rate?
14. A credit card company charges 17% annual interest compounded monthly. With a balance of $180 at the end of this
cycle (month) and new purchases totaling $45, what is next month’s balance?
15. A credit card company charges 17% annual interest compounded monthly. What is the minimum payment necessary to
maintain this credit card when $115 of purchases is made monthly?
REFERENCE
Buffett, M., Clark, D., 2008. Warren Buffett and the Interpretation of Financial Statements: The Search for the Company with a Durable Competitive
Advantage. Scribner, New York.
502
Chapter 11
Basic Finance

Chapter 12
Game Theory
12.1 Introduction to Game Theory
504
12.2 The Matrix Game
505
12.3 Strictly Determined Game: The Saddle Point
507
12.4 Games with Mixed Strategies
511
12.5 Reducing Matrix Games to Systems of Equations
518
Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
521
Summary of Important Concepts
522
Review Test
523
References
523
The Beautiful Mind—John Forbes Nash, Jr.—His works in Game Theory, geometry, etc. have
provided insight into the factors that govern chance and events in our daily lives.
The Joy of Finite Mathematics
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
503

JOHN VON NEUMANN (1903-1957)
John von Neumann, one of the foremost twentieth-century mathematicians, was born in Budapest, Hungary on December
28, 1903. He was a general scientific prodigy, in the mode of some of his great predecessors. He received his formal
education at the University of Berlin, the Technical Institute in Zurich, and the University of Budapest, where he earned
his Ph.D. in mathematics in 1926 at the age of twenty.
Von Neumann taught at the University of Hamburg from 1926 until 1929. He left Germany in 1930, just before the
Second World War, taking refuge in this country, where he accepted a professorship in mathematical physics at Princeton
University. He became professor of mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, New Jersey, when it was
founded in 1933, retaining this position until his death in 1957.
Von Neumann was one of the founders of game theory. In 1944 he collaborated with Oskar Morgenstern on a book,
Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. This important and initial comprehensive treatment of game theory offered a
new approach to the study of economic behavior through the use of game-theoretic methods.
The development of the first electronic computers at the institute was directed by von Neumann. He initiated the concept
of stored programs in the computer—that programs and data should be treated similarly. This was one of the major break-
throughs in computer development. Among the computers for which von Neumann is credited are the MANIAC, NORC,
and ORDVAC.
Von Neumann served on the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission and consulted on the Atomic Bomb Project at Los Alamos.
In 1956, he received the $50,000 Enrico Fermi award for his outstanding work on computer theory, design, and
construction.
12.1
INTRODUCTION TO GAME THEORY
Game theory is a relatively new branch of mathematics; it is the study of the
rational behavior of people in conflict situations. The conflict may be between
individuals involved in a game of chance, between teams engaged in an athletic
contest, between nations engaged in war, or between firms engaged in compe-
tition for a share of the market for a certain product. In our study of game
theory, we shall refer to each contestant as a player and restrict our investiga-
tions to games employing two players. In general, however, we need not
restrict ourselves to conflicts generated by two players only; such games
can involve any number of players.
504
Chapter 12
Game Theory

The two players involved in a game have precisely opposite interests. Each
player has a specified number of actions from which to choose. However, the
action taken by one of the players at a particular stage of the game is not known
to the other player. Each of the players has a certain objective in mind, and he
attempts to choose his actions so as to achieve this aim.
Definition 12.1.1 Game Theory
Game theory is concerned with the analysis of human behavior in conflict situations. In
our brief introduction to the subject, we have considered only games between two
persons (players); however, they may involve any number of players, teams, companies
and so forth.
The initial study of game theory was conducted independently by John von
Neumann and Emil Borel during the 1920s. After World War II, von Neumann
and Oskar Morgenstern formulated the subject area as an independent branch
of mathematics. The close relationship between systems of equations and
game theory will become apparent as we proceed with our study.
12.2
THE MATRIX GAME
Consider a modified version of the game “matching pennies.” Player P1 puts a
coin either heads up, H, or tails up, T. A second Player P2 without knowing
P1’s choice calls either “heads” or “tails.” Player P1 will pay Player P2 $5
if P1 shows H and P2 chooses H; Player P1 will pay Player P2 $3 if both have
chosen T. However, if Player P2 guesses incorrectly, he must pay P1 $4 (that is,
if P1 shows H and P2 guesses T, or if P1 shows T and P2 guesses H Player P2
must pay P1 $4).
This game is a two-person game since there are two players involved. It can
be displayed in the form of a matrix as follows:
P2
H
T
P1 H
T
25
4
4 23


The positive entries of the matrix denote the gains of Player P1, and his
losses to Player P2 are the negative entries of the array. We designate P1,
the role player and P2 the column player. Player P1’s two choices are each
associated with a row of the matrix. Player P2’s choices are each associated
with a column of the matrix. Thus, if P1 chooses row one and P2 chooses
column one, then P1 pays P2 $5; instead, if P2 selects column two, then P2
pays P1 $4.
Definition 12.2.1 Game Theory/Payoff Matrix
The states of the game are given in the form of a matrix called the game matrix or
payoff matrix.
This game is a zero-sum game because whatever is lost or gained by P1 is
gained or lost by P2. The matrix representation of the game is called the matrix
game. Each entry of the matrix game represents the payoff to either player P1
or P2. Thus a matrix game is also referred to as the payoff matrix.
Reality is broken: why games make us better and
how this changes the world.
Jane McGonigal
All reality is a game.
I. Banks
12.2 The Matrix Game
505

Definition 12.2.2 Two-person Zero Game
A two-person zero-sum game is a game played by two opponents with opposing
interest and such that the payoff to one player is equal to the loss of the other.
The problem facing each player is what choice to make so that it will be in
his best interest. That is, should P1 select row one or row two? Should P2, not
knowing P1’s choice, select column one or column two? Before we proceed to
discuss the method for choosing optimally, we shall summarize the basic
concept and terminology constituting a two-person zero-sum game:
(a) Two players, P1 and P2, are engaged in a conflict of interest. For example,
in the game of “matching pennies,” P1 wants to maximize his winnings
while P2 wants to minimize his losses.
(b) Each player has at his disposal a set of instructions regarding the action to
take in each conceivable position of the game. We shall refer to these
instructions as strategies. (In the game given above each player has
two strategies H and T.)
(c) Associated with each strategy employed by P1, there is a certain payoff.
The set of all strategies will result in an array of payoffs known as the
matrix game or payoff matrix.
For instance, in “matching pennies,” the payoff matrix was
Strategies of P2
H T
zﬄﬄ}|ﬄﬄ{
Strategies of
P1
f
H
T
25
4
4 23


(d) The objective of P1 is to utilize his strategies so as to maximize his win-
nings; P2’s objective is to select his strategies so as to minimize his losses.
(e) Such games are called zero-sum games or strictly competitive games,
since the sum of the amounts won by the two players is always zero.
Note: The winnings of one player are equal to the losses of the other.
Example 12.2.1 Payoff Matrix
Consider a two-person zero-sum game, the payoff matrix of which is given by
P2
γ1 γ2 γ3
P1 β1
β2
22
1 3
6 24 5


Here, there are two strategies available to Player P1; namely β1 and β2, and three
strategies, γ1, γ2, γ3, available to Player P2. The entries in the matrix denote winnings
of Player P1. Recall that negative entries mean that Player P1 will pay P2. In the game P1
chooses one of his two strategies, β1 or β2, and simultaneously, Player P2, without
knowing P1’s choice selects γ1, γ2, γ3. The intersection of the row corresponding to
P1’s choice and the column corresponding to P2’s selection gives the payoff of this play
in the game. For example, if P1 chooses strategy β2 and P2 selects γ3, then P1 wins $5. If
P1 chooses β1 and P2 selects γ1, then P1 receives $-2; that is, he must pay Player P2 $2.
Here, we have the question of importance: What strategy should P1 choose to max-
imize his winnings? At the same time, what should P2’s choice be to minimize his
losses? The selection of strategies will be the focus of the remaining discussions in this
chapter.
Like all mathematics, game theory is a tautology
whose conclusions are true because they are
contained in the premises.
R.A. Epstein
506
Chapter 12
Game Theory

12.3
STRICTLY DETERMINED GAME:
THE SADDLE POINT
Let us consider a two-person game, the payoff matrix of which is given by
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
P1
β1
β2
β3
3
7
2
4
5
8
2
3
4
2
4
3
5
Here, P1 wants to maximize his payoff, while P2 wishes to minimize it. Before
we proceed to determine the optimal strategy for the game, we shall employ the
concept of row and column domination to simplify the game. That is, each of
the elements of row 2 is greater than the corresponding element of row three
(4>2, 5>3, 8>4). In view of P1’s objectives of maximizing his payoff, he
can always do better by choosing β2 instead of β3. Thus, we can eliminate
row 3 of the game matrix. P2’s aim is to minimize his payoff to P1. Assuming
that P1 will be playing rationally, it is clear, looking at the three strategies
available to P2, that he will not choose strategy γ2 (second column). This is
because no matter what strategy P1 uses, P2 can do better than γ2 by selecting
γ1, since each entry in the first column is smaller than the corresponding entry
in the second column. Thus, the second column can be eliminated from the
game matrix since it is dominated by column one. That is, if Player P2 plays
intelligently, he will never consider strategy γ2.
At this point, the payoff matrix is reduced to
P2
γ1
γ2
P1 β1
β2
3
2
4
8


We shall not attempt to analyze the game. If P1 uses strategy β1, the worst
that can happen is that P2 will select strategy γ3 and P1 will only gain $2. If P1
uses strategy β2, the worst that can happen is that P2 will select strategy γ1 and
P1 will only gain $4. The best approach to the game by Player P1 is to aim at the
larger of these minimum payoffs. Thus, P1 must choose strategy β2, which will
result in the maximum of the minimum amounts he stands to gain.
The method of selecting the best strategy for P1 is called the maximin
decision, which is simply the maximum of the row minimum.
Rule 12.3.1 Maximin/Minimax
The search for the saddle point of a matrix game, if one indeed exists, can be made in
three steps:
Step 1
Write the minimum entry of each row at the end of that row and write the
maximum entry or each column at the end of the column.
Step 2
Identify the maximin strategy for Player P1 by circling the largest of the row
minimum. Similarly, circle the smallest of the column maximum to identify the
minimax strategy for Player P2.
Step 3
The game has a saddle point if and only if the maximin and minimax are equal
to the same number, and that number also appears at the intersection in the
matrix of maximin (row) and minimax (column).
Now let us consider P2. If he uses strategy γ1, the worst that can happen is
that he will lose $4 if P1 employs strategy β2. If he selects strategy γ3, the worst
that can happen is that he will lose $8. Thus, it is to his advantage to choose γ1
Games lubricate the body and mind.
Benjamin Franklin
12.3 Strictly Determined Game: The Saddle Point
507

in that this choice will minimize his maximum loss to P1. This method of
selecting the strategy for Player P2 is called the minimax decision, which is
simply the minimum of the column maximum.
The selection of the preceding strategies can be displayed in the form of a
table as follows:
P1
P2
b1
g1
g3
b2
Row
minimum
3
2
4
4
4
8
8
2
Column
maximum
Thus, the maximum decision for P1 is the strategy resulting in the maximum
of the row minimum, which is β2, and the minimax decision for P2 is the strategy
resulting in the minimum of the column maximum, which is γ1. In the present
example, P1’s maximum decision results in a payoff of $4, which coincides with
P2’s minimax decision, also resulting in a payoff of $4. When this fact occurs,
we say that the matrix game possesses a saddle point or point of equilibrium. We
call this entry in the game matrix the value of the game. A matrix game pos-
sessing a point of equilibrium is said to be strictly determined. We shall sum-
marize these important terms in the following definition:
Definition 12.3.1 Strictly Determined
A matrix game is said to be strictly determined if and only if there is an entry in the payoff
matrix that is the smallest entry in its row and also the largest entry in its column. This entry
is called the saddle point or equilibrium point and is the value of the game.
The name saddle point is derived from the property of the point as the
minimum in its row and the maximum in its column, as visualized by the point
(βi,γj) in Figure 12.1.
We shall illustrate our discussion by considering some examples.
Example 12.3.1 Saddle Point
Obtain the value of the following matrix game:
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
P1
β1
β2
β3
$23 $1
$4
$4
$23 $5
$6
$2
$7
2
4
3
5
(bi,g j)
FIGURE 12.1
The saddle point.
Game Theory is the Art and Science of
Negotiation Prologue, …
H. Raiffa
508
Chapter 12
Game Theory

Solution
Here again, the aim of P1 is to maximize his winnings and that of P2, to minimize his
losses. Inspecting the payoff matrix, we see that the second row is dominated by the
third row. This is, each entry in the third row is larger than the corresponding entry
in the second row. Thus, if P1 plays intelligently, he will never employ strategy β2,
so we can eliminate row 2. Similarly, column 3 is dominated by column 2. Thus, if
P2 plays intelligently, he will not use strategy γ3. Hence, the payoff matrix reduces to
P2
γ1
γ2
P1 β1
β2
$23 $1
$6
$2


Applying the maximin and minimax method we have
P1
P2
b1
$–3
$–3
$–1
b3
Column
maximum
Row
minimum
$6
$6
g1
g2
$2
$2
$2
Thus, the best strategy for P1 to employ is β3. This will assure him a gain of $2,
provided player P2 plays intelligently and uses strategy γ2 which will cost him only
$2. Since the maximin and minimax decisions result in the same amount of payoff;
namely, $2, this is a saddle point. The game is strictly determined since it possesses
a point of equilibrium. The value of the game is $2.
In attempting to find the best strategies of the players, we need not employ the row
and column dominance technique to reduce the payoff matrix. We can directly employ
the maximin-minimax procedure.
Example 12.3.2 Best Strategies
Find the best strategies for Players P1 and P2 which will lead to the value of the game if
the payoff matrix is given by
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
P1
β1
β2
β3
β4
$10
$0
$24 $214
$12
$5
$6
$18
$24 $23 $
$22
$12
$27 $6
$5
2
664
3
775
Solution
Again, the aim of P1 is to find the best strategy to maximize his winnings. P2 wishes
to employ the strategy to minimize his losses. Utilizing the maximin-mimimax pro-
cedure, we construct the table below. Thus, Player P1 should employ strategy β2 to
maximize the minimum amount he stands to win. Player P2 should employ strategy
γ2 to minimize the maximum amount he stands to lose. It is clear that the value of
the game is $5.
Continued
Game theory is a study of strategic decision
making.
12.3 Strictly Determined Game: The Saddle Point
509

Solution—cont’d
P1
P2
g1
g2
g3
g4
b1
b2
b3
b4
$10
$12
$0
$6
$18
$16
$5
$6
$24
$18
$24
$12
$5
$5
$5
$12
$–14
$–4
$–3
$–2
$–4
$–7
$–14
$–7
Column
maximum
Row
minimum
The solutions of strictly determined games possess certain properties that are
optimal to both players provided that they play intelligently. If one of the players
deviates from the procedure leading to the saddle point, the other player may increase
his profit. For instance, suppose that in Example 12.3.2, Player P1 uses his best strategy,
β2, but that P2 plays irrationally by using strategy γ4. This will result in P1 increasing his
payoff from $5 to $18. If both players deviate from their optimal strategies, then,
needless to say, one of them will suffer.
In this section, we have discussed two-person games that are strictly determined;
however, there are games that do not possess a point of equilibrium. Such games will
be studied in Section 12.4.
PROBLEMS
12.3.1 Find the best strategies for players P1 and P2 in the matrix games given by
a
ð Þ
P2
γ1 γ2
P1 β1
β2
$4 $6
$5 $8


b
ð Þ
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
P1 β1
β2
$4
$10 $6
$23
$5
$22


The aim of P1 is to maximize his payoff, P2’s objective is to minimize his losses.
12.3.2 Find the saddle point of the following matrix games and interpret their meanings:
a
ð Þ
$6
$0 $25
$3
$2 $6
$27 $1 $211
2
4
3
5
b
ð Þ
$23 $4
$22
$0
$1
$5
$22 $16 $213
2
4
3
5
12.3.3 Determine whether or not the following matrix games are strictly determined:
a
ð Þ
$22 $3
$21
$25 $1 $216


,
b
ð Þ
$9
$2 $4
$7
$1 $7
$21 $3 $14
2
4
3
5
12.3.4 Construct a 3×3 matrix game, the value of which is $10.
12.3.5 Construct a two-person zero-sum matrix game in which the payoff to the maximizing player is negative.
510
Chapter 12
Game Theory

12.4
GAMES WITH MIXED STRATEGIES
As we mentioned in the previous section, not all two-person zero-sum games
possess a saddle point. We shall now turn our attention to those games that are
not strictly determined. Consider the following two-player game:
P2
γ1 γ2
P1 β1
β2
$8 $3
$4 $16


Applying the procedure we discussed in our search for a saddle point, we
can write the game as
P1
P2
b1
b2
Row
minimum
Column
maximum
g1
g2
$8
$3
$16
$16
$4
$8
$3
$4
If Player P1 chooses his maximin strategy, then his maximin payoff will be
$4. If Player P2 employs his minimax strategy, then his minimax payoff will be
$8. Thus, the maximin payoff of P1 and the minimax payoff of P2 are not
equal—the matrix game does not possess a point of equilibrium. For such a
game, it is difficult to see what either player should do.
Let us consider the case in which Player P2 employs his minimax strategy,
γ1. If Player P1 suspects P2‘s choice, he can then select strategy β1 instead of
his maximin strategy, β2, to increase his payoff from $4 to $8. However, if
Player P1 continues to employ strategy β1, P2 will detect this and can shift from
his minimax strategy, γ1, to strategy γ2 decreasing his losses from $8 to $3.
After a while, Player P1 will likely become aware of P2’s strategy and can shift
his choice from β1 to β2, thus increasing his payoff from $3 to $16. It is clear,
then, in games without a saddle point, that a player should not stick with a par-
ticular strategy, but rather mix his strategies in such a way that the opposite
player will not easily be able to predict his choice.
Mixing strategies can be done by some random mechanism to assure that
the opposing player in the game will not discover the pattern of moves. For
example, the random mechanism can be a fair coin. Player P1 flips a coin;
if a head appears, he chooses strategy β1 with probability p; if a tail occurs,
he chooses strategy β2 with probability 1–p. Note that p+(1–p)51; that is,
we are certain that at each move one of the two strategies will be chosen. Thus,
the random mechanism mixes the strategies of the players. Games in which
each player’s strategies are mixed for lack of a saddle point are called
mixed-strategy games.
Now, suppose that in mixed-strategy games, we assign to each player a
certain probability for choosing each of his strategies. What we want to know
here is how we can characterize the payoff of a game? In strictly determined
games the payoff of the game was defined by the maximin and minimax
strategies. However, in the present case we do not know which strategies
are being used by the players and we cannot define the payoff if the game
Evolution and the Theory of Games
J. Maynard Smith
12.4 Games with Mixed Strategies
511

is played only once. However, if the game is played a number of times, by uti-
lizing the frequency with which each strategy is used, we can obtain the
expected payoff or central tendency of the matrix game. For example, suppose
that in the matrix game on page 504 Player P1 chooses his strategies β1 and β2
with probabilities 0.6 and 0.4, respectively. Similarly, player P2 selects his
strategies γ1 and γ2 with probabilities 0.7 and 0.3, respectively. (Shortly we
shall be discussing the best way of arriving at these probabilities.) The
expected payoff of the matrix game is given by evaluating the following
expression:
0:6 0:4
½
  8
3
4 10


0:7
0:3


First, we multiply the vector [0.6 0.4] and the 2×2 matrix game
8
3
4 16


that is,
0:6 0:4
½
  8
3
4 16


5 4:8 + 1:6 1:8 + 6:4
½
5 6:4 8:2
½
:
Next, we multiply the row vector [6.4 8.2] by the column vector
0:7
0:3


to
obtain the expected payoff,
0:6 0:4 8:2
½
  0:7
0:3


5 6:4
ð
Þ 0:7
ð
Þ + 8:2
ð
Þ 0:3
ð
Þ
54:48 + 2:46
5$6:94
Thus, the expected payoff which favors Player P1, is $6.94. That is, in the
long run and under the specified probabilities of selecting the strategies, P1’s
expected gain is $6.94.
In general, the expected payoff of a 22 matrix game is obtained as
follows: Let P1 and P2 be the probabilities that Player P1 selects his strategies,
β1 and β2 respectively. We shall refer to these probabilities as strategy prob-
abilities of Player P1 and write them as a row vector [p1 p2]. Similarly, we shall
denote the strategy probabilities for Player P2 by the column vector
q1
q2


. Note
that p1 + p251 and q1 + q251. The expected payoff of the matrix game
a11 a12
a21 a22


denoted by E is defined by
E5 p1 p2
½

a11 a12
a21 a22


q1
q2


Example 12.4.1 Expected Payoff
Obtain the expected payoff of the matrix game,
P2
γ1 γ2
P1 β1
β2
4 23
25
7


If Player P1 and P2 decide on selecting their strategies with probabilities [1/2 ½] and
[1/3 2/3], respectively.
512
Chapter 12
Game Theory

Solution
The expected payoff of this game is
E5 1
2
1
2


4 23
25
7

 1
3
2
3
2
664
3
775
5 21
2
4
2

 1
3
2
3
2
664
3
775
57
6
Thus, the expected payoff is in favor of P1. Note that if the actual value of E had been
negative, then the game would have been in favor of Player P2.
For higher order matrix games, say k×k, given by
β1
β2
⋮
βk
P2
γ1 γ2 ⋯γk
a11 a12 ⋯a1k
a21 a22 … a2k
⋮
⋮
⋮
ak1 ak2 ⋯akk
2
664
3
775
with strategy probabilities for P1 and P2 given by
p1 p2 ⋯pk
½
 and
q1
q2
⋮
qk
2
664
3
775
respectively, the expected payoff of the game is
E5 p1 p2 ⋯pk
½

a11 a12 … a1k
a21 a22 … a2k
:
:
:
a21 a22 … a2k
2
664
3
775
q1
q2
⋮
qk
2
664
3
775
with p1 + p2 + ⋯+ pk51 and q1 + q2 + qk51:
Example 12.4.2 Expected Payoff
Obtain the expected payoff of the matrix game,
P1
β1
β2
β3
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
4
23
0
2
1 24
210 23
1
2
4
3
5
if the strategy probabilities of P1 and P2 are given by
1
3
1
3
1
3


and
1
2
1
4
1
4
2
66666664
3
77777775
respectively.
12.4 Games with Mixed Strategies
513

Solution
The expected payoff of the 3×3 matrix game is
E ¼ 1
3
1
3
1
3



4
23
0
2
1
24
210 23
1
2
4
3
5
1
2
1
4
1
4
2
66666664
3
77777775
¼ 24
3 25
3 21


1
2
1
4
1
4
2
66666664
3
77777775
¼ 24
3
Thus, the expected payoff of the game is –4/3 and it favors Player P2.
There is still a basic question remaining: What is the best way for Player P1 to
choose his strategy probabilities so that his expected payoff will be maximum? To
answer this question we proceed as follows. Consider a two-person zero-sum game
given by
P2
γ1 γ2
P1 β1
β2
a11 a12
a21 a22


and P1’s strategy probabilities by [p1 p2]. Player P1 wants to choose the probabilities p1
and p2 to select his strategies so as to maximize the expected payoff E.
That is,
E≤p1 p2
½

a11 a12
a21 a22


Which can be written as
a11p1 + a21p2 ≥E
a12p1 + a22p2 ≥E;
such that
p1 + p251:
Treating these inequalities as equalities and solving the three equations we obtain
p15
a222a21
a112a122a21 + a22
and
p25
a112a12
a112a122a21 + a22
Similarly, the aim of P2 is to select his strategy probabilities, q1 and q2 in such a
manner as to minimize the expected payoff. That is,
E5 a11 a12
a21 a22


q1
q2


which can be stated as
a11q1 + a12q2 ≥E
a21q1 + a22q2 ≤E;
such that
q1 + q51:
514
Chapter 12
Game Theory

Solution—cont’d
Solving the inequalities as if they were equalities, we have
q15
a222a12
a112a122a21 + a22
q25
a112a21
a112a122a21 + a22
and
E5 p1 p2
½

a11 a12
a21 a22


q1 q2
½

5
a112a21
a112a122a21 + a22
Definition 12.4.1 Optimal Strategies
The strategy probabilities {p1,p2} and {q1,q2}, as defined above are called the optimal
strategies for Players P1 and P2, respectively. The expected payoff E is called the value
of the game.
Example 12.4.3 Expected Payoff
Consider “matching pennies” under the following rules. If Player P1 has turned up H
and P2 calls H, then P1 must pay P2 $6. However, if P2 calls T, then P2 must pay P1 $4. If
P1 has turned up T and P2 calls H, then P2 must pay P1 $8, and if P2 calls T, then P1 pays
P2 $2. Find the optimal strategies for P1 and P2 and the value of the game.
Solution
The game matrix is given by
P2
P1
$26 $4
$8
$22


It can be seen that the game does not have a saddle point. Thus, we must employ the
mixed-strategies procedure. The optimal strategy for P1 is
p15
a222a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
2228
262428225 1
2
and
p25
a112a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
2624
262428225 1
2
The optimal strategy for P2 is
q15
a222a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
2224
262428225 3
10
and
q25
a112a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
2628
262428225 7
10
The expected payoff of the game corresponding to these optimal strategies is
E5
a11a222 a12a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5 26
ð
Þ 22
ð
Þ2 4
ð Þ 8
ð Þ
26242822
5$1:00:
Continued
Baseball, it is said, is only a game. True, … and
the Grand Canyon is only a hole in Arizona. Not
all holes, or games are created equal.
George Will
12.4 Games with Mixed Strategies
515

Solution—cont’d
Thus, Player P1’s optimal strategy is to choose row one with probability 1/2 and row
two with the same probability. Player P2’s optimal strategy is to select column one with
probability 3/10 and column two with probability 7/10. The value of the game is $1.00.
That is, since E is positive, the game is favorable to Player P1 in the long run.
Example 12.4.4 Expected Payoff
Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2 for the matrix game given in Example
12.3.2. That is,
P2
P1
4 23
25
7


Also obtain the value of the game.
Solution
We should mention here that in Example 12.4.1, we stated the strategy probabilities of
[1/2 1/2] and [1/3 2/3] for P1 and P2, respectively, for purpose of illustrating the concept
of expected payoff. Here we shall obtain the optimal strategies for each of the players.
The optimal strategy for P1 is
p15
a222a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
7 + 5
4 + 3 + 5 + 7512
19
and
p25
a112a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
4 + 3
4 + 3 + 5 + 75 7
19
The optimal strategy for P2 is
q15
a222a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
7 + 3
4 + 3 + 5 + 7510
19
and
q25
a112a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
4 + 5
4 + 3 + 5 + 75 9
19
The expected payoff of the game corresponding to these optimal strategies is
E5
a11a222 a12a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5 4
ð Þ 7
ð Þ2 23
ð
Þ 25
ð
Þ
4 + 325 + 7
513
19
Thus, the optimal strategies for P1 and P2 are [12/19 7/19] and [10/19 9/19], respec-
tively. The value of the game is 13/19 and since it is positive it favors Player P1. That is,
in the long run P1 is expected to gain 13/19.
We should mention here that we can sometimes employ the row and column dom-
inance relation to reduce a higher order matrix game so that the preceding formulas
would be applicable. For example, consider the 33 matrix game given by
P2
P1
2 1
3
12 3 11
5 6 10
2
4
3
5
Here, row one of the matrix is dominated by the second row, since each element of
row two is greater than the corresponding element of row one. Similarly, since each
element of column two is smaller than the corresponding element of column three,
we conclude that column three is dominated by column two. Thus, the matrix game
reduces to
516
Chapter 12
Game Theory

Solution—cont’d
P2
P1
12 3
5
6


and we can apply the mixed-strategies procedure to obtain optimal strategies for P1
and P2.
The optimal strategy for P1 is
p15
a222a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
625
122325 + 65 1
10
and
p25
a112a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
122 3
122325 + 65 9
10
The optimal strategy for P2 is
q15
a222a12
a112a122a21 + a22
5
623
122325 + 65 3
10
and
q25
a112a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5
1225
122325 + 65 7
10
The expected payoff of the game corresponding to these optimal strategies is
E5
a11a222 a12a21
a112a122a21 + a22
5 12
ð
Þ 6
ð Þ2 3
ð Þ 5
ð Þ
122325 + 6 557
10
The value of the game is 57/10 and it favors Player P1 because it is positive. This
means that in the long run Player P1 is expected to gain 57/10.
PROBLEMS
12.4.1 Find the expected payoff of the matrix game given by
P2
γ1
γ2
P1 β1
β2
26
12
4 210


If Player P1 chooses strategy β1 60% of the time and Player P2 selects strategy γ2 70% of the time. Which player
does the game favor?
12.4.2 Determine the expected payoff for the game
P2
P1
10
26
2
212
8
4
16 214 28
2
4
3
5
for the strategy probabilities [1/3 1/3 1/3] and
1=4
1=4
1=2
2
4
3
5 for Players P1 and P2, respectively.
12.4.3 Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, and the value of the following games:
P2
P1
24
6
8 22


and
P2
P1
10 212
216
14


Problems
517

12.4.4 In the game of matching pennies, consider the following situation: If Player P1 turns up T and P2 calls T, P1 pays P2
$5. However, if Player P2 calls H, then P2 must pay P1 $8. Now if P1 turns up H and P2 calls T, then P2 must pay P1
$10, but if P2 calls H, then P1 must pay P2 $12.
(a) Obtain the matrix of the game.
(b) Determine the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2.
(c) Find the value of the game.
(d) Does the game favor Player P1?
12.4.5 Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2 and the value of the game
P2
P1
3 7 1
2 6 8
1 3 4
2
4
3
5
12.4.6 Determine the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2 and the value of the following game, if possible:
P2
P1
3 4 24 6
0
23 5 22 7 10


12.5
REDUCING MATRIX GAMES TO SYSTEMS
OF EQUATIONS
The aim of the present section is to show that a matrix game can be reduced to a
problem in linear programming. We can then solve matrix games by applying
the techniques introduced in Chapter 10. We shall illustrate the procedure by
considering a specific example. Suppose that we have a two-person zero-sum
matrix game given by
P2
P1
4 22
26
8


Player P1 wants to utilize the best strategy to maximize his expected payoff
E. Player P2 wants to choose his strategies so that he will minimize the
expected payoff. Thus P1 and P2 are the maximizer and minimizer of E, respec-
tively. Let p1 p2
½
 and
q1
q2


be the strategy probabilities of Players P1 and P2,
respectively. Proceeding as in the previous section, we can write
p1 p2
½

4 22
26
8


≥E
which can be stated as
4p126P2 ≥E
22p1 + 8P2 ≥E
restricted by the fact that we must have
p1 ≥0:
p2 ≥0,
Ep1 + p251:
There is new restriction here that E must be positive for this procedure to
work. However, if E is not positive, we can make it so by adding an appropriate
constant to every term in the inequalities without changing the character of the
problem.
518
Chapter 12
Game Theory

Thus, P1 must select P1 and P2 to maximize his expected payoff E subject
to the following constraints:
4p126P2 ≥E
22p1 + 8P2 ≥E
p1 + p251:
p1 ≥0,
p2 ≥0,
E > 0:
To simplify the problem further, we divide the preceding inequalities and
equality by E; that is,
4p1
E 26p2
E ≥1
22p1
E + 8p2
E ≥1
p1
E 26p2
E ¼ 1
E
p1
E ≥0,
p2
E ≥0:
Let z15p1=E and z2 5 p2=E. Now, the object of the preceding inequalities
is to minimize
z1 + z25 1
0
E
subject to the constraints
4z126z2 ≥1
22z1 + 8z2 ≥1
z1 ≥0,
z2 ≥0;
which is simply in the form of a linear program. Note that when we maximize
E, it means that we minimize 1/E; that is, increasing E implies that we are
decreasing the value of 1/E.
We begin by treating the constraints as if they were equalities. Solving
them for z1 and z2 we obtain
z15 7
10 and z25 3
10:
You recall that
z15p1
E
and z25p2
E :
subject to
z1 + z25 1
E:
Substituting the values of z1 and z2 in the above equation we have
7
10 + 3
105 1
E:
Solving this expression for the expected payoff, we obtain E51.0. Thus,
substituting this value of E in
p15z1E and p25z2E;
we have
p15 7
10 1
ð Þ5 7
10 and p25 3
10 1
ð Þ5 3
10
12.5 Reducing Matrix Games to Systems of Equations
519

Thus, Player P1 must select the first row of the matrix game with proba-
bility 7/10 and the second row with probability 3/10 so as to maximize his gain.
Similarly, Player P2’s objective to select the strategy probabilities q1 and q2
so as to minimize the expected payoff. That is,
4 22
26
8


q1
q2


≤E;
which can be written as
4q122q2≤E
26q1 + 8q2≤E
along with the restrictions
q1 ≥0,
q2 ≥0,
q1 + q251,
E>0:
P2’s problem, then, is to choose q1 and q2 that will minimize the expected
payoff E subject to the constraints
4q122q2≤E
26q1 + 8q2≤E
q12 + q251
q1 ≥0
q2 ≥0:
Using arguments similar to those previously mentioned, and letting
γ15q1=E and γ25q2 =E, we have reduced the game into the following linear
equations:
4γ122γ2≤1
26γ1 + 8γ2≤1
γ1 ≥0,
γ2 ≥0:
subject to minimizing γ1 + γ251=E. Treating the first two inequalities as if
they were equalities and solving them, we obtain y151=2 and y251=2.
Since we know that E51, we can obtain the strategy probabilities:
q15y1E or q151
2 1
ð Þ51
2
and
q25y2E or q251
2 1
ð Þ51
2:
Note that the restriction that y1 + y25 1
E or 1
2 + 1
251 is satisfied. Thus, Player
P2 must select columns one and two of the matrix game with equal probability.
Furthermore, we check our results by obtaining the value of the game as
follows:
E5
7
10
3
10


4 2
6
8


1
2
1
2
2
64
3
75
5 1 1
½

1
2
1
2
2
64
3
75
51:
Therefore, the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2 are [7/10 3/10] and
[1/2 1/2], respectively. The corresponding value of the game is 1 and, since it is
positive, it favors P1.
520
Chapter 12
Game Theory

PROBLEMS
12.5.1 Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, in the following games:
a
ð Þ
P2
P1
22 8
10 6


b
ð Þ
P2
P1
4 25
23
2


12.5.2. Reduce the matching pennies game given below into a system of linear equations and find the optimal stratiegies for
Players P1and P2. Inthe gameofmatchingpennies,considerthe following situation: IfPlayer P1 turns upT and P2 calls
T, P1 pays P2 $5. However, if Player P2 calls H, then P2 must pay P1 $8. Now if P1 turns up H and P2 calls T, then P2
must pay P1 $10, but if P2 calls H, then P1 must pay P2 $12.
12.5.3. Solve the following matrix game:
P2
P1
6
8 28 12
0
26 10 24 14 20


12.5.4. Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, of the matrix game
P2
P1
4 23 2
5
4 3
8 22 8
2
4
3
5
by reducing it into a system of linear equations.
Hint: Begin by employing the row and column dominance relation.
CRITICAL THINKING AND BASIC EXERCISE
12.1 Find the best strategies for Players P1 and P2, in the matrix games given by:
a
ð Þ
P2
γ1
γ2
P1 β1
β2
21 4
23 2


b
ð Þ
P2
γ1
γ2
γ3
P1
β1
β2
β3
210
5 28
4
2
1
0 24 21
2
4
3
5
12.2 Find the point of equilibrium of the following matrix games:
a
ð Þ
4 24
4
23 23 23
5 25
5
2
4
3
5
b
ð Þ
2 24 1 23
0
1 6 25
7
1 4 21
2
4
3
5
12.3 Are the following matrix games strictly determined?
a
ð Þ
4 12
10
14
8
2
26
4 28
2
4
3
5
b
ð Þ
2
3 4 5 6
21 22 1 2 3


12.4 Construct a 33 matrix game, the point of equilibrium of which is 5.
12.5 Construct a zero-sum two-person matrix game in which the payoff to P1 is negative; that is, a gain for Player P2.
12.6 Find the expected payoff of the matrix game given by
P2
γ1
γ2
P1 β1
β2
210
8
5 28


Critical Thinking and Basic Exercise
521

Player P1 chooses his strategies with equal probability and Player P2 selects strategy y1 three-fourths of the time
and strategy y2 one-fourth of the time.
12.7 Determine the expected payoff for the matrix game given by
P2
P1
7 3 22
24 5
4
6 8
10
2
4
3
5
for the strategy probabilities [1/2 1/4 1/4] and
1=6
1=3
1=2
2
4
3
5 for Players P1 and P2, respectively.
12.8 Determine the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, and the value of the following games:
a
ð Þ
P2
P1
4 23
22
10


b
ð Þ
P2
P1
1 22
21
2


12.9 What are the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, and the value of the game:
P2
P1
28
4
5
10 26 25
29 27 26
2
4
3
5?
12.10 Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, and the value of the following matrix game:
P2
P1
7 21
6 10 12
14
5 22
6
8


12.11 Find the optimal strategies for Players P1 and P2, in the following matrix games by reducing the games into linear pro-
gramming problems:
a
ð Þ
P2
P1
28
4
10 26


b
ð Þ
P2
P1
28
12
14 26


12.12 Reduce the following matrix game into a linear programming problem and then obtain the optimal strategies and
value of the game:
P2
P1
a11 a12
a21 a22


SUMMARY OF IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
Definitions:
12.1.1. Game theory is concerned with the analysis of human behavior in conflict situations. In our brief introduction to the
subject, we have considered only games between two persons (players); however, they may involve any number of
players, teams, companies and so forth.
12.1.2. The states of the game are given in the form of a matrix called the game matrix or payoff matrix.
12.2.1 A two-person zero-sum game is a game played by two opponents with opposing interest and such that the payoff to
one player is equal to the loss of the other.
12.2.2. A zero-sum games such that the loss or gain by Player P1 is equal to the gain or loss by Player P2.
522
Chapter 12
Game Theory

12.3.1
A matrix game is said to be strictly determined if and only if there is an entry in the payoff matrix that is the
smallest entry in its row and also the largest entry in its column. This entry is called the saddle point or equilibrium
point and is the value of the game.
12.4.1. The strategy probabilities {p1,p2} and {q1,q2}, as defined above are called the optimal strategies for Players P1 and
P2, respectively. The expected payoff E is called the value of the game.
Rules:
12.3.1 The search for the saddle point of a matrix game, if one indeed exists, can be made in three steps:
Step 1 Write the minimum entry of each row at the end of that row and write the maximum entry of each column at
the end of the column.
Step 2 Identify the maximin strategy for Player P1 by circling the largest of the row minimum. Similarly, circle the
smallest of the column maximum to identify the minimax strategy for Player P2.
Step 3 The game has a saddle point if and only if the maximin and minimax are equal to the same number, and that
number also appears at the intersection in the matrix of maximin (row) and minimax (column).
REVIEW TEST
1. Define game theory.
2. What is another name for game matrix?
3. Agame playedbytwo opponentswithopposinginterest and such that the payoff toone player isequal tothe lossofthe other is
referred to by what name?
4. What is meant by strictly determined?
5. What is the value of the two-person zero-sum game, the payoff matrix of which is given by
22
3 4
6 21 5


6. Find the best strategies for Players P1 and P2 which will lead to the value of the game if the payoff matrix is given by
24
1 5
5 24 6
7
3 8
2
4
3
5.
7. Construct a 3×3 matrix game with a value of $5.
8. Construct a 3×3 matrix game with a negative value.
9. Obtain the expected payoff of the matrix game:
25
7
4 23


REFERENCES
Luce, R. Duncan, Raiffa, Howard, 1957. Games and Decisions. Wiley, New York.
May, F.B., 1970. Introduction to Games of Strategy. Allyn & Bacon, Boston.
McKinsey, J.C.C., 1957. Introduction to the Theory of Games. Wiley, New York.
von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., 1954. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, 2nd ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Owens, G., 1970. Finite Mathematics. W. B. Saunders, Philadelphia, PA.
Williams, J.D., 1964. The Compleat Strategyst. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Tsokos, C.P., 1978h. Mainstreams of Finite Mathematics with Application. Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company, A Bell & Howell Company.
References
523

Appendix: Standard Normal
TABLE A1: Standard Normal Probability Distribution: To the Center P 0 ≤Z ≤z
ð
Þ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
0.0000
0.0040
0.0080
0.0120
0.0160
0.0199
0.0239
0.0279
0.0319
0.0359
0.1
0.0398
0.0438
0.0478
0.0517
0.0557
0.0596
0.0636
0.0675
0.0714
0.0753
0.2
0.0793
0.0832
0.0871
0.0910
0.0948
0.0987
0.1026
0.1064
0.1103
0.1141
0.3
0.1179
0.1217
0.1255
0.1293
0.1331
0.1368
0.1406
0.1443
0.1480
0.1517
0.4
0.1554
0.1591
0.1628
0.1664
0.1700
0.1736
0.1772
0.1808
0.1844
0.1879
0.5
0.1915
0.1950
0.1985
0.2019
0.2054
0.2088
0.2123
0.2157
0.2190
0.2224
0.6
0.2257
0.2291
0.2324
0.2357
0.2389
0.2422
0.2454
0.2486
0.2517
0.2549
0.7
0.2580
0.2611
0.2642
0.2673
0.2704
0.2734
0.2764
0.2794
0.2823
0.2852
0.8
0.2881
0.2910
0.2939
0.2967
0.2995
0.3023
0.3051
0.3078
0.3106
0.3133
0.9
0.3159
0.3186
0.3212
0.3238
0.3264
0.3289
0.3315
0.3340
0.3365
0.3389
1.0
0.3413
0.3438
0.3461
0.3485
0.3508
0.3531
0.3554
0.3577
0.3599
0.3621
1.1
0.3643
0.3665
0.3686
0.3708
0.3729
0.3749
0.3770
0.3790
0.3810
0.3830
1.2
0.3849
0.3869
0.3888
0.3907
0.3925
0.3944
0.3962
0.3980
0.3997
0.4015
1.3
0.4032
0.4049
0.4066
0.4082
0.4099
0.4115
0.4131
0.4147
0.4162
0.4177
1.4
0.4192
0.4207
0.4222
0.4236
0.4251
0.4265
0.4279
0.4292
0.4306
0.4319
1.5
0.4332
0.4345
0.4357
0.4370
0.4382
0.4394
0.4406
0.4418
0.4429
0.4441
1.6
0.4452
0.4463
0.4474
0.4484
0.4495
0.4505
0.4515
0.4525
0.4535
0.4545
1.7
0.4554
0.4564
0.4573
0.4582
0.4591
0.4599
0.4608
0.4616
0.4625
0.4633
1.8
0.4641
0.4649
0.4656
0.4664
0.4671
0.4678
0.4686
0.4693
0.4699
0.4706
1.9
0.4713
0.4719
0.4726
0.4732
0.4738
0.4744
0.4750
0.4756
0.4761
0.4767
2.0
0.4772
0.4778
0.4783
0.4788
0.4793
0.4798
0.4803
0.4808
0.4812
0.4817
2.1
0.4821
0.4826
0.4830
0.4834
0.4838
0.4842
0.4846
0.4850
0.4854
0.4857
2.2
0.4861
0.4864
0.4868
0.4871
0.4875
0.4878
0.4881
0.4884
0.4887
0.4890
2.3
0.4893
0.4896
0.4898
0.4901
0.4904
0.4906
0.4909
0.4911
0.4913
0.4916
2.4
0.4918
0.4920
0.4922
0.4925
0.4927
0.4929
0.4931
0.4932
0.4934
0.4936
2.5
0.4938
0.4940
0.4941
0.4943
0.4945
0.4946
0.4948
0.4949
0.4951
0.4952
2.6
0.4953
0.4955
0.4956
0.4957
0.4959
0.4960
0.4961
0.4962
0.4963
0.4964
2.7
0.4965
0.4966
0.4967
0.4968
0.4969
0.4970
0.4971
0.4972
0.4973
0.4974
2.8
0.4974
0.4975
0.4976
0.4977
0.4977
0.4978
0.4979
0.4979
0.4980
0.4981
2.9
0.4981
0.4982
0.4982
0.4983
0.4984
0.4984
0.4985
0.4985
0.4986
0.4986
3.0
0.4987
0.4987
0.4987
0.4988
0.4988
0.4989
0.4989
0.4989
0.4990
0.4990
3.1
0.4990
0.4991
0.4991
0.4991
0.4992
0.4992
0.4992
0.4992
0.4993
0.4993
3.2
0.4993
0.4993
0.4994
0.4994
0.4994
0.4994
0.4994
0.4995
0.4995
0.4995
3.3
0.4995
0.4995
0.4995
0.4996
0.4996
0.4996
0.4996
0.4996
0.4996
0.4997
3.4
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4997
0.4998
525

TABLE A2: Standard Normal Probability Distribution: To the Left P Z ≤z
ð
Þ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
0.5000
0.5040
0.5080
0.5120
0.5160
0.5199
0.5239
0.5279
0.5319
0.5359
0.1
0.5398
0.5438
0.5478
0.5517
0.5557
0.5596
0.5636
0.5675
0.5714
0.5753
0.2
0.5793
0.5832
0.5871
0.5910
0.5948
0.5987
0.6026
0.6064
0.6103
0.6141
0.3
0.6179
0.6217
0.6255
0.6293
0.6331
0.6368
0.6406
0.6443
0.6480
0.6517
0.4
0.6554
0.6591
0.6628
0.6664
0.6700
0.6736
0.6772
0.6808
0.6844
0.6879
0.5
0.6915
0.6950
0.6985
0.7019
0.7054
0.7088
0.7123
0.7157
0.7190
0.7224
0.6
0.7257
0.7291
0.7324
0.7357
0.7389
0.7422
0.7454
0.7486
0.7517
0.7549
0.7
0.7580
0.7611
0.7642
0.7673
0.7704
0.7734
0.7764
0.7794
0.7823
0.7852
0.8
0.7881
0.7910
0.7939
0.7967
0.7995
0.8023
0.8051
0.8078
0.8106
0.8133
0.9
0.8159
0.8186
0.8212
0.8238
0.8264
0.8289
0.8315
0.8340
0.8365
0.8389
1.0
0.8413
0.8438
0.8461
0.8485
0.8508
0.8531
0.8554
0.8577
0.8599
0.8621
1.1
0.8643
0.8665
0.8686
0.8708
0.8729
0.8749
0.8770
0.8790
0.8810
0.8830
1.2
0.8849
0.8869
0.8888
0.8907
0.8925
0.8944
0.8962
0.8980
0.8997
0.9015
1.3
0.9032
0.9049
0.9066
0.9082
0.9099
0.9115
0.9131
0.9147
0.9162
0.9177
1.4
0.9192
0.9207
0.9222
0.9236
0.9251
0.9265
0.9279
0.9292
0.9306
0.9319
1.5
0.9332
0.9345
0.9357
0.9370
0.9382
0.9394
0.9406
0.9418
0.9429
0.9441
1.6
0.9452
0.9463
0.9474
0.9484
0.9495
0.9505
0.9515
0.9525
0.9535
0.9545
1.7
0.9554
0.9564
0.9573
0.9582
0.9591
0.9599
0.9608
0.9616
0.9625
0.9633
1.8
0.9641
0.9649
0.9656
0.9664
0.9671
0.9678
0.9686
0.9693
0.9699
0.9706
1.9
0.9713
0.9719
0.9726
0.9732
0.9738
0.9744
0.9750
0.9756
0.9761
0.9767
2.0
0.9772
0.9778
0.9783
0.9788
0.9793
0.9798
0.9803
0.9808
0.9812
0.9817
2.1
0.9821
0.9826
0.9830
0.9834
0.9838
0.9842
0.9846
0.9850
0.9854
0.9857
2.2
0.9861
0.9864
0.9868
0.9871
0.9875
0.9878
0.9881
0.9884
0.9887
0.9890
2.3
0.9893
0.9896
0.9898
0.9901
0.9904
0.9906
0.9909
0.9911
0.9913
0.9916
2.4
0.9918
0.9920
0.9922
0.9925
0.9927
0.9929
0.9931
0.9932
0.9934
0.9936
2.5
0.9938
0.9940
0.9941
0.9943
0.9945
0.9946
0.9948
0.9949
0.9951
0.9952
2.6
0.9953
0.9955
0.9956
0.9957
0.9959
0.9960
0.9961
0.9962
0.9963
0.9964
2.7
0.9965
0.9966
0.9967
0.9968
0.9969
0.9970
0.9971
0.9972
0.9973
0.9974
2.8
0.9974
0.9975
0.9976
0.9977
0.9977
0.9978
0.9979
0.9979
0.9980
0.9981
2.9
0.9981
0.9982
0.9982
0.9983
0.9984
0.9984
0.9985
0.9985
0.9986
0.9986
3.0
0.9987
0.9987
0.9987
0.9988
0.9988
0.9989
0.9989
0.9989
0.9990
0.9990
3.1
0.9990
0.9991
0.9991
0.9991
0.9992
0.9992
0.9992
0.9992
0.9993
0.9993
3.2
0.9993
0.9993
0.9994
0.9994
0.9994
0.9994
0.9994
0.9995
0.9995
0.9995
3.3
0.9995
0.9995
0.9995
0.9996
0.9996
0.9996
0.9996
0.9996
0.9996
0.9997
3.4
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9997
0.9998
526
Appendix: Standard Normal

TABLE A3: Standard Normal Probability Distribution: To the Left P Z ≤z
ð
Þ
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.0
0.5000
0.4960
0.4920
0.4880
0.4840
0.4801
0.4761
0.4721
0.4681
0.4641
0.1
0.4602
0.4562
0.4522
0.4483
0.4443
0.4404
0.4364
0.4325
0.4286
0.4247
0.2
0.4207
0.4168
0.4129
0.4090
0.4052
0.4013
0.3974
0.3936
0.3897
0.3859
0.3
0.3821
0.3783
0.3745
0.3707
0.3669
0.3632
0.3594
0.3557
0.3520
0.3483
0.4
0.3446
0.3409
0.3372
0.3336
0.3300
0.3264
0.3228
0.3192
0.3156
0.3121
0.5
0.3085
0.3050
0.3015
0.2981
0.2946
0.2912
0.2877
0.2843
0.2810
0.2776
0.6
0.2743
0.2709
0.2676
0.2643
0.2611
0.2578
0.2546
0.2514
0.2483
0.2451
0.7
0.2420
0.2389
0.2358
0.2327
0.2296
0.2266
0.2236
0.2206
0.2177
0.2148
0.8
0.2119
0.2090
0.2061
0.2033
0.2005
0.1977
0.1949
0.1922
0.1894
0.1867
0.9
0.1841
0.1814
0.1788
0.1762
0.1736
0.1711
0.1685
0.1660
0.1635
0.1611
1.0
0.1587
0.1562
0.1539
0.1515
0.1492
0.1469
0.1446
0.1423
0.1401
0.1379
1.1
0.1357
0.1335
0.1314
0.1292
0.1271
0.1251
0.1230
0.1210
0.1190
0.1170
1.2
0.1151
0.1131
0.1112
0.1093
0.1075
0.1056
0.1038
0.1020
0.1003
0.0985
1.3
0.0968
0.0951
0.0934
0.0918
0.0901
0.0885
0.0869
0.0853
0.0838
0.0823
1.4
0.0808
0.0793
0.0778
0.0764
0.0749
0.0735
0.0721
0.0708
0.0694
0.0681
1.5
0.0668
0.0655
0.0643
0.0630
0.0618
0.0606
0.0594
0.0582
0.0571
0.0559
1.6
0.0548
0.0537
0.0526
0.0516
0.0505
0.0495
0.0485
0.0475
0.0465
0.0455
1.7
0.0446
0.0436
0.0427
0.0418
0.0409
0.0401
0.0392
0.0384
0.0375
0.0367
1.8
0.0359
0.0351
0.0344
0.0336
0.0329
0.0322
0.0314
0.0307
0.0301
0.0294
1.9
0.0287
0.0281
0.0274
0.0268
0.0262
0.0256
0.0250
0.0244
0.0239
0.0233
2.0
0.0228
0.0222
0.0217
0.0212
0.0207
0.0202
0.0197
0.0192
0.0188
0.0183
2.1
0.0179
0.0174
0.0170
0.0166
0.0162
0.0158
0.0154
0.0150
0.0146
0.0143
2.2
0.0139
0.0136
0.0132
0.0129
0.0125
0.0122
0.0119
0.0116
0.0113
0.0110
2.3
0.0107
0.0104
0.0102
0.0099
0.0096
0.0094
0.0091
0.0089
0.0087
0.0084
2.4
0.0082
0.0080
0.0078
0.0075
0.0073
0.0071
0.0069
0.0068
0.0066
0.0064
2.5
0.0062
0.0060
0.0059
0.0057
0.0055
0.0054
0.0052
0.0051
0.0049
0.0048
2.6
0.0047
0.0045
0.0044
0.0043
0.0041
0.0040
0.0039
0.0038
0.0037
0.0036
2.7
0.0035
0.0034
0.0033
0.0032
0.0031
0.0030
0.0029
0.0028
0.0027
0.0026
2.8
0.0026
0.0025
0.0024
0.0023
0.0023
0.0022
0.0021
0.0021
0.0020
0.0019
2.9
0.0019
0.0018
0.0018
0.0017
0.0016
0.0016
0.0015
0.0015
0.0014
0.0014
3.0
0.0013
0.0013
0.0013
0.0012
0.0012
0.0011
0.0011
0.0011
0.0010
0.0010
3.1
0.0010
0.0009
0.0009
0.0009
0.0008
0.0008
0.0008
0.0008
0.0007
0.0007
3.2
0.0007
0.0007
0.0006
0.0006
0.0006
0.0006
0.0006
0.0005
0.0005
0.0005
3.3
0.0005
0.0005
0.0005
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0004
0.0003
3.4
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0003
0.0002
Appendix: Standard Normal
527

Index
NOTE: Page numbers followed by b indicates boxes, f indicates figures and t indicates tables.
A
Accumulation fund, 464–465
Additive law of probability, 159, 161, 161b, 162f
Algebra
associative, 106b
coefficients, 418b
commutative, 107b
complement, 107b
definition, 104b
example, 105b
definition, 416b
DeMorgan’s law, 108
direct variation, 420b
distributive, 107b
evaluation, 419b
examples, 416–417b
formulation, 419–420b
idempotent, 106b
identity, 107b
indirect variation, 421b
intersection
definition, 100b
examples, 101–103b
like terms, 418–419, 418–419b
operators, 417b
set difference, 109b
statements, 418b
symmetric difference, 110b
terms, 418, 418b
union, 98–99b
Amortization, 473, 473b
Applied mathematics, 4
Argument
deductive reasoning, 54–55b
definition, 55b
fallacy, 55–56b
symbol, 55
validity
conclusion, 62–65b
definition, 55b
law of detachment, 55b
law of syllogism, 56b
proof patterns, 60b
testing examples, 57–58b, 61b, 63–64b
Aristotle, 16
Arithmetic
base (see Base system)
fractions (see Fractions)
greatest common factor, 401b
least common multiple, 403b
percentages, 406–407b
place-value notation, 398b
prime factorization, 402b
ratios, 406b
scientific notation, 401, 401b
sequence, 412b
series, 414–415b
Arithmetic and algebrace
definition, 10–11
goal, 11
Associative law, 38, 38b
Axiomatic probability, 154–156, 154b
B
Bankruptcy
consequences, 460
definition, 460
United States Code, 459–460
Bar chart
definition, 275b
example, 276b
step-by-step procedure, 276b
Base system
decane, 398, 399b
hexadecimal, 400b
octal, 399–401, 399–400b
Bayes’ rule
examples using, 168, 170b, 172b, 174b
rule of elimination, 169, 169b, 170f
tree diagram, 169, 169f
Bell-shaped curve, 9
Bernoulli, Jacob, 188
Bernoulli probability distribution. See Binomial
probability distribution
Binary operators
addition, 382
decimals, 405b
division, 383
examples, 384b
exponentiation, 383b, 391b
fractions, 404b
multiplication, 383
order, 392b
sign effects, 385b
subtraction, 383
Binomial expansion, 104–105b, 209b
Binomial probability distribution
binomial expansion, 209b
binomial experiment, 208b
binomial theorem, 208–212
common binomial calculations
common question, 212–217
examples, 213–217b
definition, 212b
expected value, 219–222, 219–221b
variance/deviation, 222–223b
Budgeting
definition, 465b, 493
examples, 494–495b
personal, 496–497
Buffet, Warren Edward, 458
C
Cantor, Georg, 88
Certificate of Deposit (CD), 464, 467–468
Circle graph, 281–282b
Classical probability, 148b
Coefficient of variation (CV), 319–320b
Combinations, 97, 98b, 106
Commutative law, 38, 38b
Complementary law, 39, 39b
Conditional probability
definition, 163
examples, 164b
independent events, 166, 166b
multiplicative law, 165b
Contingency table
definition, 279b
example, 279–280b
step-by-step procedure, 279b
Continuous random variables
continuous curve, 234
definition, 191b, 232b
normal probability distributions (see Normal
probability distributions)
probability histogram, 233–234
relative frequency ratio, 233
Contracts, 485–486
Counting techniques
binomial expansion, 104–105b
combinations, 97, 98b, 106
countably finite, 90b
countably infinite, 91b
enumeration, 87b
evolution, 6–7
factorials, 94b
goal, 7
multiplication/sequential counting principle,
96–97
mutually exclusive events, 102b
next coefficient, 106b
overlapping events, 100–102b
partial ordering, 98, 99b
permutations, 95b, 97, 98b, 106
Cramer’s rule, 436–437, 437b
Credit
definition, 474
examples, 475b
formula, 474b
529

Credit (Continued)
maintenance, 475, 475b
payments, 476–477b
report, 496
unions, 464
D
De Morgan’s rule, 39, 39b, 49–51
Detachment law, 55b
Diophantus, 378
Discrete random variable
arithmetic/average/sample mean, 199b
definition, 191b
expected value
central tendency, 200
definition, 200b
examples, 198b, 200–202b
population standard deviation, 203b
population variance, 202b, 203
probability distribution function
definition, 193, 194b
examples, 194–196b, 196
residuals, 202b
sample variance
constant adding property, 203–204b
constant multiplication property, 204–205b
definition, 203b
measuring unit, 203
Distributive law, 38, 38b
E
Effective rate, 462, 463b, 490–492
Elementary algebra, 3–4
Emergency reserve fund, 464–465
Empty set, 93b
Enumeration, 87b
Equations
definition, 423b
elementary operations, 427b
examples, 423–424b
inequalities
absolute value, 429–430b
bounded interval, 428–430, 428–429b
definition, 426b
examples, 426–427b
integers, 429b
linear, 430b
notations, 428b
unbounded interval, 428, 428b
literal, 425b
optimization, 439b
properties, 423b
quadratic (see Quadratic equation)
solving, 425–426b
system (see System equations)
three-steps, 424b
two-steps, 424b
Euclid, 330
Expected payoff, 512–515b
Expected value, 302–303b
F
Field axioms
associative, 386, 389
closure, 385, 389
commutative, 386, 389
distributive, 388, 390
identity, 387, 390
inverse, 387, 390
Finance
amortization, 473, 473b
bankruptcy (see Bankruptcy)
comparison shopping
cash vs. credit, 481–485
leasing vs. purchasing,
485–487
renting vs. owning, 487–489
currency, 458–459
debts, 459, 478b
definition, 11
goal, 11–12
interest
amount of time, 461
effective rate (see Effective rate)
future amount, 462
nominal rate, 461
number of periods, 462
payments, 463
periods per year, 461
principal, 461
rate per period, 462
means, 497
money, 458
and savings (see Savings, financial)
sinking funds (see Sinking funds)
trade, 458
Fractions
definition, 401
improper, 401
mixed, 401, 403b
operators, 404b
percentages, 407b
proper, 401
reduced form, 401, 402b
summing, 403b
Frequency data, 300–302b
Functions
definition, 189b, 443b
domain restrictions, 443b
linear, 443–444b, 446b
quadratic, 446–447b
Future amount, 462
G
Game theory, 12
definition, 505
linear equations, 503
mixed-strategy
definition, 511
expected payoff (see Expected payoff)
optimal strategies, 515
payoff matrix, 503
strictly determined
definition, 508
examples, 508–509b
maximin/minimax, 507b, 508
saddle point, 508, 508f
Gaussian probability distribution. See Normal
probability distributions
Gauss, Johann C.F., 237
Geometry
angle
acute angle, 339
0° angle, 339b
complementary angle, 339b
consecutive angle, 336b
definition, 332
exterior angle, 337b
interior angle, 337b
measuring unit, 332
obtuse angle, 339
right angle, 339b, 339
straight angle, 339b
supplementary angle, 340b
vertex diagram, 338
area
of circle, 358–359b
definition, 332b
Heron’s method, 358b
of rectangle, 355b
rectangular solid, surface area, 360–361, 361b
of rhombus, 355b
right circular cylinder, 361–363,
361–362b
of sphere, 362–363b
of square, 354b
surface area, 359b
of trapezoid, 356–357b
of triangle, 357b
distance measurement, 331–332, 331b
evolution, 10
goal, 10
lines
complementary lines, 335b
definition, 333b
intersecting lines, 334–335, 334b
one-sided figures, 333b
parallel lines, 335b, 336
perpendicular lines, 335b
supplementary angles, 334
transverse lines, 336–337b
two-sided figures, 333b
polygons
circumference, 353b
definition, 351b
hexagon, 351
pentagon, 351
perimeter, 352b
regular, 351–352b
quadrilaterals
definition, 345b
kite, 350b
parallelogram, 345–346b
rectangle, 348b
rhombus, 346–347b
square, 349b
trapezoids, 345b
symbols, 330
triangles
acute, 341
congruent, 343b
definition, 340b
equilateral, 342
isosceles, 342
obtuse, 341
530
Index

pythagorean theorem, 341
right, 341
scalene, 342
similar, 342b
volume
cone, 365–366b
cookie cutter shape, 365b
of cube, 364b
definition, 332b
rectangle solid, 364b
right circular cylinder, 365b
sphere, 366b
Greatest common factor (GCF), 401b
H
Histogram
definition, 286b
examples, 286b, 289–290b
step-by-step procedure, 289b
I
Idempotent law, 37–38, 37b
Identity law, 38–39, 38b
Insurance, 493–496
Interest
amount of time, 461
compound, 468, 468b
continuous, 470, 470b
effective rate, 462–463
future amount, 462
nominal rate, 461
number of periods, 462
payment, 463
periods per year, 461
principal, 461
rate per period, 462
simple, 467, 467b
J
Joy of Finite Mathematics, 4–5
L
Logic
argument (see Argument)
Aristotelian logic, 16
Boolean algebra, 68–69
conjunction, 18, 19t
contradiction, 34–35b
deductive reasoning, 5
definition, 5
disjunction
definition, 19
exclusive, 20, 21b, 21t
inclusive, 20, 20t, 20b
equivalent statements, 35b, 37b
associative, 38, 38b
commutative, 38, 38b
complementary, 39, 39b
contrapositive, 36b
converse, 36b
definition, 35b
De Morgan’s rule, 39, 39b
distributive, 38, 38b
idempotent, 37–38, 37b
identity, 38–39, 38b
goals, 5–6
inductive reasoning, 5
not implied statement, 36b
paradox, 35b
proof by induction, 66–68
statement (see Statement, logic)
switching circuits
definition, 69b
parallel, 70–76
series, 70
syllogism, 16
tautology, 34b
truth tables, 27–33
truth value, 17
Long-range investment, 464–465
M
Margin of error, 308b
Mean deviation, 314b
Median (M), 296–298b
Mixed-strategy games
definition, 511
expected payoff (see Expected payoff)
optimal strategies, 515
Mode (M), 294–295b
Modus tollens, 55b
Multiplication/sequentialcountingprinciple,96–97
N
Normal/Gaussian probability distribution.
See Bell-shaped curve
Normal probability distributions
bell-shaped curve, 236–237
definition, 235b
examples, 248–250b, 252–254b
fixed μ varying σ graphical representation,
237, 237f
fixed σ varying μ graphical representation,
237, 237f
normal approximation
continuity correction factor, 257
example, 258b
property, 260b
normal curve graph, 236–237
notation, 236
overview, 235
standard normal probability distribution
definition, 239b
example, 244b, 245–248
graphical representation, 241–245
probabilities table, 240, 241t
standard score, 240
variance/standard deviation, 237
Null set, 93b
P
Pareto chart
definition, 277b
example, 277–278b
step-by-step procedure, 277b
Partial ordering, 98, 99b
Pascal, Blaise, 146
Pattern recognition
deductive reasoning, 410–411
examples, 411b
inductive reasoning, 410–411, 410b
sequential pattern (see Sequence)
serial pattern (see Series)
Payoff matrix, 503
Permutations, 95b, 97, 98b, 106
Personal probability, 147b
Pie chart. See Circle graph
Place-value notation, 398b
Population standard deviation, 203b
Population variance, 202b, 203
Powers, 390–391, 391b
Probability
axiomatic probability, 154–156, 154b
basic laws
additive law, 161, 161b, 162f
complement, 157–158b, 158
empty set, 158b
union, 159, 159–160b
Bayes’ rule (see Bayes’ rule)
classical probability, 148b
combinatorial techniques, 175–178, 176–177b
conditional probability
definition, 163
examples, 164b
independent events, 166, 166b
multiplicative law, 165b
definition, 7, 146
experiment
compound event, 151b
definition, 150b
examples of, 150
mutually exclusive event, 153b
population, 151b
sample point, 150, 151b
sample space, 152b
simple/elementary event, 151b
goal, 7–8
personal probability, 147b, 148
in professional fields, 146
Pure/abstract mathematics, 4
Pythagoras, 3
Q
Quadratic equation, 432b
R
Random variables (RV)
continuous random variables (see Continuous
random variables)
definition, 189, 190b
discrete random variable (see Discrete
random variable)
examples of, 189, 190–191b
Range (R), 312–313b
Real number system
axioms (see Field axioms)
definition, 381
integers, 380b
irrational numbers, 381
natural numbers, 379, 381–382b
number line, 379
operators (see Binary operators)
rational numbers, 381
whole numbers, 380, 380b
zero, 380, 380b
Index
531

S
Saddle point, 508, 508f
Savings, financial
budgets (see Budgeting)
CD, 467, 468b
credit balance (see Credit)
definition, 464
discounts, 466, 466b
personal, 464–465
taxation, 465, 465–466b
Sequence
arithmetic, 412b
definition, 411b
examples, 413b
geometric, 412b
term, 411–412b
Sequential counting principle, 96–97
Series
arithmetic, 414–415b
definition, 413b
examples, 414b
geometric, 415b
Set theory
algebra (see Algebra)
Cantor set, 88
common denotations, 90
definition, 6, 89b
empty/null set, 93b
evolution, 6
feature, 89
goal, 6
grouping symbol, 89
roster notation, 89–90, 91b
set-builder notation, 90
subsets
definition, 94–95b
examples, 91b, 95b
proper subset, 94
symbol, 94
universal set, 92
Venn diagrams, 92–93
well-defined set, 90–92
Sinking funds
definition, 471b
examples, 472b
formula, 471b
Slope formula, 445, 445b
Standard mean, 299–304, 299–300b
Standard normal probability distribution
definition, 239b
example, 244b, 245–248
graphical representation, 241–245
probabilities table, 240, 241t
standard score, 240
Standard population deviation, 315–316b
Standard population variance, 315b
Standard sample deviation, 316–317b
Standard sample variance, 316b
Statement, logic
bi-conditional statement, 24–25b, 25t
compound statement, 18
conditional statement
conditional truth values, 23b
definition, 22b
necessary and sufficient condition, 24b
property, 23b
variations, 41–43
definition, 17
negating statement
common negations, 49b
definition, 21b, 22t
De Morgan’s law, 49–51
examples, 49–52b
existential quantifier, 53
translations, 52b
universal quantifier, 53
quantified statement
particular affirmative, 45–46
particular negative, 46–48
universal affirmative, 44–45
universal negative, 45
simple statement, 18
Statistics
central tendencies measurement
expected value, 302–303b
frequency data (standard mean), 300–302b
margin of error, 308b
median, 296–298b
mode, 294–295b
standard mean, 299–304, 299–300b
trimmed mean, 304b, 305b
weighed mean, 305b, 306–307b
data organization
dot plot, 266b
frequency distribution, 269b, 270–272
frequency tables, 269b
listed data, 266
probability distribution, 270–271b
relative frequency, 270b
stem-and-leaf plot, 267–268b
descriptive statistics, 9–10
deviation measurement
coefficient of variation, 319–320b
definition, 312b
mean deviation, 314b
range, 312–313b
standard population deviation, 315–316b
standard population variance, 315b
standard sample deviation, 316–317b
standard sample variance, 316b
goal, 9–10
qualitative information
bar chart, 275–276b
circle graph, 281–282b
contingency table, 279–280b
Pareto chart, 277–278b
quantitative information
class boundaries, 288b
class limits, 287b
class mark, 288b
class width, 287b
histogram (see Histogram)
Strictly determined games
definition, 508
examples, 508–509b
maximin/minimax, 507b, 508
saddle point, 508, 508f
Switching circuits
definition, 69b
parallel
complementary, 72b
equivalent electrical networks, 73–75b
switch positions, 70, 71f
series, 70
Syllogism, 16, 56b
System equations
definition, 434b
determines of matrices, 434, 436–437b
elimination, 434–436, 434b
inequalities, 437–438b
substitution, 434, 435b
T
Taxation, 465, 465–466b
The Nature of Mathematics, 5
Tree diagram, 93b, 95
Trickle effect, 337–338, 337b
Trimmed mean, 304b, 305b
Truth tables, 27–33
Tukey, John Wilder, 266
Two-person zero-sum game, 505–506
U
Universal set, 92–93
V
Venn diagrams, 92–93
Von Neumann, John, 504
W
Weighed mean, 305b, 306–307b
532
Index

