
T H E  I N D O N E S I A N  L A N G U A G E
James Sneddon is Head of the School of Languages and Linguistics at Griffith
University in Brisbane. A university-level teacher and researcher of linguistics and
Indonesian language for over 20 years, he is the author of Indonesian Reference
Grammar (1996) and Understanding Indonesian Grammar (2000).

TO ANTON M. MOELIONO
A TRUE CHAMPION OF THE INDONESIAN LANGUAGE

THE 
INDONESIAN
LANGUAGE
I T S  H I S T O R Y  A N D  R O L E  
I N  M O D E R N  S O C I E T Y
James Sneddon
UNSW
PRESS

A UNSW Press book
Published by
University of New South Wales Press Ltd
University of New South Wales
Sydney NSW 2052
AUSTRALIA
www.unswpress.com.au
© James Sneddon 2003
First published 2003
This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for
the purpose of private study, research, criticism or review,
as permitted under the Copyright Act, no part may be
reproduced by any process without written permission.
Inquiries should be addressed to the publisher.
National Library of Australia
Cataloguing-in-Publication entry:
Sneddon, James N.
The Indonesian language: its history and role 
in modern society.
Includes index.
ISBN 0 86840 598 1.
1. Indonesian language – History. I. Title.
499.221
Printer  Griffin Press
Cover design Di Quick

PREFACE
1
1
INTRODUCTION
5
A new language for a new nation
5
A brief history of the language
7
The standardisation and spread of Indonesian
9
Malay outside Indonesia
11
On the name of the language
14
Fallacies and misconceptions
14
The teaching of Indonesian as a foreign language
18
Structure of the book
20
2
MALAY AND THE AUSTRONESIAN LANGUAGE FAMILY
22
The Austronesian languages
22
Proto-Austronesian and its descendants
25
The Malayic languages
31
3
OLD MALAY
33
The beginning of Indian influence
33
The Malays and the growth of trade
35
Srivijaya
36
Srivijaya’s power and the spread of Malay
40
The decline of Srivijaya
43
Borrowing from Sanskrit
45
4
THE CLASSIC AL MALAY PERIOD
52
The coming of Islam
52
Malacca and its influence
57
C O N T E N T S

Malay in the east
59
The earliest Malay letters
62
Malay literature
65
Munshi Abdullah
71
External influences
72
5
EUROPEAN INFLUENCES BEFORE THE 20 T H CENTURY
79
The Portuguese
79
The Dutch and their use of Malay
82
1824: The dividing of the Malay world
86
Moves towards standardisation
87
Newspapers and their influence
89
The influence of van Ophuijsen
91
6
THE 20 T H CENTURY TO 1945
93
The situation at the beginning of the century
93
Balai Pustaka
95
Other influences and the emergence of General Cultivated 
97
Malay
The nationalists
99
The Second Indonesian Youth Congress and the Sumpah 
101
Pemuda
Why Malay?
103
Alisjahbana and Pujangga Baru
106
The First Indonesian National Language Congress
108
Dutch reaction and the position of Indonesian in 1941
109
The Japanese period
111
7
LANGUAGE PLANNING
114
The early days of planning
114
Components of planning
119
Diglossia and the language situation in Indonesia
121
Conservatives vs progressives
125
Spelling reform
127
The Pusat Bahasa
128
Alisjahbana vs Moeliono
130
Cultivation and dissemination
132
Language problems in the education system
137
Bahasa pejabat
139
Elite language and alienation
140
The advice industry
142

8
BEYOND PLANNING: OTHER INFLUENCES ON THE 
144
LANGUAGE
The influence of Sukarno
144
Acronyms and other abbreviations
145
The mass media
149
Borrowing from other languages
152
Jakarta Malay and informal Jakartan Indonesian
153
The influence of Javanese
156
The influence of Dutch
160
The influence of Sanskrit on the modern language
167
9
THE INFLUENCE OF ENGLISH
173
The status language
173
The role of the mass media in disseminating English
177
Areas of borrowing
180
The assimilation of borrowings
183
Excessive borrowing from English
185
Affixes
188
Loan translations
191
Grammatical innovations
192
Reaction to English influence
194
10
REGIONAL LANGUAGES AND THE SPREAD OF INDONESIAN
196
The languages of Indonesia
196
Knowledge of Indonesian
199
Lingua francas and language shift
203
The spread of Indonesian
205
Efforts to maintain regional languages
207
The position of Javanese
210
The present state of Indonesian
212
The future of Indonesian
213
ENDNOTES
218
REFERENCES
227
INDEX
236


This book discusses the history of the Indonesian national language and
its role in the modern state. Although most of the topics dealt with are
also covered in other publications, often in more detail, there has never
been a unified book-length historical and social study of the language.
The book aims to be of interest to non-specialists and those with a gen-
eral interest in the language. It therefore avoids lengthy and detailed
consideration of specific topics. Much of the material is drawn from
other works, and these are identified for readers wishing to pursue par-
ticular matters in more detail.
Since late 1997, Indonesia has been in a state of social and political
turmoil, which makes the country of interest to many people, including
academics in fields such as history, politics and sociology, journalists and
those with an interest in international affairs. The national language,
intimately linked with the nation and in many ways a reflection of it,
shares in this interest.
A study of the Indonesian language is particularly relevant to
Australians. Indonesia is Australia’s closest large neighbour and is con-
sistently identified as one of Australia’s most important foreign rela-
tionships. A knowledge of the country and its language is often
emphasised to Australians and Indonesian is one of the major languages
taught in Australia, at both secondary and tertiary levels. Despite recent
serious economic and political problems, relations with Indonesia 
clearly remain of major significance to Australia, for political, econom-
ic, strategic and social reasons.
However, interest in Indonesia is by no means confined to Australia.
Because of its position as the fourth largest nation in the world and the
P R E FA C E

largest Moslem state, it is the focus of considerable international atten-
tion. Indonesia’s population is more than 200 million, and the number
speaking the national language is approaching 100 per cent. Indonesian
is thus among the languages with the highest numbers of speakers in the
world; a study of the language is highly relevant for this reason alone.
While the book aims to be informative to teachers and advanced
students of the language and students of linguistics, nevertheless the
structure of the language is only very briefly touched on. Comments on
grammar and phonology are few and discussion of phonetics is kept to
a minimum. There is thus no assumption of expert knowledge of lin-
guistics or Indonesian on the part of the reader. Although the book
traces the history of the language, linguistic description of historical
changes is only given in a very limited way. Any historical linguistic
study would, of necessity, be technical and thus uninformative to any-
one without training in historical-comparative linguistics.
Traditional English place-names are used, rather than local names;
for instance, Malacca instead of Malaka or Melaka, and Moluccas
instead of Maluku. For Indonesian names, the present-day Indonesian
spelling is used; thus Pujangga Baru instead of the older spelling
Poedjangga Baroe. The names of the first two presidents, which are
inconsistently spelt today with ‘u’ or ‘oe’, are rendered Sukarno and
Suharto. All instances of Indonesian words and phrases are presented
in italics.
I am grateful to many people for helpful assistance, advice and infor-
mation. These include Soenjono Dardjowidjojo, Bambang Kaswanti
Purwo, Dendy Sugono, Yuli Kartika Sari, Tessa Yuditha, George Quinn,
Sander Adelaar, John Jorgensen, Keith Foulcher, Bob Elson, Ed
Aspinall, Hein Steinhauer, Margaret Bocquet-Siek, Raimy Che-Ross,
Doris Nicholson and Leila Chudori.
During my many visits to Indonesia, I have received generous help
from many people, some of whom are listed above. I particularly wish
to express my sincere gratitude to the Suparto and Widagdo families in
Jakarta for their hospitality and friendship over many years.
My wife Susan has been most encouraging and understanding and
has provided the supportive environment necessary for extended peri-
ods of reclusive work, as well as giving sensible advice on drafts of some
sections of the book. To her I offer my loving thanks.
Finally, I express my appreciation to Anton Moeliono, who gave me
the opportunity to work for two extended periods at the National
Centre for Language Cultivation and Development (the Pusat Bahasa)
2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

in Jakarta. This enabled me to gain some insight into its activities.
Professor Moeliono has devoted his professional life to the Indonesian
language, to its development, refinement and acceptance, enduring
many battles for his cause along the way.
Any errors in the text are mine alone and I apologise to anyone who
supplied information that I misinterpreted or misused in any way.
P R E F A C E • 3

4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

A  N E W  L A N G U A G E  F O R  
A  N E W  N AT I O N
On 28 October 1928, delegates at the Second Indonesian Youth
Congress passed a resolution, known as the Youth Pledge, proclaiming
Indonesian to be the language of national unity. The language to which
they were referring was Malay, or rather the variety of it that would
become the national language of the future Indonesian state. Malay was
far from being universally understood in Indonesia, with only about
5 per cent of the population at that time being native speakers. It was,
however, the principal lingua franca among the speakers of the hun-
dreds of languages in the Indonesian archipelago and it was partly this
status that led to its choice, under a new name, as the national language.
The development of Indonesian as the sole national language and
one of the major unifying forces in Indonesia has been described by a
leading sociolinguist as a ‘miraculous’ process whereby the population
was successfully ‘convinced that a particular outside language should
become their own integrative, inter-ethnic, unifying tongue’.1 It was an
essential element, some say the most important element, in the integra-
tion of hundreds of ethnic groups into what is today the fourth most
populous nation in the world; ‘perhaps the most important single ingre-
dient in the shaping of the modern Indonesian culture’.2
The nation of Indonesia stretches over thousands of inhabited
islands, from Sumatra in the west to West Papua (Irian Jaya) in the east,
with a total population of more than 200 million at the end of the 20th
century. Estimates of the number of languages in Indonesia vary, but 
a figure of 550, one-tenth of all the languages in the world, is not 
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N

excessive. The Indonesian nationalists at the beginning of the 20th cen-
tury were fully aware of the need for a single national language to allow
communication throughout the future nation — to comprise all the
Dutch possessions, known then as Dutch East Indies — if unity was to
be achieved and maintained. The Indonesian motto, Bhinneka Tunggal
Ika (Unity in Diversity), acknowledges the multiethnic and multilingual
nature of Indonesia and emphasises the importance of unity.
Since independence, Indonesian has had the status of national lan-
guage in its true sense, being the sole official language and the language
of national unity. Its position has been far firmer than that of national
languages in other multiethnic Southeast Asian countries, Malaysia,
Singapore and the Philippines, where linguistic differences have pre-
vented any language achieving such a status and where the chosen
national language has, to a greater or lesser extent, been overshadowed
by a foreign language, English. How remarkable the acceptance of
Indonesian has been is shown by a comparison with India, where forms
for the 2001 census had to be printed in 17 languages. By contrast, in
every Indonesian census, forms have been printed only in Indonesian,
although the country has many more languages than India.
In a slightly different form, Malay is also the national language of
Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei, and is spoken by communities in a
number of other countries. The history of the Malay language, the
events leading up to its choice as the national language of Indonesia,
and the planning and other developments that have influenced the lan-
guage are the subject matter of this book.
When Malay became the national language, as Indonesian, it did
not take over all the roles of the other languages spoken throughout the
archipelago, which continued to be used within their own linguistic
communities. As the official language, it is used in the mass media and
is the language of all government business and of education. It is used
in most situations where two people with different regional back-
grounds wish to communicate with each other, although in some
regions local lingua francas also have a role. While the other languages
of the nation continue their role as language of the home within their
own regions, many are in a precarious position. They are more likely to
be confined to use in areas of traditional culture rather than anything
associated with modern life. Informal communication within the home
and village in activities associated with traditional customs, such as cer-
emonies, story telling, and traditional occupations, will usually be in the
regional language. But Indonesian is more likely to be used in modern
6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

contexts, such as discussion of politics and technology. As the modern
world continues to intrude into even the remotest villages, through
television and education, knowledge of Indonesian grows. Larger
regional languages are surviving the increasing spread of Indonesian
into aspects of everyday life, but for many minor languages there is
increasing threat to survival as speakers turn to Indonesian in more and
more areas of their daily lives.
For most of the 20th century, the greatest challenge to Indonesian
was to quickly become the language of unity and a fully developed
national language able to cope with all the demands of modern life.
During the century, the language underwent enormous changes,
including significant syntactic elaboration and a much enlarged lexicon,
thus acquiring greatly enhanced powers of expression. During the
Suharto era (1966–98), the government viewed standardisation and
modernisation of the language as essential to its program of economic
development. As a consequence, the nature of the language and the 
language-planning process came in for criticism from some who saw the
language as too closely linked to the authoritarian Suharto government.
Today, the language faces new challenges. The unity of the Indonesian
state is under threat and this presents threats to the continued develop-
ment, expansion and stability of the language.
A  B R I E F  H I S T O R Y  O F  T H E  L A N G U A G E
The Malay-speaking people originated on the coastal plains of east and
southeast Sumatra and off-shore islands, later spreading to the Malay
Peninsula and to coastal areas of Borneo. They were first-rate seafarers
and traders and their position in the Straits of Malacca between Sumatra
and the peninsula brought them into contact with merchants and sea-
men from India and later from China and other countries. Able to con-
trol east–west trade, which was required to pass through the Straits of
Malacca, Malay kingdoms became prosperous and powerful. From its
early history, the Malay language was used in the region by traders and
travellers from many lands as their means of communication with each
other. When trade routes spread east to the Moluccas (Spice Islands),
and even further afield, Malay was taken along, becoming the language
of trading ports throughout the archipelago. Simplified forms of Malay,
heavily influenced by local languages, formed the basis for later creole
varieties, especially in the eastern archipelago, where they sometimes
displaced local languages as the first language of the home. Such forms
of Malay were well established in the Moluccas when the Portuguese
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 7

arrived early in the 16th century. The spread of Malay can be seen from
the considerable number of borrowings from a very early date in 
languages as far afield as Tagalog in northern Philippines.
Before the 16th century there were two classes of Malay: ‘indige-
nous’ or ‘traditional’ varieties in Sumatra, Malaya, nearby islands and
some coastal areas of Borneo, and ‘non-indigenous’ or ‘post-creole’
varieties, spoken by populations who were originally exposed to Malay
as a contact language and whose original languages were eventually
replaced by it.
In its traditional heartland in the western archipelago, literary vari-
eties developed in the various royal courts. It also became a prestige lit-
erary language in aristocratic circles in many non-Malay-speaking areas,
such as Aceh in northern Sumatra and Makassar in South Sulawesi. Of
particular importance in the history of the language was the literary
‘Classical Malay’ of the Riau-Johor Sultanate, which continued and
developed the traditions of the literary language of the earlier royal
court of Malacca.
The development of two standard forms of Malay — Malaysian and
Indonesian — had its origin in the rivalry between the British and
Dutch for trade supremacy in the archipelago. In 1824, the British and
Dutch signed a treaty that specified their separate spheres of influence.
As has happened so often in Asia and Africa, the drawing of boundaries
was for the convenience of the colonial powers, taking little account of
traditional boundaries or ethnic and cultural groupings. As a result, the
traditional Malay homeland was split in two, with Sumatra and off-
shore islands going to the Dutch and the Malay Peninsula to the British.
The former Sultanate of Riau-Johor was divided, Riau going to the
Dutch and today being part of Indonesia, and Johor going to the
British and now being part of Malaysia. This did have one beneficial
result in relation to language; because the Classical Malay of Riau-Johor
was so prestigious and because the 1824 treaty left it in both spheres of
influence it was to play an important part in the shaping of the standard
language in both Malaysia and Indonesia. As a result, the two languages
are very similar — which might not have been the case if the boundary
had been placed elsewhere.
The Dutch encouraged the use of Malay as a lingua franca among
the speakers of the archipelago’s many languages, recognising that it
provided a vehicle by which they could communicate throughout their
colonies, thereby retaining and strengthening their position. By the
early 20th century, emerging nationalist groups in the Dutch East
8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Indies were using Malay publicly, seeing it as the only language
through which they could spread their message. The Malay that they
were using was a convergence of many varieties whose sources were in
both the ‘High’ Malay of the literary traditions and the various forms
of ‘Low’ Malay, of both traditional and post-creole antecedents.
Ironically, in choosing Malay the nationalists were inspired by the same
desire as the Dutch: to unite the archipelago’s people through use of a
common language.
When the Second Indonesian Youth Congress of 1928 recognised
the language as the ‘language of unity’, its future role as national lan-
guage was already a fait accompli. The declaration was, however, of
great symbolic importance; the nationalists had, by changing the name
of the language to Indonesian, formally linked it to the future state of
Indonesia. When the Japanese occupied the Dutch territories early in
1942, the use of Dutch in administration and education was immedi-
ately banned and Indonesian overnight achieved the de facto status of
official language. This was formalised with the Declaration of
Independence on 17 August 1945.
T H E  S TA N D A R D I S AT I O N  A N D  
S P R E A D  O F  I N D O N E S I A N
The modern Indonesian language is strikingly different from the lan-
guage of the early 20th century. Language planning began in 1942, but
development of the language to make it suitable for communication as
a national language had already informally begun, in novels and in the
writings of intellectuals, and in fact even earlier, in the decisions of the
Dutch over the form of language to use in education.
These developments involved mainly the language of education and
literature and not the language of everyday interaction. There thus
began a process of differentiation into two very different forms of the
language, a situation known as diglossia (see p. 121). The seeds of this
process lay in the decision of the Dutch authorities in the 19th century
that Malay-language education would use High Malay, or Riau Malay,
the style that had evolved in Classical Malay literature. This was, to a
large extent, an artificial construct, developed over many centuries,
which had diverged significantly from the various vernacular forms of
the language spoken by the common people in their daily lives.
By independence the two styles — high or formal language and low
or informal language — had become quite distinct, a situation that con-
tinues to the present. The high variety is used in education and in all
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 9

government business, in the law and mass media and in other domains
of formal activity. The low variety is the language of the home and of
informal social interaction.
Partly as a result of official language-planning activities, but also
under other influences, such as the mass media, a quite standardised
form of the high language has emerged. Informal or colloquial varieties
of the language, on the other hand, vary considerably from place to
place and among different groups within the one area.
Most Indonesian children have little or no contact with the formal
language until they begin their education. Formal Indonesian is expect-
ed to be mastered by educated people and proficiency in it is a mark of
a person’s level of education.
There are several consequences of this. First, because formal lan-
guage is used on important occasions, such as state ceremonies, and
is mastered by better educated (and therefore usually wealthier) peo-
ple, it is generally regarded as superior to informal speech; it is the
prestige form of the language. Informal speech, by contrast, is fre-
quently held in disdain. There is a tradition of study of the formal
language, with dictionaries and grammars and other descriptions. It
is held up as ‘good and correct’ language and there is a flourishing
advice industry, for people eager to improve their language skills and
thereby also their employment prospects. On the other hand, there
has been virtually no study by Indonesian linguists of the informal
variety. The language-planning authorities show no interest in infor-
mal speech and the official grammar of Indonesian contains no
description of it.
Second, although the formal variety has greater prestige, many peo-
ple feel alienated from it. People who have not had the opportunity of
a good education are very unlikely to have anything approaching ade-
quate proficiency in the high variety. It is associated by such people with
the elite, from whose ranks they are excluded. Such people often feel no
desire to develop proficiency and have no inclination to participate in
efforts to cultivate the language. There is thus something of a paradox
in that many people feel pride in their national language, as a symbol of
the nation and of its uniqueness, yet, on the other hand, have no per-
sonal emotional commitment to it, feeling it to be something remote
and detached from their own lives.
Informal varieties of Indonesian, often referred to as bahasa
sehari-hari (everyday language), are increasingly being used in 
daily interaction at the expense of regional languages. Their use is
1 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

particularly strong in larger cities, especially Jakarta, where people
daily come into contact with others from many language back-
grounds. Jakarta is a great melting pot, as to a lesser extent are other
large cities, like Medan, Palembang, Bandung and Semarang. People
who migrate to the cities find themselves surrounded by neighbours
from many different regions, in which case Indonesian is usually the
only means of communication between them. Their children are edu-
cated in Indonesian and use it with their friends. In such an environ-
ment it takes only two or three generations before the regional
language is lost altogether from the family. While the number of
speakers of Indonesian in 1928 was very limited, the percentage of
the population who can now be counted as native speakers of
Indonesian has grown rapidly, rising to 41 per cent of the population
at the time of the 1971 census, and to 83 per cent by the 1990 cen-
sus. In the larger cities, especially Jakarta, virtually the whole popula-
tion can now speak Indonesian, with a growing number being
monolingual in the language.
In recent decades, a prestige variety of informal Indonesian has
emerged in the speech of the Jakarta middle class, which is develop-
ing into a standard colloquial variety of the language. Thus the terms
‘standard’ and ‘formal’ must be clearly differentiated; it is likely that,
as has happened in many other languages, standard varieties of both
formal and informal language will exist in the near future.
M A L AY  O U T S I D E  I N D O N E S I A
In an only slightly different form from Standard Indonesian, a standard
variety of Malay is the national language of Malaysia, Singapore and
Brunei.
Following the dividing of the Malay world in 1824, the language
travelled in two separate directions, coming under the influence of
English in the British colonies and Dutch in the Dutch East Indies.
Despite an enormous variety of regional dialects of Malay throughout
the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra and Borneo, the national languages are
today remarkably similar, heavily based as they are on the same literary
tradition.3
However, in many details the different Dutch and British influ-
ences can be clearly seen and this is nowhere more apparent than in
vocabulary. In many cases, Malaysian has an English word while
Indonesian has a Dutch word to express the same meaning, as in the
following examples:
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 1 1

MALAYSIAN
INDONESIAN
suitcase
beg (English ‘bag’)
kopor (Dutch koffer)
tyre
tayar
ban (Dutch band)
bicycle
basikal
sepeda (Dutch velocipede [obsolete])
ticket
tiket
karcis (Dutch kaartjes [plural])
A number of related, though not phonologically identical, English and
Dutch words have been borrowed into the respective languages, such
as:
MALAYSIAN
INDONESIAN
police
polis
polisi (Dutch politie)
policy
polisi
polis (Dutch polis)
television
televisyen
televisi (Dutch televisie)
August
Ogos
Agustus (Dutch Augustus)
In many cases, one of the languages has borrowed from a source 
other than the language of the colonial power or one has retained the
original Malay word:
MALAYSIAN
INDONESIAN
towel
tuala (Portuguese)
handuk (Dutch)
Christmas
Kerismas (English)
Natal (Portuguese)
room
bilik (Malay)
kamar (Dutch)
file
fail (English)
berkas (Malay)
Indonesian has also borrowed considerably from Javanese (see 
p. 156) and, in recent times, from Jakarta Malay (see p. 153) and
Sanskrit (see p. 167), while Malaysian has borrowed considerably more
from Arabic. These and other differences between the two standard
forms of Malay are conspicuous. Nevertheless, the similarities between
the two vastly outweigh the differences and they are, by and large,
mutually intelligible.4 Moreover, the Malaysian variety is under consid-
erable influence from Indonesian, exposure coming largely via films
and magazines.
National consciousness in the British colonies did not emerge until
long after it did in the Dutch colony and this is reflected in language
development. After the Second World War, English continued as the
official language and the language of all higher education in the British
colonies, with Malay very much occupying a subservient role. It was not
until 1952 that the First Congress of Malay was held (in Singapore) and
1 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

it was concerned mainly with the question of which writing system, the
Latin-based or Arabic-based, should become official. The Latin-based
script was eventually chosen and use of Arabic script has continued to
decline ever since. The language-planning authority Dewan Bahasa dan
Pustaka (Language and Literacy Agency) was established in 1956.5
In Indonesia, Malay was not a major community language; its estab-
lishment as the official language therefore presented neither threat nor
favouritism to any ethnic group and was universally supported. By con-
trast, in Malaysia the Malay language was very much the language of the
Malay ethnic group, who made up a little more than half the popula-
tion. When it became the sole official language on independence in
1957, many non-Malays, including the sizable Chinese and Indian pop-
ulations, felt disadvantaged, particularly as few of them had facility in
it.6 The change of name to Malaysian in 1967 was part of the campaign
to make the language more acceptable to non-Malays, although at a
later date official policy was to again refer to the language as Malay.
Knowledge of Malaysian spread quickly once it became the sole lan-
guage for education. However, the position of English remains strong in
Malaysia and many felt that the removal of English as the language of high-
er education worked to the disadvantage of the nation internationally. In
1993, the government allowed English to be used again as a language of
instruction in universities in the interest of science and technology.7 In
2002, the Malaysian government announced that, from 2003, all maths
and science would be taught in English in secondary schools.8
Malay also became the national language of the state of Brunei in
northern Borneo. This official form of the language varies only in minor
ways from Malaysian, and is distinct from Brunei Malay, the traditional
Malay dialect of the region, which is the major lingua franca between all
ethnic groups in Brunei. English can also be used for official purposes
and in schools and the university.9
It also became the national language of Singapore and one of the
four official languages, along with English, Mandarin and Tamil. In
reality, Malay is a minority language in Singapore, Malays constituting
about 15 per cent of the population, with the great majority being of
Chinese descent. English retains a significant position, being the lan-
guage of education and the principal language for inter-ethnic com-
munication.
A variety of the language, Pattani Malay, is spoken by more than a
million people in southern Thailand and other forms of the language
are also spoken by small groups in a number of other countries.10
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 1 3

O N  T H E  N A M E  O F  T H E  L A N G U A G E
The name Bahasa Indonesia is often used for Indonesian. While this is
the name for the language in Indonesian, it is not used here, for the
same reason that when speaking English we do not refer to French as
Français, or German as Deutsch, and so on. While these are the native
names, they are not the names in English. Similarly, there is a perfectly
good English name for the national language of Indonesia, namely
‘Indonesian’, and this term is used throughout this work, except when
quoting others who use Bahasa Indonesia.
In Indonesian, bahasa means no more than ‘language’ and is
applied to all languages, such as bahasa Inggris (English). Moreover, it
is not a proper noun and is not spelt with a capital. Indonesian does not
have a system of deriving adjectives from nouns, which can then stand
alone. A modifying noun must be used, as in bahasa Indonesia (lan-
guage of Indonesia) and orang Indonesia (person of Indonesia; an
Indonesian). The practice of using the native term does not appear to
be applied to other national languages. Thus no one speaks in English
of Korean as Hangungmal, which means ‘language of Korea’, having
the same structure as the Indonesian. One problem with using Bahasa
Indonesia is that it is frequently reduced to Bahasa, on the assumption
that this is the name of the language. This is no different from referring
to English as ‘Language’ and Indonesians normally would not recog-
nise the name Bahasa alone as referring to their national language.11
F A L L A C I E S  A N D  M I S C O N C E P T I O N S
There are few languages about which there is so much misunderstand-
ing as Indonesian. Negative attitudes to the language abound, proba-
bly more so than towards any other Asian language. Most of this
results from ignorance about the language and is easily refuted. There
are two basic misconceptions; one that it is ‘simple’, the other that it is
‘soulless’.
The myth of simplicity applies not just to Indonesian but to varieties
of Malay in general. This misconception basically states that Malay has
little grammar and people are quite free to speak it however they wish.
The belief was held by many Europeans in colonial days, who were only
familiar with simplified lingua franca varieties of Malay, which were no
one’s mother tongue and were used for limited purposes, such as trade.
In the words of one Dutch writer, Malay was ‘a mere auxiliary language,
only fit for communications of a simple and concrete kind’.12
1 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

The myth of simplicity is widespread among people who have little
or no facility in the language. An Australian naval officer once recom-
mended Malay as a suitable language for sailors to study because ‘it can
be learned in three weeks’. A travellers’ handbook states that
‘Indonesian was designed to be simple and streamlined for the masses’13
and another writer states ‘Malay has an extraordinary feature in that it
can be greatly simplified, producing a “bazaar Malay” that is perfectly
adequate to meet common everyday needs’.14 It is not usual for ‘the
masses’ to speak some sort of simplified language for their ‘common
everyday needs’ as the above two writers imagine; simplified forms of
Malay developed for use between speakers of different languages with
limited communication needs, not for use as a first language.
It is a common misconception that the national language of
Indonesia arose from ‘Bazaar Malay’, or even from a pidgin language,
and this has led to much of the prejudice against it. One linguist has
stated: ‘In an independent country, the major example to date of a 
language originating as a trade jargon and achieving the status of a
national language is Indonesian, an outgrowth of Bazaar Malay.’15
Even some Indonesian scholars have shown confusion about the ori-
gins of Standard Indonesian. Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana, an outstanding
contributor to the status and growth of Indonesian as the national lan-
guage (see p. 106), wrote that the language had been ‘transformed
from a pidgin’.16 In fact the origins of modern Standard Indonesian are
actually much more in the literary language of the royal courts of Riau-
Johor and southern Sumatra than in the markets and trading ports of
the archipelago.
Another Indonesian linguist has written: ‘The emergence of Malay
as the lingua franca of Indonesia and peninsular Malaya and later its
transformation into the national language … was facilitated by …[its]
relative simplicity and flexibility’.17 Not only is the myth of simplicity
continued, but also the belief that this was partly responsible for its
choice as the national language of Indonesia and Malaysia. The fact is
that languages acquire importance because they are in the right place at
the right time, not for any linguistic characteristics that they might have.
Numerous people have talked confusedly about the reasons English has
gained such world importance, claiming, for instance, that ‘it embodies
the free spirit of the English-speaking people’, and so on. English has
achieved its place because of the importance achieved by the countries
where it is spoken, not because of its own nature. Likewise, Malay, once
just another language among hundreds in the archipelago, rose to
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 1 5

prominence for geographic, social and political reasons, not because of
linguistic characteristics.
The perception of simplicity accounts in part for its popularity as a
school and university subject in Australia, where it is one of the major
Asian languages taught. Students who choose Indonesian because it is
easy are soon disabused, failing to become fluent ‘in three weeks’ and
rarely even after three years of university study. Much of the ‘drop-out’
after a brief period studying Indonesian in Australian universities is a
result of frustration that expectations of an easy ride were not fulfilled.
Apart from the belief that the language is or has derived from a pid-
gin, there are several other reasons for the notion that Indonesian is a
simple language.
First, compared with other major Asian languages, particularly
Chinese and Japanese, Indonesian has a distinct advantage as a LOTE
(language other than English) in the education system. Chinese and
Japanese have scripts that require an enormous amount of time and
effort before the student can acquire advanced reading skills.
Indonesian, on the other hand, has a Latin-based script that is not only
familiar to the learner but is also phonemically accurate, with one letter
or group of letters always representing the one sound, with very few
exceptions. The result is that the student need spend next to no time
mastering the writing system and can concentrate on actually learning
the language. The student of Chinese and Japanese is diverted from
studying the language by the need to spend a great deal of time learn-
ing written characters. The time that the characters take to master adds
to the overall time taken to learn Chinese and Japanese and hence adds
to the perception that they are difficult languages. By contrast,
Indonesian gets a reputation for simplicity.
Secondly, there are some aspects of Indonesian grammar that allow
the learner to quickly acquire ‘survival’ proficiency, sufficient for com-
municating about very basic needs. Visitors to Indonesia often acquire
this very limited proficiency and, stopping there, assume that the rest is
just as easy. But the student soon learns that to acquire general profi-
ciency requires just as much effort as does proficiency in other lan-
guages. Among the aspects of grammar that allow the foreign learner to
begin using basic language early is absence of tense and aspect markers
on verbs. This has led to a quite common belief that the language is
unable to express concepts of time and aspect, another of the ‘simple
language’ fallacies. In fact all the complexities of the English verb phrase
can be reproduced in natural Indonesian.18 (It could likewise be pointed
1 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

out that a speaker of Latin or Russian, presented with insufficient infor-
mation on modern English, might suppose that English is incapable of
indicating the semantic relationship of nouns to verbs because nouns do
not have case endings.)
Linguists generally reject the notion that some natural languages
(which excludes pidgins) are more complex or simple than others. ‘It is
the finding of modern linguistics that all languages are roughly equal in
terms of overall complexity’.19 This applies to Indonesian as well as to
any other language. After commenting that the language was ‘designed
to be simple and streamlined for the masses’, the travel book mentioned
above states, with considerably more insight: ‘But to speak it well it is
as difficult and as sophisticated as any of the world’s great languages’.20
Another factor supporting the simplicity notion can be added here.
Indonesians have few expectations that foreigners visiting the country
will learn their language. When they meet a visitor making an effort,
they are usually most pleased and encouraging. With the addition of a
cultural avoidance of criticism, Indonesians tend to be effusive in praise
of the struggling foreigner’s attempts at their language. Sudah lancar
(You’re fluent) is heard by a great many foreign visitors who can pro-
duce a few hesitant phrases. In comparison with native speakers of
English and French, who expect proficiency in their language from vis-
itors and who require high standards before they consider using words
like ‘fluent’, Indonesians are extremely tolerant. This leads many learn-
ers to believe that they actually are good at the language. It also leads
to the fallacy that ‘Indonesian has a forgiving syntax’; as long as
Indonesians can understand the foreigner they will heap praise, whatev-
er tortures have been inflicted on the grammar of their language, so that
‘it doesn’t matter how you say it in Indonesian’.
The second myth, that of the ‘soulless’ language, appears to refer
exclusively to standard formal Indonesian, as distinct from other vari-
eties of Malay. As a national language needing to deal with every area of
learning in the modern world, Indonesian underwent enormous devel-
opments in the 20th century. The changes from Classical Malay to
modern Indonesian are striking and deserve objective study. For lovers
of older Malay, the modern developments are viewed with horror.
Indeed, one great British scholar of Malay, Richard Winstedt, wrote in
the preface to his Malay dictionary: ‘It is a curious commentary on
Indonesian nationalism that along with a rich vocabulary it has accept-
ed a travesty of European syntax based on incompetent translation 
and quite unknown to daily speech, and by this foreign borrowing has
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 1 7

utterly spoilt the logical clarity of traditional Malay’.21 This is powerful
condemnation, but it has little meaning except to display the author’s
negativity to a form of the language different from the one he was famil-
iar with and therefore preferred. If Indonesian has ‘utterly spoilt the
logical clarity of traditional Malay’ it is a wonder its speakers can com-
municate with each other at all! Objectively, the expression can only be
understood as meaning ‘modern Indonesian has undergone significant
grammatical changes’.
Indonesian is sometimes disdained, in speech and writing, as a ‘soul-
less’ and alienating language. One writer has referred to it as ‘a language
of an alienated and bureaucratic intelligentsia’ that seems to the
Javanese, ‘by comparison with their own rich language, peculiarly
turgid, humourless, awkward, mechanical and bereft of emotion or sen-
suality’.22 Another has written: ‘Modern Indonesian has something
curiously impersonal and neuter about it, which sets up psychological
distances between its speakers’.23
The fallacy common to such claims is that only very formal
Indonesian is actually Indonesian. The colloquial language used by tens
of millions of Indonesians every day is either not recognised as existing
or is regarded as something other than a form of Indonesian. Those
who have facility in formal Indonesian speak it in appropriate settings;
for most of their daily activities they speak more informal variants of the
language (if they are not speaking a regional language). Anyone who
has spent time with Indonesians can hardly be anything but puzzled at
claims that their language is turgid, humourless and bereft of emotion.
The ‘soulless’ misconception thus can be explained in terms of fail-
ure to appreciate the diglossic nature of Indonesian, in which the for-
mal language is significantly different from the colloquial variety of
everyday conversation (see p. 121). Indonesian is the language of the
home and playground as well as of the bureaucracy. To criticise it in
general as ‘turgid, humourless, bereft of emotion’ and so on, is no more
justified than saying the same of English because this is characteristic of
the style used in legal documents.
T H E  T E A C H I N G  O F  I N D O N E S I A N  
A S  A  F O R E I G N  L A N G U A G E
As the only variety of the language associated with education, formal
Indonesian is also usually considered the only variety worthy of being
taught to foreigners; teaching informal speech to foreigners in a formal
learning situation would be next to unimaginable to most native-
1 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

speaking teachers of the language. The advice ‘It is better for a foreign
student to err on the correct or even formal side than to employ care-
less, incorrect or substandard usage’24 would be echoed by most
Indonesian teachers of the language. The negative terms ‘careless’,
‘incorrect’ and ‘substandard’ reflect the attitudes of such teachers and
many other educated Indonesians to informal speech, even though they
themselves use this style when it is appropriate to the social situation.
As a result, many foreign learners, most of whom study the lan-
guage in Australia, both at school and tertiary levels, are only aware of
the highly stylised variety associated with the most formal situations and
are quite uninformed about colloquial forms of the language. It comes
as something of a surprise for such learners arriving in Indonesia for the
first time to hear the language as actually spoken in informal situations.
There are two reactions: either the student assumes that Indonesians
cannot speak their own language properly (as is sometimes stated to
Indonesians)25 or, the more frequent reaction, the student expresses
dissatisfaction with the way he or she has been taught, claiming that
‘real Indonesian’ is being ignored.
Both reactions reflect a lack of understanding of the diglossic situa-
tion in Indonesia, which is poorly understood by most teachers and hence
not conveyed to students. The frequent result of this lack of understand-
ing is that, having unsystematically acquired some informal language on
visiting Indonesia, the student proceeds to use (a very imperfect imitation
of) it in all situations, oblivious to the solecisms that may occur.
If Indonesian language educators are to effectively address the
needs of learners of the language, informal Indonesian must be taught
as well as formal Indonesian. Moreover, students must acquire sensitiv-
ity to the sociolinguistic situation in Indonesia and an appreciation of
the need for style to be appropriate to the social occasion. For this to be
possible, teachers must themselves possess such awareness and have the
resources to teach effectively. This includes availability of suitable mate-
rials for teaching the colloquial language. While there is now a great
variety of resources available for the teaching of formal Indonesian,
descriptions of informal language currently available to teachers and
learners of the language are few and fragmentary, mainly comprising
comments on some grammatical points where it differs from formal
Indonesian. Such treatments offer no detailed or consistent description
and minimal discussion of contextual appropriateness.26
In Australia in recent years there has been a greater willingness on
the part of some teachers to introduce students to the informal variant
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 1 9

(although many non-native teachers themselves have little or no facility
in it). Nevertheless, development of a sensitivity to the social appropri-
ateness of different styles is considerably more difficult than some 
proponents of the teaching of informal Indonesian in schools and uni-
versities imagine. In particular, the attitudes of Indonesians themselves
to the type of Indonesian they expect foreigners to speak is rarely taken
into consideration. Most older people are likely to expect more formal
language use from foreigners than they themselves use on most occa-
sions. This perhaps reflects the attitude that colloquial speech is infe-
rior and not worthy of teaching to foreigners, and therefore should not
be used by them. Others may regard it as an in-group code not for use
by outsiders. On the other hand, many people with poor proficiency in
formal language feel alienated from it and are much happier for for-
eigners to ‘speak like us’. Students and other youths are more likely to
expect greater use of informal language from visiting youths from other
countries. This is a topic that deserves serious study in any development
of policy on Indonesian language teaching.
S T R U C T U R E  O F  T H E  B O O K
The book traces the historical development of the language up to the
present, with identifiable periods in the past assigned to separate chap-
ters. The later chapters consider its position within Indonesian society
in the modern period.
Malay/Indonesian is a member of the large Austronesian language
family. One group of Austronesians settled in western Borneo and it is
from this group that the Malayic languages, of which Malay is a mem-
ber, developed. Chapter 2 considers the origins and migrations of the
Austronesian people and the emergence of the Malayic subgroup.
The ancestors of the Malays travelled to southeast Sumatra, where
they eventually built powerful kingdoms, as discussed in Chapter 3. It
was in the kingdom of Srivijaya that the earliest known Malay inscrip-
tions were made. Dating from the late 7th century, these inscriptions
are the first direct information that we have on the Malay language.
During this Old Malay period, the kingdoms were Hinduised and many
Indian influences appeared in the language.
As trade flourished throughout the archipelago, Srivijaya eventually
gave way to Islamised kingdoms, as described in Chapter 4. There fol-
lowed the period of Classical Malay and the literary court style, which
was eventually to have such a strong influence on the emerging national
language.
2 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

The Portuguese appeared in Southeast Asia at the beginning of the
16th century and European influence in the archipelago thereafter was
considerable. Chapter 5 covers the influence of European languages and
the contribution of the Dutch to the emergence of a standard form of
the language.
Early in the 20th century, nationalists in the Dutch East Indies were
beginning to contribute to the direction of the language’s development,
as described in Chapter 6. By the time of independence, the language
was ready to assume its role as sole national and official language of the
new nation.
Chapter 7 covers language planning and the influence of official
policy on the language, from independence to the present. It also dis-
cusses the diglossic nature of the language, characterised by significant-
ly different high and low varieties.
There have been other contributions to the shaping of the modern
language, operating outside, and sometimes in conflict with, the official
planning program, including the influence of former president Sukarno
and the mass media. Other languages, both foreign and regional, have
also contributed greatly to the development of the modern language.
These influences are considered in Chapter 8.
In recent decades, English has exerted an increasingly strong influ-
ence on Indonesian, both formal and informal, much to the consterna-
tion of purists. The influence of English is discussed in Chapter 9.
Use of Indonesian continues to spread at the expense of regional
languages. Many minor languages are in danger of extinction as the
number of people monolingual in the national language increases.
Chapter 10 looks at the spread of Indonesian, including information
from censuses. It concludes with brief conjecture on the future state of
the language.
I N T R O D U C T I O N • 2 1

T H E  A U S T R O N E S I A N  L A N G U A G E S
The Malay language, of which Indonesian is a variety, is a member of
the Austronesian language family, a large group of languages all
descended from a common ancestor. The name for the family,
Austronesian, is made up of Greek formatives meaning ‘southern
islands’. Terms like ‘family’, ‘ancestor’ and ‘descent’ usually refer to the
way people are related to each other through common ancestors and,
to some extent, the analogy is valid. Languages, however, do not pro-
duce descendants before dying, but rather change gradually over time.
A casual inspection of basic vocabulary in Malay and Pacific island
languages reveals many words that sound similar and have similar mean-
ings. Table 2.1 provides a sample of related words in Malay and three
Pacific Ocean languages.
Table 2.1
Related words in Malay and Pacific Ocean languages
MALAY
TONGAN
SAMOAN
TAHITIAN
cry
tangis
tangi
tangi
ta’i
louse
kutu
kutu
’utu
’utu
eye
mata
mata
mata
mata
two
dua
ua
lua
rua (archaic)
sky
langit
langi
langi
ra’i
fish
ikan
ika
i’a
i’a
liver
hati
’ate
ate
—
ear
telinga
telinga
talinga
tari’a
2
M A L AY  A N D  T H E  
A U S T R O N E S I A N  
L A N G U A G E  FA M I LY

Chance similarities in sound and meaning can occur between any
two languages. But chance resemblance cannot account for the system-
atic similarities in the list above and this points, even to the casual
observer, to some sort of relationship between Malay and the Pacific
island languages. One can see a number of differences between Malay
and the Pacific languages in the list. But even these differences are sys-
tematic. Thus where Malay has k, Tongan and Tahitian have ’ (which
represents the glottal stop, like the catch in ‘uh-uh’), where Malay has
ng Tahitian has ’ (glottal stop) and where Malay has l Tahitian has r.
Over time, all living languages undergo change; they change in their
vocabulary, pronunciation and grammar. Usually the changes are so
slow that they are not obvious at any given time or even over a longer
time, such as a generation, except to the careful observer. Sometimes
change is much faster, as can occur in periods of social upheaval. But
almost inevitably change will be clearly noticeable in a language over a
longer period, such as 200 years, provided written records are available
so that the language at the two periods can be compared.
When there is no direct witness to a language spoken in a previous
age, because there are no written records, information on it is inferred
by comparing recorded languages which have descended from it. Thus
by comparing the words in the list above, and many other similar sets,
we can gain a considerable amount of understanding of the ancestor of
these languages. When a parent language, an ancestral form spoken in
the past, is only known by a comparative study of descendant languages,
it is called a proto-language. The ancestral language of Malay and its rel-
atives is known as Proto-Austronesian and the languages are members
of the Austronesian family.
It is sometimes possible to reconstruct some of the features of
ancestral languages. These are usually a set of words and a sound sys-
tem. If there is sufficient good evidence, it may also be possible to
reconstruct some characteristics of the grammar of the proto-language.
Comparative linguistics may also provide information on the culture of
the people who spoke the proto-language. If daughter languages share
common words for certain cultural items, these may reflect words in the
proto-language, indicating that these items existed when the parent lan-
guage was spoken.
By a comparative study of Malay and other Austronesian languages,
scholars have been able to discover a great deal about their relationships,
determining subgroups, and reconstructing a considerable amount of
the vocabulary of their common ancestor, Proto-Austronesian.
M A L A Y
A N D
T H E
A U S T R O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
F A M I L Y • 2 3

One factor hampering progress in determining relationships within
the Austronesian family and in reconstructing ancestral forms is the fact
that comparativists have access to very little written material from pre-
vious times. In studying the Indo-European languages, scholars have
access to writings from Sanskrit and Greek dating from almost 3000
years ago and for Latin from considerably more than 2000 years ago, as
well as from other ancient languages. This has given them a head start
in reconstructing Proto-Indo-European; witnesses to that language
from 2000 years ago had undergone much less change than present-day
languages and thus provide much more high-quality evidence, and in
considerable abundance, for what the parent language was like.
For the Austronesian languages, there is very little written evidence
from earlier stages of the languages. The oldest written sources are in
Malay (apart from one very short fragment in the Cham language), com-
prising inscriptions from the end of the 7th century AD. Unfortunately,
these Malay inscriptions are very fragmentary and offer extremely little
information. Considerably more information comes from Old Javanese
from several centuries later. There are no written records for any other
Austronesian language until about 500 years ago and then very little. For
the vast majority of languages, there were no writings until compara-
tively recent times and linguists have had to rely on wordlists and gram-
matical descriptions collected from the modern languages, which preserve
much less from the original parent language than languages from 2000
years ago would have provided had written sources been available.
Nevertheless, it has been possible for scholars to reconstruct a sur-
prising amount about the nature of Proto-Austronesian and work con-
tinues, enabling a gradual building up of a more complete and accurate
picture of the interrelationships between the languages in the family and
of Proto-Austronesian itself.1
The Austronesian family today is estimated to contain slightly more
than 1000 languages. Austronesian languages thus account for up to
20 per cent of the 5000–6000 languages estimated to be spoken in the
world today. (This compares with fewer than 150 present-day languages
in the Indo-European family, to which English belongs.) It also extends
over a truly vast portion of the globe, more so than any other language
family (excluding movements of Europeans to the Americas, southern
Africa and Australasia in recent centuries). Austronesian languages are
found from Madagascar in the west to Easter Island in the east, a dis-
tance of 15 000 kilometres, and from Taiwan and Hawaii in the north
to New Zealand in the south.
2 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Despite the large number of languages in the family and the enor-
mous area that they cover, the number of speakers of Austronesian lan-
guages is actually very small, being fewer than 300 million.2 The
majority of speakers of these languages are found in just two countries,
Indonesia and the Philippines. The eastern half of the Austronesian area
consists almost exclusively of small islands and island groups, with lan-
guages typically having only a few thousand or even a few hundred
speakers. Fewer than three million people are speakers of Oceanic lan-
guages. Only 25 Austronesian languages today have more than a mil-
lion speakers, all of them spoken in the Southeast Asian archipelago,
with the exception of the Malagasy language of Madagascar.
Indonesian has by far the largest number of speakers of any
Austronesian language, with an estimated 180 million at the beginning
of the 21st century. However, most of these are second-language speak-
ers, using another language in the home, as discussed in Chapter 10. By
far the largest of the Austronesian languages in terms of first-language
speakers, is Javanese, with about 75 million and possibly 80 million
speakers. Next is Sundanese, spoken in the western third of the island
of Java, with about 28 million speakers. Cebuano in the Philippines has
12 million and Tagalog has 11 million speakers. As Tagalog is the basis
for the Philippines national language, Filipino, it is now spoken or
understood by almost 70 per cent of the Philippine population. By 
contrast, Samoan and Fijian, the largest of the Oceanic languages, are
spoken by just 200 000 people each. Tongan and Tahitian have about
90 000 and 70 000 speakers respectively. Numbers of speakers of 
varieties of Malay, spread over numerous countries, are difficult to
determine, as discussed in Chapter 10.
P R OTO - A U S T R O N E S I A N  A N D  I T S  D E S C E N D A N T S
While there are still many gaps in our understanding of the
Austronesian family, and thus many controversies, there is a fair amount
of consensus on a number of basic factors. The parent of the language
family, Proto-Austronesian, is believed to have been spoken in Taiwan
about 6000 years ago. Its speakers were successful agriculturalists, being
descendants of people who participated in the development of millet
and rice agriculture in central and eastern China — in the lower Yangzi
and Yellow River basins — by about 6000 BC.3
Agriculture led to population growth in China and the subsequent
spreading of agricultural people at the expense of hunter-gatherers. The
archaeological record provides dates for this initial expansion of
M A L A Y
A N D
T H E
A U S T R O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
F A M I L Y • 2 5

between 5000 and 4000 BC. This accords well with the linguistic esti-
mates of the length of time needed for diversification. Some people with
agricultural economy moved across the Formosa Strait from the
Chinese mainland to Taiwan in the period 4000–3500 BC. It may be
that Proto-Austronesian was spoken on the Chinese mainland, its speak-
ers then crossing the sea to Taiwan. Alternatively, the language origi-
nated in Taiwan following the migration. In either case, the ancestral
language of the 1000 or so present-day Austronesian languages was
spoken in Taiwan by 3500 BC and possibly as early as 4000 BC.
Other linguistic groups in Southeast Asia also appear to have
descended from participants in the development of agriculture in south-
ern China. These are the Austro-Asiatic peoples, whose languages
include Khmer (Cambodian), Vietnamese and the Aslian languages spo-
ken in the interior of the Malay Peninsula, and the Tai-Kadai peoples,
whose languages include Thai and Lao. A hypothesis that the
Austronesian and Austro-Asiatic languages form two branches of a larger
grouping, called Austric, was first proposed in 1906 and is supported by
a number of scholars. Some other scholars favour a link with the Tai-
Kadai languages in an Austro-Tai superfamily. While some researchers
believe that the evidence for one or other of these links is strong, oth-
ers are sceptical. The fact is that the enormous time that has passed since
the proposed parent languages, Proto-Austric and Proto-Austro-Tai,
would have been spoken has resulted in such large-scale language
change that evidence for the relationships is very tenuous. Nevertheless,
some scholars continue to search for evidence of an Austric or Austro-
Tai superfamily.4
Much can be said from linguistic evidence about the way of life and
material culture of the early inhabitants of Taiwan. Where related lan-
guages contain cognates — words directly inherited from the ancestral
language, as shown in Table 2.1 — this is strong evidence that the item
referred to was known to the speakers of the parent language. For
instance, the words rumah in Malay, lumaq in the Bunan language of
Taiwan, and ruma in the Arose language of Solomon Islands in the
western Pacific, all mean ‘house’.5 When sets of related words such as
these, called cognate sets, occur in widely separated languages that are
most unlikely to share similarity as a result of borrowing, they provide
strong evidence that the item can be reconstructed for the parent 
language. In this case, with evidence from considerably more langu-
ages and after careful reconstruction of the Proto-Austronesian 
sound system, the word *Rumaq (house) has been reconstructed for
2 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Proto-Austronesian (where capital R probably represents a sound pro-
duced at the back of the mouth, rather like French ‘r’). The asterisk
before a form indicates that it is reconstructed on the basis of compar-
ative evidence and not from the direct evidence of written records. Not
only can we say, not surprisingly, that these people had houses, but we
can say quite a lot more about their houses from the linguistic evidence.
Houses were rather substantial, being built of timber, on raised posts
and with a roof containing a ridgepole and covered with thatch, prob-
ably of sago leaf. The people made pots, wove cloth on a loom, and had
domesticated pigs and dogs. The linguistic evidence is clear that they
cultivated rice, cognates for ‘riceplant, rice in the field, unhusked rice’
occurring in a great many Austronesian languages, such as Malay padi,
Paiwan (Taiwan) padai, Kankanay (Philippines) pagey, Li’o (Flores,
eastern Indonesia) pare, Numfor (Irian Jaya) fas. From these has been
reconstructed Proto-Austronesian *pajay. (Rice cultivation was lost in
the Pacific, so no native words for rice occur in those languages.) 
The linguistic evidence is supported by archaeological evidence,
which points to a rice-growing civilisation in Taiwan by 3000 BC. (This
date does not preclude its earlier occurrence in Taiwan, but archaeo-
logical evidence is apparently lacking.) A great many other items can be
reconstructed for Proto-Austronesian on the evidence of the present-
day languages, giving information of the environment and culture of
the people. They cultivated millet and were familiar with rattan, bam-
boo, taro and sugarcane. They had an elaborate rice culture, distin-
guishing ‘growing rice’, ‘husked rice’, and ‘cooked rice’. They
winnowed rice and made use of the stubble.
The most widely accepted theory about the early divisions in the
Austronesian languages suggests that the population in Taiwan broke
into four groups at an early date. About 20 Austronesian languages are
spoken in Taiwan today; these are the Formosan languages, which
appear not to be a single group but rather three separate groups of
Austronesian languages. According to this theory, one of the four
groups of Austronesians moved to the south of Taiwan and from there
to the island of Luzon in northern Philippines, leaving the other three
groups as ‘stay-at-homes’, referred to collectively as Formosans. Those
who left, probably about 3000 BC, are now referred to as the Malayo-
Polynesians.
The earliest splitting of the Austronesian languages is shown in
Figure 2.1, with the three branches on the left representing the three
Formosan groups.6
M A L A Y
A N D
T H E
A U S T R O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
F A M I L Y • 2 7

As the Malayo-Polynesians travelled, they carried with them their
material and social culture, although this subsequently underwent
changes in different places. The further from Taiwan they travelled the
later archaeological remains, such as pottery, can be dated, giving a pic-
ture of a gradual expansion of the people from one island to another
over thousands of years. This strongly supports the linguistic evidence
for the dispersal of these people. The earliest archaeological remains,
such as pottery and evidence of rice cultivation, are dated from 2000 to
1500 BC for Borneo and Sulawesi and from 1500 BC for western
Melanesia.
Comparison of Malayo-Polynesian languages reveals that their
ancestors possessed a relatively advanced maritime technology. Their
ocean voyages in dug-out canoes with outriggers and triangular sails
have rightly been called true epic journeys. It is possible that the out-
rigger canoe complex existed in earlier times, although this technology
cannot be reconstructed for Proto-Austronesian because related seafar-
ing terminology does not occur in the Formosan languages. This may
be because the technology was not developed until after the break-up
of Proto-Austronesian, when the Malayo-Polynesians commenced their
travels from Taiwan. It is also possible that the Formosan languages lost
a complex vocabulary dealing with seafaring. Beginning in the 17th
century, there was increasing immigration of Chinese from the main-
land to Taiwan, with the consequence that Formosan aboriginal groups
were pushed from coastal areas into the mountains. Here they had no
use for seafaring and vocabulary relating to their earlier seafaring culture
would have eventually been lost.
What is now the Philippines was the second geographical area to be
settled by ancestors of the Malayo-Polynesian peoples. When they
2 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
PROTO-AUSTRONESIAN
ATAYALIC   RUKAI-TSOUIC   PAIWANIC   MALAYO-POLYNESIAN
FORMOSAN LANGUAGES
Figure 2.1  
Major divisions in the Austronesian language family
{

entered this area, they were moving into a warmer region than Taiwan.
A great many words occur throughout the Malayo-Polynesian world,
reflecting innovations in their ancestral language that are absent from
the more northerly Formosan languages. These include many words for
tropical foodstuffs. Widely dispersed words for taro, breadfruit, banana,
yam, sago, coconut and so on indicate that these became known to the
Malayo-Polynesians before their first dispersal in the Philippines.
From here the Malayo-Polynesians dispersed in several directions,
beginning about 2500 BC, at a rate that was one of the most rapid on
record from the prehistoric agricultural world.7 According to the
strongest subgrouping theory at present, they broke into two groups.
One group, called Western Malayo-Polynesian (WMP), entered
Borneo, with subsequent movement into the western parts of the
Indonesian archipelago. The other group, called Central-Eastern
Malayo-Polynesian (CEMP), moved southeast from the Philippines and
entered the northern Moluccas.
CEMP apparently split into two subgroups. One subgroup, called
Central Malayo-Polynesian (CMP), moved to the southern Moluccas
and from there to the Lesser Sunda Islands, eventually occupying
almost all the islands of eastern Indonesia, except the island of New
Guinea, westward as far as Sumbawa. The other subgroup, Eastern
Malayo-Polynesian (EMP), moved eastward to the northwest tip of
New Guinea. Proto-EMP split into two daughter languages, Proto-
South Halmahera-West New Guinea (SHWNG) and Proto-Oceanic.
The splitting up of the Malayo-Polynesian languages is shown in
Figure 2.2.8
M A L A Y
A N D
T H E
A U S T R O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
F A M I L Y • 2 9
MALAYO-POLYNESIAN
WESTERN 
MALAYO-
POLYNESIAN
Figure 2.2  
Subgroups of Malayo-Polynesian languages
CENTRAL-EASTERN
MALAYO-POLYNESIAN
CENTRAL
MALAYO-
POLYNESIAN
SHWNG
OCEANIC
EASTERN
MALAYO-
POLYNESIAN

The SHWNG languages remained in the vicinity of Halmahera, in
the northern Moluccas, and the northwest coast of New Guinea. The
ancestors of the Oceanic language speakers moved further east, passing
along the north coast of New Guinea. However, the island was already
inhabited by Papuans (speakers of non-Austronesian languages) and the
Oceanic speech community had few opportunities for settlement there
except in some isolated spots on the coast. This situation is reflected
today, with Austronesian languages occupying only a few coastal regions
of the island. They probably settled in the New Britain/New Ireland
area about 2000 BC and remained in this area for some considerable
time. All the Oceanic languages share a number of phonological and
grammatical changes which suggest that their ancestral language under-
went a relatively long period of isolation before dispersal.
There was probably a rapid expansion eastward after that, into
island Melanesia. Some Oceanic people travelled to the Solomons and
other Melanesian islands and then further eastward, reaching Fiji about
1200 BC. Oceanic peoples also travelled north to the islands of
Micronesia. About 1000 BC, the ancestors of the Polynesians moved
eastward from Tonga. They spread first to Samoa and then, in various
movements, occupied the Pacific islands as far southeast as Easter
Island and, in remarkable voyages, spread north to Hawaii and finally
southwest to New Zealand about 1000 years ago. The Polynesians,
‘the ultimate wanderers’,9 had travelled as far as they could; east of
Hawaii and Easter Island lay 3000 kilometres of ocean before the
American mainland.
The speakers of the languages of the western branch of Malayo-
Polynesian languages occupied the Philippines and then moved south,
entering northwest Borneo between 2500 and 2000 BC.
It is far from clear that the WMP languages, of which Malay is one,
do in fact form a single group. While the higher subdivisions within the
Eastern Malayo-Polynesian group have been quite clearly revealed by
comparative study, the same has not been the case in the west. This has
led some scholars to believe that they are simply the descendants of
those languages, in a number of primary Malayo-Polynesian groups,
which stayed behind in the Philippines and Borneo when migrations to
the east began, just as the Formosan languages are the descendants of
different groups that stayed behind in Taiwan. On the island of Borneo
today there are ten distinct groups of WMP languages, no two of which
appear to be more closely related to each other than to other groups
outside Borneo.10
3 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

It has been hypothesised that after radiation of languages through-
out Borneo an extensive population movement from southwest Borneo
occurred. WMP peoples occupied parts of Sumatra and the islands of
Bali, Lombok and Sumbawa. In Sumbawa, they came into contact with
CMP people moving west. The island is now occupied in the west by
the Sumbawa language of the WMP group and in the east by Bima of
the CMP group and marks the boundary between the two. At a later
date, some peoples of another group, speaking Malayo-Chamic lan-
guages, settled in the island of Sumatra and large parts of the coast of
mainland Southeast Asia, as far north as the Gulf of Tonkin. This dialect
complex eventually differentiated into a northern group and a southern
group. The northern group gave rise to the Chamic languages in
Vietnam and Cambodia. The Chamic languages are today spoken by
small hill-dwelling communities, surrounded by Vietnamese and
Khmers. The languages are descendants of Cham, the language of the
powerful Indianised kingdom of Champa, which was destroyed by the
invading Vietnamese in AD 1471. In the 10th century AD, one group
of Chamic people, ancestors of the Acehnese, moved to the northern tip
of Sumatra. The southern group of Malayo-Chamic languages includes
the Malayic languages, to be discussed below, and other languages, such
as Madurese, Sundanese and possibly Javanese, although this language
may instead link with Balinese.
The most distant of the WMP languages is Malagasy, spoken on
the island of Madagascar, off the east coast of southern Africa. The
relationship of this language to Malay was identified by Frederick de
Houtman, a Dutch sailor, in 1603, long before the concept of genetic
relationships among languages was really understood. Malagasy has
been convincingly identified as a member of the Barito group of lan-
guages of Borneo. The usual assumption is that the ancestors of the
Madagascans sailed from Borneo about the 5th century AD.
However, one scholar suggests that they must have arrived later,
because their language contains not only borrowings from Malay and
Javanese but also Sanskrit words borrowed via Malay; consequently,
they must have journeyed to Madagascar after considerable Indian
influence on the Malays.11
T H E  M A L AY I C  L A N G U A G E S
Malay is a member of the sub-branch of Western Malayo-Polynesian
languages now referred to as the Malayic group, descendants of Proto-
Malayic.12 The greatest diversity of Malayic languages is found in west-
M A L A Y
A N D
T H E
A U S T R O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
F A M I L Y • 3 1

ern Borneo, strongly suggesting it was the homeland of speakers of the
ancestral Malayic language. As one writer puts it, they ‘occupied a spe-
cific ecological niche: the swamps, wetlands, deltas and shores of the
complex riverine system of western Borneo. This settlement pattern
allowed them to maintain and develop their sailing technology’.13
Their advanced seamanship allowed some speakers of Proto-
Malayic to sail westward to Sumatra, not much more than 2000 years
ago. Those remaining in west Borneo were the ancestors of speakers of
the Malayic Dayak languages, including Iban (sometimes in earlier
writings referred to as Sea Dayak), Salako and Kendayan. Those who
moved to Sumatra settled on the east coast and later in the interior of
the southern part of the island. Here developed Malay and its closest
relatives, including Central (or Middle) Malay (a number of very closely
related dialects, including Besemah and Seraway), Minangkabau and
Kerinci. These are strikingly similar to Malay in structure and vocabu-
lary, although some have undergone considerable changes in their
phonology.
Minangkabau, Kerinci and Central Malay developed from inland
and west coast dialects, while dialects spoken on the east coast of south-
ern Sumatra and on some off-shore islands gave rise to Malay itself.
Some time later, Malay speakers established colonies on the nearby
Malay Peninsula. Later, some Malays migrated back to Borneo, where
they made settlements in numerous river estuaries around the coast 
of much of the island. These Malay dialects are distinct from the 
indigenous Malayic Dayak languages, the languages of the people
whose ancestors did not travel to Sumatra. It is probable that many
coastal Dayaks were absorbed into the Malay-speaking communities;
Malay-speakers in Borneo are thus not all descendants of people who
returned from Sumatra. Today, a number of Malay dialects are found in
coastal regions of Borneo, such as Banjarese, Kutai Malay, Sarawak
Malay and Brunei Malay.
3 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  B E G I N N I N G  O F  I N D I A N  I N F L U E N C E
The development of Malay as a lingua franca throughout the
Indonesian archipelago and its subsequent emergence as a national lan-
guage was a fortuitous result of its geographical position on the sea
route through the Straits of Malacca. Two thousand years ago, the
speakers of the Malayic language who had travelled from Borneo had
spread along much of the coast of south-eastern Sumatra. At a later
date, some of these people moved to the interior of southern Sumatra,
where their dialects gave rise to Minangkabau, Kerinci and Central
Malay. But it was the dialects spoken in the lower river courses in east-
ern Sumatra and off-shore islands that gave rise to Malay.
The first event leading to the spread of Malay was probably the
establishment of sea trade with India. It is not known precisely when
contact first occurred with India, but it has usually been supposed to
be about or shortly after the beginning of the Christian era, although
the recent discovery in Java and Bali of Indian pottery possibly dating
from as early as 200 BC may push back that date.1 There is much
uncertainly about the terms of the original commerce between India
and Indonesia, although it is probable that pepper from Sumatra was
important from early on and camphor was traded to India before the
4th century.
It was assumed by earlier historians that the Malays were passive
partners in their trade relations with India, that much of their progress
was a result of Indian influence and that there were large Indian set-
tlements, perhaps even kingdoms, in Sumatra. It is probable that con-
tact was made by Indian traders in the first instance, but the Malays
3
O L D  M A L AY

3 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
must have been active partners in subsequent trading.2 They were
excellent sailors, as their Austronesian background and recent travel
from Borneo would suggest. Living in settlements around river estuar-
ies, they were in touch with the outside world and soon became active
traders, if they had not already been so before leaving Borneo. One his-
torian has written: ‘In prehistoric times Malays had probably played
their part in the barter trade which brought knowledge of metal from
the coast of Indo-China to the hinterland of Sumatra. At the dawn of
recorded Indonesian history this coast may already have become a
trading centre’.3 Early in the Christian era, there was a great increase
in the number of traders voyaging between India and Southeast Asia
and before AD 500 much of the archipelago, stretching up into the
Philippines, ‘was perhaps a zone of continuously-flourishing inter-
island travel and trade’.4
It is thus unlikely the Malays needed to learn much from Indians
about trade and sailing. Despite many borrowed words from Sanskrit in
Malay, there are no nautical terms from that source and very few deal-
ing with trade. There were no significant Indian settlements in
Indonesia; nor was there, despite the cultural influence, any political
domination of the area.
The earliest direct evidence for Indian cultural influence in the arch-
ipelago is from further east, in the region of Kutai in southeast Borneo,
in the present-day Indonesian province of East Kalimantan. This con-
sists of inscriptions on seven stone pillars known as yupas (sacrificial
posts).5 These inscriptions are in Sanskrit, the old language of northern
India, which became the religious language of Hinduism and
Buddhism. They are written in the Pallava script, a south Indian version
of the Brahmi script of northern India, from which most modern Indian
and Southeast Asian scripts, such as the Javanese and Thai scripts, have
derived. Although the inscriptions are not dated, they are estimated on
palaeographical grounds to be from about AD 400 or slightly earlier. If
the inscriptions are to be believed, they point to a quite large Hindu
kingdom with many brahman priests. The inscriptions refer to King
Mulawarman, his conquest of other kings and his gift of large numbers
of cattle to the priests. Other archaeological remains in the region, such
as Hindu and Buddhist images, also attest to the Indian influence.
If an Indianised kingdom could exist in southeast Borneo before
AD 400, there can be no doubt there was even stronger influence in
Sumatra. Clearly, considerable contact had been long established
between western Indonesia and India by that time. While traders played

a part in the spread of the Indian influence, it was Hindu and Buddhist
monks who were the main disseminators of Indian civilisation in the
region. Through their influence, Indian concepts of royalty and state-
hood were introduced, with rulers embracing either Hinduism or
Buddhism and adopting Sanskrit as their ritual language.
T H E  M A L AY S  A N D  T H E  G R O W T H  O F  T R A D E
With the commencement of sea trade between the Indian Ocean and
the archipelago, the geographical position of the Malays began to work
to their advantage. Vessels that came from India on the southwest mon-
soon were forced to remain in the region for several months until they
could sail home with the northeast winds towards the end of the year.
During this period, they required harbours in which to discharge their
cargoes, engage in trade and to refit and repair vessels.6 There was no
more suitable place for these activities than the Straits of Malacca, the
narrow strip of sheltered sea between Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula.
Here there were numerous river estuaries with Malay settlements offer-
ing the required facilities.
Any enterprising local ruler could take advantage of the situation by
imposing port dues, thus profiting from visiting ships. Regulation of
trade required the development of an effective administration and
would have led to the growth of more powerful states than those of tra-
ditional small-scale Malay society. Here the Indianisation of Malay poli-
ties was important; the introduction of Indian concepts of royalty
enabled the development of states with specialised bureaucracies and
the powers to maintain allegiance by force.7 Increasing wealth allowed
the emergence of a leisured class, centred around the king and his royal
court. Writing was introduced, perhaps brought first by Indian mer-
chants, but with more systematic dissemination of literacy by Hindu
brahmans and Buddhist monks. Their influence on palace life in various
Sumatran kingdoms must have been strong by the 4th century, as it
already was in the Borneo kingdom in present-day Kutai.
Trade with China commenced somewhat later than with India.
India–China trade had originally been overland, but this was disrupted
in the 4th century when northern China was overrun by barbarians,
forcing the Chinese government to move further south. The Chinese
then needed sea routes to market opportunities, and Malay seafarers
were ready to take advantage of this need. In the 4th century,
‘Indonesian ships were pioneering the voyage across the South China
Sea. Their cargoes were normally of foreign origin and their passengers
O L D
M A L A Y • 3 5

must have included foreigners, but the ships and crews were
Indonesian’.8 Chinese records show that, by the year AD 430, several
kingdoms in western Indonesia were regularly sending missions to
China and that trade between China and the region was developing.
With the growth of Chinese trade, both with states in Southeast Asia
and with India, there was increased demand for port facilities in the
Straits of Malacca.
Chinese records refer to a kingdom called Kan-t’o-li, probably in
Sumatra, although its location is not known, which contributed signifi-
cantly to the expansion of western Indonesian commerce when it devel-
oped trade links with southern China. By the middle of the 6th century,
Kan-t’o-li was in decline and in the following century a kingdom named
Melayu sent a mission to China. Melayu — the origin of the name
Melayu (Malay) — was located on the Jambi River, somewhat north of
the Musi River on which the present-day city of Palembang is located.
S R I V I J AYA
The earliest direct evidence for the existence of an Indianised state in
Sumatra are a number of stone inscriptions and the writings of a
Chinese Buddhist monk, both from the late 7th century.
The inscriptions are from the Buddhist kingdom of Srivijaya and date
from AD 682 to 686, although the first of them was only discovered late
in the 19th century. These are written in Malay, the earliest direct evi-
dence that we have of the language. With the exception of brief 4th-
century fragments in the Cham language, these constitute the earliest
known writing in any Austronesian language, predating the earliest
known Javanese inscriptions by several decades. The Malay inscriptions,
like those of Kutai, are in Pallava script. Of the six inscriptions, three are
from present-day Palembang, one from further north in Jambi, one from
further south in Lampung and one from the island of Bangka.
Unfortunately, no later inscriptions from Srivijaya have been found.
This contrasts with Old Javanese, for which hundreds of inscriptions
have been found, dating from a period of more than six centuries, from
the earliest of AD 804, which give detailed insight into the Old Javanese
language of the Indianised kingdoms of East and Central Java.
The Srivijaya inscriptions have been recognised as being in a lan-
guage that, from the time of their discovery, has been called Old Malay.
There has been debate about the relationship of this language to mod-
ern Malay. Whether it was directly ancestral or not is uncertain; there
have been many varieties of Malay, with divergence and convergence
3 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

throughout its history, and it would be difficult to establish a direct
ancestral link between a 7th-century variety and any variety of 1000 and
more years later. Nevertheless, it is generally accepted that the Old
Malay of the Srivijaya inscriptions is more closely linked to modern
Malay than to any other language.9
One striking feature of the language in the inscriptions is the great
number of Sanskrit words. The inscriptions were composed by Buddhist
monks and the use of Sanskrit expresses their deep religion, the holy
language enhancing the strength and efficacy of the messages.
However, it would be wrong to assume that the language of the inscrip-
tions reflects the spoken language of Srivijaya. It is unlikely that most of
the Sanskrit words would have been intelligible to more than a few peo-
ple besides the monks and scribes. Thus the Sanskrit words do not rep-
resent borrowing into Malay and most of them never appear in later
writings. Nevertheless they reveal considerable Sanskrit influence on the
language at this early stage; clearly, Sanskrit words were already begin-
ning to enter the Malay language. The inscriptions deal with various
matters; one commemorates the foundation of a public park, while
another calls down curses on the inhabitants if they disobey the king.10
The earliest of the six, the inscription of AD 682, was discovered in
the village of Kedukan Bukit in Palembang in 1920. It tells of a large-scale
expedition, possibly of conquest, although there has been debate about
the significance of the expedition and the location of the conquered
land.11 The text of the inscription, the earliest known example of Malay,
is given on page 38, together with a translation. Scholars have found some
words difficult to identify or interpret and there are differing opinions on
how to translate some sections of the text. Thus one segment is inter-
preted as laghu mudita (light-hearted joyful) by one scholar (followed
below), but as laghu mudik (sail upriver) by another. The word-for-word
gloss given here thus does not always coincide with the meaning of the
full text provided. There are also different Romanisations of the Pallava
script. In particular, a mid-central vowel /∂/ (called ‘schwa’ by linguists
— the sound represented by the letter ‘e’ in English ‘enough’) did not
occur in Sanskrit and this sound was represented by ‘a’ in the inscriptions
or was not indicated; in this version, /∂/ is represented by the letter ‘e’,
as it is in modern Indonesian. The ‘b’ sound was represented by the
Sanskrit symbol for ‘v’. The inscription is damaged in parts, indicated by
dots, while one missing segment, in square brackets, has been restored in
line with a similar segment on another of the inscriptions.12 Sanskrit ele-
ments are in bold italics; the other words are Malay.
O L D
M A L A Y • 3 7

Svasti      Syr
Syakavars  t ta 604  ekadasy      syuklapaksa vulan
prosperity fortune syaka (era) elapsed      eleventh    waxing-half    month
Vaisy kha dapunta hiyang n yik
di s  mvau mengalap siddhay  tra
lord      god     ascend   in    boat    obtain      successful expedition
Di saptam-i syuklapaksa vulan Jyestha dapunta hiyang merlepas dari
on seventh  waxing-half
month          lord       god     depart     from
Min  nga T  mvan mem  va yang
vala dua laksa
dengan … dua ratus
take                  army two 10 000 with          two hundred
cara      di  samvau dengan j  lan sarivu             telu r  tus
sapulu dua
journey in boat     with     walk  one-thousand three hundred ten      two
vañyakñya
d  tang di mataja … sukhacitta
their number arrive   at (?)           happy
Di pancami syuklapaksa vula[n As  dha] … laghu            mudita d  tang
on fifth        waxing-half 
month                    light-hearted joyful  arrive
mervuat vanua …. Syr vijaya jaya         siddhay  tra             subhiksa …
make      settlement               
victorious successful expedition wealthy
3 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–
a–
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
a–   
i-
i-
i-
i-
TRANSLATION:
Prosperity! Good Fortune! In the expired year 604 Syaka, the
eleventh day of the bright fortnight of the month Vaisyakha (23 April
682), our divine Lord embarked to carry out a successful expedition.
On the seventh day of the bright fortnight of the month Jyestha (19
May 682), our divine Lord left Minanga Tamban; he led an army of
twenty thousand [men] plus two hundred following by ship, and one
thousand three hundred and twelve [men] by land. All arrived at …
satisfied at heart. The fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month
Asadha (16 June 682) … light-hearted, joyous, arrived to make the
country … Srivijaya, victorious, successful in his expedition, endowed
with plenty …

O L D
M A L A Y • 3 9
Figure 3.1  
The Kota Kapur inscription (Bangka Island, AD 686) stands neglected in
Jakarta’s Central Museum.

The number of Sanskrit words is considerable, but very few were
absorbed into Malay. The only word that can be said to be a regular part
of modern Indonesian is sukacita (joy, happiness), the formant suka
(like; pleasure) also being an everyday word. Some other words occur
in restricted contexts, including some of the numbers, particularly
panca (five), as in Pancasila (Five Principles), the state motto of
Indonesia, and bala (army), which occurs in a few compounds, like Bala
Keselamatan (Salvation Army). Some of the Malay words are obsolete,
like minanga (estuary) and telu (three), which still occur in related lan-
guages. There are also archaic features of verb morphology. Thus prefix
mer- in merlepas and mervuat is ber- in the modern language. In the
text, sapuluh dua (literally ‘ten two’) occurs for ‘twelve’, whereas the
modern language has dua belas (literally ‘two teen’).
The second source of information on Srivijaya is the writings of a
Chinese Buddhist monk, I-tsing.13 He stopped at Srivijaya, which the
Chinese called Che-li-fo-che, in the year AD 671 on his way to India
from China. He was so impressed with the city that he stayed there 
for six months, studying Sanskrit, before continuing his journey. He
reported that Srivijaya was a fortified city with more than 1000
Buddhist monks and recommended the place as a suitable centre for
Chinese Buddhists to study before proceeding to India. I-tsing stayed
at Srivijaya again, between 685 and 689, on his way back to China,
translating Buddhist texts from Sanskrit into Chinese.
The inscriptions and the writings of I-tsing reveal a large and pow-
erful kingdom in the second half of the 7th century. Clearly, it had its
origins much earlier and had been under Indian influence for centuries.
It must have been in this time that Srivijaya, situated on the Musi river
where the city of Palembang now stands, began to succeed at the
expense of rival kingdoms.14 By the middle of the 7th century, it had
established itself as the dominant trading power in western Indonesia.
After leaving Srivijaya in 671, I-tsing stayed for two months in Melayu,
on the Jambi River, north of the Musi River. He wrote that, on his
return from India, Melayu had become part of Srivijaya. This seems to
point to Srivijaya’s subjugation of its rival and a consolidation of its
power.
S R I V I J AYA ’ S  P O W E R  A N D  T H E  S P R E A D  O F  M A L AY
The Musi River in southeast Sumatra, on which Palembang lies, might
seem somewhat off the direct route between India and China.
However, Srivijaya’s fleet had come to dominate the coasts and waters
4 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

between western Java, through the Straits of Malacca to the waters
between northern Sumatra and southern Thailand, defeating potential
rivals. (The city’s location was closer to the sea than it is today, siltation
having significantly extended the coastline.) A stone pillar at Ligor on
the southeast coast of Thailand contains an inscription dated AD 775
that commemorates the founding of a Buddhist sanctuary by the ruler
of Srivijaya. It thus indicates the expansion of Srivijaya to the northern
part of the Malay Peninsula in the 8th century, if not earlier.15 By occu-
pying strategic points on the main trade routes and developing a strong
navy, Srivijaya was able to direct ships to call and do business in its port.
It was this ability, more than wealth from the hinterland, that sustained
its power. I-tsing wrote that he travelled from China to Srivijaya on a
ship belonging to a Persian merchant, but his voyage on to India was
made in one belonging to the king of Srivijaya.
From the earliest contact between Malays and overseas seafarers and
merchants, a means of communication was necessary. When the ports
of the Straits of Malacca and southeast Sumatra became stopping-off
points for trade, storage, repairs, taking on supplies, and awaiting
favourable winds, they brought together Indian, Chinese, and later
Arab and Persian traders, needing to communicate with each other and
with the local Malay merchants, seamen and port authorities. There was
thus need for a lingua franca, a common language for communication
between the different groups. As the local vernacular and, at least from
the time of Srivijaya, the language of the powerful states in the region,
Malay readily fulfilled this role. I-tsing stated that Chinese Buddhist
monks, besides studying Sanskrit, mastered a language he called K’un-
lun. Although the name was generally applied by the Chinese to any
local indigenous language, in this case it clearly referred to Malay. Its
role as the language of wider communication must have begun much
earlier, when the first contacts with India were established, or earlier
still, when Malays engaged in local trade with other nearby ethnic 
communities.
It is useful to distinguish three types of Malay.16 First, there is the
great variety of vernacular dialects of the traditional Malay communities,
spoken in the Malay homelands of eastern Sumatra, off-shore islands,
coastal regions of the Malay Peninsula and coastal regions of Borneo,
many of which have even now not been adequately recorded. Speakers
include other peoples who were absorbed into the Malay community 
as the influence of Malay states grew. Second, there are the lingua 
franca varieties of Malay. These were carried with trade throughout the
O L D
M A L A Y • 4 1

archipelago and further. Finally, there is literary Malay. It is only the lit-
erary variety, beginning with the Srivijayan inscriptions, of which there
is any record before the arrival of Europeans. The literary style, in the
writings of the small literate community of priests and court scribes,
grew significantly different from the various forms of traditional Malay
and lingua franca Malay and developed into the style of the later
Classical Malay literary works (discussed in Chapter 4).
The lingua franca variety of Malay was significantly different from
the more elaborate language used in the royal court and by scribes and
priests and even from the vernaculars of the local Malay communities.
Lingua franca Malay was not a community language, needed for the
whole range of social interactions necessary within a society. As a trade
language it was needed only for the reduced communication needs of
trade, and so a grammatically simpler and lexically reduced form of
Malay would soon have appeared. When trade later spread east to the
Moluccas and to other distant places, this lingua franca Malay was car-
ried along. In the east, Malay mixed with elements from local lan-
guages, many of which were non-Austronesian or Papuan, producing
pidgin varieties. When trading ports appeared, such pidgin forms of
Malay often became the first language of the local community, a state
known as creole. Such creoles over a long period developed more com-
plexity, evolving into the post-creole eastern types of Malay that the
Europeans found on entering the eastern parts of the archipelago in the
16th century. Such forms of Malay have, since the early 18th century,
been called Bazaar Malay or Low Malay. The terms are also sometimes
used for the great variety of vernacular forms of Malay in the tradi-
tional Malay homeland of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula, to distin-
guish them, albeit with a prejudicial tone, from literary Malay.
Unlike the Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms in Java, Srivijaya has left
no enduring temples or other monuments to attest to its greatness. It
has been speculated that, with its concentration on maritime wealth and
power, it had no time for such spiritual matters.17
From the middle of the 9th century, Persian and Arab visitors began
to report on the riches and power of Srivijaya. Its territories were then
producing camphor, cloves, sandalwood, nutmeg and much else.
Chinese annals indicate that Srivijaya was attacked by the king of East
Java at the end of the 10th century. Srivijaya was able to counter-attack
and defeat the Javanese, enabling it to then extend its domination east-
ward to cover all of Java and probably much of Borneo, as well as the
whole of Sumatra and the Malay Peninsula. Evidence of Srivijaya’s
4 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

influence in Java comes from a number of inscriptions in Old Malay.
One is from the area of Gandasuli in Central Java, dated AD 832 —
about 50 years after the Srivijaya inscriptions. It is composed in very
similar language and also contains many Sanskrit words.18 A very short
inscription found near Bogor in western Java and dating from AD 942
points to strong Srivijayan influence, if not domination, in the area.19
A small copperplate inscription in Old Malay, dating from the year
AD 900, has been found in the Laguna district south of Manila in
Luzon, northern Philippines. Only discovered in 1989, in sand on the
shore of the lake, it is a certificate of acquittal of a debt incurred by a
person in high office and amounts to ten lines of text, also written in
Pallava-derived script.20 As with the Srivijaya inscriptions, it contains
Sanskrit words, including the opening formula, which gives the date. It
also contains a number of Old Javanese words. Tagalog, the original
language of the Manila region, contains many pre-Islamic loan words
from Malay and Manila is known to have been a Malay-speaking port in
the 14th century.21 However, the discovery of the Laguna inscription
significantly pushed back the history of the Manila region. It attests to
the early spread of Malay to the furthest reaches of the Southeast Asian
archipelago, at an even earlier date than most scholars had previously
supposed.
T H E  D E C L I N E  O F  S R I V I J AYA
At the beginning of the 13th century, Srivijaya was still a powerful king-
dom; Chinese records list 15 vassal states, covering all of Indonesia
westward from Sunda in western Java, as well as the Malay Peninsula.
However, its power was in decline. International trade had increased
and many ships were using ports in northern Sumatra and the Straits of
Malacca instead of continuing to southern Sumatra, evading Srivijaya’s
monopoly and avoiding paying port dues. Pressure to free trade
increased with development of trade to the Moluccas in the east, with
Javanese traders bringing nutmeg and cloves and seeking alternative
harbours. By the 11th century, vassals were gradually challenging the
monopoly by encouraging merchants to visit their harbours. A Chinese
report of 1225 noted that harbours in the Straits of Malacca had recov-
ered their independence from Srivijaya. As Srivijaya’s power waned and
its control over trade in the region of the Straits slipped away, various
other ports grew and vied for trading supremacy.
By the end of the 13th century, Srivijaya was no longer an extensive
imperial power, although Palembang and Melayu were still prosperous
O L D
M A L A Y • 4 3

trading centres. Melayu, where Jambi now stands on the Jambi River,
appears to have regained its independence; Marco Polo, visiting in
1292, mentions Melayu as the foremost state in Sumatra.22 By this time,
both the Javanese and Thais were extending their power, the Thais over
Srivijaya’s northern possessions and the Javanese taking control of the
Sunda Straits between Sumatra and Java. Chinese records note that near
the end of the 14th century the ruler of Palembang rebelled against
Javanese overlordship. The Javanese invaded, defeating and expelling
the ruler. Palembang remained a busy port, but the power of Srivijaya
had been destroyed.23
At this time, while the old Buddhist empire was losing control over
the Straits of Malacca through the pressure of Siam and Java, Islam
began to have an impact in northern Sumatra. Although Arab and
other Muslim merchants, from places such as Persia and Gujerat in
India, had been prominent in the trade through the Straits for cen-
turies, it was only at the end of the 13th century that their religion
began to take a foothold in northern Sumatra. Marco Polo reported
that Perlac, a port in the northern end of Sumatra, had been con-
verted to Islam and the discovery of the tombstone of a sultan of near-
by Samudra, dated 1297, shows that this state had adopted the new
religion at about the same time.
With the fall of Srivijaya and the coming of Islam, Indian influence
rapidly declined, although it still lived on in Java for some centuries and
still does in Bali.
Srivijaya had played an enormously important part in the develop-
ment of the Malay language. Before Srivijaya’s time, Malays had estab-
lished river settlements along the east coast of Sumatra and there can be
little doubt that earlier kingdoms, such as Kan-t’o-li, were Malay-
speaking. Certainly Srivijaya’s predecessor, Melayu, was. Malay settle-
ment of off-shore islands and river estuaries on the Malay Peninsula may
have begun before Srivijaya’s time, but further spread must have
occurred during the Srivijayan period and other ethnic groups were
probably absorbed into the Malay-speaking community, both in Malaya
and Sumatra, as also occurred when Malays migrated to Borneo, which
also probably began in Srivijayan times.
The Srivijayan inscriptions are the earliest known examples of Malay
and it is thus unfortunate that they and later inscriptions from Java and
Luzon are so brief. The AD 942 inscription found in western Java con-
tains just 13 words, eight Sanskrit and five Malay. While Sanskrit words
would have been entering the language, certainly by later Srivijayan
4 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

times, the large number of Sanskrit words in the inscriptions does not
point to large-scale borrowing in the 7th century. Rather, Sanskrit was
partly used precisely because it was not familiar; its mystery enhanced
the power and efficacy of the texts.
The next known examples of Malay are three inscriptions from 
the 14th century, 700 years after the Srivijayan inscriptions. Two of
these are Islamic, the Trengganu inscription, written in Arabic script,
and a gravestone found at Minye Tujuh in northern Sumatra, dis-
cussed in Chapter 4. The Minye Tujuh stone, although Islamic, is
written in Pallava script and contains Sanskrit words. The third is a
stone inscription of 1356 found at Pagarruyung in the Minangkabau
language area of central Sumatra. This inscription also contains many
Sanskrit words. It is clear from the Pagarruyung inscription that 
Old Malay writing was in some sort of decline by the 13th century,
with the Sanskrit described as ‘very faulty’ and the Malay as ‘rather
corrupt’.24
Apart from the inscriptions, nothing is known of Srivijayan litera-
ture, although there must have been a considerable court literature
over many centuries. The 14th-century Pagarruyung inscription sug-
gests that Old Malay remained in use as a written language, with
Indian script and containing many Sanskrit elements, up to the end of
the Sumatran Buddhist period, which may have lasted longer in the
hinterland than on the coast. However, with the coming of Islam the
literature was no longer copied and so was not preserved.25
Nevertheless, the early literature of the Islamic period probably car-
ried on a number of traditions from the earlier period. It has been
claimed that ‘certain peculiar features of the earliest Malay texts using
Arabic script can only be explained by an older tradition of writing in
a syllabic script of Indian derivation, similar to that still used in Java’.26
B O R R O W I N G  F R O M  S A N S K R I T
Indian cultural penetration during the Hindu–Buddhist period in
Indonesian history had a profound and in many ways permanent influ-
ence on Indonesian society and culture, not only in Malay areas but
also, and to a greater extent, in Bali and Java. While the first contacts
with India were with merchants and seamen, it was not they who were
responsible for Sanskrit influence. They were of lower caste and did not
possess the learning characteristic of Indian culture in Southeast Asia.
The influence came as a result of the activities of small numbers of
Indian brahmans and Buddhist monks serving Indonesian courts as
O L D
M A L A Y • 4 5

advisers and of Indonesian pilgrims and students who studied in
India.27
Because of the fragmentary nature of the record of Old Malay, con-
sisting of the sporadic occurrence of brief inscriptions, understanding of
early borrowing from Sanskrit is limited. The picture of Sanskrit bor-
rowing into Old Javanese is far clearer due to the continuous and abun-
dant nature of Old Javanese records, which reveal the process of
adoption and assimilation of Sanskrit forms, a process that must also have
occurred in Malay. A number of Sanskrit words have also been borrowed
into Malay via Old Javanese; this is particularly true of modern borrow-
ing of Sanskrit forms drawn from Old Javanese literature (see p. 167).
Borrowing from Sanskrit represents the first known influence on
Malay from a language external to the Austronesian group. Presumably,
many borrowings have disappeared from the language and most of the
Sanskrit elements appearing in Old Malay inscriptions cannot be
regarded as borrowings at all, as already mentioned. However, a great
many Sanskrit words exist in the present-day language, many of them so
assimilated that Indonesians are not aware that they are borrowings. It
cannot be stated for certain when most of these terms actually acquired
general acceptance in Malay; the process of adoption stretched over
many centuries and some words would have acquired common usage
much earlier or later than others, even within the same semantic
domain. The Trengganu inscription contains Sanskrit words that were
presumably assimilated at that time (see p. 53) and a Malay–Chinese
wordlist drawn up in the 15th century (see p. 77) contains about 20
Sanskrit words, as well as words from other Indian languages. A Dutch
religious booklet of 1612 contains a number of Sanskrit words, includ-
ing karena (because), guru (teacher) and nama (name), showing that
they were assimilated by that time.28
Borrowings given below are cited in the form and with the mean-
ing that they have in modern Indonesian; the form and meaning in
Sanskrit is not given, except in a few cases where it is quite different
from the Indonesian. Only a small sample of common words in the
modern language, grouped into semantic fields, is given here.29
•
RELIGION:
Many Hindu and Buddhist terms have been borrowed, including
the names of Hindu deities. Other terms include:
agama
religion
dewa
god (especially in a polytheistic or pagan system)
4 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

dosa
sin
jiwa
soul
neraka
hell
puasa
to fast
puja
worship
surga
heaven
•
TITLES, NAMES AND RELATIONSHIPS:
bangsa
people, nation (Sanskrit vans ‘family’).
bendehara
treasurer
keluarga
family
laksamana
admiral (after a character in the Hindu epic 
Ramayana)
menteri
minister of state
mitra
friend
perdana menteri
prime minister
raja
king
Personal names of Sanskrit origin have mainly been restricted to the
Javanese community. Among them are many with the Sanskrit for-
mant su- ‘good’, such as Sumitro ‘good friend’, Suharto ‘good
wealth’.
•
SCHOLARSHIP AND CEREMONIES:
bahasa
language
guru
teacher
mantra, mantera
magic formula
pendeta
Hindu or Buddhist priest; Protestant 
clergyman; (archaic) scholar (Sanskrit 
pandita ‘learned’)
sarjana
scholar
sastra
literature
siswa
student
upacara
ceremony
•
GEOGRAPHY, LOC ALITIES AND PLACES:
angkasa
sky, heavens
asrama
hostel, dormitory
biara
monastery
bumi
earth; world
desa
village
O L D
M A L A Y • 4 7
a–   

gempa
earthquake
gua
cave
istana
palace
kota
town
negeri
country
nusa
island
semudera
ocean
udara
air
•
ANATOMY; BODILY CONDITIONS:
bahu
shoulder (Sanskrit b  hu ‘arm’) 
kepala
head (Sanskrit kap  la ‘skull’) 
muka
face
roma
body hair
selesma
cold (Sanskrit slesman ‘mucus’)
sendi
joint
•
NUMERALS:
Malay, like other Austronesian languages, had a developed decimal
counting system, although lacking words for very high numbers.
The word juta (million) is from Sanskrit ayuta (ten thousand).
There are some other less common words, such as laksa (ten thou-
sand — Sanskrit laksa ‘one hundred thousand’), which occurs in
the AD 682 inscription given on page 38. The common word for
‘first’, pertama, is from Sanskrit, as is angka (number). Numerals
for lower denominations have more recently been borrowed for
restricted usage, usually as prefixed forms, such as dwi- (dual) and
tri- (tri-), as discussed in Chapter 8.
•
BOTANIC AL NAMES, FOODSTUFFS, ANIMALS:
angsa
goose
cendana
sandalwood
gajah
elephant
labu
gourd, pumpkin
madu
honey
melati
jasmine
pala
nutmeg
singa
lion
4 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–   
a–   

•
ABSTRACT TERMS:
aniaya
tyranny, injustice
bukti
proof
cinta
love
dusta
lie
gembira
cheerful, happy
merdeka
freedom (Sanskrit maharddhika ‘powerful’)
mulia
noble
sentosa
tranquil, peaceful
setia
loyal
susila
decent, moral
The term sukacita ‘joy, happiness’ occurs in the AD 682 inscription.
•
FUNCTION WORDS:
Some function words and prepositions have been borrowed, such
as:
antara
between
atau
or
karena
because
ketika
when
tetapi
but
The common word for ‘I’ in formal language is saya, which derives
from a Sanskrit word meaning ‘slave’.
It is not at all uncommon for a word in modern Indonesian of
Sanskrit origin to have a significantly different meaning from the origi-
nal in Sanskrit, a very few being indicated above. The modern
Indonesian meaning may be narrower or wider than the original or have
undergone some other semantic shift. An example of narrowing of
meaning is the word agama, meaning ‘religion’ in Indonesian but in
Sanskrit having the wider meaning ‘traditional precept, doctrine, any-
thing handed down and fixed by tradition’. On the other hand, Sanskrit
sodara meant ‘brother, born of the same womb’, which as saudara was
extended in meaning to refer to any relative of the same generation.
Sanskrit nagari meant ‘town’. In earlier Malay, it denoted the chief set-
tlement of a ruler. As the Malay state expanded from the traditional
river system with a negeri as its capital to a larger area with defined
boundaries, the word extended in meaning to ‘country’.
In some cases, the modern meaning is so different that a relation-
ship with the Sanskrit source might easily be overlooked. The word
O L D
M A L A Y • 4 9
–

denda (fine) is from Sanskrit danda, which meant ‘staff, rod as a sym-
bol of power; application of power, punishment’. In the modern lan-
guage, gembira means ‘delighted, happy’; in Sanskrit, gambh-ira meant
‘profound, grave, serious’; in earlier Malay, the word took on the mean-
ing of ‘passion, excitement, lust for fighting’ before acquiring its pre-
sent meaning.
Borrowings from Sanskrit almost always underwent changes of pro-
nunciation. This was inevitable in most cases, given the far larger stock
of sounds in Sanskrit — 35 consonants as against 18 in Malay (exclud-
ing consonants entering the language via later borrowings) — and a dis-
tinction between long and short vowels, which does not occur in Malay.
In some cases, a word split into two in its history, giving two forms in
the modern language, where Sanskrit had only one. Thus berita and
warta, both meaning ‘news’, reflect the Sanskrit word v  rtt  (news);
kerja (to work) and karya (a work — of art, literature) both derive from
k  rya (work).
Sanskrit words were often introduced as synonyms to native Malay
words. As so frequently occurred in English with loans from Latin, the
borrowing was considered more refined, due to the prestige of the
donor language (as further discussed in Chapter 8). Thus suami (hus-
band) and istri (wife) are politer than the indigenous laki and bini. The
terms putra and putri were originally used as ‘prince’ and ‘princess’
respectively, as in Sanskrit, but also came to be used as honorific forms
for ‘son’ and ‘daughter’ when referring to the children of someone of
high social standing or, for courtesy, the children of the person being
spoken to.
Terms like putra and putri introduced to Malay a gender-marking
distinction that Malay, like other Austronesian languages, did not make,
even having a single pronoun ia/dia for third person singular, ‘he, she,
it’. The -a/-i masculine/feminine distinction also occurs in the Sanskrit
borrowings dewa (god) and dewi (goddess), siswa (student) and siswi
(female student), where the -a form is used both for males and in 
general for males and females, while the -i form is specifically feminine.
The male and female endings -wan and -wati also introduce gender 
distinction. As these have become more frequent in usage in the mod-
ern language, they are discussed further in that connection (see p. 171).
Borrowing from Sanskrit, an Indo-European language, has brought
into the language a number of words related to English words. Some
are obvious, such as nama (name) and sama (same), while others, due
to sound changes in English or changes in meaning, are not readily
5 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–   a–   
a–   
–

identifiable, such as kepala (head), dasa (ten) and madu (honey —
English ‘mead’). Modern Indonesian also shares a number of related
words with English where a Sanskrit word was borrowed into Malay
while English borrowed a cognate from Latin or Greek, such as
Indonesian dewa (god) and English ‘divine’. In some cases, English has
borrowed words from Hindi, a development from Sanskrit, giving indi-
rectly related forms in the two languages, such as Indonesian pendeta
(priest) and English ‘pundit’, Indonesian panca (five) and English
‘punch’ (the drink — so called because it originally contained five ingre-
dients). ‘Five’ is the directly related English word to Sanskrit panc  , the
origin of the Indonesian word.
O L D
M A L A Y • 5 1
a–   

T H E  C O M I N G  O F  I S L A M
The spread of Islam in the archipelago proceeded gradually. The reli-
gion was brought by merchants and sailors from Persia and the Arab
countries, but mainly from India, particularly by Moslems from
Gujerat, who were playing a major part in commerce in the 13th and
14th centuries.1
North Sumatra was the first part of the archipelago to be con-
verted. Marco Polo called at Perlak on the far north coast on his return
home in 1292 and reported that the town was visited by so many
Moslem traders that they had converted the natives to Islam, although
he suggests that the conversion had not been in process long.2 While
Moslem traders had been visiting the Straits of Malacca for centuries
and Moslem tombstones of an earlier period are known, this is the ear-
liest report we have of Islamic influence in Southeast Asia. The Arab
voyager Ibn Batuta visited the north Sumatran port of Samudra-Pasai,
a prosperous commercial state in the 13th and 14th centuries, on his
way to and from China in 1345–46. He reported that it had a Moslem
sultan, although surrounding areas were non-Moslem.3
A Muslim gravestone of 1380, discovered in Minye Tujuh, in the
Aceh-speaking region of northern Sumatra, consists mainly of a poem
in Sanskrit metre in Pallava script. It is written in Malay, but with
numerous Sanskrit words (as in the Srivijayan inscriptions from 700
years earlier), containing also some formulaic Arabic phrases. Although
Islamic, it demonstrates that in northern Sumatra in the 14th century
Malay was considered the right literary language for a commemorative
inscription and that Indian writing was still in use.4
4
T H E  C L A S S I C A L  M A L AY  P E R I O D

On the Malay Peninsula the earliest Islamic document is an inscrip-
tion on a granite stele found at Trengganu on the northeast coast.5 The
Trengganu inscription is the oldest Malay text in the Arabic script yet
discovered and the earliest contemporary record of the introduction of
Islam into the peninsula. The precise date of the inscription is open to
doubt. The first side of the stele ends with the words tujuh ratus dua
(seven hundred and two). The year 702 in the Islamic calendar is AD
1303. However, the wording is probably incomplete, being continued
at the top of the second side, which has been lost. Presumably the word
tahun (year/s) would have followed. Other numbers may have followed
dua. It could have been puluh, giving dua puluh (twenty), and this
could have been followed by any of the numbers from one to nine.
Alternatively, it may have been lapan, giving dua lapan, the older form
for modern delapan (eight), still in use when Pigafetta compiled his
wordlist in 1521 (see p. 61); thus somewhere in the 780s, giving a final
possible dating of AD 1387. Whatever the date, it is still the oldest
example of Malay written in Arabic script, considerably predating the
next known example, an inscription from 1468.
The Trengganu inscription was discovered at the very end of the
19th century by a trader-cum-prospector in the river Teresat, about
30 kilometres upstream from the mouth of the Trengganu River. It is
on the four sides of a granite stone, the top portion of which is miss-
ing. The characters were engraved with a pointed instrument and are
of crude workmanship. The spelling is also unorthodox. The inscrip-
tion contains on its first side a proclamation ordering rulers and gov-
ernors to uphold the Moslem faith. At the time, Trengganu was
claimed as a vassal by the Javanese kingdom of Majapahit, a Hindu-
Buddhist state, and the inscription clearly shows that it was written in
a period when Islamic beliefs were just being introduced. The Hindu-
Buddhist past is much apparent in the inscription; there are 29
Sanskrit words, not all of which are still in use. By contrast, there are
fewer than ten words from Arabic and these are confined to the Arabic
names for the day of the week and the month and a stock religious
phrase. Indeed, God is referred to as Dewata Mulia Raya (Great High
Godhead), rather than by the Arabic formula Allah subhanahu wa
taala.6 The first two elements are Sanskrit: dewata (god), mulia
(noble, exalted), and only the third raya (great) is Malay. Even in the
one Arabic religious phrase the engraver made an error, revealing his
lack of familiarity with Arabic. The scholar who first described the
inscription wrote: 
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 5 3

5 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
Figure 4.1  
The 14th-century Trengganu inscription — the oldest existing Malay writing
in Arabic script.This photograph of side A (see p. 55) is in negative to 
highlight the writing. (Paterson 1924, plate 1a)

The evidence, in fact, leads inevitably to the conclusion that this repre-
sents the promulgation of a new religion in language adapted to the
understanding of a population educated only in Hinduistic religious
terms. The period of the inscription is one in which Islam was slowly
but surely displacing the older religious beliefs of the Malays.7
The text of side A of the Trengganu inscription consists of eleven
lines, as follows, the doubtful parts being in square brackets. Dots in the
first line indicate parts that cannot be deciphered.
1 Rasul Allah dengan yang orang … [bagi] mereka …
2 ada pada Dewata Mulia Raya beri hamba menegohkan ugama
Islam.
3 dengan benar bicara derma meraksa bagi sakalian hamba Dewata
Mulia Raya
4 di-benua-ku ini [penentu] ugama Rasul Allah salla’llahu ‘alaihi wa
sallama Raja
5 mandalika yang benar bichara sa-belah Dewata Mulia Raya
didalam
6 behumi. Penentua itu fardzu pada sakalian Raja manda-
7 lika Islam menurut sa-titah Dewata Mulia Raya dengan benar
8 bichara berbajiki benua penentua itu maka titah Seri Paduka
9 Tuhan medudokkan tamra ini di-benua Trenganu adi-pertama ada
10 Juma’at di-bulan Rejab di-tahun sarathan di-sasanakala
11 Baginda Rasul Allah telah lalu tujoh ratus dua
TRANSLATION: 8
1 … God’s Apostle, together with the Blessed Spirits (a salutation to
them) ….
2 trust in the Great High Godhead, cause the servants to hold firmly
the doctrines of Islam
3 together with true regard for the laws, govern all the servants of the
Great High Godhead
4 in this land of mine. The expounders of the doctrines of God’s
Apostle (God bless him and give him peace!) are the Raja
5 Mandalikas who have true regard towards the Great High
Godhead, on
6 earth. Such exposition is incumbent upon all Muslim Raja Manda-
7 likas, following all the commands of the Great High Godhead
together with true
8 regard for the setting in order, for the country, of such exposition;
and when His Majesty
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 5 5

9 Lord first ordered the setting up of this record in the country of
Trengganu it was
10 a Friday in the month of Rejab, in the year ‘Cancer’, in the religious
era
11 of our Lord the Apostle of God, after the passing (in that era) of
seven hundred and (?) (years) …
For line 11, the translation of dua (two) was omitted by the trans-
lator, placing a question mark, for reasons discussed above.
Of the 29 Sanskrit words contained in the Trengganu inscription,
the following occur on side A, with line numbers shown. Most of them
are still in use in modern Indonesian:
2 dewata ‘god’, mulia ‘noble’, ugama ‘religion’ (modern agama)
3 bicara ‘speak’, derma ‘laws’ (modern ‘alms’), raksa ‘guard’ (archaic),
4 raja ‘ruler, king’
5 mandalika ‘regional’ (archaic), thus raja mandalika ‘regional
rulers’
6 behumi ‘world’ (Sanskrit bhumi, modern bumi)
8 Seri Paduka ‘His Majesty’
9 adi ‘beginning’, pertama (Sanskrit prathama) ‘first’ [although the
reading of adi is doubtful]
10 sasanakala (from Sanskrit s’  sanam ‘command’ (archaic) and k  la
‘time’)
11 Baginda ‘the fortunate’ (used as a title for rulers)
The Sanskrit words in the inscription were already assimilated into
the Malay language. This contrasts with the Srivijayan inscriptions in
which the Sanskrit component essentially comprised religious formulae
unintelligible to most people other than the Buddhist monks.
A number of Malay words have different meanings in the modern
language. Thus on lines 8–9 Seri Paduka Tuhan means ‘His Lord
Majesty’, where tuhan is a variant of tuan (lord, master), rather than
meaning ‘God’ as in the modern language.
The transcription of the piece, even overlooking the problems in
interpreting a number of words, is difficult for a speaker of the mod-
ern language to understand. Nevertheless, it is clearly Malay and much
can be identified in transcription, unlike the Srivijaya inscriptions,
which a modern Indonesian without the necessary training simply
would not recognise. The situation is remarkably similar to that of an
English speaker looking at earlier English of comparable periods, such
as Anglo-Saxon of the 8th century and Chaucer of the 14th century.
5 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–   
a–   

While Chaucer may be difficult to understand, it is instantly recognis-
able as English, whereas writing of the earlier period is unlikely to be
perceived as such by most people. During the six or seven hundred
years since the Srivijaya inscriptions, significant changes had occurred
in the language, although too little is preserved to allow any sort of
documentation of the changes and their dates. Regional dialects of
Malay would have developed quite quickly after the dispersal of the
language and there is no reason to suppose that the dialect spoken in
Trengganu in the 14th century was a direct continuation of the
Srivijayan language of the 7th century.
The conversion of the Malay world to the Moslem religion was
largely responsible for a great flowering of literature, although there was
undoubtedly a tradition of literature in pre-Islamic courts. The avail-
ability of a great many written works of both religious and non-religious
nature, in Arabic and Persian, reproduced in Malay translations, stimu-
lated the production of similar works in Malay. Another important fac-
tor was the introduction of paper and ink, which were used by Moslem
scribes in western Asia. In the Hindu-Buddhist period, works of litera-
ture were usually cut by a knife on palm leaf, and the Hindu and
Buddhist scribes resisted the undoubtedly superior method of writing
after it was introduced.9
M A L A C C A  A N D  I T S  I N F L U E N C E
Information on the language and the history of the region continues to
be very sketchy until the Malaccan period. There is evidence that
Malacca, which began as a small river settlement engaged in fishing,
farming and piracy, was occupied by a prince from Palembang some
time towards the end of the 14th century. Under him and his succes-
sors it developed gradually into a busy and wealthy entrepot port and
the pre-eminent trading centre in the region. By the end of the 15th
century, it was the capital of a powerful Malay empire.10
Our knowledge of Malacca’s history in the 15th century comes
mainly from two sources. The Suma Oriental, which provides an
account of Malacca’s history, including its origins, administration and
trade, was written by Tome Pires, a Portuguese official who arrived in
Malacca in 1512.11 The second source is the Sejarah Melayu (The
History of Malaya), known in English as The Malay Annals, which has
been handed down in a number of different versions.12 The work has
been called the foremost example of Classical Malay style, as well as a
literary masterpiece.13 Although the text’s stated aim was to set forth
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 5 7

the genealogy of the Malay rajas and the ceremonial of their courts, it
did not have the aim of precisely describing events in the past and can-
not be regarded as history in the Western sense (beginning as it does
with a genealogy that traces the line of Malacca’s kings back to
Alexander the Great).
Despite the considerable differences between them, both the Suma
Oriental and the Sejarah Melayu contain a core of similar information
concerning the founding of Malacca, tracing the Malaccan royal line to
a ruler in Palembang. They both describe his departure for Tumasik or
Temasek (now Singapore), possibly following a Javanese attack on
Srivijaya, later moving his settlement to Muar, about eight kilometres
from Malacca, and finally establishing himself in Malacca. Some schol-
ars believe that Malacca represents a continuation of the power of
Srivijaya and that its rapid rise to prominence was due to its direct con-
nection with the earlier state. One even goes so far as to state that the
last ruler of Srivijaya, ousted by the Javanese, settled first in Singapore
and then founded Malacca, where he ruled for 14 years.14 In the Sejarah
Melayu and other Malay epics, Melayu, the origin of ‘Malay’, is identi-
fied with the area of Palembang, where Srivijaya stood.
Malacca was ideally situated to take advantage of trade passing
through the Straits. The harbour was sheltered and deep with easy
access to the interior and a naturally defensible position. It developed a
reputation for security and well-ordered government, a cosmopolitan
marketplace, excellent warehouses and other facilities, where merchants
could store their goods and await a change in the monsoon winds. Early
on, Malacca established good relations with China, which offered pro-
tection from Thai attacks. This encouraged increasing numbers of mer-
chants to come to Malacca, which soon outshone commercial rivals
such as Samudra-Pasai in northern Sumatra.
Under these conditions the port became a centre for the interna-
tional trade, with many thousands of Indian merchants either resident
in Malacca or travelling between it and India. With wealth and power
from international commerce and control of the spice trade, mainly nut-
meg and cloves from the Moluccas, it came to dominate the region. By
1500, the kingdom included most of the Malay Peninsula, the Riau-
Lingga archipelago and much of the east coast of Sumatra, although it
never succeeded in gaining complete control of the region and other
trading states continued to compete with it.
Malacca rose to become a commercial city of such importance that
Tome Pires admiringly wrote that it had no equal in the world. It also
5 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

laid the foundation for later Malay society. ‘Building upon an illustrious
past, it established a pattern of government and a life style which was
emulated by subsequent Malay kingdoms and became the basis of what
was later termed “traditional” Malay culture and statecraft’.15
Despite the fact that Malacca never succeeded in fully controlling
the Straits of Malacca, it had an enormous influence in the region, its
distinctive literature, style of government, and culture being con-
sciously imitated in the rest of the Malay world. The spread of Malay
culture and language did not begin with Malacca, having been under-
way during the time of Srivijaya. However, it accelerated under Malacca
and at the height of Malacca’s power in the 15th century it spread east-
ward to areas far beyond Malacca’s political control, such as Ternate and
Tidore in the northern Moluccas. Malay became the language of court
and literature in kingdoms outside traditional Malay-speaking areas.
There was a great blossoming of Malay literature of all types; Malay
texts, written in Jawi — Arabic script adapted to the Malay language —
consisting of stories, chronicles, religious tracts, and law codes, were
produced not only in Malacca but in aristocratic circles in Minangkabau
and in non-Malay areas such as Aceh, Lampung in southern Sumatra,
Makassar, Bima on the island of Sumbawa, the Sulu archipelago and
Mindanao in southern Philippines.16 This literary Malay, although not
entirely uniform, was soon to become quite standardised, despite
regional variation in local spoken forms of the language.
The cosmopolitan nature of Malacca can be seen in an early
Malay–Chinese wordlist, which shows numerous borrowings for cul-
tural items. The list was compiled in the mid-16th century, drawn from
earlier lists in numerous Chinese reports on activities in Malacca before
1511.17 The list reflects the Chinese interest in trade, with large sections
dealing with natural phenomena, geography, flowers and trees. The
great majority of the 482 entries are still in common use today
(although some items cannot be identified, owing to the inefficiency of
Chinese characters to accurately represent syllables in Malay). Although
the majority of the words are Malay, there is nevertheless a significant
number of borrowings from many sources, pointing to the vigorous
commercial and cosmopolitan nature of Malacca society and its readi-
ness to absorb elements from other cultures.
M A L AY  I N  T H E  E A S T
The period of Malacca’s power came to an abrupt end in August 1511,
when the city was captured by the Portuguese. As the most important
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 5 9

commercial port in Southeast Asia and the centre for the spice trade it
was a valued prize for the Portuguese. The royal court fled, eventually
settling on the island of Bintan in the Riau-Lingga archipelago. Conflict
with the Portuguese led to several moves, but finally the sultan estab-
lished his royal residence on the Johor River in the 1530s, founding the
kingdom of Johor.
Here the Malacca dynasty was able to resume its commercial activi-
ties, although Johor never acquired the dominating position of Malacca
and numerous other trading states vied with it. One of the sons of the
last sultan of Malacca established himself in the tiny settlement of Perak
on the northwest coast of the peninsula and Malacca’s culture and tra-
ditions thus continued there also. Perak grew to become a wealthy 
kingdom, profiting from the increasing demand for tin from European
traders. Aceh also developed into a wealthy kingdom after the fall 
of Malacca, profiting from Moslem trade. Malacca itself, under the
Portuguese, also remained a significant commercial centre.
By the time the Portuguese and Spanish arrived in the archipelago
early in the 16th century, the whole area, from Aceh in the west to west-
ern New Guinea and north through the Philippines, was a thriving net-
work of trade routes. Malay had been taken east as the lingua franca for
trade in the Srivijaya era and its importance grew as trade spread, cen-
tred around the Moluccas. While a somewhat standardised form of lit-
erary Malay became established in royal courts throughout the
archipelago, so-called Bazaar Malay was the language of commerce.
Forms of Malay that probably began as pidgins, vehicles for communi-
cation on a limited range of topics by traders and local populations,
spread as ports sprang up throughout the archipelago, such as Ambon
and Ternate in the Moluccas and Kupang in Timor. As populations
increased in these ports, lingua franca Malay was used for more and
more social functions, acquiring more vocabulary and grammatical
complexity, absorbing elements from traditional Malay and from local
languages. When people came to speak Malay as their home language,
it was needed for all the daily purposes of any vernacular. In this stage
the language was no longer a pidgin, used only between speakers of dif-
ferent languages for limited purposes, but had become a creole, a first
language derived from a previous pidgin stage. It was these creoles that
developed into the post-creole forms of Malay spoken today in places
like Ambon, Ternate, Manado and Kupang. In other places, such as the
northern Moluccas and coastal parts of western New Guinea, the lan-
guage remained largely for inter-ethnic communication.
6 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Also important in the eastern archipelago, but distinct from the lin-
gua franca varieties of Malay, were the traditional vernacular forms
brought to Borneo by Malay immigrants from the west. These were
continuations of regional dialects of Sumatra and were not the product
of pidginisation and creolisation. These people settled around much of
the coast of Borneo and their language is reflected in Banjarese, Kutai
Malay, Sarawak Malay and Brunei Malay. Later, the literary tradition of
Malacca was introduced and continued in the courts of local sultans.
Local populations were absorbed into the Malay-speaking community
as they were converted to Islam.
Brunei, in northwest Borneo, had a long maritime tradition, having
been part of the network of trade between Srivijaya and China. By the
beginning of the 15th century, it had sound relations with China and
was an important part of the northern trade route to the Moluccas. It
became a Moslem state after the arrival there of Moslem traders and
possibly court officials from Malacca. Survivors of Magellan’s round-
the-world expedition visited Brunei in 1521 and were impressed by the
splendour of its court and by Brunei’s influence throughout the
Philippines. Antonio Pigafetta, an Italian travelling with Magellan’s
expedition, wrote that Luzon (the northern island of the Philippines)
was vassal to Brunei.
The spread of Malay was thoroughly established throughout the
archipelago by the time the Europeans arrived in the 16th century, as a
number of Portuguese sources attest. A report of 1544 by Antonio 
Galv  o, Portuguese governor of the Moluccas, compares the spread and
general use of Malay with Latin in Europe.18 Jan Huygen van
Lindschoten, a Dutch sailor travelling with the Portuguese between
1579 and 1592, wrote that ‘Anyone who does not know Malay in the
Indies will not get anywhere, as with French with us’.19 The Jesuit mis-
sionary Francis Xavier arrived in Malacca in 1545, where he studied
Malay. He proceeded to the Moluccas and wrote from Ambon in the
following year that, while each island had its own language, Malay was
widely understood. He wrote that it was into Malay that he translated
scriptures and prayers.20
Pigafetta compiled his Malay–Italian wordlist in 1521, the earliest
extant Malay wordlist, now preserved in the Ambrosiana Library of
Milan. (The Chinese wordlist already referred to, although based on
earlier lists, was itself of a later date.) Although the expedition visited
the Moluccas as well as the Philippines, it is probable that the source of
the list was a Sumatran slave on board, whom Magellan had acquired
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 6 1
a~

after his assistance at the conquest of Malacca in 1511. There are no
words in the list identifiable as purely Moluccan Malay and most of the
words are clearly western (Sumatran-Malaccan). Pigafetta described
how the slave was understood by the inhabitants of a small island in the
Sulu archipelago, which stretches between northeast Borneo and
Mindanao island.21
T H E  E A R L I E S T  M A L AY  L E T T E R S
The earliest known letters in Malay were written in 1521 and 1522 in the
name of Sultan Abu Hayat of Ternate, one of the two powerful Moslem
sultanates in the northern Moluccas. Writings of many kinds, including
letters, were produced before this, but none has been preserved. The
Ternate letters were addressed to the king of Portugal and owe their sur-
vival to preservation in Europe. It is significant that the earliest preserved
documents in Malay, apart from inscriptions on stone, were from the east-
ern archipelago, an area where Malay was not native but where it had long
been the language of wider communication. While the Malay (Jawi)
handwriting is good, the letters were written by someone who was ‘cer-
tainly very imperfectly acquainted with the Malay language’, to quote
Blagden, who translated the letters. Blagden points out that ‘The style
and grammar are bad, the order of the words appears to have been influ-
enced by the syntax of the quite alien local language of Ternate, and the
meaning is therefore often ambiguous or obscure’.22 The Ternate lan-
guage belongs to the North Halmahera language group, a subgroup of
non-Austronesian (Papuan) languages in the northern Moluccas, and the
peculiarities in the Malay of the letters are characteristic of such languages.
Malay was thus the language considered suitable for diplomacy and for all
other communication between people of different native languages,
although it was not the everyday language of Ternate.
Some of the non-Malay influences are apparent at the beginning
of the first letter, which follows, in Blagden’s transliteration of the
original:
1
Raja Sultan Abu Hayat surat datang ka-pada mama Raja Portukal
raja (be)sar al-dunia ‘alam
2
semuha-nya tuwan basar karana dahulu Raja Portukal manyuroh
Frangshisko Sera datang dari Muluku
3
binasa dari Ambun maka Raja Meluku semuha-nya dengar Feringgi
ada binasa dari Ambun maka Raja
4
Tedore dan Jailolo di-suroh Ambun semuha-nya berhimpah mau
bunoh pada Frangshisko Sera.
6 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Blagden translates this:
1
Letter of Sultan Abu Hayat to his uncle the King of Portugal, the
(great?) king of the whole
2
world, the great lord. Because formerly the King of Portugal
ordered Francisco Serrao to come to the Moluccas,
3
(and he) came to grief at Amboina, and all the Rajas of the
Moluccas heard that Europeans had come to grief at Amboina, the
Rajas
4
of Tidore and Jailolo ordered all Amboina (to assemble together?)
in order to slay Francisco Serrao.
In Malay a possessive follows the noun, but in this letter, line 1, the
name of the king precedes surat ‘letter’. This is a characteristic of the
various post-creole varieties of Malay in the east, influenced by the pos-
sessor–possessed word order of non-Austronesian languages of the
region. Irregularly, the word order object–passive verb is replaced by
passive verb–object, another characteristic of non-Austronesian lan-
guages of the region. Thus on line 4 Raja Tedore dan Jailolo di-suroh
Ambun semuha-nya berhimpah means, not ‘the kings of Tidore were
ordered by all Ambon (Blagden’s Amboina) to assemble’ (with the last
word being an error for berhimpun ‘assemble’) but ‘the kings of Tidore
and Jailolo ordered all Ambon to assemble’.
Unlike Brunei, where Malay was the language of literature and the
court, as well as that of trade, in Ternate and in other Moluccan states,
such as Tidore, Malay was the language of the port and trade only. As
the language of wider communication, it was considered appropriate for
communication with Europeans, as it was with all non-locals. Lacking a
literary style, the scribes could only use Bazaar Malay, which, in its local
form, influenced by their own language, was soon to become further
entrenched in the region, developing into Ternate Malay. The letters
thus offer an excellent insight into the process of development of the
creole-based eastern varieties of the language.
The second letter from the Sultan of Ternate of 1522 reports the
arrival of two Spanish ships in 1521 to protect the Sultan of Tidore,
with whom Ternate was in conflict. The ships were from Magellan’s
expedition of 1519–22, which arrived in the Moluccas following
Magellan’s death during fighting in the Philippines. On one of the ships
was the Italian Antonio Pigafetta, who wrote an account of his voyage
with Magellan, which included the Malay wordlist referred to above.
Other letters in lingua franca Malay from a somewhat later period
have also been preserved, such as those from the ruler of Banten to the
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 6 3

Dutch authorities in Batavia, written in 1619. Of the language in these,
it has been observed that they are:
examples of the kind of Malay used as a lingua franca throughout the
Malay/Indonesian area by peoples whose first language was not
Malay. The similar language found in the Ternate and Banten letters
is that pasar Malay (Bazaar Malay) which, however imperfectly it
approximated to ‘good’ Malay, was the language by which
Indonesians, Europeans, Chinese, and other Asians communicated
with one another across cultural and linguistic barriers.23
The oldest extant Malay letters from the western part of the archi-
pelago were written in 1602 and are preserved in the Bodleian Library
at Oxford.24 They are letters from Sultan Ala’u ’d-Din Shah of Aceh to
Queen Elizabeth, with authority to trade, given to captains on the first
voyage to the archipelago undertaken by the English East India
Company. Although Aceh had its own language, Malay had long been
the language of the royal court and of literature; in fact, Aceh was one
of the major centres for Malay literature in the period after the fall of
Malacca. As such, Malay was, like Latin in medieval Europe, regarded
as the only appropriate language for communicating with other peoples.
The first letter, given to Sir James Lancaster, leader of the English expe-
dition, begins:
Aku raja yang kuasa yang di bawah angin ini, yang memegang takhta
keraja’an negri Acheh, dan negri Sammudara, dan segala negri yang
t’alok ka-negri Acheh. Maka sakalian kamu yang menilek ka-pada
surat ini, hendak-lah dengan tilek kebajikan, dan tilek yang sejahtra.
Dan kamu dengarkan perkata’an yang dalam-nya, dan kamu
fahamkan segala perkata’an-nya. Bahwa aku telah bersabda dengan
suka-hati-ku, membri kamu tahu ini: Bahwa aku telah bersuhbat den-
gan Raja Ingliter …
Shellabear translates this as follows. (Why he translates raja as
‘king’, when it was written during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, as
Shellabear mentions, is not explained.)
I am the reigning sovereign of these [countries] below the wind,
holding the throne of the kingdom of Acheen and Sumatra, and all
the countries subject to Acheen. All ye who scan this letter shall [do
so] with good will and peace, and listen to the words which it con-
tains and understand them all. It has been my pleasure to declare for
your information as follows: I have made friends with the King of
England …
6 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

A decade later, in 1615, Sultan Perkasa Alam Johan of Aceh wrote
to King James I. This is the splendidly illustrated ‘Golden Letter’, on a
scroll almost a metre long, also held in the Bodleian Library (see Figure
4.2). While dealing with trade matters, most of the letter is a glorifica-
tion of the sultan and speaks of his wealth and power. The letter begins:
Surat deri-pada Sri Sultan Perkasa ‘Alam Johan berdaulat, raja yang
beroleh mertabat keraja’an, yang dalam takhta keraja’an yang tiada
terlihat oleh penglihat, yang tiada terdengar oleh penengar, yang berma-
ligai gading, berukir berkrawang, bersendi bersindura, bewerna sadal-
inggam, yang berayer ‘mas, yang beristana sa-yojana menentang.
TRANSLATION:
A letter from His Excellency Sultan Perkasa Alam Johan the majestic,
the king who possesses kingly rank, who is upon the throne of a king-
dom which (human) vision cannot cover nor (human) hearing fully
comprehend, whose palace is of ivory, engraved with network, with
joints of red-lead, of the colour of vermilion and gilt; whose palace
front extends as far as the eye can reach.
Compared with the letters from Ternate, these letters are not only
more elaborate stylistically but are in a ‘purer’ form of Malay, clearly
composed by someone thoroughly familiar with the literary language.
The language used in these letters is, in many ways, remarkably similar
to the literary form of the language of 300 years later.
M A L AY  L I T E R AT U R E
Literature of various kinds was produced in the court of Malacca and
in the courts of the states that followed it, although no early works
have been preserved. In the hot and humid conditions of the tropics,
works on paper or palm leaf did not last long and needed to be regu-
larly copied. Copyists in later periods edited and updated works, so
that copies now known are not a reliable reflection of the language
used in the original. Thus, apart from the Ternate letters, there are very
few manuscripts preserved from the 16th century. The Trengganu
inscription was made not long before some of the oldest Malay texts of
the classical period, which probably date from the 14th century,
although there may have been an unbroken literary tradition from
early Srivijayan times. 
However, a clear distinction must be made between texts and man-
uscripts. The earliest known literary manuscript, apart from the letters
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 6 5

Figure 4.2  
The Malay-
language letter
from the Sultan
of Aceh to 
King James I
(AD 1615)
(Bodleian Library,
University of
Oxford, Bodleian
Images: MS. Laud
Or Rolls b.1)

already referred to, was made in the first half of the 17th century. Much
Old Javanese literature has been preserved in its original form because
the priests and scribes of Bali, where the Hindu-Javanese tradition was
continued after Java became Moslem, copied the original texts with
great care over many centuries. By contrast, ‘the copyists of Malay lit-
erature not only set to work rather carelessly, they often even seemed to
deem it their duty and even their honour to purify their material, adapt-
ing it to the requirements of the day’.25
Because texts were regularly updated in language, manuscripts are
likely to represent the literary language of the time they were written
and not of the time of the original text. Consequently, there is very lit-
tle evidence of the literary tradition before the time of the oldest pre-
served texts. Thus the Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai (History of the Kings
of Pasai), which is likely to have been written in the northern Sumatran
city before 1524, when Pasai was annexed by Aceh, is only known from
a manuscript of 1814 and, ‘except for a few lexical relicts which slipped
through the meshes of the purifying net, has been entirely made to con-
form with the classical ideal as far as language is concerned’.26 The ear-
liest datable literary manuscript is a copy of Hikayat Seri Rama (The
Story of Rama), which was acquired by a European in 1633 and was
probably copied not many years earlier.
The most famous of the histories, which were concerned primarily
with the legitimacy and lineage of the sultan and very little with histor-
ical fact, is the Sejarah Melayu (see p. 57). The name was given to it by
Westerners, the original name being Sulalat u’s-Salatin (Genealogy of
Sultans). The Sejarah Melayu is sometimes said to have been com-
menced at Johor in 1612. However, while 29 copies of the text are
known, the earliest of these manuscripts dates from the 19th century.
There is evidence in one manuscript tradition that it was commenced in
Malacca before the Portuguese conquest in 1511.27
A tradition evolved in the writing of Malay hikayats (narratives or
‘histories’) and other literary works that led to a quite standardised style
of language, to which the term ‘Classical Malay’ often specifically refers.
This writing, in works like Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai, Sejarah Melayu
and many others, became highly stylised and quite different from any
spoken variety of Malay. Scribes throughout the Malay world, linked to
one another via the archipelago’s network of sea routes, became accus-
tomed to writing in a similar manner, influenced very little by their own
regional vernaculars. As the style evolved over the centuries, character-
istics of earlier stages of literature tended to be replaced by the copyists’
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 6 7

adherence to the general literary style of the time, which developed into
a form quite unlike spoken varieties of the language. One source com-
ments: ‘The consistency of this written superstratum was maintained by
the intensity of regional networks. Most important were commercial
and, above all, religious networks, with pilgrims, advanced students and
scholars moving about the archipelago and travelling to Mecca.’28 From
the early 17th century Aceh letters it is clear that Classical Malay, while
acquiring features not present in vernaculars, was very conservative in
many ways and by then had become quite fixed, so that there are
remarkable similarities in 19th-century manuscripts to the style of the
letters of the early 17th century.
It is likely that classical style is very similar to the style developed in
the royal court of Malacca in the 15th century, although no manuscripts
from that time have survived. The fall of Malacca led to a dispersal of its
scholars and scribes, who carried their tradition to various Malay courts
in the Malay Peninsula, in Sumatra and further afield, significantly con-
tributing to the standardisation process. This is not to say that there was
no regional variation at all in Classical Malay literature and differences
in vocabulary do show at times, especially in the style closest to speech,
in the Malay poetic form, the syair.29 The Jawi script is not well suited
to indicate Malay phonology and, as a result, differences in pronuncia-
tion, especially of vowels, are not detectable in the script.
It was in the Riau-Johor Sultanate, where the main branch of the
Malaccan royal dynasty continued, that some of the better known
Classical Malay texts, like Sejarah Melayu and Hikayat Hang Tuah, the
story of a Malaccan folk hero, were written. For this reason, the literary
style came to be commonly referred to by many people as Riau-Johor
Malay, or just Riau Malay (in Indonesia) or Johor Malay (in Malaysia).
This literary tradition did not begin in the courts of Riau and Johor, but
was a continuation of the literary tradition of Malacca. Because of the
similarity in style of Classical Malay texts composed in other centres, all
under the influence of Malaccan culture, the label ‘Riau-Johor Malay’ is
often applied to them as well, even though they were written in such
places as Aceh and Pasai in north Sumatra and Kutai in Borneo.
The following short extract from Sejarah Melayu is typical of clas-
sical literature. It is highly stylised; for instance, many sentences begin
with maka, which functions simply to mark a new sentence. Sentences
are short, with very few subordinate clauses and a dearth of descrip-
tive adjectives and adverbials. The spelling is as in the published
version.30
6 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Maka tersebut-lah perkataan raja benua Siam. Dari-pada zaman
dahulu kala-nya, bahawa negeri Siam itu Shahru ‘n-nuwi nama-nya
di-sebut orang, segala raja-raja yang di-bawah angin ini semua-nya
ta‘alok ka-pada-nya, Bubunnya nama raja-nya. Sa-telah kedengaran-
lah ka-benua Siam bahawa Malaka negeri besar tiada ta‘alok ka-
padapnya, maka paduka Bubunnya pun menyuroh ka-Malaka hendak
minta surat sembah. Maka Sultan Muzaffar Shah pun tiada mau
menyembah ka-benua Siam. Maka raja benua Siam pun terlalu marah,
lalu menyuroh berlengkap akan menyerang Malaka; Awi Chakra nama
penglima-nya, membawa ra‘ayat terlalu banyak. Maka di-wartakan
orang ka-pada Sultan Muzaffar Shah, bahawa raja benua Siam
menyurohkan hulubalang-nya, Awi Chakra nama-nya, membawa
ra‘ayat terlalu banyak tiada tepermenai, berjalan darat terus ka-hulu
Pahang.
TRANSLATION:
Here now is the story of the Raja of Siam. From ancient times the
country of Siam was known as Shahru’n-nuwi, and all princes of these
regions below the wind were subject to Siam, the Raja of which was
called the Bubunnya. And when the news reached Siam that Malaka
was a great city but was not subject to Siam, the Bubunnya sent an
envoy to Malaka to demand a letter of ‘obeisance’: but Sultan Muzaffar
Shah refused to own allegiance to Siam. The Raja of Siam was very
angry and ordered an expedition to be made ready for the invasion of
Malaka. Awi Chakra was to command the expedition and to take a vast
army with him. And word was brought to Sultan Muzaffar Shah that
the Raja of Siam had ordered Awi Chakra, his war-chief, to lead an
army, in numbers past counting, overland to Ulu Pahang.
The considerable homogeneity of language in the classical texts has
led to a number of misconceptions. So often in history language of the
past comes to be regarded by later generations as more pure, refined
and correct than their own, partly because of the comparison of a high-
ly stylised written form with their own spoken form. Thus the gram-
marians of Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC regarded Greek
literature of the ancient past as more pure and correct than their own
speech.31 So too did Riau-Johor Malay come to be regarded as more
pure and refined than other varieties of Malay, which in comparison
were regarded as inferior or even debased. Literary works that deviated
in any way from the purest form of Riau-Johor Malay were regarded as
corrupted, by both native and European commentators. When Malay
education spread towards the end of the 19th century, it was the Riau-
Johor form that was taken to be the only acceptable standard and, as a
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 6 9

consequence, this variety became a major basis for the standard
Indonesian language.
Use of the names Riau-Johor and Riau for this literature led to
another fallacy among the Dutch in the 19th century, which is still wide-
spread today, even among scholars of Indonesian language. This is the
belief that the name refers to the local dialect of Riau (and Johor). It is
thus commonly heard that the people of Riau speak the purest form of
Malay (or Indonesian).32 The fact is that the scribes of the royal courts of
Riau and Johor were continuing the literary tradition brought from
Malacca and, while the style undoubtedly evolved further in the Riau-
Johor area, it owes little, if anything, to the local vernaculars of the region.
Because of prejudice against local dialects of Malay, judged to be
inferior by comparison with Classical Malay literature, they were rarely
studied until comparatively recently. In preparation for the production of
a dictionary as part of the efforts to produce a standard variety of the lan-
guage, a Dutch philologist travelled to Riau and Johor in the 1850s, to
the ‘heartland’ of Malay, where he assumed ‘real Malay’ was spoken. His
collection of local speech appalled some of his contemporaries, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 5, because of its divergence from classical literature.
There was very little interest in or study of vernaculars in the region until
the 1980s and only recently has linguistic study shown just how differ-
ent the local Riau dialects are from the Riau-Johor literary standard.33
Finally, the scribal tradition of updating texts has led to a common
belief that there has been remarkably little change in Malay over the
centuries. One British scholar wrote in 1913: ‘It is a remarkable fact
that the Malay language in the Straits of Malacca has remained practi-
cally the same for centuries … the letters written from the court of
Acheen to Queen Elizabeth and King James I of England could to-day
be read and thoroughly understood by any fourth standard boy in the
Malay vernacular schools of the Straits Settlements.’ He goes on: ‘The
only important changes which have taken place in the spoken language
of the Malays in the past 300 years appear to have been through the
addition of … Arabic words’.34
These statements completely overlook the conservatism of the type
of Malay taught in schools at the time, based as it was on the literary
Classical Malay. They also reveal the rejection of other varieties of Malay
as entirely unworthy of consideration, and thus a failure to understand
just how different the ‘spoken language of the Malays’ really is from the
conservative variety taught in schools. The attitude persists to the pre-
sent in some circles. One writer stated in 1998: ‘Traditional Malay is the
7 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

term applied to the Malay that spread so widely through the Indonesian
archipelago up to the nineteenth century … It showed a remarkable sta-
bility over the centuries, and school children can be taught to read and
understand the Malay used almost 400 years ago without much diffi-
culty.’35 This is similar to commenting that English-speaking school
children today can be taught to understand the King James Bible, writ-
ten at the same time as the ‘Golden Letter’, and then assuming that
their colloquial speech is very similar to it. Although people today who
are familiar with the King James Bible can understand it, this is hardly
evidence that English has been remarkably stable over the centuries.
The same is true of Malay.
M U N S H I  A B D U L L A H
The first individual writer in Malay of whom we know was Abdullah bin
Abdul Kadir Munsyi, known as Munshi Abdullah. Writing in the early
part of the 19th century, at the end of the period of Classical Malay liter-
ature, he has been called one of the greatest innovators in Malay letters.36
Although of mixed Arab and Tamil ancestry, he was a native speaker of
Malay who served for a time with Thomas Stamford Raffles, founder of
Singapore and lieutenant-governor of the Indies during the period of
British rule (1811–16). In his autobiographical works he gave detailed
sketches of life in Singapore, Malacca and other places, in writings that
were more individualistic than any in the Malay language before him.
A champion of the Malay language, Abdullah also showed the way to
its modern usage … he was writing in a time of transition and his lan-
guage is clearly taken from the classical and partly moulded from it. He
sculpted it to describe new situations and predicaments that had, at that
time, never been experienced by the Malay community or language —
the confrontation with the colonial government and Western ways,
political, religious and cultural.37
His work was an inspiration to future generations of writers and
marks an early stage in the transition from Classical Malay literature to
the literature of early 20th-century novelists. The following passage is
taken from his discussion of Raffles.38 The text retains many of the for-
mulaic expressions of Classical Malay writing, such as use of maka to
mark a new sentence or clause. However, the insightful description of a
personality was something new in Malay writing.
Sebermula maka pada suatu hari Tuan Raffles itu tengah berkata-kata
dengan jurutulisnya dari hal hendak membalas surat kepada Raja
Sambas. Maka tiba-tiba, datanglah seorang orang Malayu membawa
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 7 1

enam buah kepala-kepala durian, disangkanya Tuan Raffles itu hendak
membeli durian, lalu dibawanya masuk ke dalam rumah. Ia berdiri di
pintu. Maka Tuan Raffles pun mendapatlah bahu durian itu. Maka
dengan segeranya ditutupnya hidungnya, larilah ia naik ke atas. Maka
heranlah semua orang melihatkan halnya itu berlari, tiada diketahui ia
tiada boleh mencium bahu durian. Maka sebentar lagi dipanggilnya
akan supai yang menjaga pintu itu, katanya: ‘Siapa bawa buah durian
ke mari?’ Maka diunjukkannya orang Melayu itu. Maka disuruhnya
keluar lekas-lekas serta ia memberi perintah kepada supai itu, ‘Seorang
pun jangan beri bawa lalu durian dari pintu ini’. Maka daripada hari
itu seorang pun tiadalah berani membawa durian lagi.
TRANSLATION:
One day while Mr. Raffles was in the middle of discussing with his Malay
clerk the reply which he wished to be sent to the ruler of Sambas one of the
Malays suddenly came in bearing six durians. Thinking that Mr. Raffles
liked to buy durians he brought them into the house and stood waiting
near the door. But as soon as Mr. Raffles caught the smell of the durian he
held his nose and ran upstairs. Everyone was surprised to see him run like
this for they did not realise that he could not stand the smell of a durian. A
moment later he called the Sepoy guard and said ‘Who brought those duri-
an here?’ When they pointed to a Malay he told him to leave quickly and
ordered the guard ‘Never allow anyone to bring durians to the door again’.
From that day onwards no one dared to bring any more durians.
E X T E R N A L  I N F L U E N C E S
The Classical Malay period, very broadly from the end of the 14th cen-
tury to the beginning of the 19th century, was a period in which
Malays, receptive to outside ideas and influences, borrowed extensively
from other languages. This section deals briefly with borrowing from
some of the Asian sources.
The influence of Sanskrit on Malay began during the time of
Srivijaya or even earlier; the existence of a Hindu kingdom in Borneo in
AD 400 provides good evidence that it was earlier. The Minye Tujuh
and Minangkabau inscriptions of the late 14th century demonstrate a
continuation of Sanskrit influence at that time and, moreover, of assim-
ilation of Sanskrit words, which had probably barely begun at the time
of the 7th-century inscriptions. Indian traders and seamen were not
speakers of Sanskrit but of languages that had descended from Sanskrit,
such as Hindi, and of unrelated Indian languages, such as Tamil, and
7 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

these also contributed to the Malay lexicon. While Sanskrit was largely
introduced via priests and scribes associated with royal courts, these
other languages were brought by mercantile travellers to Indonesia and
perhaps also by Malays who had travelled to India. Tamil was probably
the most important Indian source of borrowings after Sanskrit, with
Hindi, Gujerati and other languages also contributing.39
Tamil is today one of the four official languages of Singapore, the
Tamil-speaking population having largely arrived during the British
period. However, Tamils had been conspicuous in the archipelago
much earlier, especially since the period of the powerful southern Indian
kingdom of Chola in the 11th century. By that time, Tamils were
among the most important trading peoples of maritime Asia. Their sig-
nificance in Sumatran and Malay Peninsula trading continued for cen-
turies and borrowings into Malay from Tamil increased between the
15th and 19th centuries due to their commercial activities.40 In the
17th century, the Dutch East India Company was obliged to use Tamil
as part of its correspondence. In Malacca and other seaports up to the
19th century, Malay terminology pertaining to book-keeping and
accountancy was still largely Tamil.41
Borrowings from Tamil include such everyday words as:
kapal
ship
kolam
pool
logam
metal
mangga
mango (the English word was brought to Europe
by the Portuguese, who took it from the Malay)
modal
capital (for investment)
nelayan
fisherman
satai, sate
sate, kebab
tunai
cash
Of other Indian languages, Hindi has contributed most. Words
from this language include:
cap
seal, stamp
cium
kiss
curi
steal
ganja
Indian hemp, marijuana
kapas
cotton
kuli
labourer
kunci
key
roti 
bread
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 7 3

With Islamic influence came borrowing from Arabic, but also from
other languages whose speakers had been important in the spread of
Islam — in particular, Persian. Islamic influence was underway in the
west of the archipelago by the end of the 13th century, as accounts of
travellers and the Trengganu inscription from the Malay Peninsula and
the Minye Tujuh gravestone from northern Sumatra, both from the
14th century, indicate. Some borrowing from Arabic continues today,
especially in Moslem circles. Moslem children are taught to recite the
Quran to some extent and many attend elementary Arabic classes.
It is clear that borrowing from Arabic was directly into Malay and that
Malay was the major vehicle for Arabic influence on other Indonesian lan-
guages. Malacca played an enormously important part in the absorption
of Islamic culture and many loan words from Arabic entered the language
during the Malacca period. Together with the spread of Malacca’s culture
went the dissemination of Islam, for which Malay, rather than Arabic, was
the vehicle. (On the other hand, much Sanskrit influence on modern
Indonesian has come via Old Javanese, as discussed in Chapter 8.) The
Chinese wordlist based on materials collected in the 15th century (see p.
59) shows a number of Arabic words already in common use in Malaccan
Malay, such as kertas (paper) and kursi (chair). 
Malacca was not the only centre from which Arabic influence was
disseminated and it is likely that many loan words were borrowed a
number of times separately in different places and at different times,
‘coalescing over the centuries into the loan word as we know it’.42
Classical Malay literature, written in the Jawi adaptation of Arabic
script, and containing many features of Arabic literature, was an impor-
tant vehicle for the spreading of Arabic linguistic influences, in structure
as well as vocabulary. A Malay–Dutch reader published in 1612 (for
Malays to learn Dutch) contains many Arabic words in the Malay, along
with Persian and Sanskrit.43
There are about 1000 words from Arabic in common use in the
modern language. Many other words have appeared at certain times
but have either disappeared entirely or are now rarely used, such as
kalam (pen), which occurs in the Chinese list but was replaced later
by the Portuguese pena. Many more words occur in the religious lan-
guage of Moslems, although most of these cannot be said to be fully
integrated. The representative words listed here are placed in seman-
tic groups, although there are many borrowings in other categories.
Only words that are in common use in modern Indonesian are 
mentioned.
7 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

As with borrowings from other languages, there have sometimes
been changes of meaning or differences in pronunciation, not always
mentioned here. A final vowel was usually added to avoid word-final
consonant clusters, as with salju (snow) from Arabic thalj, and ilmu
(knowledge, science) from Arabic ilm. Sometimes the final conso-
nants are separated by a vowel, as with fikir, pikir (think) from fikr.
In some cases, a single Arabic word has given rise to two Indonesian
words, one a religious term, which tends to retain a shape more sim-
ilar to that of Arabic, and a common word without religious associa-
tion, which has undergone further change, such as fardu (religious
obligation) and perlu (necessary), both from Arabic fard (religious
obligation).
•
RELIGION, MORAL VALUES, PHILOSOPHY:
adab
civilised
adat
customary law
adil
just
aib
shame
Allah
God
do’a
prayer
filsafat, falsafa
philosophy (borrowed by Arabic from Greek)
ikhlas
sincere
Islam
Islam
khotbah
sermon
mayat, jenazah corpse
mesjid
mosque
nafsu
lust, passion
nasib
fate
wafat
to pass away
•
EDUC ATION AND WRITING:
abjad
alphabet
bab
chapter
eja 
spell
huruf
letter of alphabet
jilid
volume
kalimat
sentence (Arabic kalima ‘word’).
kuliah
lecture (Arabic kull-iya ‘college’ — the Dutch word
college ‘lecture’ was avoided because of possible
confusion in meaning with English ‘college’44)
majalah
magazine
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 7 5

•
ANATOMY AND HEALTH:
badan
body
dubur
anus
rahim
womb
sehat
healthy
wabah
epidemic
wajah
face
•
TIMES, DATES:
abad
century
musim
season
sa’at
moment
waktu
time
zaman, jaman
period of time
The days of the week are also from Arabic; for example, Ahad
‘Sunday’ (although Minggu from Portuguese is the common
word), Senin ‘Monday’ (Arabic [yaum al-] ithnain ‘day two’).
In quite a number of cases, Malay has borrowed as separate lexical
items different words built on the same base in Arabic. Thus hadir
(attend) and hadirin (audience); hakim (judge), hukum (law) and
mahkamah (court of law); Islam (Islam), salam (greetings — Arabic
‘peace’) and selamat (welfare, safety). Singular and plural forms in
Arabic are sometimes combined as a compound; for example, asal-usul
(origins) and hal-ihwal (circumstances, particulars). A number of set
phrases are also sufficiently common that they can be regarded as
entirely assimilated, such as insya-Allah (God willing) and alhamdulil-
lah (praise be to God).
There is also a significant number of words of Persian origin in com-
mon use in modern Indonesian. Persian itself borrowed extensively from
Arabic and frequently it is not possible to determine if an Arabic word
borrowed into Malay came directly from Arabic or via Persian. Persian
was an important language at the Moghal court in India and almost all
Persian loan words, including words of Arabic origin, were borrowed via
northern Indian languages. Some of these words had already entered the
language during Malaccan times; the Chinese list gives baju (coat), 
gandum (flour) and several other words for common items. 
Other borrowings from Persian include:
anggur
wine
bandar
port
dewan
council
7 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

kelasi
seaman
medan
field
nasabah
customer
pahlawan
champion
pasar
market (English ‘bazaar’ being from the 
same source)
saham
share, stock
Chinese has also contributed to the Malay/Indonesian lexicon,
although compared with Sanskrit, Arabic and a number of other lan-
guages its influence has been slight — remarkably so, considering the
extent of contact and the Malay willingness to borrow from other cul-
tures. The Chinese had been in contact with the Malays from the 4th
century, when sea trade opened through the Straits of Malacca to
China, and in the 13th century the first permanent Chinese settlements
appeared in Java.45 Malacca established relations with China in 1403
and Chinese trade presence during the 15th century was significant.
The Chinese–Malay wordlist, compiled from lists previously collected at
Malacca in the 15th century, contains a number of Chinese words,
including cawan (cup) and sumpit (chopsticks).
The number of Chinese living in Malay-speaking regions seems to
have been small until the 17th century and only began to grow signifi-
cantly in the following century.46 A type of Low Malay known as Baba
Malay developed among Hokkien Chinese communities, especially in
the British settlements of Penang, Malacca and Singapore. Not surpris-
ingly, it is considerably influenced by Hokkien Chinese structure.
Structures that resemble those in Hokkien include the genitive con-
struction with punya (possess), as in gua punya ruma (my house) for
standard rumah saya. This and a number of other constructions are a
regular feature of lingua franca forms of Malay and are sometimes
regarded as a result of Hokkien influence. However, such constructions
also occur in non-Austronesian languages of eastern Indonesia. As these
had an influence on eastern lingua franca varieties of Malay, as in the
Ternate letters (see p. 62), it is possible that the same types of con-
struction resulted from two independent influences or that similarities
in Hokkien are just coincidence.
Numerous words entered Jakarta Malay from Hokkien and from 
it into colloquial Jakartan Indonesian, including the pronouns gua
(I) and lu (you). Some of the vocabulary has entered Standard
Indonesian, with a considerable proportion of the words relating to
food and drink, including:
T H E
C L A S S I C A L
M A L A Y
P E R I O D • 7 7

capcai
mixed vegetable dish
mi, bakmi
noodles
tahu
soybean cake, tofu
tauge
bean sprouts
teh
tea
teko
kettle
Among other borrowings are:
becak
pedicab (from Hokkien be ‘horse’ and chhia 
‘carriage’)
cat
paint
cengkih
clove
cukong
financial backer (usually ethnic Chinese)
lihai
shrewd, cunning
loteng
upstairs; attic
toko
shop
7 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  P O R T U G U E S E
The Portuguese were driven to Asia for many reasons, including trade
and proselytising, and both these reasons saw a concentrated effort in the
Moluccas, beginning almost immediately after the conquest of Malacca.
In their desire to control the spice trade, the Portuguese set up centres
in the east, at Ambon, Ternate and Banda. Later they established posts
further south, in Flores and Timor. Portuguese teaching and preaching
in the archipelago concentrated on using Malay. The Jesuit missionary
Francis Xavier arrived in the Moluccas in 1546 and preached in Malay
because it was the most widely understood language. However, none of
the early works of the Portuguese missionaries appear to have been
printed, being simply copied by hand. As a result, no manuscript of these
early Malay materials has ever been found and there is little evidence of
the kind of Malay that the Portuguese missionaries used.1
Portuguese creole, which had developed along the coasts of Africa
and India, spread rapidly throughout the archipelago wherever the
Portuguese set up trading posts.2 From the beginning of their pres-
ence in the archipelago, it was common for the Portuguese to inter-
marry with local women, partly to prop up their very small numbers.
This resulted in a considerable amount of bilingualism and encour-
aged the spread of their language, especially in the simplified creole
variety.
Portuguese creole was so widely used as a lingua franca, along with
Malay, that early attempts by the Dutch to replace it in low-level admin-
istration and in preaching failed. It became so well established that the
5
E U R O P E A N  I N F L U E N C E S  
B E F O R E  T H E  2 0 t h C E N T U R Y

Dutch were obliged to use it in order to carry out their functions as
administrators, and it continued as an important lingua franca in Batavia
(present-day Jakarta) long after the Dutch established their head-
quarters there in 1619. Not only did the Dutch fail to replace the
Portuguese creole, but they frequently used it as a first language them-
selves, many learning it from creole-speaking nannies or when they mar-
ried women of Portuguese descent.3
For many years, Portuguese creole and Bazaar Malay existed side by
side in uneasy rivalry as contact languages in the coastal cities and ports
of the archipelago. By the early 17th century, the Dutch were putting
great pressure on Portuguese posts, ousting them from Ambon in 1605
and from Malacca in 1641. The Portuguese ceded East Flores to the
Dutch in 1859, thereafter retaining only East Timor.
With the passing of Portuguese power, their language gradually
dwindled in importance, although it remained the most influential
European language in the archipelago until the 19th century. In
Malacca, Portuguese creole was still spoken in the 20th century by a
small community of people of Eurasian descent.4
In East Timor, Portuguese remained the official language until the
Indonesian take-over in 1975. Soon after gaining independence in
1999, the new East Timorese administration restored Portuguese as the
official language (see p. 214).
Before dying out, Portuguese provided Malay with a considerable
number of words, many referring to common items that the Portuguese
had introduced to the archipelago.5 As the first to bring Christianity and
as their language was long used in religions affairs, even by the Dutch,
the Portuguese introduced a number of words relating to Christianity,
including:
gereja
church
Natal
Christmas
Paskah
Easter
rosario
rosary
Portuguese Domingo (Sunday) became (hari) Minggu (Sunday),
minggu alone taking the meaning ‘week’.
They introduced foodstuffs, including various fruits and vegetables
from the Americas, their contributions including:
kaldu
broth
keju
cheese (Portuguese queijo)
ketela
sweet potato
8 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

mentega
butter
nanas
pineapple
papaya
papaw
Items of everyday apparel and the household include:
garpu
fork
jendela
window
kemeja
shirt
lemari
cupboard
meja
table
peniti
pin
pita
ribbon
saku
pocket
sepatu
shoe
Other items of everyday life include:
bangku
bench
bendera
flag
bola
ball
boneka
doll, puppet
kereta
carriage
pesta
party, feast
roda
wheel
sekolah
school
tembakau
tobacco
The Portuguese introduced innovations in warfare and, although
many borrowings have become obsolete, a number remain, including:
amada
fleet
peluru
bullet
picu
trigger
serdadu
soldier
Almost all borrowings from Portuguese, including those above, are
nouns referring to concrete items. There are very few borrowings for
abstract nouns, verbs or other word classes, among the few being:
antero
whole
meski
although
seka
wipe
sita
confiscate
tempo
time
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 8 1

A list of words borrowed from European sources records 327
Portuguese borrowings into Indonesian, although it includes a consid-
erable number of items that are obsolete.6 Portuguese words were
probably absorbed over a long period and in many different places.
Raffles’ criticism early in the 19th century of Low Malay as having
much Portuguese influence (see p. 86) points to its considerable pene-
tration by that time. Although the overall number of Portuguese words
in modern Standard Indonesian is limited, they are significant in that so
many are of high frequency, referring to everyday items. Eastern vari-
eties of Malay, in particular, absorbed numerous Portuguese words,
many of which do not occur in the standard language, the following
common words in Manado Malay being a small sample:7
capeo
hat
kadera
chair
kintal
yard
lenso
handkerchief
milu
maize
sombar
shadow
T H E  D U T C H  A N D  T H E I R  U S E  O F  M A L AY
In 1595, Dutch merchants financed an expedition to the East Indies under
Cornelis de Houtman. The expedition showed, especially with the profits
from the sale of pepper obtained at Banten (Bantam) in West Java, that
successful trade with the archipelago was possible. Consequently, numer-
ous Dutch trading companies were established and intensive efforts were
made to capture the markets then being dominated by the Portuguese.
Rivalry between the various companies was damaging to trade and, in
1602, the companies were amalgamated into the Vereenigde Oostindische
Compagnie (United East India Company), generally known by its initials,
VOC. The Dutch launched an aggressive assault on the Portuguese spice
trade and soon took control of Portuguese possessions in the Moluccas.
The English began to show an interest in the Moluccas at the same
time as the Dutch and there was considerable rivalry between them,
continuing into the 17th century. Eventually, the Dutch, with far larger
fleets in the area, succeeded in triumphing over the English, who, after
1684, held only their pepper trading factory in Bencoolen (Benkulin)
on the southwest coast of Sumatra. In 1786, the English established a
vigorous trading settlement on Penang Island and one in Singapore in
1819.
8 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

In 1619, the Dutch founded Batavia on the site of the town of
Jayakarta, where they already had a trading settlement, and made it the
centre for their operations in Asia. The VOC established a co-operative
relationship with the Malay Sultanate of Johor, which saw the Dutch as
potential allies against continued attacks by Aceh and the Portuguese.
At the end of 1640, the Dutch attacked Portuguese Malacca, with
active support from Johor, and captured it in January 1641.
From their first contacts, the Dutch realised the importance of the
Malay language throughout the archipelago. In 1599, Frederick de
Houtman, brother of Cornelis, who had led the first Dutch expedition
to the archipelago, was imprisoned in Aceh. During his two years there,
he compiled a Malay–Dutch vocabulary, together with dialogues in
Malay with Dutch translations. These were published in Holland in
1603, becoming the first published information on the Malay language
made available in Europe. The work was reprinted in English in 1614
(from a translation into Latin!) for the benefit of those ‘who happily
shall hereafter undertake a voyage to the East-Indies’, as is stated on the
cover of the English version.8 De Houtman’s work of 1603 is of value
because he drew on spoken language; it also demonstrates that the con-
siderable interest that the Dutch showed in the language, which was
eventually to have an enormous influence on it, began as soon as they
appeared in the archipelago.
Other Dutch publications on Malay soon followed. When they took
over government of the Moluccas from the Portuguese, the Dutch
found a significant Christian community, sorely in need of Malay reli-
gious texts. In 1611, a Dutch merchant, Albert Ruyll, published the
first book in Malay that was specifically intended for a Malay-speaking
audience, namely the Christians of Ambon and other parts of the
Moluccas. This was a 12-page primer to teach the Latin alphabet; it also
included the Ten Commandments, prayers and the Articles of Faith. In
1612, he published a much longer work, Spieghel vande Malaysche Tale
(Mirror of the Malay Language), which contained dialogues in Malay
and Dutch and also included de Houtman’s vocabulary list.9 The first
known grammar of Malay was written by Joannes Roman, a Protestant
missionary, in 1674.10
From the beginning of their endeavours in the archipelago, the
Dutch made use of Malay to a greater extent than was usual in colonial
situations and, in attempting to mould it to their own ends over the
next three centuries, they made a central contribution to the develop-
ment of a standard form of the language.11 Perhaps because their own
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 8 3

language was not of significance in Europe they were less assuming that
it should be imposed on the native population than were the English,
Spanish and French in their respective colonies.
From the establishment of Batavia in 1619 Portuguese, Malay and
Dutch were used by the Protestant clergy. In Ambon, Dutch clergy at
first tried to disseminate their language through religious and general
education, but as early as 1618 it was observed that Dutch learnt at
school was soon forgotten by children because they had such limited
opportunities to use it. Because of the complex pattern of languages in
the region and the fact that Malay was already well established as a lin-
gua franca, they turned to this language. In trade and administration
also, the VOC came to prefer the use of Malay.
There was much dispute among the Dutch as to which variety of
Malay should be the language of religious propagation, including the
publication of an Indies Bible. They debated vigorously about the rel-
ative worth of what they called High Malay and Low Malay. By High
Malay they meant the literary variety that was developed in the royal
court of Riau-Johor — also known as Riau Malay or Riau-Johor Malay
— and which continued the literary tradition of the court of Malacca
(see p. 68). Low Malay, also known by a number of other terms,
including Bazaar Malay, referred to a variety of local vernaculars, in
particular those varieties in the east that had developed as a result of
trade and that were influenced by local languages (see p. 42).
Inevitably, Low Malay, which was rarely written, suffered in compari-
son with the more elaborate form used in literature. To the Dutch,
High Malay was more refined, pure and expressive. Its prestige derived
from this and from the fact that it was identified with the ‘Malay heart-
land’, neither contaminated by foreign elements nor ‘degenerate’
through lack of cultivation.
Some clergy argued that High Malay should be used and that a uni-
tary and pure form of the language would be in the interests of the
Dutch and Christianity in the archipelago. Others were strongly
opposed to the use of High Malay in the Moluccas, arguing that the
Low Malay familiar to the inhabitants of each region should be used in
preaching and that there should not be a standardised form thrust on
populations that did not understand it; the VOC’s Christian enterprise
could lose its identification with populations throughout the Indies if it
attempted to impose a single unfamiliar form of Malay on them. The
choice was thus between pure High Malay or intelligible Low Malay.
The clerics who argued for High Malay were linguists who also had
8 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

influence with the Indies establishment. In 1677, orders were sent from
Batavia to Ambon for High Malay to be used. In a letter soon after-
wards, sent by the VOC’s directors in the Netherlands, ‘their Nobilities
charged, concerning the Malay language, that now in Batavia and else-
where had been very much corrupted, that it should be restored to its
old purity’.12
One of the strongest proponents of Low Malay, the clergyman
François Valentyn, argued that it was flexible and locally adaptable. He
declared that the authorities in Batavia wanted to force an artificial
High Malay on areas where a form of Low Malay, or no Malay at all,
was spoken. Valentyn’s vigorous efforts against a standardised form of
Malay were ultimately unsuccessful. The VOC’s steps to promote High
Malay led, in 1731, to the Bible translation by Leydekker and Werndly,
followed by Werndly’s Malay grammar in 1736. These High Malay
works provided ‘enduring standards for religious and general educa-
tion in areas where the Company and its successor, the Netherlands
Indies government, introduced or regulated the Malay language’,
according to one scholar,13 although another refers to Leydekker’s
Bible as a ‘stilted, pseudo-Arabicised translation’.14 Whatever the value
of these works, the language used was a considerably different kind of
Malay from that familiar to the people of Ambon and other areas in the
east where creole-based forms of the language were spoken.
In the mid-18th century, a serious decline in the spice trade led the
Dutch to reduce their activities in the east and move the centre of their
operations to Java. The VOC continued to encourage High Malay, but
this language did not gain acceptance in Java or in other parts of the
archipelago and its use continued to receive criticism. Instead, indige-
nous rulers and VOC administrators communicated with each other via
a variety of Low Malay that came to be called in Dutch Dienst Maleisch
(Service Malay), because of its association with the civil service. This,
like other varieties of Low Malay used in Java, had been heavily influ-
enced by Javanese and, to a lesser extent, by Sundanese. It was, in addi-
tion, influenced by Ambon Malay, a variety of eastern lingua franca
Malay, as in the use of possessive constructions with punya (possess); for
instance, kita punya ruma (our house) for traditional Malay rumah kita,
and the use of ini (this) and itu (that) before, instead of after, the noun.
These constructions are characteristic of the local non-Austronesian lan-
guages that had influenced Malay in the east.
Through the 18th century, the Dutch generally dealt with the
Javanese via Malay. For the brief period from 1811 to 1816, the Dutch
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 8 5

colonies were taken over by the British, the Netherlands having been
conquered by the French. The British administrator, Lieutenant-
Governor Thomas Stamford Raffles, moved to promote the Javanese
language, criticising earlier attempts to communicate with the Javanese
through what he referred to as ‘a barbarous dialect of Malays, con-
founded and confused by the introduction of Portuguese and Dutch’.15
This began a period of strong Javanese language promotion which,
however, met with little success. 
A complaint to the Dutch king in 1842 stated that most officials
were unable to understand Javanese and that they tended to use a form
of Low Malay unknown to ‘the great mass of the people’. More empha-
sis was then placed on training Dutch civil servants in Javanese, but still
with little success. In 1893, the Batavia-born linguist and civil servant
AA Fokker wrote that ‘most young officials quickly gave up speaking
Javanese after some desperate attempts — if they ever made them’,16
shifting thereafter to Service Malay. The inability of Dutch officials to
acquire basic communication skills in Javanese, and frequent Dutch dis-
couragement of the use of Dutch by educated Javanese, tended to force
both sides into greater use of Malay.
1 8 2 4 : T H E  D I V I D I N G  O F  T H E  M A L AY  W O R L D
In 1824, a treaty between the Dutch and British determined their sep-
arate spheres of control and interest in the archipelago. (The VOC’s
charter had expired in 1799 and its role thereafter had been taken over
by the Dutch government.) The British ceded their Bencoolen posses-
sion and the Dutch handed over Malacca. The demarcation line, later
extended to Borneo, separated the British and Dutch colonies, and was
thus the origin of the present-day borders between Indonesia on the
one side and Malaysia, together with Singapore and Brunei, on the
other. Significantly for the history of the Malay language, the Anglo-
Dutch line passed right through the territory of the Riau-Johor
Sultanate. 
Although fixed boundaries were not a feature of pre-colonial
Southeast Asia, this area was always a region of cultural unity, a single
Malay kingdom, and the centre of the literary form known as Classical
Malay or Riau-Johor Malay. In drawing their line, the colonial powers
divided the kingdom, permanently severing east coast Sumatra from the
peninsula. The Riau-Lingga archipelago, now cut off from the penin-
sula, became a separate sultanate from Johor. Because both the British
and the Dutch regarded Riau-Johor Malay as the legitimate standard
8 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

form of the language, it retained its prestige on both sides of the bor-
der, although it now came under different influences in the two
colonies. Thus a decision made far away, which took no account of eth-
nic or linguistic factors, resulted by chance in the one form of Malay
becoming the basis for the standard variety of the national language in
both Indonesia and Malaysia.
M O V E S  T O W A R D S  S TA N D A R D I S AT I O N
In the middle of the 19th century, the Dutch authorities, increasingly
aware of how unsatisfactory was the use of various lingua franca forms
of Malay, began to work towards standardisation of the language. As
one writer put it: ‘the need to construct a standard Malay-to-be was
more urgently felt than ever before — for the sake of an effective
bureaucracy, a successful army, a profitable economy’.17 Moves towards
a standardised form of the language were also contributed to by orders
from the governor-general at the time for Malay to be used in dealings
with local rulers outside Java.
In the second half of the century, members of the local nobilities
were incorporated into the administration as lower civil servants and it
became necessary to give these people an education that could make
them fit for their functions.18 This led to the establishment of govern-
ment elementary schools for indigenes, beginning in 1849. In areas
where major languages were spoken, such as Javanese and Sundanese,
these became the medium of education, while Malay was taught as a
subject. Where there was no important regional language, Malay was
used in teaching. Dutch education was limited to the Dutch themselves,
but became available later to small groups of Christians, especially in
Ambon and Minahasa, the region surrounding Manado in northern
Sulawesi, and to the children of aristocrats in Java. In 1871, High Malay
became the official medium of instruction in all government Malay-
language schools.19
Moves towards standardisation included commissioning of a
Malay–Dutch dictionary in 1855. Despite considerable debate, 
agreement was reached among influential government advisors that
‘real’ Malay was the only acceptable basis for a standardised form, that
is the Malay of the Malay ‘heartland’ of Riau and Malacca. Thus, in
preparation of the new dictionary, the linguist H von de Wall travelled
to Riau and the Malay Peninsula in the 1850s to collect materials on
‘pure and correct’ Malay. The dictionary was finally completed in 1877,
under the linguist HN van der Tuuk. Perhaps because von de Wall
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 8 7

believed Riau speech to be ‘pure’ Malay, he used almost no literary
source materials and the dictionary never became the standard work
that was hoped for.20 It contained a great deal of local Riau material and
van der Tuuk criticised the work because spoken Riau Malay deviated
considerably from the language of Malay literature, which von de Wall
had almost completely ignored. Van der Tuuk stated that Riau speech
seemed to be affected by ‘the broken language’ spoken by Chinese and
by the brabbeltaal (gibberish) Malay spoken by many Dutch.21 This is
yet another example of Europeans failing to recognise the worth of spo-
ken varieties of Malay and rejecting them as inferior to the stylised lit-
erary language.
Van der Tuuk argued strongly for the use of High Malay, or ‘pure’
Malay, in education and administration. He vehemently condemned
Europeans for their use of ‘gibberish’ — their imitation of Low Malay
— and Service Malay, which he regarded as devoid of value. He criti-
cised Europeans for not taking the trouble to learn good Malay and
urged the government to set standards for correct usage, as the only
way for promoting advancement of the native population.
Not all Dutch scholars involved in debate over directions for gov-
ernment language policy agreed with van der Tuuk. There were those
who protested that High Malay was becoming particularly identified
with the administration and was being forced on unwilling learners. 
N Graafland, a missionary in Manado, like van der Tuuk supported
efforts for the purification and improvement of the language. He advo-
cated extension of well-written publications throughout the archipel-
ago, saying that this could lead to greater unity and enrichment of the
language. Nevertheless, he declared that van der Tuuk and others of
similar mind did not know the conditions and languages in the east of
the archipelago, where the Malay culture they referred to did not exist;
Malacca or Riau Malay was unusable in the east, where local varieties of
the language were spoken. To work for the purification and improve-
ment of Malay was, Graafland said, possible and desirable, but coercion
would not succeed; Low Malay was a living language, intimately con-
nected with the people who used it.
Until the end of the century there were voices raised against use by
the Dutch administration and missionaries of any sort of Malay instead
of regional languages. One opponent, commenting in 1889 on the sit-
uation in Aceh, stated that it was ‘a disgrace that such a language [Low
Malay] should be thrust onto millions of natives’ and that there were
still missionaries continuing ‘in incomprehensible short-sightedness, to
8 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

thrust Malay onto populations for whom this language is just as foreign
as, for instance, Russian for a Hollander’.22 Other voices arguing for the
use of regional languages were heard, but there were also those who
urged greater use of Dutch. Moreover, there were still those who
argued for education to be in Dutch, this being more likely to foster
Western-style progress. The linguist H Kern called for the use of Dutch
in schools instead of Malay in regions where Malay was not the native
language, even recommending Dutch ‘as the vehicle for culture among
the Javanese’. He criticised those Dutch who were intolerant of edu-
cated Indonesians using Dutch to them, but who preferred instead to
use a ‘gibberish’ kind of Malay. Repeatedly between 1890 and 1909,
the government tried to encourage the use of Dutch in dealings with
the indigenous population but encountered resistance from many
regional administrations.
Nevertheless, Malay was coming to be increasingly used for com-
munication between people from different language areas and the
understanding became widespread among the Dutch that to attempt to
‘civilise’ the people in a large variety of languages would be an endless
task. Fokker wrote in 1891 that attention had to be given to the ques-
tion of which language had the most value as a medium of civilisation
for the indigenous population and stated that ‘no language is so suitable
for the native to acquire our concepts in as Malay. It is astonishing that
this can still be doubted’.23 Fokker predicted that there would come a
time when every native who had attended lower school would be
ashamed of not knowing Riau Malay. He stated that the Dutch could
contribute much to the dissemination of Malay, and that there was need
for it to become ‘a universal language of civilisation’. He argued that
‘unity of language gives solidarity’, little realising that before long
nationalists would be advancing similar arguments for Malay to become
the language of unity.
N E W S P A P E R S  A N D  T H E I R  I N F L U E N C E
Malay-language newspapers began to appear in 1856 and played their
part in the controversies over the type of Malay that was appropriate.24
The first was Soerat Kabar Bahasa Melaijoe (Malay Language
Newspaper), published in Surabaya. Despite using Low Malay, this
newspaper did not attract enough subscribers to survive long. In the
same year there appeared a monthly, Bintang Oetara (Northern Star),
published in Holland to avoid official restrictions on locally printed
matter. The paper used High Malay and, although it had as one of its
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 8 9

aims the enlightenment of the people through Malay, it has been criti-
cised for the unintelligibility of the language to many readers, employ-
ing many seldom-used Arabic terms instead of simple widely
understood expressions. A new editor of the newspaper stated that he
would ‘use a more simple form of the Malay language’, which he called
Melayu luar (outsiders’ Malay), which apparently was in the style of
Munsyi Abdullah and not the Low Malay of Soerat Kabar Bahasa
Melaijoe. Although these papers were short-lived, others soon followed.
Bintang Timor (Eastern Star), first published in Surabaya in 1862,
informed its readers that its usage was Low Malay, while Soerat Chabar
Batawie (The Batavia Newspaper) in 1858 announced that it would use
a type of language tiada terlaloe tinggi, tetapi tiada lagi terlaloe rindah,
soepaija segala orang boleh mengarti, siapa djoega jang mengarti bahasa
Malaijoe, adanja (not too high, but not too low either, so that anybody
who knows Malay will be able to understand it).25
Journalists and editors saw the problem of the variation in Malay
and sought out the variety that would best accommodate the needs of
their readership. With the exception of the early editions of Bintang
Oetara, they did not attempt to enlighten or improve their readers by
choice of purely High Malay, although Soerat Chabar Betawie did state
that it would use High Malay in its education sections. Clearly, Low
Malay was necessary for newspapers that wanted to reach a variety of
groups within the community, including Chinese, Eurasians, Arabs and
Indonesians of various linguistic backgrounds. A newspaper that con-
sistently used High Malay was considered to have little chance of suc-
cess. By selecting elements from various types of Malay, the papers
played a significant part over the next century in the development of a
general form of cultivated Malay, the forerunner of Standard
Indonesian.
Towards the end of the 19th century there was a considerable
increase in the number of popular publications in Malay, most of them
in forms of Low Malay. As well as a variety of short-lived newspapers
and periodicals, booklets on a great variety of topics also appeared,
including cookbooks, books of religious instruction, military song-
books, children’s storybooks, reports on agricultural experiments, ‘even
sordid romances and cheap detective stories’.26
The first newspaper for Peranakan (locally born, Malay-speaking)
Chinese was Mataharie (The Sun), which began publication in Batavia
in 1869. It too was in Low Malay, which was by far the most effective
form of written communication for literate Chinese in the Indies.27
9 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  V A N  O P H U I J S E N
One significant step towards standardisation of Malay was the intro-
duction of a systematic spelling. There had previously been no stan-
dardised Latin-based spelling for Malay, which was printed with a great
deal of variation in Dutch publications. With an expanding administra-
tion and education system, recognition of the need for standardisation
in spelling grew in the last half of the 19th century. This was linked to
the Dutch East Indies government’s aim to extend and unify its control
throughout the archipelago. Some Dutch scholars were also critical of
the Arabic-based Jawi script, because its conventions were unsystematic
and unsuited to Malay phonology and because of its perceived links
with Islamic militancy.
One of the most significant figures in the standardisation of Malay
was CA van Ophuijsen, an inspector of indigenous education.28 He rec-
ommended the issuing of a wordlist as a step towards standardising
spelling, to overcome the ‘existing anarchy’. A government advisor,
Snouck Hurgronje, recommended in 1895 that van Ophuijsen’s plan be
carried out, stating that the compiler ought to ascertain the pronuncia-
tion of the ‘cultivated Malays of Riau and elsewhere’.29 In 1896, van
Ophuijsen was commissioned by the government to assemble the data
necessary for a fixed system of spelling Malay with Latin characters for
use in indigenous education. He travelled through the foremost Malay-
language areas, including outside the Dutch East Indies, in Malacca,
Johor and other places on the Malay Peninsula, in search of the ‘purest’
pronunciation.
Van Ophuijsen’s Kitab Logat Melayu: Woordenlijst voor de spelling
der Malaisch taal met Latijnsch karakter (Malay Vocabulary: Wordlist
for the spelling of the Malay language with Latin characters), published
in Batavia in 1901, contained 10 130 Malay words in the new spelling,
which was based on Dutch spelling principles. The major differences
with the spelling of Malay introduced by the British included the use of
dj for the first and last sound in ‘judge’ (for which the British used the
letter ‘j’), tj for the first and last sound in ‘church’ (for which the British
used the letters ‘ch’), j for the first sound in ‘yet’ (for which the British
used the letter ‘y’), and oe for the vowel in ‘book’ (for which the British
used the letter ‘u’). The new spelling was implemented in a circular
from the Director of Education in 1902, with the specification that
those engaged in teaching Malay in the indigenous education system
should employ this spelling and that only the 10 000 words in the list
were to be acceptable in the school system.30 Thus, as an example, bisa,
E U R O P E A N
I N F L U E N C E S
B E F O R E
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y • 9 1

the everyday word for ‘can, be able’ for many Indonesians, had to be
regarded as unacceptable in schools because it did not appear in the list,
the listed High Malay word dapat being required.
By providing a stock of the commonest words with a standardised
spelling and pronunciation, van Ophuijsen made a significant contribu-
tion to standardisation of the language, particularly because of the use
of his book in the education system. His book can be regarded as the
first deliberate act of language planning for the language. This work was
followed in 1910 by his authoritative grammar of Malay. In this, as in
the wordlist, he took the view that the best Malay was to be found in
the literature of the Malay ‘heartland’. As one writer puts it:
it is rather amazing that this great scholar did not have the slightest hes-
itation in assuming that the best and most correct Malay was used in the
Malay heartland rather than anywhere else. Maybe even more amazing is
to see how, after he had always laid so much emphasis on the importance
of oral traditions and spoken forms of language, he now based the stan-
dard Malay on the written forms of Malay he found in Riau manuscripts
rather than on the conversations he had with the local population.31
In justifying this approach, van Ophuijsen wrote in the introduction
to his grammar:
Among the various dialects Malays themselves — and after all, they are
the only qualified judges — tend to give preference to the dialect that
is spoken in Johor, a part of Malacca, in the Riau-Lingga Archipelago.
This so-called Riau-Johor Malay in which the greatest part of the liter-
ature is presented will be treated in this book.32
Through his great influence on the education system in the early
part of the 20th century, in his spelling and his grammar — which
quickly established itself as an essential guide to correct usage — van
Ophuijsen ensured that the Classical Malay tradition became the basis
for School Malay, the type of Malay both taught and used as the medi-
um of instruction in the education system. As a consequence of its asso-
ciation with education and as the variety of the language used in most
writing, it formed the basis for the standardised formal Indonesian that
was to evolve in the 20th century. On the other hand, there was no such
standardising influence on colloquial forms of the language, which con-
tinued to thrive in bewildering variety. The selection for use in the
school system of a highly constructed formal variety of the language was
one of the most significant contributing factors to the emergence of
diglossia in the language in the 20th century (see p. 121).
9 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  S I T U AT I O N  AT  T H E  B E G I N N I N G  
O F  T H E  C E N T U R Y
At the beginning of the 20th century, the Dutch were continuing with
their debates about the appropriate variety of Malay for archipelago-
wide communication. The indigenous population, for whom varieties of
Low Malay served as the lingua franca throughout the archipelago,
were largely oblivious to this debate. Despite unifying activities, stan-
dardisation of Malay in the Dutch East Indies still faced considerable
obstacles. Many Dutch officials in Java were critical of the use of ‘cor-
rect’ Malay in public notices and in official dealings with Javanese
because it was poorly understood, and Javanese-Malay colloquial speech
was often used in translating government ordinances. While decisions
by the Dutch had set the language on its course to the future,
Indonesians began to play an increasingly important role; by the 1920s,
they were to completely eclipse the Dutch in determining the future
direction of the language.
Dutch served as the language of higher learning and most adminis-
tration, as well as all branches of technology and science, just as English
did in the British colonies. As a consequence, Malay was alienated from
scientific and technological advances and failed to develop the necessary
lexicon and powers of expression to function in new social situations.
From 1900, there were moves towards giving the indigenous pop-
ulation access to European culture, for which a command of Dutch was
seen as indispensable. Consequently, there took place a gradual expan-
sion in Dutch-language education for Indonesian children, particularly
those of the upper classes. As increasing numbers of Indonesian 
6
T H E  2 0 t h C E N T U R Y  
T O  1 9 4 5

children were able to gain a Dutch education, their numbers began to
put pressure on the education system meant for Europeans. To relieve
this pressure, Dutch-Native schools were established in 1914 with edu-
cation in Dutch, providing a five-year course for children of the indige-
nous elite.1 Although the major purpose of these schools was to train
upper classes for the public service, they were also partly in response to
demands by Indonesian cultural groups for greater opportunities to
acquire Dutch and to continue their education to higher levels.
This led to a rapid increase in the number of Dutch-speaking
Western-oriented members of the indigenous elite. As the number of
people bilingual in Dutch and Malay increased, Dutch influence on
Malay began to grow, even though these bilinguals represented only a
minute fraction of the overall Indies population. Malay now began to
absorb Dutch elements at an increasing rate. Not only was it taking in
Dutch words, but slowly there began the process of increasing powers
of expression in many areas of discourse in which the language had not
previously been used.
Despite the policy of making Dutch more available, there was still
resentment among some Dutch colonials at being addressed in Dutch
by Indonesians. There was a widespread belief among the Dutch that
access to their language would threaten their position through natives
imitating their customs and being ‘less obedient’.2 In their dealings with
Indonesians, these people continued to use the ‘gibberish’ Malay that
had long been condemned by purists.
As mentioned, towards the end of the 19th century a variety of
High Malay began to emerge in the school system, which became
known as School Malay. This was based on the Classical (Riau) Malay
tradition in morphology and syntax, with Latin orthography. Many
school teachers were from the Minangkabau ethnic group of Sumatra
and they were strongly influenced by van Ophuijsen, through his
Kitab Logat Melayu and grammar and his personal influence as an
inspector of schools in Sumatra. They played the most prominent part
in shaping School Malay and through them a distinctive Minangkabau
influence emerged. The teacher training college in Bukit Tinggi in the
Minangkabau language area, where they were trained, was one of the
major centres for the shaping of the formal language. The school
teachers were very conscious of their role in nurturing a ‘superior’
form of the language; they saw themselves as setting the norm for
good style and ‘they acted as if they were the guardians of the purity
of the language’.3
9 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

B A L A I  P U S T A K A
With primary education becoming more widely available, the govern-
ment saw the need for a greater variety of ‘better’ reading materials than
those of popular literature and the press. In 1908, the Commissie voor
de Volkslectuur (Committee of Popular Literature) was established to
provide suitable publications, not only to meet the growing need for
educational works, but also for light reading.4 Publications by the
Volkslectuur, as it was generally called, were produced in School Malay.
There was a political dimension to its publications, as only ideolog-
ically appropriate works were printed, deemed suitable by the Dutch
authorities for the new Indonesian intelligentsia.5 Nevertheless, it had
the aim of modernising and promoting the spread of Malay and made
reading materials on popular science and literature widely available.
From its beginning, Volkslectuur made use of the van Ophuijsen spelling
system, and most newspapers quickly adopted it as well, helping to
rapidly spread it as the standard spelling for Indies Malay. Some authors,
however, among whom many were Malay-speaking Chinese writing in
varieties of Low Malay, continued to use non-standard spelling and
idiom up to the time of independence.
In 1917, the Volkslectuur was renamed Balai Pustaka (Publishing
House — Balai Poestaka in the original spelling). Balai Pustaka published
a large amount of modern, informative and educational material and
thereby became a powerful force in promoting the spread of Malay,
although it also published in regional languages and Dutch. Western nov-
els deemed fit by the authorities for the Indonesian public were translat-
ed into Malay and were influential in the development of Indonesian
novel writing.6 At a time when there were virtually no bookshops, Balai
Pustaka, under the guidance of its far-sighted leader, DA Rinkes, quickly
developed a network of agencies and many hundreds of libraries through-
out the archipelago. Balai Pustaka publications provided the public with
not only novels and translations, but booklets on a vast range of topics,
including such practical works as advice on child care and bicycle repair.
Rinkes even devised motorised bookstalls, which could travel into remote
regions, further opening up access to Balai Pustaka’s works and to the
type of Malay that it wished to propagate.7
Through Balai Pustaka publications, writers and school teachers
from the Minangkabau region of Sumatra played a substantial part in
the development of a standardised language. Of particular importance
was the influence of Nur Sutan Iskandar, one of the Sumatran editors at
Balai Pustaka.8 Iskandar had a strong influence on the moulding of 
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 9 5

pre-war standard Malay. He and his colleagues at Balai Pustaka were
rigid in their insistence on high standards and, like the Minangkabau
school teachers, from whose ranks many of them had been drawn, they
contributed to Minangkabau influence on the language. Balai Pustaka
also stimulated writing by Indonesian authors, publishing a large num-
ber of novels. In so doing, it played a fundamental role in the develop-
ment of modern Indonesian literature. ‘It is no exaggeration to state
that the coming into being of the modern Indonesian novel, and its
popularity, was largely made possible through the existence of Balai
Pustaka and the enlightened policy of its successive directors’.9 The
remarkable uniformity of language of the pre-war novels produced by
Balai Pustaka contributed strongly to standardising the written lan-
guage. There was a significant growth in vocabulary and syntactic elab-
oration as the language became employed for a greater range of
functions than it had in traditional literature, with novels touching on
interpersonal relations and social issues.
Not all works of literature were produced by Balai Pustaka; in
fact, one of the reasons for its existence was to combat what were
seen as substandard (as well as subversive) writings. This included a
significant number of works by Peranakan Chinese in what is some-
times called Sino-Malay, although it has been claimed that this term
had no relevance because the daily language of Malay-speaking
Chinese varied from region to region, being similar in each location
to the dialect of indigenous Malay speakers.10 This literature was
intended primarily for Chinese of lower socio-economic status and
seems to have been of little interest to others, contributing little if
anything to the growing standardisation of the written language.11 It
became increasingly marginalised before finally disappearing in the
early years of independence.12
Balai Pustaka’s influence on the developing language was
strengthened by its privileged position as a government institution.
Authors knew that they would receive reasonable fees, prompt publi-
cation and wide distribution.13 The condition was that they adhered to
Balai Pustaka’s strict guidelines on language. Private publishers found
it extremely difficult to compete with such advantages and, after the
imposition of stricter censorship following the Communist uprising 
in 1926, it became impossible to publish ideologically unacceptable
materials.
It was not only the language of novels that was shaped by Balai
Pustaka; it affected all other types of writing as well. The following
9 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

example illustrates its influence on the language of administration. In
1918, the Department of the Interior began producing practical manu-
als for Indonesian officials throughout Java. Malay of the Service Malay
variety, called Dienst Maleisch in Dutch and Melayu dinas in Malay, was
the major language used in lower echelons of the colonial administra-
tion and there were calls for the original Dutch to be translated into
Service Malay in the manuals. However, Balai Pustaka, which was
responsible for the translations, argued that Service Malay varied from
region to region throughout Java and thus was inappropriate in manu-
als that had to be used everywhere. The manuals therefore appeared in
School Malay, helping to further spread the influence of this variety.14
O T H E R  I N F L U E N C E S  A N D  T H E  E M E R G E N C E
O F  G E N E R A L  C U L T I V AT E D  M A L AY
Despite the prominence of the Minangkabau teachers, editors and writ-
ers, it would be wrong to think that they had a monopoly in influenc-
ing Balai Pustaka. Authors, translators and editors included Javanese
and people from other ethnic groups and these too contributed to Balai
Pustaka’s language.15 The first Malay-language weekly magazine was
edited by a Madurese.16 Nor would it be correct to think that Balai
Pustaka had a monopoly on the developing language. Its influence was
on formal writing, but even here there were other factors shaping the
language.
The number of newspapers expanded rapidly during the early part
of the century. Balai Pustaka, which kept up as complete a documenta-
tion as it could, subscribed to 40 newspapers in 1918 and to nearly 200
by the end of 1925, almost all of which used Malay.17 The styles
employed in these newspapers drew on elements of both High and Low
Malay, but were largely associated with the spoken language and so
were not characteristic of School Malay or of the style of Balai Pustaka
publications. Newspapers contributed enormously to literacy in the lan-
guage and also to expansion of vocabulary and grammatical elaboration,
in large part under the influence of Dutch. Although there was a strong
element of Low Malay in newspapers in the early decades of the cen-
tury, there was a gradual shift in the style of language in the mainstream
press; by independence, it was much more formal than it had been ear-
lier in the century.
Malay also became the major language of the nationalist movement,
although in practice the intellectuals and nationalists were usually more
fluent in Dutch and tended to use this language in private situations. In
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 9 7

speeches and writings they used Malay, influenced both by School
Malay and the hybrid variety emerging from the different streams in the
press and popular literature.
In the early decades of the 20th century, there was thus a conver-
gence of different varieties leading to the emergence of a General
Cultivated Malay. This was essentially a continuation of High (Riau)
Malay, passing through School Malay and Balai Pustaka Malay stages,
but with significant input from the language of the press and even of
colloquial varieties.18 Added to this was the influence of Dutch, leading
to grammatical elaboration and expansion of the lexicon.
Two things can be noted about this development. First, it occurred
in Jakarta, or Batavia as it then was, the capital of the Dutch East Indies.
Batavia was the location of most government offices and was a major
centre of formal education. It contained many publishing houses,
including Balai Pustaka, and was one of the major centres of trade. It
was here that people from all areas of the archipelago came together
most frequently, where most important newspapers were published and
where the educated elite, the intellectuals and nationalists met. This
environment offered the conditions for a convergence of the numerous
varieties and for the emergence of a standardised form of the language.
By about 1930, a rather stable standardised form of written Malay had
appeared, which was being used in an ever-increasing number of
domains.19 The capital city has been the centre in which almost all
developments in the language have occurred until the present.
Secondly, developments at this stage were largely confined to the
language of the educated minority. The great majority of Indonesians in
the pre-war period spoke mainly or solely their regional language
(Javanese, Sundanese and Madurese on the island of Java). For most
who spoke Malay it was a second language and not the language of the
home, although it was the first language in areas of both traditional
Malay (mainly parts of Sumatra and Borneo) and post-creole Malay
(mainly in the eastern archipelago, but also including Batavia). None of
these varieties was at that time much affected by the processes of con-
vergence then occurring. This was largely confined to the Malay of
those who had received a formal (Western) education, who in 1930
totalled about 8 per cent of the Batavian population. Among this group
it influenced mainly their writing and their speech in public situations;
it was these varieties, which can be grouped together loosely as formal
language, which were converging to a recognisable standard of General
Cultivated Malay, the model for good usage and the predecessor of
9 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

modern formal Indonesian. Informal varieties, on the other hand,
including the informal speech of educated people, continued to display
enormous regional variation, as they do today (although the everyday
speech of educated Jakartans began to develop towards a recognisable
colloquial standard later in the 20th century, as discussed in Chapter 8).
The General Cultivated Malay has been referred to as a koine (from
Greek koiné ‘common’), which can be defined as a ‘stable linguistic vari-
ety which results from contact between varieties which are subsystems
of the same linguistic system. Linguistically it is characterised by a mix-
ture of features of the contributing varieties’. It comes about because of
‘the need for unification among speakers of different dialects in a new
environment’.20 Typically, in the koineisation process the new variety
undergoes a levelling out of grammatical differences between the con-
tributing dialects, which results in grammatical simplification. However,
in the case of General Cultivated Malay there is no evidence of such sim-
plification occurring. Not only was the language acquiring greater syn-
tactic complexity but morphologically, in its system of prefixes and
suffixes, it was becoming more regularised and complex.
T H E  N AT I O N A L I S T S
One of the first signs of the emergence of a nationalist consciousness was
the appearance in 1902 of the fortnightly newspaper Bintang Hindia
(The Indies Star), which aimed to appeal to all educated sectors of soci-
ety. ‘For many Indonesians, the Bintang Hindia was an “eye-opener”
impelling them to change their traditional values and attitudes for a more
modern and Western approach to life’;21 it is said to have planted the
seeds of a national awareness among the educated. As to its language,
there was disagreement among the editors on language matters and it
employed a mixture of literary Malay and Low Malay. By 1911, there
was significant growth in the number of indigenous-run newspapers,
whose contents were largely educational and propagandistic in nature.
Thus before the 1920s the nationalists and the literati had begun to
take the initiative from the Dutch in shaping the language. The Dutch
had played a fundamental role in shaping a common language, espe-
cially in the 19th century, with van Ophuijsen’s spelling, introduced at
the beginning of the 20th century, being the first act of language plan-
ning. But with their adherence to classical form and School Malay and
the growth of national consciousness, the Dutch became increasingly
irrelevant; by the late 1920s, developments in the language were fully
under the control of the indigenous people themselves.
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 9 9

From 1915, groups formed by nationalist youths began to appear,
the first being Jong Java. The concept of a unitary state comprising the
whole of the Dutch East Indies began to take shape and, from 1918
onward, this was increasingly referred to as ‘Indonesia’. Many among the
young intellectuals lived in the Netherlands as students. There they func-
tioned as one social group and among them consciousness of a common
identity, that of being Indonesian, developed. Periodicals and associa-
tions that provided for single ethnic groups failed to gain any significant
support, but the Perhimpunan Indonesia (Indonesian Association),
which embraced all ethnic groups, was fully supported by the students.
Through their journal Indonesia Merdeka (Free Indonesia) they began to
express their aspirations for an independent and unitary nation.22
Returning to Indonesia, these students formed the core of the new
national intelligentsia. Although fluent in Dutch and usually in a
regional language, they adopted Malay as the language of their nation-
alist groups, as the symbol of national unity. In 1926, Jong Java, the
largest youth organisation, strongly urged members to use Malay more
frequently and the following year adopted Malay as its official language.
In 1927, Sukarno and other young nationalists formed Jong Indonesie,
renamed Pemuda Indonesia (Indonesian Youth) the same year, choos-
ing to use Malay as their working language. In the same year, Sukarno
founded the Partai Nasional Indonesia (Indonesian National Party),
which accelerated the growing sense of unity. The use of Malay by the
nationalists became a way of expressing their nationalistic beliefs and
also facilitated the spread of their ideas from Java to the other islands.
Recognising this, Sukarno said that the sooner Malay became wide-
spread the sooner independence would be achieved.23
At the First Indonesian Youth Congress, held in Batavia from 30
April to 2 May 1926, the poet and radical nationalist Muhammad
Yamin described the future possibilities for a national language. He stat-
ed that, in his opinion, of all the languages in Indonesia only two, Malay
and Javanese, had any prospect of becoming the language of unity. He
said he was convinced that it was Malay that would gradually become
the language of wider communication and unity for the Indonesian
people, and that Indonesian culture in future would find expression in
the Malay language. It is an interesting comment on the attitudes and
practices of the nationalists that Yamin, like all the speakers at the con-
gress, was speaking in Dutch!24
Mohamad Tabrani, one of the organisers of the congress, later wrote
that he did not like the term Malay for the ‘language of unity’. He informed
1 0 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Yamin that if there was to be one nation, Indonesia, and one people,
Indonesians, then if there was to be one language, it should be called
Indonesian: bahasa Indonesia, not bahasa Melayu.25 Yamin agreed with
Tabrani, but they decided that a choice of name for the language should be
deferred and put forward at the Second Indonesian Youth Congress.
T H E  S E C O N D  I N D O N E S I A N  Y O U T H
C O N G R E S S  A N D  T H E  S U M P A H  P E M U D A
The Second Indonesian Youth Congress was held in Batavia on 27–28
October 1928. The participants were surprisingly young; the leaders
were in their twenties and the majority of members were still high school
students.26 They were drawn from the wealthy, Dutch-educated elite and
Dutch was the language in which they communicated with each other,
although for this occasion most speakers used Malay. Only one newspa-
per, the Chinese-Malay paper Keng Po, sent a reporter, Wage Rudolph
Soepratman. Dutch police are reported to have intervened during the
first session, when one speaker used the word kemerdekaan ‘freedom’.
In the first session, Yamin, the secretary of the congress, stated that
Malay had been transformed into Indonesian and was producing a sense
of unity in the multiethnic society. The reporter Soepratman was given
permission to play a melody he had recently composed on the violin.
The tune, Indonesia Raya (Great Indonesia), was to become the
national anthem of independent Indonesia. (Soepratman was not
allowed to sing the words he had composed, as the session chairman
was afraid that the police would intervene.)
Following Soepratman’s performance, the chairman read the draft
resolution that subsequently became known as the Sumpah Pemuda
(The Youth Pledge —also sometimes translated ‘The Oath of the
Youth’). The Sumpah Pemuda is as follows:
Pertama:
Kami putera dan puteri Indonesia mengaku bertumpah 
darah yang satu, Tanah Indonesia.
Kedua:
Kami putera dan puteri Indonesia mengaku berbangsa 
yang satu, Bangsa Indonesia.
Ketiga:
Kami putera dan puteri Indonesia menjunjung bahasa 
persatuan, Bahasa Indonesia.
TRANSLATION:
First:
We the sons and daughters of Indonesia declare that 
we belong to one fatherland, Indonesia.
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 0 1

Second:
We the sons and daughters of Indonesia declare that 
we are one people, the Indonesian people.
Third:
We the sons and daughters of Indonesia uphold the 
language of unity, the Indonesian language.27
The decision to have Malay, with the new name Indonesian, as the
language of unity, was carried unanimously by delegates. The Sumpah
Pemuda was not the very first use of the new name. It had been sug-
gested by Tabrani two years earlier and in 1927 the youth organisation
Jong Java spoke of the language as Indonesian. Nevertheless, the decla-
ration was of great significance. Although the change in name did not
involve any immediate change in the nature of the language itself, it did
act as a declaration of its future status. Henceforth, nationalists referred
to the language as bahasa Indonesia (the Indonesian language) and 
28 October 1928 is regarded as the founding day of the Indonesian lan-
guage. The occasion was later given much significance as a part of the
nationalist struggle, far more than participants at the time would have
imagined. The third pledge was ‘rewritten’ by 1938 into such declara-
tions as: Kita berbahasa satu, yaitu bahasa Indonesia (We have one lan-
guage, the Indonesian language), which congress delegates, many of
whom had only poor Malay, would hardly have formulated. In the
1980s, Hari Sumpah Pemuda (Youth Pledge Day) became an impor-
tant day for nationalist propaganda, as part of the Suharto regime’s
Development program.28
The five-yearly Indonesian National
Language Congress commences on 28 October and every year that
month is Bulan Bahasa (Language Month), during which promotional
activities for the use of good language take place.
The new name bahasa Indonesia was not immediately taken up by
all groups in the community. It was not used in the press until 1933 and
conservative school teachers, who regarded modernising tendencies in
the language with despair, refused to use it.
The question is often asked, what kind of Malay were the delegates
at the Second Indonesian Youth Congress thinking of when they
renamed the language. One writer observes: ‘At that time they them-
selves were obviously more concerned with the cause of political unity
than with the problem of the variation in their usage of Malay’.29
Nevertheless, the oath itself is in High Malay, as shown by the use of
the formal word kami (we), which almost never occurs in the collo-
quial language, the refined Sanskrit-derived putra (sons) and putri
(daughters), and the formal verbal prefix men(g)-. It is obvious that this
style was recognised as the only variety suitable for such an important 
1 0 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

statement, particularly one that was first written. Its association with
education, as School Malay, and in literature, as published by Balai
Pustaka, had already established High Malay as the appropriate variety
for formal situations.
W H Y  M A L AY ?
What were the reasons for the choice of Malay as the national language
of Indonesia? It was not the language of the majority; in fact, only a
small percentage of the people of the Dutch East Indies spoke it as a
first language. However, it had significant advantages over the only
other two languages that could in any way be considered alternatives,
Dutch and Javanese. It is sometimes erroneously stated that Malay was
chosen because it was ‘simple and easy to learn’. In fact, it was not cho-
sen for any perceived linguistic characteristics, but for social and politi-
cal reasons.
There would have been certain advantages in choosing Dutch as the
national language. It was the language of higher education and as such
was spoken by the educated elite, the leaders of the nationalist move-
ment and the future leaders of the nation. It was a language of modern
communication, which had for centuries kept abreast of developments
in all fields of learning, for which books and other literature were avail-
able. Consequently, it needed no development of structure or lexicon.
Malay, by comparison, had been much neglected in both Dutch and
British colonies. In many fields of learning it had never been used and
so had not developed the lexical and syntactic complexity necessary for
those domains, let alone for a national language. Although such devel-
opment was now occurring in Malay, it had a long way to go to become
an effective language of modern national communication.
Educated Indonesians, including nationalists, continued to use
Dutch as the principal means of communication among themselves,
although they used Malay in public situations and in their political writ-
ings. While Sukarno addressed crowds in Malay, he was more comfort-
able in Dutch, like many of the educated elite. Sukarno has stated of
Dutch that ‘It became the language in which I did my thinking. Even
today I automatically curse in Dutch. When I pray to God, I pray in
Dutch’.30
Despite this, few Indonesians gave serious thought to accepting
Dutch as the national language. It was the language of the colonial
power against whom the nationalists were struggling for independence.
There was thus an important psychological barrier to its acceptance;
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 0 3

national pride was against it. And although it was the usual language of
communication among the educated elite, they were a very small
minority of the entire population. In many former British colonies,
English became the national language, or at least an official language,
on independence. Its status as an important world lingua franca was an
enormous incentive to its acceptance; it allowed for greater communi-
cation than would have been possible with one of the local languages.
But, unlike English, Dutch was not an important language of interna-
tional communication. Its adoption would allow easy communication
with the Netherlands, but not with other nations; it would not open the
rest of the world to Indonesia.
The other possibility was Javanese. This language had by far the
largest number of native speakers of any language in the archipelago. It
was spoken by about 40 per cent of the overall population, including a
significant proportion of the educated elite and nationalist leadership. If
it were chosen, a large number of people would not be in the position
of having to learn another language. It also had an unbroken literary
tradition stretching back 1000 years and its own script, taught to
Javanese as part of their education. (The fact that the Javanese script was
not used for other languages was a disadvantage, but a similar problem
did not hinder the Thais in accepting their own language, which has a
related writing system, derived from the same south Indian Pallava
script as the Javanese.)
There were two major factors working against the acceptance of
Javanese. First, it was the language of one particular ethnic group. The
fact that this was the largest ethnic group was actually a hindrance to its
acceptance; it would be seen as giving significant advantages to native
speakers, already the most powerful and, many non-Javanese would say,
most advantaged ethnic group, in terms of education and other oppor-
tunities. This would cause resentment among speakers of other lan-
guages and would hence work against national unity rather than for it,
just as attempts in India to have Hindi, the language of the largest eth-
nic group, adopted as the national language led to bitter opposition
from speakers of other languages.
The second disadvantage had to do with the nature of the Javanese
language itself and its intimate connection with traditional Javanese cul-
ture. Javanese society was rigidly hierarchical, with an aristocracy at the
top and the mass of peasants at the bottom. A person’s behaviour in any
social situation, including their choice of language style, was strictly
determined by their social relationship to those with whom they 
1 0 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

were interacting. Javanese is often said to be the supreme example of a
language that expresses social relationship between speaker and
addressee, possessing, among other things, an elaborate set of vocabu-
laries for addressing people of higher rank. The two major social levels
have their own names. Ngoko ‘low style’ is the familiar style, used
among equals where there is solidarity and by superiors to inferiors.
Krama is the ‘high style’, used by inferiors to superiors or among equals
without solidarity. Vocabulary differences between Ngoko and Krama
are illustrated by the following short example, in which every meaning
unit (morpheme) is different:
A language tied to traditional Javanese culture was not at all what
the nationalists wanted, aspiring as they did to a modern democracy of
equality and modernity. The Javanese among them were just as unpre-
pared for Javanese to be the national language, ‘since even for the more
traditionally oriented intellectuals the drive for modernity was at that
time still partly seen in terms of breaking out of “Javanism” and the
hierarchical modes of Javanese social intercourse’.32
Malay was the native language of only about 5 per cent of the peo-
ple of the Dutch East Indies in 1928; that is, the people of those areas
of Sumatra, off-shore islands and parts of Kalimantan where traditional
Malay was the vernacular. Native speakers of post-creole forms of Malay,
especially in the east but also in Jakarta, did not add substantially to this
number. The fact that native speakers were such a small percentage of
the population meant that, unlike Javanese, Malay was not seen as a
threat to the cultures of other ethnic groups; Malay speakers could in
no way be regarded as an assertive majority. Most people did not think
of it as the language of a particular ethnic group at all; one writer has
commented on its ‘almost statusless character, like Esperanto … tied to
no particular regional social structure’.33 It was also the principal lan-
guage of inter-ethnic communication and trade throughout the archi-
pelago and the language of education, at least of lower education, the
most that the majority of people could aspire to. It had also become the
language of literature, in every variety from the Low Malay of some
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 0 5
Ngoko: Aku    ora       ng-erti        jeneng-é
Krama:
Kula  mboten  mang-ertos  asma-nipun
I       negative  know         name-his
I don’t know his name. 31

newspapers and fiction to the High Malay Balai Pustaka novels. The
unique position of Malay can be seen also from the fact that in 1918, at
the urging of indigenous members, the newly opened Volksraad, the
People’s Council, agreed to Malay being recognised as an official lan-
guage along with Dutch for the purpose of debate within the council.34
In short, Malay was seen as the only language that could act as a unify-
ing force between the many ethnic groups in the archipelago.
When the young nationalists recognised Malay as the basis for the
future national language, the lack of opposition or even scepticism was
extraordinary. The more so because most realised that it was not yet a
suitable vehicle for communicating about a great many aspects of mod-
ern life, that in fact it was not yet ready to be the unifying language of
a multilingual nation in the modern world. The choice of Malay was
received as if it were the most natural thing; very few debates about its
advantages and disadvantages seem to have occurred. Despite later sug-
gestions that Javanese had been a contender for national language, its
drawbacks were so obvious that it is probable that very few people gave
it serious consideration. Indonesia, unlike India, was thus spared a great
deal of strife over the choice of a national language. The choice of Malay
proved to be the best decision for the unity of the future nation.
A L I S J A H B A N A  A N D  P U J A N G G A  B A R U
Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana commented in 1932 that ‘the Dutch language
has received a terrible blow. In the circles of educated Indonesians its
position has been hard pressed by Malay. In meetings, in the press,
Dutch is no longer used. The Indonesians who in the past were crazy
about the Dutch language have now changed their attitude and
dropped it … for ever’.35 Alisjahbana was a great promoter of the use
and development of Indonesian and he was greatly exaggerating the
decline of Dutch. Higher education was still in Dutch and many edu-
cated Indonesians were writing and speaking in Dutch in many situa-
tions (and were still doing so well after independence was achieved).
Alisjahbana became a most significant figure in the development of
the language. He believed passionately in the need to develop
Indonesian so that it could take its place as a fully adequate national lan-
guage, able to replace Dutch as a means of entry into modern interna-
tional culture. In 1933, he began the magazine Pujangga Baru (New
Writer — Poedjangga Baroe in the original spelling) with co-editors
Amir Hamzah and Armijn Pane.36 The magazine contained articles in
modern Indonesian on literary and cultural issues, and enabled young
1 0 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

writers to express their ideas and feelings on matters of language and
culture. Through Pujangga Baru, Alisjahbana and his colleagues con-
sciously strove to modernise the language. In the magazine and in their
novels, such as Alisjahbana’s Layar Terkembang (Sails Unfurled) and
Armijn Pane’s Belenggu (Shackles), they extended the boundaries of the
new language, dealing with new areas of discourse and expressing their
feelings in a way that had not been done before. The ‘creative and crit-
ical writing it published set new standards for the language and revealed
its flexibility and efficiency’.37
The literature of Pujangga Baru was more nationalistic than that of
Balai Pustaka and this was reflected in the more modern language. Its
nationalistic and progressive tone was more satisfying to many writers
than the more classical style demanded by Balai Pustaka, which
eschewed nationalism and adventurous language. Pujangga Baru thus
contributed to acceptance of Indonesian among intellectuals, establish-
ing the language as the vehicle for future literature.
The language of Pujangga Baru came in for criticism from those
associated with the more classical School Malay and it was accused of
publishing Dutch written with an Indonesian vocabulary. Alisjahbana
would no doubt have taken the criticism as a demonstration of his suc-
cess. To him the language of Pujangga Baru pointed the way to the
future, to an elaborated, Westernised language able to express all the
concepts of the modern world.
Those who emphasised continuity with Classical Malay saw the
changes taking place as destroying the logical clarity of Malay. Among
these were the Minangkabau school teachers, who expressed to their
students their contempt for the modernising tendencies of both
Pujangga Baru and newspapers. As an example, among the many inno-
vations they condemned was use of the word bisa instead of dapat for
‘can’. In Malay bisa meant only ‘poison from an animal’s bite’ and the
increasing use of Javanese bisa in the new meaning they regarded as one
of the many threats to the language’s purity.
Alisjahbana aspired to create a modern Indonesian culture and the
language that would be its expression. Unlike more traditional intellec-
tuals, he did not look to Classical Malay and the past. For him,
Indonesian was a new concept; a new beginning was needed and he
looked to Western civilisation, with its dynamic society of individuals
freed from traditional fetters, as his inspiration. He believed that there is
a relationship between thinking and the rules of grammar and that ‘a cul-
ture oriented to science, economics and technology, with its own logic,
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 0 7

concepts and reality, unavoidably has its consequences in the rules of
grammar’.38 He recognised Indonesian as a continuation of Malay, but
believed it should be freed from its traditional syntactic forms to allow it
to better express complex intellectual concepts. Alisjahbana was particu-
larly critical of school teachers’ adherence to classical norms, writing in
1933 that ‘The language which reflects the life of the people … in
schools becomes something frozen, dead, motionless. The teaching of
grammar as used by our ancestors … kills all interest in language’.39
After Alisjahbana the most important figure identified with
Pujangga Baru was Armijn Pane. He also saw Indonesian as not just a
new name but as a new language. He said that the grammar of older
Malay would be of no value to writers in the new Indonesia ‘because it
is not adequate for the language demanded by their souls’ and that tra-
ditional literary forms would be replaced by new and modern ways of
expression.40 His novel Belenggu, published by Pujangga Baru after
being rejected by Balai Pustaka, was the most discussed novel of the
pre-war period, its non-moralising consideration of social relations
being a powerful influence on young writers.
T H E  F I R S T  I N D O N E S I A N  N AT I O N A L
L A N G U A G E  C O N G R E S S
It was Alisjahbana who put forward the idea of holding a national lan-
guage congress. In 1936, a Javanese language congress was held in
Yogyakarta, at which it was decided that there would be no mention of
politics, only purely language matters being discussed. Alisjahbana was
contemptuous of the aims of the congress and declared that the time for
holding a congress of the national language had arrived. He and the
Pujangga Baru group took the initiative and organised the First
Indonesian National Language Congress, held in Surakarta, Central
Java in June 1938, ten years after the Second Indonesian Youth
Congress and the Sumpah Pemuda.41
The First Indonesian National Language Congress demonstrated
that some people already recognised the need for a policy on national
language development and it was thus an important preliminary step in
the nationalists’ language-planning program. Papers were read on the
future of the language, its grammar and spelling. Amir Sjarifoeddin, 
a future prime minister, read a paper on borrowing from foreign 
languages and the congress approved the continued use of the van
Ophuijsen spelling. Alisjahbana criticised grammar textbooks used in
government schools, stating that they were out of date and did not
1 0 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

stimulate interest in learning the language. The congress agreed with
him that textbooks did not reflect the development and use of the lan-
guage and resolved that a new grammar should be written, which
reflected the new conditions of the language. Delegates approved a res-
olution calling on journalists to co-operate in developing and refining
the language and urged the establishment of a faculty of arts. They also
called for Indonesian to become the official language and language of
government business.42
Despite the good intentions, there was no official organisation
behind the congress, so that resolutions could not be implemented. It
did, nevertheless, have an impact by creating awareness for the need to
foster development of the language. For instance, it prompted
Indonesian members of the Volksraad to declare that they would always
use Indonesian (although in practice this was not always adhered to, as
many of them were more fluent in Dutch).43
D U T C H  R E A C T I O N  A N D  T H E  P O S I T I O N  
O F  I N D O N E S I A N  I N  1 9 4 1
The debates among the Dutch about the type of Malay to be used in
schools never reached resolution. In 1929, doubts were raised at high
level about the appropriateness of Riau Malay in the school system, with
the recognition that outside schools and their textbooks the language
had moved on significantly. The debates continued through the 1930s,
both as to the type of Malay that should be officially recognised and its
position in relation to Dutch.44
In the late 1920s and the 1930s, the attitude of the Dutch towards
the Indonesian language was largely negative, as it was towards the
nationalist movement in general. While there were some who saw Malay
as an important unifying factor within the colonies, there were many
who held the new language in contempt and openly derided it as unfit
to become a modern language of culture. Prominent among these was
the education specialist GJ Nieuwenhuis, ‘who set himself up as the
great propagator of Dutch in the Indies’ and who stated that ‘The task
of the Dutch language in the Indies is to help create a future for the
Indonesians’.45 He wrote in 1930:
Everything we are doing to make Malay the lingua franca works against
our efforts to spread our language, to introduce international culture,
to implement a unification on a higher level, and also against the
perpetuation of our interests. In other words, it could only be disad-
vantageous for the Indies as well as for the Netherlands.
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 0 9

Nieuwenhuis argued for a comprehensive Dutch language educa-
tion for the lower ranks of the civil service, seeing the perpetuation of
Dutch interests in the Indies and continued economic expansion as
being best ensured by the spread of Dutch language and culture. Others
supported the strengthening of Dutch for more enlightened reasons,
believing that it was the best way to advance the Indonesians, cultur-
ally and economically. According to the 1930 census, 230 000
Indonesians knew Dutch, increasing to about 400 000 in 1941,
although it is not the case that they all spoke fluent Dutch, the figures
referring mainly to reading ability.
There were still among the Dutch those who were unhappy about
the increasing numbers of Indonesians acquiring the language — even
though the 1941 figure represented less than 1 per cent of the indige-
nous population — believing that it would harm Dutch interests by
leading to political and social instability. However, those in favour had
greater power and their efforts to strengthen the position of Dutch
included weakening the position of Indonesian. The use of Indonesian
by the nationalists had become a way of expressing their nationalistic
beliefs and this added to Dutch suspicion of the language. By 1932,
Indonesian was no longer a required subject for the Dutch-Native
schools anywhere in the Indies. The strengthening of the position of
Dutch was supported by the Dutch-Indies Teachers’ Association, whose
members believed the elimination of Indonesian from the system would
improve opportunities for learning Dutch, which they saw as the road
to job opportunities and social advancement.
Despite opposition from some Dutch and even from some
Indonesians, the Indonesian language had made remarkable progress by
the time of the Japanese invasion. A Dutch linguist, C Hooykaas, wrote
in 1939 that ‘the few decades of the twentieth century have shown a
development so rapid, expansive and even with such depth, that it can
be compared with nothing in the previous centuries’.46
By the early 1940s, the language had expanded in its capabilities to
such an extent that intellectuals were becoming increasingly confident
in using it in academic fields. Mohammad Hatta, who was to become
the first vice-president of Indonesia, stated shortly before the Japanese
invasion that as an economist he could write anything on economics in
the language,47 a comment that he would not have dreamt of uttering
in 1928. Hatta, nevertheless, like other conservatives, was critical of the
emerging undisciplined use of Indonesian by many writers, who had
had no education in the language and who showed excessive zeal in
their adoption of Dutch vocabulary and grammatical structures.
1 1 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  J A P A N E S E  P E R I O D
Rarely has an entrenched position come to such an abrupt ending as
when Dutch rule in the East Indies ceased with the Japanese invasion in
March 1942. Immediately the Japanese banned the use of Dutch, until
then the official language of the Dutch East Indies, from all public use.
This was the single most significant influence on the status of Indonesian
in its history. Overnight, Indonesian was thrust into a prominence that
few had imagined would come so soon or so dramatically.
It was the intention of the Japanese to spread their culture as quickly
as possible throughout the archipelago. The Dutch education system
was abolished and moves swiftly made to introduce a new education sys-
tem for the dissemination of Japanese language and culture.48 Because
the Japanese language was almost entirely unknown in Indonesia, the
Japanese could not at first introduce it as the medium of instruction in
schools. They therefore had to use Indonesian, which they always
referred to as Malay, as the language for all education, from primary
school to university level. So assiduous were the Japanese in obliterat-
ing traces of Dutch from public life that Malay-language teaching mate-
rials had to be ‘purified’, with pupils required to black out Dutch words
from their textbooks.
The long-term consequence, unforeseen by the Japanese, was an
enormous strengthening of the position of Indonesian in society.
Virtually overnight, Indonesian replaced Dutch as the language of
administration. Even the Japanese were forced to make use of it for
practical reasons, their own language being so unfamiliar. Indonesian
thus became the de facto official language, for law and government
communication with the people. The Japanese always intended that
their own language would soon be introduced into all spheres of life,
including education, although they were compelled temporarily to
make use of Indonesian. However, they were always aware of its links
with national feelings; it was for this reason that they insisted on using
the term ‘Malay’ rather than ‘Indonesian’.
Many people who knew barely any Indonesian now found them-
selves required to use it in their work, in schools and government busi-
ness. While members of the educated elite continued to use Dutch in
private, they now had to develop greater proficiency in Indonesian for
public communication. Indonesian was suddenly required in a great
many situations in which it had hitherto not been used and for which it
was not ready: to express all the concepts of every relevant branch of
learning, a role hitherto taken by Dutch.
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 1 1

It was obvious that Indonesian did not contain words or expressions
for a great many concepts. This was forcefully brought home at the
beginning of the Japanese period with the requirement to produce
Indonesian language materials for education. This largely consisted of
translating the Dutch texts used until then. In 1942, some nationalists
suggested the setting up of a body that would develop the language so
that it could function adequately in this new role, including the selec-
tion of technical vocabulary. The Japanese agreed to the establishment
of the Komisi Bahasa (Language Commission), seeing it as in their
interests to expand the capacities of the language. The Commission was
set up in October 1942, formally headed by three Japanese but with a
number of prominent Indonesian intellectuals playing the major part in
its activities. Soewandi, later to be Minister of Education and Culture,
was appointed secretary, Alisjahbana was appointed an ‘expert secretary’
and other members included the future president and vice-president,
Sukarno and Hatta. Thus began the first formal Indonesian language-
planning activities. The most important section of the Komisi Bahasa
dealt with the creation of terminology. This was split into smaller sub-
sections, each dealing with terms in a particular field. Under
Alisjahbana, the work of the Komisi Bahasa staff also included making
preparations for a dictionary.
The prohibition on use of Dutch led to an expansion of Indonesian-
language newspapers and pressure on them to increase the language’s
wordstock. Journalists, beginning a practice that has continued to the
present, did not wait for the Komisi Bahasa to provide new words, but
actively participated themselves in coining terms. Many of the Komisi
Bahasa’s terms never found public acceptance and after the Japanese
period were replaced by the original Dutch forms, including jantera
(Sanskrit for ‘wheel’), which temporarily replaced mesin (machine),
ketua negara (literally ‘chairman of state’), which had replaced presiden
(president) and kilang (meaning ‘mill’), which had replaced pabrik (fac-
tory). In a few cases, however, coinings permanently replaced earlier
Dutch terms, including pajak (earlier meaning ‘monopoly’) instead of
belasting (tax) and senam (meaning ‘exercise’) instead of gimnastik
(gymnastics). The Komisi Bahasa is said to have coined more than 7000
terms, although few of these gained common acceptance. The Japanese
did little or nothing to assist the work of the Komisi Bahasa; its recom-
mendations were poorly promoted and came to the notice of few peo-
ple. A grammar was intended but did not appear, although a
two-volume dictionary was produced.
1 1 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

In their determination to mobilise the entire population to their war
effort, the Japanese helped spread Indonesian wherever they went in the
archipelago, although their insistence on propagating the language
actually worked against them. Indonesian came to be regarded as a sym-
bol of national unity and consequently of resistance to the Japanese
desire to spread their own language and culture.
With military defeat becoming obvious to the Japanese, they agreed
in March 1945 to the establishment of a committee to plan Indonesian
independence. It was during a meeting of this committee that Sukarno
first put forward his concept for the Pancasila, the Five Principles of the
Indonesian State, although the ultimate form of Pancasila was rather
different from that formulated by him on this occasion. The committee
also produced the document on which the Indonesian constitution was
based. The constitution stipulates: Bahasa negara ialah bahasa
Indonesia (the State language is Indonesian).49 By this time, it was
inevitable that Indonesian would be the national language of the new
nation. Nevertheless, the pronouncement of its status in the constitu-
tion was an important milestone in the development of the language
and highlighted the importance of having a single national language of
unity in the new multilingual nation.
T H E 2 0 T H
C E N T U R Y
T O 1 9 4 5 • 1 1 3

T H E  E A R LY  D AY S  O F  P L A N N I N G
On 17 August 1945, Sukarno read the proclamation of Indonesian
independence. Significantly, it was in Indonesian, as have been all offi-
cial Indonesian documents since. The language is surprisingly modern,
demonstrating how much it had developed in the preceding two
decades:
Kami bangsa Indonesia dengan ini menyatakan kemerdekaan
Indonesia. Hal-hal yang mengenai pemindahan kekuasaan dan lain-
lain, diselenggarakan dengan cara saksama dan dalam tempo yang
sesingkat-singkatnya.
TRANSLATION:
We the Indonesian people herewith declare Indonesia’s Independence.
Matters relating to the transfer of authority will be carried out in an
orderly manner and in the shortest possible time.
The unanimous acceptance of Indonesian as the sole national lan-
guage in such a multilingual nation was a remarkable thing. Yet it is easy
to overlook just how remarkable it really was, with so little attention
being drawn to the fact because of the complete absence of conflict, or
even debate on the matter.
Indonesian independence was not recognised by the Dutch and the
new republic had to contend with Dutch military action until 1949.
During the revolutionary period, Indonesian played an essential unify-
ing role, which contributed greatly to widespread commitment to it as
7
L A N G U A G E  P L A N N I N G

the national language and helped build a solid foundation for national
unity.1 The Dutch, on the assumption that they would be able to regain
their former colony and accepting the popularity of Indonesian,
announced in November 1945 that it was to be the second official lan-
guage after Dutch.
Following the declaration of independence, planning continued on
from what had been carried out during the Japanese occupation. In
June 1947, when the Republican government was located in
Yogyakarta, the Ministry of Education and Culture set up a new board
to continue the work of the Komisi Bahasa of the Japanese period.2
While it produced a dictionary for teaching Indonesian in schools, the
board’s work was frustrated by Dutch military action and it was short-
lived.
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 1 5
Figure 7.1
The Proclamation of Independence — the first official document in the
Indonesian language.The document was hastily typed on 17 August 1945 after
President Sukarno had read from a handwritten draft. It is signed by Sukarno
and Vice-President Hatta. (State Secretariat, Republic of Indonesia)

Despite the overall lack of progress in language planning in this
period, there was one important achievement. In 1947, a revision to the
van Ophuijsen spelling was introduced under Soewandi, the Minister of
Education and Culture. This became commonly known as the
Soewandi spelling, but formally as Ejaan Republik (Republic Spelling).
There were two major changes in the new system. One was the replac-
ing of the digraph ‘oe’ with ‘u’ for the high back vowel /u/. Thus
boekoe (book) became buku. This change was resisted by most people in
the spelling of their own name; someone named Soeparno, for instance,
was likely to retain the ‘oe’, rather than spell his name Suparno. Many
people continue this practice to the present. Consequently, there can be
uncertainty about how a particular person’s name should be spelt and
there is ongoing inconsistency in the press. Thus present-day newspa-
pers might refer either to Sukarno and Suharto or to Soekarno and
Soeharto, or to one with ‘oe’ and the other with ‘u’.
The other major change was the removal of any indication of the
difference between the mid-central vowel /∂/ (called ‘schwa’ by lin-
guists — the sound represented by the letter ‘e’ in English ‘enough’)
and the mid-front vowel /e/ (the vowel in English ‘pet’), both now to
be spelt ‘e’. Thus the word pepet (schwa) contains /∂/ in each syllable
and bebek (duck) contains /e/ in each syllable, although the difference
is not shown in the orthography. This change removed the impractical
use of a diacritic over the symbol for the mid-front vowel: ‘é’.
The previous practice of inserting the schwa vowel between conso-
nants in borrowings was made optional. Thus peraktek (practice —
Dutch praktijk) could now be spelt peraktek or praktek. Even some
inherited words were allowed variation, such as perahu or prahu (boat).
This led to some uncertainty as to how certain words should be writ-
ten. For instance, Poerwadarminta’s Kamus Umum
(General
Dictionary) in the first edition of 1953 included pab(e)rik (factory),
while in the second edition of 1961 the word was spelt paberik, the
spelling pabrik being included but referring to the former. In the 1976
edition, this was reversed, with paberik referring the reader to pabrik.
The new spelling came at a time of military action by the Dutch,
who seized the republican capital of Yogyakarta. Republican leaders,
who had taken to the hills, could hardly be concerned with matters 
of language development. Nevertheless, even in remote places in 
republican-controlled territory there were schools where the language 
was being taught. Some language promoters stayed in Jakarta, under
Dutch control, and continued the work of creating terminologies by
1 1 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

translating Dutch scientific terms into Indonesian. One of these was
Sutan Takdir Alisjahbana, who also continued publication of the maga-
zine Pujangga Baru and launched a new journal devoted to discussion
of language problems generally, named Pembina Bahasa Indonesia
(Builder of Indonesian). In 1949, Alisjahbana produced his grammar,
Tatabahasa Baru Bahasa Indonesia (New Indonesian Grammar). While
there were other grammars, this became the most widely used in
schools, remaining as such until the late 1980s.
After Indonesia’s independence was recognised by the Dutch, a
Komisi Istilah (Terminology Commission) was established in Jakarta.
In 1952, this was combined with a body that had been set up by the
Dutch, as the Lembaga Bahasa dan Budaya (Institute for Language
and Culture). This was originally part of the Faculty of Arts at the
University of Indonesia, but was later taken over by the Ministry (later
Department) of Education and Culture. Until the present, the succes-
sive official language-planning bodies have been attached to the
department.
Following independence, almost all education was in Indonesian,
except in some private schools, where it continued in Dutch until 1952.
In some areas, the language of instruction was the local language dur-
ing the first three years of education, and this practice continues to the
present. This only occurs in the areas of a few large languages, such as
Javanese, Sundanese and Madurese. In Jakarta and other places where
no single regional language predominates and in areas where smaller
regional languages are spoken, only Indonesian is used.
The Komisi Istilah was very active after 1950, until it ceased activi-
ties in 1966. The creation of a body of technical, scientific and profes-
sional terms was seen as central to the goal of developing Indonesian to
be a modern national language. Like national languages in most other
developing countries, Indonesian was not well equipped to express new
ideas and concepts relating to professional and scientific activities.
Alisjahbana and others were aware of the need to make Indonesian
‘intertranslatable’ with other modern languages, able to meet commu-
nication needs in the modern world. This entailed extending not only
the lexicon but also the range of discourse forms and registers available
to educated users of the language, as well as conventions of paragraph
organisation and rules pertaining to expository, descriptive and narra-
tive discourse.3
In the early days of terminology creation, many coinings were lit-
eral translations from Dutch, such as buku harian (diary) from Dutch
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 1 7

dagboek, rumah sakit (hospital) from Dutch ziekenhuis and nama kelu-
arga (surname) from Dutch familie naam. Many Dutch words were
adopted without translation, although usually a change in pronuncia-
tion and spelling was required, such as bursa (stock exchange) from
beurs and oplah (circulation — of a publication) from oplaag. In some
cases, Dutch compounds were employed, although word order usually
had to be reversed, as in kantor pos (post office) from post kantoor, buku
kas (cashbook) from kasboek and insinyur sipil (civil engineer) from
civiel ingenieur. (See also the discussion on borrowing from Dutch in
Chapter 8.)
Not all new terms were taken from Dutch. One other source for
technical terms was Arabic, which provided hukum (law), kaidah (rule),
sifat (attribute, quality) and numerous other words.
It has been claimed that, by 1952, the 16 sections of the Komisi
Istilah, each responsible for a particular branch of learning, had pro-
duced more than 74 000 technical and professional terms and that, by
1966, new terms totalled 327 000.4 By 1959, 75 000 new terms, most
of which were from Dutch, had been published in official lists.
However, although a great many new terms were coined and published,
few of these actually entered the language or appeared in general dic-
tionaries. This highlights one of the major problems of the language-
planning process in Indonesia: an enormous gap between the
terminology producers and their potential customers. Until well into
the 1970s, the Komisi Istilah and its successors were poorly funded and
resourced and lacked the means of effectively communicating their
work to the public. Specialists in various fields rarely took up technical
terms created for their field by the relevant section of the commission,
preferring to use Dutch or English terms instead and avoiding Indone-
sianised versions of Dutch where these had been coined. In most cases,
specialists simply did not even hear of the existence of the officially
coined terms. 
The Komisi Istilah’s method of publicising its new terms was to
place them in supplements to the monthly magazine Medan Bahasa
(Language Field) until 1952 and after that as supplements to the peri-
odical Bahasa dan Budaya (Language and Culture). But these publica-
tions had limited circulation and were simply unknown to most people
outside the circle of those interested in language and cultural matters.
Moreover, lists tended to be disorganised and sometimes not in alpha-
betical order, frequently making it a laborious task to search for partic-
ular items.5 In the 1950s, wordlists of the different terminology panels
1 1 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

were published separately, as the kamus kedokteran (medical dictionary),
kamus hukum (legal dictionary) and so on, but these also suffered from
poor distribution.
It was in schools that the language-planning bodies, being part of
the Department of Education and Culture, were able to have more
influence, being able to directly present their decisions, and so have an
impact on the moulding of the standard language. This was helped by
a leap in literacy between 1945 and 1966. A mass literacy drive,
launched by Sukarno, resulted in an increase in adult (over 15 years) lit-
eracy from 15–20 per cent in 1950 to 65 per cent in 1964.6
Nevertheless, their influence in the school system was hindered by the
fact that many teachers were poorly educated and lacked proficiency in
formal Indonesian.
C O M P O N E N T S  O F  P L A N N I N G
From the beginning, the goal of planning was always to develop a stan-
dard form of Indonesian to be an effective national language and the
sole official language. It would need to be an effective means of com-
municating modern concepts, as well as being the vehicle of education,
a unifying force throughout the nation and a symbol of both national
pride and national identity.
An official language is a language of government business, while a
national language is a symbol of national unity and identification. The
two are not necessarily the same thing, although a national language is
always an official language. Thus in Singapore Malay is the national lan-
guage, but there are four official languages: Malay, English, Mandarin
and Tamil. One of the notable successes in Indonesia has been the ease
with which Indonesian was established in both roles, despite the multi-
lingual nature of the country. In India, by comparison, attempts to
make Hindi the sole national language were not successful and fourteen
regional languages have official status in addition to Hindi and English.
To make Indonesian effective in both roles a considerable amount
of planning was necessary in all four components of language planning:
selection, acceptance, elaboration and codification.
Selection refers to the choosing of a particular language or variety
of a language to be developed. In Indonesia, Malay was selected as the
future national language, by acclamation at the Second Indonesian
Youth Congress in 1928, and earlier by the process of its increasing
importance, including its recognition as a second language in the
Volksraad in 1918.
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 1 9

Acceptance refers to recognition by the population of the variety
selected as an official language and symbol of national unity. The atti-
tude of the people is crucial because, if they feel no loyalty to the selected
variety, attempts to make it the national language will fail. Very little
effort was needed to encourage the Indonesian population to accept
Malay as the basis of the national language. Before independence, as
already mentioned, there was no opposition to its choice and since inde-
pendence Indonesians have had pride in their national language as a
symbol both of the nation and its unity. Nevertheless, despite their pride
in the national language and the prestige gained from mastery of the
standard variety, there is ambivalence towards it, with almost universal
resistance to using the standard or formal language in everyday situa-
tions (for reasons discussed on p. 141).
Elaboration refers to the development of the chosen variety so that
it can be used in new domains. This includes vocabulary expansion so
that it can be used for communicating about all areas of knowledge.
This is essential for any language intended to be used for purposes of
government, education, law and so on. Elaboration also refers to the
development of more complex sentence structure and discourse forms
to enhance powers of expression. In Indonesia, elaboration has been a
major part of language planning, having commenced formally with the
Komisi Bahasa in 1942. Malay literature of previous times used restricted
vocabulary and was used for limited purposes. The modern language
needed to be developed for use in such diverse domains as business let-
ters, scientific articles, advertisements, recipes and many other new
kinds of discourse. This required the development of discourse forms
and paragraph organisation based on Western conventions.7
Codification refers to standardising the selected variety, determining
in effect which forms will be regarded as ‘correct and proper’ usage.
Codification entails the production of an officially approved grammar
and dictionary, which then become regarded as the authority on correct
usage. This standard form then is the medium of instruction in educa-
tion and carries prestige, marking those who can use it as well educat-
ed. Codification also covers orthography; that is, a standard or official
writing and spelling system. In the case of Indonesian, codification is
still far from complete. The formal language is nowhere near as uniform
as the standard varieties of the major national languages of Europe, for
which more than 150 years of popular education has been a decisive fac-
tor. Nevertheless, given the historical background and the limited time
available, the progress of codification and elaboration has in some ways
1 2 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

been remarkable. Certainly, compared with informal varieties, which
vary considerably between different groups and places, the formal lan-
guage has become standardised to a significant extent, partly as a result
of codification resulting from language planning and instruction in
schools. Thus educated speakers from different regions will display far
less variation in their formal language than in their informal speech,
although there is evidence that colloquial varieties are converging under
influence of the Jakartan style, as discussed in Chapter 8. There has
been little emphasis on pronunciation in Indonesian language planning,
with people’s pronunciation tending to be influenced by their regional
language. However, television newsreaders, who are usually claimed not
to have any discernible accent, are frequently held up as good models.
Codification and elaboration have not entirely been a result of the
official planning processes. Informal processes, including policies in the
mass media, have also played a significant part in development of the
language, as discussed in Chapter 8.
D I G L O S S I A  A N D  T H E  L A N G U A G E  
S I T U AT I O N  I N  I N D O N E S I A
Language planning in Indonesia has always been concerned solely with
the formal language, as used in government business, law, the press and
education. There has been no interest among language planners in
influencing the various colloquial varieties of the language.
The Indonesian language exists in a diglossic state, with significantly
different ‘high’ and ‘low’ variants of the language. Charles Ferguson,
who first described the concept of diglossia in 1959, defines it as ‘a rel-
atively stable language situation in which … there is a very divergent,
highly codified superposed variety … which is learned largely by formal
education and is used for most written and formal spoken purposes but
is not used by any sector of the community for ordinary conversation’.8
He labelled this the high variety (abbreviated to H); the variety used in
everyday situations he called the low variety (abbreviated to L). Formal
Indonesian — the H variety in Indonesia — is the language of govern-
ment and administration and of formal situations (such as speeches, lec-
tures and writing). It is the language of the mass media (television and
radio, newspapers and magazines) and of most novels. It is the medium
of education at all levels and is expected to be mastered by educated
Indonesians. Formal Indonesian is learnt at school, most children having
little or no contact with it until they begin their education; proficiency
in it is thus a mark of a person’s level of education. The low variety, 
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 2 1

informal or colloquial Indonesian, is the language of everyday commu-
nication between Indonesians in all but formal situations. For an ever-
growing percentage of the population it is the language of the home,
their natural ‘mother tongue’, and thus accords with Ferguson’s defini-
tion of L in a diglossic society. For many Indonesians, particularly in rural
areas, the language of the home is one of the many regional languages
of Indonesia rather than, or as well as, informal Indonesian. For such
people, the linguistic situation is more complex, with informal
Indonesian used for communication with people from other ethnic
groups, sometimes alongside other, more local, lingua francas.
Formal Indonesian has been the subject of considerable study and
there have been numerous published descriptions of aspects of the
grammar. The language-planning authorities produce dictionaries and
grammars, sponsor research into the formal language, advise schools
and conduct campaigns in the press and on television for the use of
good language.
On the other hand, no study of the informal language has been
undertaken by Indonesians and the planning authorities have shown no
interest in the cultivation of this variety. The official grammar of
Indonesian, first published in 1988, includes no description of informal
varieties of the language. This accords with Ferguson’s observation that
in a diglossic situation there is a strong tradition of grammatical study
of the H form of the language while ‘descriptive and normative studies
of the L form are either non-existent or relatively recent and slight in
quantity’.9 There has also been very little research on colloquial lan-
guage from non-Indonesian linguists, although this began to change in
the late 1990s, with the appearance of a number of brief studies of the
Jakartan variety.10
The relationship between formal and informal varieties of
Indonesian does differ from that of the classic diglossic situation in one
noticeable respect. In the original conception of diglossia, the distinc-
tion between H and L is so clear-cut that the community assigns differ-
ent names to them (such as Katharevousa and Demotiki Greek, and
Schwyzertütsch and Standard German in Switzerland). Indonesians cer-
tainly recognise the differences between H and L forms; one writer has
remarked that they differ ‘to such an extent that an attempt to account
for both by a single unified approach would be extremely complex, if
not impossible’.11 However, H and L varieties of Indonesian are not
given distinct names. The H code is referred to by such terms as bahasa
resmi (official language), bahasa formal (formal language), bahasa baku
1 2 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

(standard language) and bahasa halus (refined language), while the L
variety is variously referred to as bahasa sehari-hari (daily language),
bahasa non-baku (non-standard language), bahasa percakapan (conver-
sational language), percakapan santai (relaxed conversation) and so on.
These are impressionistic labels only, used unsystematically as people
attempt to distinguish the types when the need arises. There are no offi-
cial names to differentiate them.
One reason for this failure to distinguish H and L Indonesian by dif-
ferent names is that there is no clear dividing line between them. While
the H and L varieties are associated with the most formal and informal
social situations, there are intermediate forms, associated with semi-
formal situations.
Formal Indonesian is confined to writing and official, impersonal
situations, in which the L variety rarely occurs. To the extent that it does
occur in formal situations it is used for a particular effect; this may be
humorous, perhaps to indicate that the user is being flippant or not seri-
ous, as in a witty aside during a television interview. While serious tele-
vision and radio programs, such as news, interviews on serious topics
and announcements, are in formal language, the informal variety may
be used in comedies and dramas, although frequently ‘soapies’ will have
the characters talking in a formal style that in real life would sound
unnaturally stilted. Almost all writing is in the formal language. Even in
most novels, characters speak formal Indonesian, much as characters in
English-language novels tend to use more formal language than people
do in real life (in both cases, most readers are not aware of anything
unusual, as they certainly would be if hearing such formal language spo-
ken in real life). In recent years, novels for young people have been
more realistic in the way they represent everyday speech and youth
magazines also now tend to have sections that use more colloquial lan-
guage. Television variety and entertainment programs from the late
1980s have also been prepared to use a lot more colloquial language.
Newspapers and magazines are more inclined to quote people using
colloquial language now, rather than rendering it into more formal style
as would previously have occurred. However, colloquial words and
phrases are usually italicised. This signals that they are inappropriate in
the context of formal writing and dissociates the publication from them.
In some cases, such quotes may also be ‘translated’ into formal language:
Kami sudah pasrah. Nggak tahu mau apa lagi … sekarang memang
semua ditanggung Sumber Waras. Tapi, abis gitu gimana (setelah itu
bagaimana) …?
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 2 3

TRANSLATION:
We are resigned to what happens. We don’t know what else to do
… now everything is in the hands of Sumber Waras [a hospital].
But, what will happen after that …?12
In the above passage, in which the mother of an injured student is
quoted, the colloquial words she uses are written in italics in the origi-
nal. The words abis gitu gimana (what about after that) are then
repeated in formal language in parentheses, although it is doubtful that
any readers would not know what the words mean. More commonly, it
is assumed that readers will understand, as with the word nggak in the
above passage, the colloquial word for ‘not’, which is italicised but not
provided with a formal ‘translation’.
Because formal Indonesian is acquired as part of the education
process, better educated people are likely to be much more proficient in
it than those who are uneducated or poorly educated. Hence profi-
ciency in formal language is a reflection of one’s level of education. As
is typical of diglossic situations, the formal H variety is the prestige form
of the language; one gains status by one’s ability to use it properly.
Lack of description of colloquial Indonesian results from its low sta-
tus in the eyes of the language planners. Suggestions to them that infor-
mal language should be studied usually meet with disdain. Any
willingness to give colloquial language the dignity of being studied and
described would appear to contradict their purpose of promoting the
formal language. Calls to use bahasa yang baik dan benar (good and
correct language) mainly refer to improving formal spoken and written
language; for many planners, there is a suggestion that formal (‘cor-
rect’) language is the only appropriate variety for any social situation.
The fact that formal Indonesian is taught and studied while infor-
mal varieties are not has resulted in a widespread mistaken assumption
that ‘Indonesian’ refers solely to the formal language, and that conse-
quently the language has no native speakers. In the words of one
Indonesian linguist: ‘The national language is considered a formal lan-
guage, to be used in schools or at official functions where a range of
ethnic groups is likely to be represented’.13 An Indonesian sociologist
has written:
Bahasa Indonesia is a product of language planning, engineering,
and Development programs par excellence. It does not evolve from
communal activities in the ordinary lives of its speakers. It has not
1 2 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

been a mother tongue to anyone. Speakers of Bahasa Indonesia
learn it from authorized institutions and professionals as a language
that their mothers do not speak.14
Despite such claims, an ever-increasing proportion of the
Indonesian people are native speakers of Indonesian, using it as the first
language of the home. The fact that the variety they use in the home is
colloquial and not formal Indonesian is, however, no reason not to
recognise it as Indonesian.
The development of diglossia in Indonesian was largely a 20th-
century phenomenon. Literary Malay long ago diverged from spoken
forms of the language, but was used in a very limited range of situations
and by very few people. Nevertheless, called High Malay or Riau Malay,
it was chosen as the basis for the language of education in the 19th cen-
tury. With the growth in education in the 20th century, written and for-
mal spoken language, under influence of European languages,
developed more elaborate sentence construction, a wider range of reg-
isters and a much larger vocabulary. Compared with literary Malay of
the 19th century, formal Indonesian by the middle of the 20th century
was strikingly developed, rich and varied. Nevertheless, it retained its
predecessor’s considerable differences from vernacular forms of the lan-
guage, resulting in diglossia. Had a form of Low Malay been chosen for
education, as had been argued by some Dutch officials, the situation
today would be significantly different.
C O N S E R V AT I V E S  V S  P R O G R E S S I V E S
Language planners in Indonesia after independence were never a homo-
geneous group of like-minded scholars. There were conservatives and
progressives and disagreements among them were often fierce and per-
sonal.15 Progressives consciously rebelled against the insistence on use
of older Malay-oriented rules by people whom they saw as rigid tradi-
tionalists and opposing forces often conducted heated debates in the
pages of the journals devoted to language matters.
Many school teachers and textbook writers consciously tried to cul-
tivate the language along the path of linguistic traditionalism and
rejected Dutch-influenced models. They were aligned to the philosophy
of Balai Pustaka and the school teachers of pre-war years in believing
that good usage should be based on Malay-oriented grammar. They
held that Indonesian writers should not slavishly follow Dutch models 
or simply borrow from Dutch when new words or expressions were
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 2 5

needed. They tended to oppose loan translations based on Dutch struc-
ture, such as tidak begitu sukar (not so difficult — Dutch niet zo
moelijk), berjalan kaki (go by foot — Dutch te voet gaan) and pada
umumnya (in general — Dutch over het algemeen). They argued for the
retention of perfectly good Malay structures, such as selekas-lekasnya (as
fast as possible) and others of the same pattern, instead of synonymous
forms, such as selekas mungkin, based on the Dutch model — in this
case, using mungkin (possible) to form ‘as fast as possible’, a loan trans-
lation of Dutch zo snel mogelijk). 
Among many other criticisms was the condemnation of excessive
reduplication of nouns to indicate plurality, clearly due to Dutch influ-
ence, reduplication in Malay having been more to indicate variety than
plurality. Conservatives claimed that such innovations were contrary to
the spirit of the Malay language and were a danger to Indonesian cul-
ture (just as they tended to see Western influences on other aspects of
Indonesian society and culture as bad). The fact that many such forms
are now very widely accepted attests to the failure of the conservatives
to halt the influence of Dutch on the development of the language.
While conservatives were fastidious and rigid, they were also con-
cerned with achieving simplicity and clarity in the use of the language,
which was far from always being the case with the progressives. Those
trained in Dutch wanted to liberalise Indonesian grammar to be effi-
cient and creative, but they frequently failed to achieve this. A genera-
tion whose schooling had been interrupted by war and revolution
lacked a sound education and many were not proficient in writing and
public speaking, either in Dutch or Indonesian. They have been criti-
cised for producing vague and carelessly constructed sentences lacking
clarity, their writings frequently containing confused and misleading
constructions and word usage. As one writer has put it, though with
some exaggeration: ‘Linguistic conservatism now was limited to the
four walls of classrooms while outside people used Indonesian in the
light of their linguistic whims, paying very little attention to rules,
idioms and good usage’.16 In 1956, Nur Sutan Iskandar expressed dis-
appointment with the rapid development of the language: ‘There are
many peculiarities in the use of words and sentence constructions
which only Western-educated intellectuals can grasp the meaning of.
As for the public at large they do not understand the language written
in this new style’.17
Commencing early in the 1950s, Radio Republik Indonesia carried
a language program that walked a middle path between the two sides in
1 2 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

the argument, giving guidance on correct usage and denouncing both
excessive borrowing from Dutch and also rigid traditionalism.
The Second Indonesian National Language Congress was held in
Medan in October 1954, under the patronage of Muhammad Yamin,
who was then Minister of Education and Culture. At the congress,
hostilities between conservatives and liberals were open, with con-
stant heated verbal exchanges. Conservatives denounced journalists
and many modern writers for undermining the teaching of
Indonesian in schools and for violating rules of grammar and ‘the
spirit of the language’.
The congress finally adopted a compromise resolution that
attempted to placate the conservatives by recognising Malay as the
basis of the language but, at the urging of progressives like writer
Achdiat Kartamihardja, another clause was added recognising the need
for progress: ‘The basis of the language is the Malay language adapted
and modified in accordance with its growth and development in soci-
ety’.18
It has been customary for the controversy to be seen as one between
progressive Javanese and conservative Sumatrans, mostly of the
Minangkabau ethnic group. Thus Dutch scholar CC Berg wrote in
1955 that, as a result of the decisions of the congress, the Sumatrans in
favour of adhering to the classical norms of Malay grammar would be
defeated by the Javanese, who did not feel bound to the traditional
form of the language. However, not all conservatives were Sumatran
and not all progressives were Javanese. Alisjahbana, a Sumatran who
played an important part at the congress, was an outspoken champion
of modernising Indonesian through acceptance of Western influence.
The success of such people in gaining acceptance for their views on the
need to modernise the language marks the Medan congress as an
important event in the modernising of the Indonesian language. Many
writers now felt released from the constraints of Classical Malay and
were more willing to experiment with language.
S P E L L I N G  R E F O R M
In 1959, a cultural agreement was signed with Malaya, which included
co-operation in language development. Negotiations began on a joint
spelling system for the two standard forms of Malay, to replace the sep-
arate systems in place until then, the Malay system, based on English
conventions, and the Indonesian system, based on Dutch conventions,
as modified by the Soewandi spelling reform of 1947.19 An agreement
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 2 7

was reached for the Melindo (a contraction of ‘Malaya’ and ‘Indonesia’)
spelling system, but, with the establishment of the Federation of
Malaysia in 1963 and the launching of Sukarno’s Confrontation cam-
paign against the new state, plans to introduce the new spelling and co-
operation in language planning were abandoned. Co-operation
between the two states was resumed in 1966 after the fall of Sukarno
and in 1967 a proposal for a new joint spelling was drafted. The final
step in the spelling reform came in 1972, when the Ejaan yang
Disempurnakan (Perfected Spelling) was introduced as a co-operative
venture with Malaysia. The new spelling was announced by President
Suharto on Independence Day, 17 August 1972.
Under the new system, differences in the Indonesian and Malaysian
spelling of consonants were removed. For Indonesian, this meant the
following changes:
SOEWANDI SPELLING
tj
dj
j
nj
sj
ch
PERFECTED SPELLING
c
j
y
ny
sy
kh
In part to make the language more receptive to European loan
words the new spelling also accepted a number of consonants occurring
only in borrowings as legitimate parts of the system, these being f, v, z,
kh (like the ‘ch’ sound in German Bach) and sy (like the ‘sh’ sound in
‘she’).
Once again, many people preferred to retain the older spelling in
their names. Thus a person whose name was spelt Djaja was very likely
to retain this rather than change it to Jaya. Names of places, however,
were changed; thus Djakarta became Jakarta.
T H E  P U S A T  B A H A S A
After the change of government in 1966, the Lembaga Bahasa dan
Budaya was placed under the Department of Education and Culture
and in 1969 it was reconstituted as the Lembaga Bahasa Nasional
(National Language Institute).
It was not until the early 1970s that the New Order government
of President Suharto began to pay serious attention to language plan-
ning. In his 1972 Independence Day speech, Suharto stated that the
building of the Indonesian language was a national responsibility and
linked good language with national development, calling for the use of
bahasa Indonesia yang baik dan benar (good and proper Indonesian),
a plea he repeated in Independence Day speeches in subsequent
years.20
1 2 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

The Lembaga Bahasa Nasional had been seen as suffering a great
shortage of Indonesian language specialists who could be entrusted with
the implementation of basic projects to develop and propagate the lan-
guage and at this time there was more study being carried out of a num-
ber of regional languages by linguistic scholars than of the national
language. The Second Development Plan, commenced in 1974, included
specific goals for language development. Funding for the institute and
for the promotion of the national language was increased eight-fold,
with attention to be given, among other things, to increasing staff num-
bers in the institute and to radio and television language programs aimed
at improving the public’s proficiency in the national language.21
The Lembaga Bahasa Nasional was restructured in 1974, making it
directly responsible to the Minister of Education and Culture and
greatly increasing its ability to undertake language study, development
and promotion. In 1975, it became the Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengem-
bangan Bahasa
(The Centre for Language Cultivation and
Development), commonly known as the Pusat Bahasa (Language
Centre). The abbreviated name became its official title in 2001.
The Pusat Bahasa, particularly from 1984 under its new, dynamic
director Anton Moeliono, was much more active than its predecessors,
concentrating its efforts both on pembinaan (cultivation) and pengem-
bangan (development).22 Cultivation referred to improving the pub-
lic’s use of Indonesian, through school education and through other
activities aimed at reaching the public and convincing people of the
importance of using ‘good and correct language’. In addition to
increasing users’ knowledge of the language, the development of a pos-
itive attitude to the national language was seen as fundamental to the
centre’s aims. Development referred to continued efforts to codify and
elaborate the language, particularly through the production of a new
dictionary and grammar. Underlying development was the assumption
that the language could not be left to find its own way, but that
progress must be consciously guided.
The work of the Pusat Bahasa has continued to the present. It also
carries out research on regional languages of Indonesia and sponsors
PhD students in study of both Indonesian and regional languages. In
the 1980s, the centre was successful in obtaining increased funding
and attracting support from overseas, such as from the British Council
and, in particular, the Dutch government. It has also continued the
work of its predecessors in conducting radio and television programs
on good usage.
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 2 9

A L I S J A H B A N A  V S  M O E L I O N O
Like Alisjahbana, Moeliono was a progressive, but differences in atti-
tude brought a certain amount of conflict between the camps they rep-
resented. The basic difference was that Moeliono wanted to base the
modern language on the old, but Alisjahbana wanted to throw out the
old and begin anew.
The language-planning bodies had generally tried to base their lex-
icographic decisions on suggestions from experts representing a variety
of disciplines, such as agriculture, law, education, economics and medi-
cine. From the beginning of the official coining of terms in 1942, there
had always been the question of where new terms should come from.
Frequently there was disagreement as different people had their own
preferences for Sanskrit, Arabic, European or local sources, although in
the early days overwhelmingly the source for coinings was Dutch. In
some fields, such as chemistry, Greek and Latin terms dominated, being
internationally accepted (including occurrence in Dutch, via which they
came).
Alisjahbana preferred European sources, especially where they were
already internationally accepted, since he saw this as allowing Indonesia
to participate more effectively in the international exchange of modern
ideas. Indonesian would thus be more ‘intertranslatable’ with other
modern languages and be an instrument for transforming Indonesian
society. In practice, there was inconsistency in Alisjahbana’s views. He
argued strongly for Western influence, but since the 1930s he had
pleaded in vain for the retention of traditional Malay phonological pat-
terns in order to preserve the Malay-based identity of Indonesian.23
Also, he did not oppose Malay as a source of borrowing, either by res-
urrecting older words and giving them modern meanings or making the
meanings of modern words more specific. Thus he wrote approvingly of
the decision by the Komisi Bahasa (of which he was a member) during
the Japanese period to confine the Malay word urat (vein, muscle,
sinew, tendon) specifically to the meaning ‘tendon’, with the word pem-
bulu (a long hollow passage) being assigned the meaning ‘blood vessel’
and a Javanese word otot being assigned the meaning ‘muscle’.24 These
became the accepted meanings for these words. Nevertheless, his first
choice was Western words, particularly if they were already internation-
ally recognised.
Unlike Alisjahbana, Moeliono preferred seeking solutions first in
the Malay language. If a suitable word for a needed concept could 
not be found in Malay, it should be sought in regional Indonesian 
1 3 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

languages. Borrowing from English should only be resorted to if these
other possibilities failed to fulfil the need. His position, and that of oth-
ers associated with the Pusat Bahasa, is in part a reaction to the indis-
criminate and unplanned adoption of a great many English words,
expressions and constructions by the Indonesian press and educated
public, even when perfectly good Indonesian words are available (as dis-
cussed in Chapter 9).
Moeliono sought archaic Malay words in older dictionaries and
‘updated’ their meanings to fill needs in the lexicon.25 Thus older cang-
gih, meaning ‘bothersome, carping’, was resurrected as ‘sophisticated’
and introduced in 1984, having immediate success with the public; adi
(superior) and kuasa (power) were combined as adi kuasa (super-
power) when a suitable term for this concept was needed. Moeliono
and others introduced a great many words into the modern language in
this way, sometimes replacing Western words that were not as yet real-
ly assimilated. Thus pantau, an archaic word for ‘see’, was introduced
to replace monitor; suku cadang, from suku (part) and cadang (some-
thing set aside), was introduced to replace onderdil (Dutch onderdeel),
meaning ‘spare part’; tayang (hold up to the light) was reintroduced as
‘present (a program on television)’; mantan, meaning ‘no longer used’
in the Besemah dialect of Sumatra, was introduced in the meaning ‘ex-
, former’. Many such words, resurrected or coined by Moeliono and
others as individual efforts, gained immediate acceptance by the commu-
nity and were soon in frequent use in the mass media, unlike most terms
issued from terminology committees, which have been far less fre-
quently adopted.
Alisjahbana and Moeliono were both progressives who were pas-
sionate about developing Indonesian to be both a dynamic language,
able to express all the concepts of the modern world, and a national lan-
guage, fully accepted with pride by the Indonesian people. The major
difference between them was that Alisjahbana was an internationalist
who rejected the past, while Moeliono was a nationalist who wanted to
build on the past.
Nevertheless, Alisjahbana was hostile to the work of the Pusat
Bahasa, especially in its failure to look solely to the West for its inspira-
tion, and in 1986 he called for it to be broken up into three sections:
one to concentrate on language teaching methodology, one to be
involved, along with Balai Pustaka, in translation activities, and one to
combine with planning authorities in Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei to
develop a single national language.
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 3 1

There was a swift and sensationalist reaction from the press to
Alisjahbana’s call, with the major Jakarta newspaper Kompas reporting
on its front page the call for the Pusat Bahasa to be abolished (diha-
pus).26 The Minister of Education and Culture, however, reacted with
a short statement to the effect that the language centre was ‘very
important and necessary’ and that language cultivation and develop-
ment was a top priority (prioritas utama).27 In his statement,
Alisjahbana criticised the terminology activities of the centre, particu-
larly its inability to distinguish between necessity and playing ‘lan-
guage games’, the lack of attention paid to whether or not new words
are used by the community, and the excess of purism in replacing
words borrowed from English with Sanskrit and Javanese words. He
also criticised the replacing of Western terms by archaic Malay words,
citing pantau for ‘monitor’ and canggih for ‘sophisticated’, men-
tioned above, on the grounds that the Malay terms were unnecessary
and ‘strange to the ear’ (terdengar tak biasa di telinga), even though
the new terms had been readily accepted by the public. It is extraor-
dinary that Alisjahbana would regard the Malay canggih as problem-
atic and not the quite foreign-sounding ‘sophisticated’. The answer
lies in the fact that he was ‘extremely hostile to anything from the
“old”’.28 He was obsessed with the internationalisation of the lan-
guage and viewed the replacing of Western terms as a threat to this
process.
C U L T I V AT I O N  A N D  D I S S E M I N AT I O N
One of the major difficulties that the Pusat Bahasa has always faced has
been with disseminating its work to the public. It is a problem that
faced its predecessors from the beginnings of language planning. As
early as 1954, Alisjahbana criticised the Lembaga Bahasa dan Budaya
(Institute for Language and Culture) for its inability to convey its mes-
sage to the public, saying that new terms were being hidden rather than
presented to the community. He pointed out that the Second
Indonesian National Language Congress, held in 1954, was a wasted
opportunity to publicise their work.29
Since then, terminology creators have displayed a consistent inabil-
ity to market their product successfully. They have lacked public rela-
tions expertise and failed to establish institutional links with the mass
media and even with the Department of Education and Culture.
Having only an advisory role, the Pusat Bahasa has no control over
implementation of its decisions. It publishes a bi-monthly newsletter on
1 3 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

word usage and points of grammar. The newsletter is in a rather drab
format, numbers containing such uninspiring mottoes as Bahasa
Indonesia adalah kekayaan rohani bangsa Indonesia (The Indonesian
language is the spiritual wealth of the Indonesian people).30 Due to
poor marketing, the newsletter is unlikely to reach many people. The
centre also publishes new terms and terminology guidelines for the mass
media, but with few links to the press the message is rarely listened to.
The media in general prefer to coin and borrow terms independently,
rather than adopting those of the Pusat Bahasa, which they frequently
consider outmoded or inappropriate.
The weekly television program Pembinaan bahasa Indonesia
(Building Indonesian), commenced by the Lembaga Bahasa Nasional in
the 1970s on TVRI, the sole television channel at that time, and con-
tinued by the Pusat Bahasa, presented an excellent opportunity for
communicating directly to the public. Unfortunately, it was always seen
as unimaginative and boring, consisting of ‘talking heads’ droning on
about the correct way to use particular words. The style was formal and
pedantic, lacking variation and creativity. Prepared and presented by
language planners rather than ‘personalities’ the show lacked any ele-
ment of entertainment and was perceived as mere lecturing. With the
opening of new television channels to rival TVRI in the late 1980s, the
program became even less appealing. Radio programs too were disap-
pointing, although more recently a weekly hour-long talk-back session
conducted by Anton Moeliono, has proved more lively, allowing inter-
action with the public.
Since 1980, there has been an official Bulan Bahasa (Language
Month) every October, during which the Pusat Bahasa obtains some
publicity in the mass media for its cause. In the early years, the campaign
for the use of ‘good and proper’ language gained quite a volume of
media attention (although a greater focus of attention was the Sumpah
Pemuda and its reinvented place in the history of the nationalist move-
ment — see p. 102). However, by the late 1980s this interest was on
the wane and its influence since then has not been felt widely in the
community.
The Third Indonesian National Language Congress was held in
1978, beginning a series of five-yearly congresses under the auspices of
the Pusat Bahasa. These attract many hundreds of participants from
around Indonesia, most of them involved in some way with Indonesian
language teaching at tertiary level. They also attract overseas researchers
and teachers of the language. The congresses have a high profile, with
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 3 3

much media coverage and a presidential reception. The Sixth
Indonesian National Language Congress in 1993 was addressed by no
fewer than seven cabinet ministers.
A great many papers are read at the congresses, often three or four
sessions running simultaneously over five days. Plenary sessions debate
important language issues and resolutions are passed.31 However, there
is a considerable amount of cynicism about what all this achieves. The
same language issues, usually relating to standardisation, tend to be put
on the agenda for successive congresses, without tangible results except
for the spelling reform of 1972. Without the authority to put resolu-
tions into effect and with little influence on those who might be in a
position to do so, the language planners have always been largely pow-
erless to implement resolutions, so that subsequent congress organisers
have found it necessary to reiterate the same policies.32
Furthermore, most resolutions have been of the vague, all-
encompassing ‘feel good’ type. Thus the decisions of the Fourth
Indonesian National Language Congress in 1983 included, under the
aims of language teaching: ‘to achieve a standard and accurate language
that is appropriate and efficient as a means of communication; to
achieve skill in the use of language as a means of communication and
knowledge’, and so on. Steps to be taken to achieve these aims includ-
ed: ‘to improve the quality of the teaching of Indonesian; to establish
national policy on the position and function of Indonesian as the medi-
um of education and teaching’, and so on.33 The fourth congress did
make the positive resolution to compile a descriptive reference grammar
and a comprehensive general dictionary. These were to be produced to
combat what delegates saw as ‘usage that does not reflect clear, logical
and systematic thinking, and unnecessary use of foreign terminology in
place of Indonesian words’.
It was only at the Fifth Indonesian National Language Congress in
1988 that the Pusat Bahasa could claim a significant achievement, with
the publication for presentation at the congress of the new standard
grammar Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia (Standard Grammar of
Indonesian) and dictionary Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia
(Comprehensive Indonesian Dictionary). Second editions of these
appeared in time for the sixth congress in 1993 and a third edition of
the grammar was presented at the seventh congress in 1998.34
Alisjahbana had long argued the necessity for a normative gram-
mar setting out the standard for good usage, attacking linguists for
their hands-off approach and avoidance of value judgments.35 He
1 3 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

declared that such an attitude, while justified in the West, where highly
standardised official languages had long existed, was unacceptable for
Indonesia where, because of the multilingual nature of society, a stan-
dardised form of national language was essential for national unity. To
that end, a comprehensive normative grammar was essential, to
replace his own modest work. The new grammar was a considerable
advance on that of Alisjahbana, which had been the most widely used
grammar in education circles. Tata Bahasa Baku makes it clear that
bahasa baku (standard language) is to be equated with the variety of
language spoken and written in formal situations by educated speak-
ers (the diglossic H) and its description is confined entirely to this.
While it recognises that there are many varieties of Indonesian, those
other than the variety it describes are labelled non-standard. It thus
recognises nothing approximating a standard variety of informal lan-
guage.
Tata Bahasa Baku underwent considerable revision in the follow-
ing two editions, although it is doubtful if changes enhanced the qual-
ity of the work overall. Although the compilers aimed at producing a
comprehensive and authoritative statement of Standard Indonesian, in
many ways Tata Bahasa Baku is a disappointing effort at a model of
standard usage. For one thing, the description of a great many aspects
of grammar is too brief and even frequently superficial. There seems to
have been a subconscious attitude among the compilers that as
Indonesians know the details of their language only broad outlines
need be given.
As an example, the transitive verbal suffixes -kan and -i cause much
difficulty for Indonesians; there is considerable uncertainty about how
to use them, even among well-educated speakers, because they rarely
occur in everyday (L) varieties of the language (see p. 121).
Consequently this is an area of grammar that deserves detailed discus-
sion for the guidance of the public. Yet Tata Bahasa Baku gives the two
suffixes just six pages (an improvement on the three pages in
Alisjahbana’s grammar), increasing to eight pages in the third edition.
By contrast, an English-language description of Indonesian published in
1996, in a far from exhaustive description, devotes 29 pages to the same
suffixes.36 There is very little in Tata Bahasa Baku’s discussion to inform
users on the various functions of these suffixes and the structures in
which they occur. The same is true of a great many other areas of mor-
phology and syntax.
The grammar entirely ignores inconsistencies and irregularities,
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 3 5

the description of which is such an important responsibility of such
a work, and thereby fails to contribute to codification. It is also
marred by a great deal of verbose and frequently vague discussion
about the language at the expense of clear description, leading one
writer to refer to parts of the second and third editions as ‘empty,
uninformative prattle’.37 Anton Moeliono, one of the major figures
in the designing and production of the grammar, has stated:
‘Indonesian grammar has recently been officially codified’.38 This is
revealing about the lack of awareness among the language planners
of the enormous deficiencies in the work, as well as their failure to
recognise that codification requires more than mere statements in a
book.
The dictionary Kamus Besar is, in a number of ways, a consider-
able advance on the earlier dictionary Kamus Umum (see p. 161),
updating the language and containing many thousands of new
entries. The compilation of a dictionary of Standard Indonesian pre-
sented problems that lexicographers of English do not have. There is,
for instance, considerably more disagreement about the meanings of
many words in Indonesian than occurs among speakers of Standard
English. There is also much variation in the use of affixed forms; for
instance, of suffixes -kan and -i (an area in which Tata Bahasa Baku
should have offered guidance, as already mentioned). The compilers
of Kamus Besar must therefore have been under considerable pres-
sure in determining which forms they would regard as standard and
what meanings they would assign. Unfortunately, the dictionary
gives no indication that such problems occur, nor the basis on which
the compilers made their decisions.
One deficiency far too common in Kamus Besar is the defining of
terms simply by citing synonyms, resulting in uninformative circular-
ity. ‘Not only does the practice obscure the shades of meaning which
in reality distinguish these “synonyms”, it also creates vicious circles:
strings of “synonyms” which begin and end with the same entry’.39
Moreover, in numerous cases the cited synonym is itself not listed. In
one of many instances, mengaruniakan (give a gift — base karunia)
merely refers the user to the synonym menganugerahkan (base
anugerah), a form that does not occur in the dictionary.
Moeliono has stated that ‘The compiling of dictionaries is impor-
tant to standardisation of the lexicon’.40 But various inadequacies in
definitions of entries in the official dictionary raise strong doubts
about the contribution it will make to standardising the language.
1 3 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

L A N G U A G E  P R O B L E M S  I N  T H E  
E D U C AT I O N  S Y S T E M
One of the best channels for dissemination of ‘good and proper’ lan-
guage and for developing a standard form of the language has lain in the
education system, in which formal Indonesian is both a compulsory
subject and the medium of instruction. However, there have been a
number of factors severely hampering exploitation of this opportunity.
First, knowledge of Standard Indonesian among teachers has not
been universally good. The change from pre-war elite education to mass
education after independence, despite its many benefits, resulted in a
substantial drop in quality. Many teachers in the post-war period were
neither proficient speakers of the language nor well trained to teach and
this problem has never been fully overcome. The claim was made in
1994 that 30 per cent of teachers at primary and secondary levels were
not qualified to teach Indonesian.41
Secondly, while the influence of planners on the education system
has been greater than their influence on the press (discussed in Chapter
8), it has suffered through lack of comprehensive reference materials
suitable for school use. Before 1988, the major grammar text used was
Alisjahbana’s Tatabahasa Baru (New Grammar), first published in
1949. Although this was little more than a brief sketch, it was held in
high regard by Indonesian linguists, one writing, ‘In a time of the com-
plete absence of good texts on Indonesian we were fortunate to have
the Tatabahasa as a concrete guide to teachers, students, and the rest of
the public’.42 Anton Moeliono has written that, ‘To most teachers this
was the grammar book that had shaped their competence and their
methods of teaching’.43 The cynic could respond that it is no wonder
their competence was so poor. The publication of the official descriptive
grammar Tata Bahasa Baku in 1988 did little to improve the situation,
offering little in the way of the clear, detailed information and advice
needed by teachers.
Thirdly, language teaching in schools has tended to concentrate on
the learning of grammar rules, somewhat similar to the ‘dos and don’ts’
of traditional English grammar teaching, with an almost complete
absence of attention to the acquisition of communication skills, often
having a stultifying effect on students’ competence and interest.
Although most children are exposed to formal Indonesian only on
entering school, the problem of using the language as a medium of
instruction has not been addressed and principles of second language
acquisition have played little part in teaching the language. Most 
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 3 7

students get little opportunity during their education to develop func-
tional language ability and the system is perpetuated as teachers con-
tinue to teach the way they were taught.
As a result of unimaginative language teaching, students tend to
regard classes as boring and the language as stiff and uninteresting, a
point made by Alisjahbana as early as 1955.44 One educationist (also
Catholic priest, writer and architect), YB Mangunwijaya, who died in
1998, founded his own schools, stating that he did so because he had
given up hope of reform in the public system, which did not teach love
and care of language and reading. Further, many millions of children in
Indonesia have had no opportunity for a full education and many
receive no education at all. The situation was severely worsened by the
financial crisis of 1997 and subsequent social upheaval and, by the end
of the century, the percentage of children going without any education
had risen sharply. Such children have next to no opportunity to acquire
proficiency in formal language.
Criticism of the education system and poor language teaching con-
tinues. Improved curricula for language teaching have been developed,
especially since the early 1990s, but application of the guidelines to
classroom practice has usually been deficient, with many teachers lack-
ing the skills to interpret the text of the syllabus. Nevertheless, there
have been some promising changes from the late 1990s, with some
teachers introducing more imaginative courses, so that from early pri-
mary school pupils get the opportunity to hear and use expressive lan-
guage, with the prospect that their interest in language, and hence their
competence, will be enhanced.45
The language ability of university staff and students is also fre-
quently deplored. One Australian academic wrote in 1974 that ‘a read-
ing of student or even staff papers from many university faculties in
Indonesia shows that there is still a casual attitude towards precise
expression’.46 Twenty-six years later, at a conference in July 2000,
speakers were still criticising the lack of ability among university staff
and students in expressing themselves in precise Indonesian. A study of
the language competence of lecturers at one university found lack of
clarity, directness and precision in writing and poor ability to adhere to
the rules of grammar and to write in well-formed sentences.47
The problems with the education system have led to a large per-
centage of the population being far from competent speakers and writ-
ers of the formal language. Along with attempts to disseminate bahasa
yang baik dan benar (good and correct language) are regular complaints
1 3 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

by language planners and social commentators that most people are
poor users of the language, with a limited command of registers, and a
lack of desire to read and develop language skills. Every October, in
Language Month, there appear articles in the media decrying the
poverty of language skills and declaring the obligation of every citizen
to develop awareness of good language. Even among supposedly well-
educated people, poor ability in expression is apparent when they write
or speak in public.
B A H A S A  P E J A B A T
One prominent group that has drawn constant criticism for poor pub-
lic speaking is higher officials, including government ministers. The
speech of many high government officials has always been characterised
by poorly formed sentences, limited and incorrectly used vocabulary,
and long-winded, vague constructions in place of concise, accurate
speech. President Suharto was not a good speaker of Indonesian
(despite his Independence Day speeches — the products of speech writ-
ers — calling for the public to improve their language) and carried over
many features of his native Javanese into Indonesian. The most perva-
sive and most commented on features have been his pronunciation of
the verbal suffix -kan as -ken, as in Javanese, with some other charac-
teristics being excessive use of the suffix -nya and the preposition dari-
pada. These mannerisms were retained by many prominent Javanese,
including cabinet ministers, and imitated by sycophants in high public
positions, who were frequently heard and seen on television. Although
they were an elite, their speech was treated with disdain by language
purists. Without mentioning the president or other prominent people,
writers on such issues condemned incorrect pronunciation and usage.
University lecturers, social commentators, writers of letters to the edi-
tor in newspapers, and others sarcastically refer to this style as bahasa
pejabat (officialese — literally ‘language of officials’).
At the Seventh Indonesian National Language Congress, in
October 1998, participants openly derided this style, more than they
would have previously dared during the Suharto period, and called for
officials to improve their competence in the language, stating that peo-
ple in prominent positions should be models of good usage. One con-
cern of the planners has been that, if the elite in society display little
attention to their own language usage, the public will see little point in
doing better. However, despite condemnation over many years, officials
have shown little inclination to improve their habits; as one social 
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 3 9

commentator put it: ‘Occupying the paramount position in the politi-
cal life of the nation-state, these officials can simply ignore the criti-
cism’.48 The fact is that changing their habits would not be an easy task;
these officials, including Suharto (President until 1998), have poor lan-
guage skills, a legacy of their inadequate language education, and would
have to make a significant effort to improve. In reporting such officials
verbatim, newspapers often retain their errors, thereby helping to
spread the use of ‘officialese’.
Government officials are also prominent among those who are
inclined to incorporate an excessive amount of English into their
speech, often referred to as bahasa gado-gado (mixed up language). This
tendency is much condemned by language planners and other purists,
especially when the English used is either inappropriate or incorrect.
E L I T E  L A N G U A G E  A N D  A L I E N AT I O N
Calls for good language have been linked to the New Order’s develop-
ment plans (as mentioned on p. 128). Indonesian has been seen as an
essential element in national unity and in the government’s task of com-
municating its message to the nation. The New Order government
viewed the standardisation, modernisation and intellectualisation of the
language to enable innovation and communication of information as a
necessary component of economic development. In his Independence
Day speech in 1973, Suharto stated: ‘Correct and orderly language
reflects a way of thinking, attitudes, and behaviour which are also cor-
rect and orderly. And this orderliness is the main key for the success of
the creation and development of the nation’.49 In 1983, legislation was
passed stating that the language must be created, developed and used
appropriately and correctly.50 It is doubtful if such legislation actually
achieved anything, although it did reaffirm the government’s ideologi-
cal stand on the important role of language in development. The eleva-
tion of the Sumpah Pemuda in the 1980s to a position of high national
importance (see p. 102) was also in line with the government’s
Pembangunan (Development) ideology, emphasising national stability
and discipline.51
Some critics have seen the activities of the Pusat Bahasa as part of
New Order attempts to manipulate the language to their own ends.
One consistent critic of the language centre’s and the government’s
program, Ariel Heryanto, has called the national language essentially
elite-centred, stating that ‘the vast majority of the population, which
forms the lower strata of the social hierarchy, is practically excluded, or
1 4 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

at best marginalised, from the dynamic productive process of legitimate
Indonesian’.52 It is certainly true that development of the language has
not been matched by a rise in general education levels, and this has con-
tributed to alienation of large sections of the community from the for-
mal language.
This leads to the issue of attitudes to the national language. There
appears to be a contradiction in the attitude of many people, who feel
both pride in Indonesian as the national language and at the same time
view it as something remote from their own lives and beyond their abil-
ity to master.
On the one hand, there is considerable prestige attached to master-
ing formal Indonesian. Proficiency is a sign of a good education and
therefore of a certain elite position in society. There is also widespread
pride in Indonesian as the national language and symbol of national
unity. Indonesians often show pride in having their own language,
unlike many Asian countries that have not successfully established a sin-
gle indigenous national language and, as a consequence, have needed to
recognise English as an official language, such as India, Singapore, the
Philippines, and Malaysia. The teaching of Indonesian in other coun-
tries is of considerable interest and is reported on in the media from
time to time.
On the other hand, many people feel alienated from the high form
of the language and have no inclination to participate in efforts to cul-
tivate the language. Formal Indonesian is acquired as part of the edu-
cation process, the usual situation where there is diglossia. Those who
do not achieve well in education — and many millions have little oppor-
tunity to acquire a good education — view it as something for the elite,
beyond their own expectations. Those who do have the opportunity for
schooling nevertheless often fail to develop proficiency, especially in
writing, due in part to the method of teaching, especially the lack of
emphasis on communication skills.
A feeling that ‘good and correct language’ is beyond reach is there-
fore common. As a consequence, there is little emotional attachment to
it or motivation to improve competence; those who have tried to ‘win
the hearts and minds’ of the community have, on the whole, failed to
do so. One prominent Indonesian linguistics scholar, Harimurti
Kridalaksana, has placed the blame for the situation on the attitude in
the education system that standard (formal) language is the only variety
deserving positive evaluation. He has stated that there should be a more
positive view of non-standard forms of the language, calling for the
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 4 1

claim that formal language is applicable in all situations to be done away
with. Instead, it should be acknowledged that it has limited functions,
being complementary to colloquial speech. Unless this is done, the
common attitude among school students that ‘it is something impracti-
cal which has to be learnt by heart just to get a certificate, will not
change’.53
T H E  A D V I C E  I N D U S T R Y
Despite the fact that many people are indifferent to ‘good and cor-
rect’ language, there is nevertheless a considerable population who
wish to be able to use the language correctly on the right occasions,
often because they perceive this as enhancing employment prospects.
This has led to the growth of a sizeable advice industry, as people
seek rulings and guidance on the correct and appropriate use of lan-
guage. Many of the advice givers are associated with the Pusat
Bahasa, principal among them being Yus Badudu, well known from
his weekly television program which began in 1977. He has also been
prolific in print. His column in the popular magazine Intisari dealt
with particular issues and answered readers’ questions and was repub-
lished in booklet form in the Inilah bahasa Indonesia yang benar
(This is correct Indonesian) series, beginning in 1983. In the 1990s,
Badadu produced another series, Membina bahasa Indonesia baku
(Building standard Indonesian), an expansion of advice on good
usage given in his weekly television session, as well as other series of
booklets. Numerous others have published in similar fashion, all
attesting to the continuing demand for such advice. Among other
things, these works deal with questions of spelling, pronunciation
and word usage. They frequently discuss salah kaprah, errors con-
demned by purists but which are so common that most people think
they are correct usage.
The advice given to the public reveals a fair amount of disagreement
among the specialists on just what is acceptable as good usage. For
instance, some, including the compilers of the standard grammar Tata
Bahasa Baku, allow the copula adalah to occur before an adjective, as
in Setiap orang adalah penting (Every person is important). Other com-
mentators strictly rule this out, allowing it only before nouns, as in Dia
adalah raja (He is the king).54 Some, again including Tata Bahasa
Baku, allow the benefactive suffix -kan to occur on a verb whose object
is the patient, as in Ida membelikan buku untuk adiknya (Ida bought a
book for her brother). Others state that this is ungrammatical, -kan only
1 4 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

being permitted if the object identifies the beneficiary, as in Ida mem-
belikan adiknya buku (Ida bought her brother a book).55
There are numerous such differences occurring in popular gram-
mars and publications of the advice industry. They reveal a certain lack
of consensus among grammarians and teachers as to what is standard
and reflect differences in actual usage among educated speakers. Those
seeking authoritative rulings on such matters must regret the failure of
the compilers of the standard grammar Tata Bahasa Baku to give clear
and detailed direction on the areas of uncertainty. Nevertheless, it
would be wrong to imagine that there is great conflict on these matters
among planners and advice givers; by and large, their message is the
same.
L A N G U A G E
P L A N N I N G • 1 4 3

Many developments in the language since independence have resulted
from factors other than the activities of the official language-planning
bodies. Some individuals have been influential. In particular, Sukarno,
the first president, was a powerful force and deserves separate consider-
ation. The mass media have been little influenced by the planners and
have played a significant role in the developments occurring in the lan-
guage. One notable development has been the excessive use of
acronyms and abbreviations for which the press, along with government
officials and the military, have largely been responsible. Acronyms and
related forms are given separate consideration below. Finally, there has
been the influence of other languages, both regional and foreign, much
of it against the wishes of the planners. The strongest influence in recent
decades has been from English and this is considered separately in
Chapter 9.
T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  S U K A R N O
For much of the 1950s, Sukarno lacked formal political power and
had to rely a great deal on his unique skills as an orator to convey his
political ideas to the nation.1 As an orator he was unsurpassed in
Indonesia and was a master at manipulating the public. Almost all lan-
guage teachers and language cultivators thought his language was
ungrammatical and verbose; he departed from the traditional Malay
style, breaking rules of grammar and using words incorrectly. But his
language was also vigorous, dynamic and flexible, something the peo-
ple could respond to. He had the habit of throwing foreign and
Javanese words and expressions into his speeches and writings — he
8
B E Y O N D  P L A N N I N G :  
O T H E R  I N F L U E N C E S  O N  
T H E  L A N G U A G E

was an excellent polyglot — oblivious to whether or not his audience
understood. 
Even when his audience did not understand, his speeches excited
them. He used powerful words, like menghantam (strike, pound) and
menggempur (smash, demolish), and provocative and stirring phrases,
like jiwa revolusi (the soul of the revolution) and negara mulia (the glo-
rious state). He used impressive-sounding cries and catch phrases, like
bintang yang menari berjingklak-jingklak, meaning ‘the joyfully danc-
ing star (of freedom)’, and picked up euphonious snatches from other
languages, such as Italian (vivere pericoloso for ‘living dangerously’)2 and
French (socialisme    la Indonesia). In this way, he projected an image of
revolutionary zeal and dynamism, which at the same time made his
speeches more lively and memorable. His words have been called instru-
ments of power. For instance, he used active voice constructions much
more than most Indonesian writers; in his Independence Day speech on
17 August 1955, entitled Tetap terbanglah, rajawali (Keep flying, O
powerful eagle — rajawali being the name of a particular kind of large
eagle, chosen for its evocation of power), by one count he used just four
passive verbs, in marked contrast to most Indonesian writers, who use a
much greater proportion of passive constructions.3
Following Sukarno’s assumption of full power in the late 1950s
under the policy of Guided Democracy, he continued his charismatic
style in speeches and writings, using slogans and catchcries to enhance
his appeal to the people, despite the economic hardship his policies were
causing the nation. By breaking many of the accepted rules of tradi-
tional School Malay grammar, Sukarno helped form a more modern,
Western style of language, as in the greater use of active voice. In par-
ticular, his style had a strong influence on the language of the press.
He and his followers created a great number of acronyms, along
with word blends and abbreviations, beginning a trend that continues
today, as discussed in the next section.
A C R O N Y M S  A N D  O T H E R  A B B R E V I AT I O N S
Acronyms and blends have played a big part in the Indonesian language
since at least the 1950s.4 An acronym is a word formed from the first
letters of other words. The process is not unknown in English; ‘radar’
is an acronym formed from ‘radio detecting and ranging’. Blends are
words formed from parts of other words, such as ‘motel’ from ‘motor
hotel’. Both processes have become prominent characteristics of mod-
ern language usage in Indonesian. An example of an acronym is ABRI,
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 4 5
a`

standing for Angkatan Bersenjata Republic Indonesia (Indonesian
Armed Forces). Some acronyms are usually spelt, as in this example,
with capitals but are pronounced as single words. Initial letters are,
however, pronounced separately if their juxtaposition does not allow for
easy pronunciation as a word. Thus the initials PKI, standing for Partai
Komunis Indonesia (Indonesian Communist Party), are pronounced
separately (pe-ka-i). Indonesians have shown great ingenuity in select-
ing letters from words in phrases to come up with easily pronounceable
blends. Thus rudal (guided missile) is from peluru (bullet) and kendali
(reined, controlled).
Acronyms and blends are so common that journalists and commen-
tators often do not bother to first mention what they stand for. No
Indonesian needs to be reminded what ABRI and PKI stand for. But
there is such a profusion of forms that frequently many if not most peo-
ple do not know what is being referred to. Letters to the editor in news-
papers frequently complain of the profusion of acronyms occurring in
the press without explanation, readers presumably being expected to
know what they mean. There are even articles in newspapers and mag-
azines on the matter, but it does not seem to deter journalists from
using such forms. Since the 1960s, numerous booklets have been pub-
lished listing abbreviations and their meanings, but these soon go out
of date.
Many creations last for just a brief period before disappearing, drop-
ping quickly out of use as the bodies or concepts they refer to disappear.
Thus in the mid-1980s sidak frequently occurred in the press, standing
for inspeksi mendadak (sudden inspection). It dropped out of use when
the minister who became notorious for making such unannounced
inspections of factories lost his job. On the other hand, many have
become accepted in the language as words in their own right, such as:
bemo (from becak bermotor)
motorised becak (pedicab)
iptek (from ilmu pengetahuan 
science and technology
dan teknologi)
puskesmas (from pusat 
community health centre
kesehatan masyarakat)
tapol (from tahanan politik)
political detainee
‘Airport’ is bandar udara, often abbreviated to bandara. Journalists
have been known to be confused into thinking that this is not an abbre-
viation and have given the redundant form bandara udara (literally 
‘air air-port’). 
1 4 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Some acronyms are used as euphemisms. TKI stands for tenaga
kerja
Indonesia (Indonesian worker), referring specifically to
Indonesians who take low-paid jobs, either legally or illegally, in other
countries. WNI is warga negara Indonesia (Indonesian citizen), but is
usually code for Indonesian Chinese, while WTS, from wanita tuna
susila (woman without morals), is a prostitute.
There is simply no limit to what names can be abbreviated and in
what ways. In the late 1950s, ballet depicting episodes from the Hindu
epics and based on a synthesis of Western and Javanese dancing-cum-
drama was developed and named sendratari for seni drama dan tari
(art of drama and dance). Pemilu is an abbreviation for pemilihan
umum (general election). Tilang is a traffic ticket, from bukti pelang-
garan (lalu lintas), meaning ‘proof of violation (of traffic regulations)’.
It has also become a verb base, so ditilang means ‘to be given a traffic
ticket’.
Sukarno was fond of creating politically meaningful blends in the
1950s and 1960s, such as berdikari (from berdiri di atas kaki sendiri),
meaning ‘to be independent’ (literally ‘to stand on one’s own feet’),
and nekolim (for neo-kolonialisme dan imperialisme), meaning ‘neo-
colonialism and imperialism’.
In the early 1960s, Indonesia held the Ganefo Games, a blend based
on the English ‘Games of the New Emerging Forces’. Abbreviations
are frequently thought up for particular events, such as Gestapu for
Gerakan September Tiga
Puluh
(The thirtieth of September
Movement), referring to the failed coup of 30 September 1965. This
example shows a typical, if rather more imaginative than usual, attempt
to make a link to something else, in this case associating the conspira-
tors with the dreaded Gestapo; the creator even reversed the normal
order of day plus month to achieve the effect.5 A later variant for the
same event was G30S PKI, for Gerakan 30 September (30 September
Movement), but adding the initials of the Indonesian Communist Party
to explicitly link them to the event. Soon after taking power in 1966,
Suharto was given the nickname Supersemar, suggesting he was a super
version of the wise wayang character Semar, the name deriving from
Surat Perintah Sebelas Maret, the ‘Eleventh of March Instruction’, by
which Suharto manoeuvred to take power from Sukarno.
Public and military offices have always been a popular area for
abbreviation. The Foreign Minister is Menlu (Menteri luar Negeri),
Menko Ekuin stands for Menteri Koordinator Bidang Ekonomi dan
Industri (Coordinating Minister for Economic and Industrial Affairs).
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 4 7

The Commander of the Armed Forces is Pangab, for Panglima
Angkatan Bersenjata. Military ranks are rarely given in full, either in
the press or in speech, abbreviations such as letkol for letnan kolonel
(lieutenant colonel) and brigjen for brigadir jenderal (brigadier gen-
eral) occurring instead. Abbreviations can appear ludicrously long,
such as MayJen TNI Syamsul Ma’arif, Kapuspen Hankam ABRI, for
Mayor Jenderal Tentara Nasional Indonesia, Syamsul Ma’arif, Kepala
Pusat Penerangan, Pertahanan dan Keamanan Angkatan Bersenjata
Republik Indonesia (Army Major General Syamsul Ma’arif, Head of
the Information Centre, Defence and Security, the Armed Forces of
the Republic of Indonesia), or Markas Brimob Polda Kalbar for
Markas Brigade Mobil Polisi
Daerah Kalimantan
Barat
(Headquarters of the West Kalimantan Regional Police Mobile
Brigade). Province names are also usually abbreviated, so Sulawesi
Utara (North Sulawesi) becomes Sulut, Sumatera Selatan (South
Sumatra) becomes Sumsel, Jawa Timur (East Java) becomes Jatim.
The greater Jakarta area has come to be generally referred to in offi-
cial statements and the press as Jabotabek, a blend from the name
Jakarta and the names of outer regions in the various directions:
Jakarta Bogor Tangerang Bekasi.
Sometimes abbreviations change. The Department of Education
and Culture was long abbreviated to Dep P & K, for Departemen
Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan. In the 1980s, this changed, to meet
the desire of a new minister, to the abbreviation DepDikBud for
Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayan, but later changed back,
presumably because a subsequent minister preferred the earlier
abbreviation.
In the Suharto era, the mass media were unable to explicitly refer
to ethnic and religious conflicts or tensions, having to comment on
any such occurrence, if at all, as an instance of SARA, an acronym for
suku (ethnic group), agama (religion), ras (race) and antargolongan
(inter-group matters). Every social and political development gives
rise to new creations. The 1997 financial crisis and the subsequent
political upheaval produced krismon for krisis moniter (monetary cri-
sis) and there was constant discussion of sembako, for ‘the nine basic
commodities’ or sembilan bahan pokok. The initials KKN, for korup-
si, kolusi dan nepotisme, became so commonly used by commentators
and the press from late 1998 onwards that it is doubtful if anyone was
unaware of the meaning.
Many organisations have their own ‘in-house’ acronyms and word
1 4 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

blends, familiar only to people within the organisation. Thus universi-
ties have such forms as pudek for pembantu dekan (assistant dean),
menwa for resimen mahasiswa (student regiment) and OSPEK for ori-
entasi studi dan pengenalan kampus (study orientation and campus
familiarisation — essentially a euphemism for initiation rites).
Indonesians are frequently amused or frustrated by the proliferation
of such forms in the press and the difficulty in understanding them.
Irreverent and facetious versions of some politically sensitive abbrevia-
tions regularly circulate. One joke making the rounds in the early 1990s
was a play on Supersemar, referred to above. In reference to the busi-
ness dealings of President Suharto and his cronies, it was given the
meaning sudah persis seperti Marcos (It’s already exactly like (under)
Marcos), associating their activities to those of the disgraced Philippines
president.6 In mid-2000, on suggestions that President Abdurrahman
Wahid should resign at the August meeting of the People’s Consultative
Assembly, wags referred to his nickname Gus Dur as meaning Agustus
mundur (retire in August). 
Preposterous acronyms and blends are regularly made up. The
respected Jakarta daily Kompas some years ago reported a commentator
criticising the excesses of abbreviations by coming up with mas adam
yang berdasi, supposedly deriving from masyarakat adil makmur yang
berdasar Pancasila (just and prosperous society based on Pancasila),
but actually meaning ‘older brother Adam who is wearing a tie’.7 The
same article complained that full forms are rarely given, so that often
people do not know what the reduced form means, making the user
sound like he is speaking Vietnamese. The view expressed in the article
that ‘culturally it is not a good development’ would receive the full sup-
port of the language planners and most members of the public. Yet this
seems to do nothing to discourage officials, the military and journalists
from creating and using such forms; the same complaints over 40 years
have had no apparent effect.
T H E  M A S S  M E D I A
The mainstream press, along with radio and television, have had a con-
siderable influence on language usage in society, in addition to having
been employed extensively by the Suharto government in its
Development program. In 1964, there was a vigorous press, with more
than 600 daily and weekly publications. Numbers declined with the
establishment of the New Order, but this was followed by a boom 
in the 1980s. The length of newspapers also expanded, with the 
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 4 9

introduction of international, regional and sports news, features and
opinion sections and access to international sources for news. Sales of
daily and weekly newspapers rose to a total of more than ten million
copies by 1992. At that time, the prestigious Jakarta daily Kompas sold
more than half a million copies per day, with an estimated three million
readers.8 With liberalisation following the fall of the Suharto govern-
ment in the late 1990s, there was a huge leap in the number of news-
papers and magazines. One source reported the appearance of 2000
new publications in 1999 alone, with the number of journalists leaping
to 20000 from 8000 just two years earlier.9
The language-planning and terminology authorities have recog-
nised the importance of the mass media in the development and culti-
vation of the language and consequently of the importance of forging
links with the media. They have called for every newspaper to have a
language editor, to ensure that the organ is a model of good and effec-
tive language by implementing standard grammar and terminology.
Nevertheless, while quality papers show an interest in maintaining stan-
dards, and sometimes contain columns on language matters, communi-
cations between them and the language planners have in general been
weak.
Newspapers like Kompas and news magazines like Tempo are serious
about the quality of their language, but have rarely taken note of ter-
minology guides. Instead, they tend to create their own terms and make
stylistic innovations when they feel the need and many of their creations
enter general usage, irrespective of the wishes of the language planners.
There is often a feeling among news people that products of the Pusat
Bahasa are inappropriate or semantically unsound.10 An example of this
is the choice of komputer for ‘computer’, rather than the Pusat Bahasa’s
proposal apurwa, a term derived from Sanskrit, which completely failed
to gain acceptance. News people rarely have the time for elaborate lan-
guage or for finding out what the terminology creators suggest for a
particular English word or for a new concept. This has led to much
‘spontaneous’, rather than ‘planned’ borrowing,11 not only among
journalists but among the educated public, as seen in letters to the edi-
tor in newspapers. In particular, the press has played an enormous part
in the entry of a great number of English terms and expressions into the
language (see p. 177), much to the chagrin of the language planners.
The planners, through their inability to have more than a minimal influ-
ence on the language of the press, have missed an excellent opportuni-
ty to foster public acceptance of ‘good and correct language’.
1 5 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

New words can catch on with amazing speed if they find favour with
the mass media. A rarely used word may suddenly appear repeatedly in
newspapers, often for no apparent reason other than being ‘discovered’
by a journalist and picked up by others; often such words fade from view
again shortly after. When President Suharto said in 1997 that he would
‘thump’ his opponents, using the word menggebuk, it was immediately
picked up by journalists and thereafter was frequently used during the
rest of Suharto’s time in office. In the same year, he used the Javanese
lengser keprabon madeg pandita (withdraw from the palace and become
a sage), meaning that he would soon step down (lengser) to become an
elder statesman. The word lengser immediately came into common use
in the meaning ‘step down from office’. Derived forms soon appeared;
in 2000, newspapers were stating that President Abdurrahman Wahid
should lengser atau dilengserkan (stand down or be stood down), using
a newly coined transitive passive derivative, an instance of the readiness
of Indonesians to seize on and play with new forms.
But along with some lively and colourful language in the press has
come also a great deal of turgid and opaque language, imprecise and
inappropriate vocabulary, infelicitous, often impenetrable structures,
frequently from journalists who are themselves not particularly profi-
cient in using the language. Alisjahbana is one who has criticised the
press, as ‘the strongest impediment to a stricter standardisation of the
official language’, saying that many editors ‘still do not have a good
command of the language, for they have not learned the language ade-
quately in school’.12
With the constant appearance of new words in the press, particu-
larly from English, and the excessive use of acronyms, there has been
much criticism that the language of the press has become increasingly
unintelligible to the majority of people. This can in part be attributed
to the press’s role in the New Order’s development plans and the need
for modernisation and intellectualisation of the language to cope with
these needs, which has contributed to the shift of the formal language
further away from its Classical Malay roots and from colloquial speech.
Combined with this, the failure of general education in the country to
provide the majority of the population with more than basic reading
and writing skills has resulted in much of the press language being
incomprehensible to them.
Rather than blaming the press for its failure to communicate effec-
tively with the public, those who are not highly educated are inclined to
blame the language itself as being too remote from the people. This
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 5 1

reinforces the negative perception of formal language and is partly
responsible for the alienation of large sections of the population from
what they see as elite language.
Journalists often blame others for the state of affairs. At a seminar in
1997, the Secretary General of the Indonesian Journalists’ Union stated
that journalists often act simply as ‘tape recorders’, quoting what is said
by the news source, which is often a government official. If journalists
are expected to follow the rules of grammar, officials should be edu-
cated to use correct Indonesian, he said. At the seminar, another jour-
nalist pointed out that high officials often used deviant language. Lower
officials imitated them, the errors eventually spreading to other groups
in the community. Another speaker gave the example of an official say-
ing rumah penduduk akan di-rehab (people’s houses will be renovated),
using rehab — unintelligible to most people — rather than standard
diperbaiki (repaired, renovated), and being quoted without explanation
in the press. He said that newspapers should edit and change the struc-
ture to make it grammatical and thus stop bahasa birokrasi (bureau-
cratic language) infiltrating the press, although he acknowledged that
there is little radio and television can do to filter out such forms.13
Partly as a reaction to the remoteness and obscurity of much main-
stream press language, there have emerged since the 1980s a consider-
able number of popular magazines aimed specifically at the urban
middle class. These include a variety of women’s magazines, such as
Kartini and Mode, magazines for teenage girls, such as Gadis, and mag-
azines for men, such as Matra. Avoiding the excesses of the mainstream
newspapers and news magazines, they are introducing an increasing
acceptance of less formal language in print. In addition, there has been
an increasing tendency on television from the early 1990s to use more
colloquial speech in variety and chat shows, quiz games and so on.
Entertainment and talk-back programs on some radio stations also are
now almost wholly in colloquial speech. Such a shift could eventually
lead to a breakdown in the diglossic gulf and produce a standardised
form of the colloquial language. Despite this trend, there are still
soapies and other ‘popular’ television shows that adhere to the old for-
mula of having characters use stilted, formal language.
B O R R O W I N G  F R O M  O T H E R  L A N G U A G E S
While some borrowing from other languages has been as a result of
planning decisions, it is also true that a great many new forms have
entered quite independently of planning processes, often in direct
1 5 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

opposition to the desires of the planners, being ‘spontaneous’ rather
than ‘planned’ borrowings. The major influences in the 20th century,
apart from English (discussed in Chapter 9), were from Javanese,
Jakarta Malay, Sanskrit and Dutch. All four of these influences are
among the factors that distinguish modern Indonesian from traditional
Malay and from the standard form of Malay in Malaysia today.
Apart from borrowings from Javanese, there have been few influ-
ences on modern Indonesian from regional languages. Although peo-
ple will employ many words from their regional language while
speaking Indonesian within their region, these are unlikely to be accept-
ed in the wider community; they will remain recognised largely by
speakers of the language they come from and others who live in that
region.
While Malaysian Malay has been strongly influenced by Indonesian,
there has been very little Malaysian influence on Indonesian in the mod-
ern era. Nevertheless, some Malaysian words have recently come into
common use, mainly through borrowing by the press, including pakar
(expert), kawasan (region) and menggalakkan (encourage). Regional
forms of Malay have contributed little to general Indonesian, although
a few terms have become widely accepted. Thus Manado Malay has
contributed berfoya-foya (enjoy oneself) and baku (reciprocal action), as
in baku hantam (fighting/hitting each other).
Also contributing some elements to informal Jakartan Indonesian is
the street argot Prokem, common among Jakarta’s youth.14 A few
words, particularly bokap (father) and nyokap (mother), occur in the col-
loquial speech of young people, but show no signs of entering formal
language.
J A K A R TA  M A L AY  A N D  I N F O R M A L  
J A K A R TA N  I N D O N E S I A N
The one variety of regional Malay having a noticeable influence on
Indonesian is Jakarta Malay. It has long had a significant influence on
the colloquial Indonesian of Jakarta and via it is penetrating the rest of
the language.
The Dutch made the town of Jayakarta their East Indies capital in
1619, renaming it Batavia. Its commercial activities grew quickly, with
an influx of Chinese traders, merchants and other free settlers from
Arabia, India and from various parts of the archipelago, especially Java,
and slaves from Bali and India. Among the polyglot community Malay
soon became the major lingua franca, first used among the diverse
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 5 3

Indonesian groups and then by others, as the main means of inter-
group communication.
By the beginning of the 19th century, descendants of the various
groups had merged with a new ethnic identity, the anak Betawi (chil-
dren of Batavia), also known by other names, such as orang Betawi asli
(original Batavians). The anak Betawi had their own distinct form of
Malay, previously called Betawi Malay but since independence more
commonly called Jakarta Malay. Betawi Malay was a koine of elements
from various Malay dialects. It was also influenced strongly by Javanese,
Sundanese and Balinese and absorbed many loan words from
Portuguese creole and from Chinese. Elements absorbed from Javanese
included many words and aspects of pronunciation, including replace-
ment of the final-syllable /a/ by the mid-central vowel /∂/ in many
words, such as dalem instead of dalam (inside). From Balinese Jakarta
Malay took the transitive verb suffix -in, corresponding to the suffixes 
-kan and -i in formal Indonesian. From Hokkien Chinese it took gua
(I), elu (you) and numerous other common words.
Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, the population of
the city grew rapidly, mainly through immigration from the archipelago,
especially of Sundanese and Javanese, but also by a considerable num-
ber of Chinese and people from other islands. As immigrants continued
to be attracted to Jakarta, they took time to be absorbed into the Betawi
community, if they were at all. The Betawi ethnic community was thus
only a proportion of the total population. The 1930 census showed that
the anak Betawi made up 53 per cent of the total population, with
Sundanese speakers the second largest group, followed by Javanese
speakers. After the Second World War, rapid immigration resulted in an
ever-decreasing percentage of anak Betawi, dropping to 23 per cent in
1960 and to 15 per cent in 1976 in one estimate.15 Another estimate is
that by the early 1980s their number had dwindled to 5.5 per cent in
urban areas, although with a considerable number of others in the outer
reaches of Jakarta.16
Among the ever-increasing number of non-Betawi residents there
developed a colloquial variety of the language, called Jakartan
Indonesian in the modern era. This has become the everyday language
of the great majority of Jakartans, including the elite and the relatively
large educated middle class, among whom a homogeneous colloquial
variety has developed.17 Although different from Jakarta Malay, this
general informal variety has been heavily influenced by it and the dis-
tinction between the two is not always recognised by outsiders. Jakarta
1 5 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Malay (or Betawi Malay) is the vernacular within the ever-shrinking and
fragmented anak Betawi communities, while Jakartan Indonesian is the
everyday language of the metropolis. It has been shown that the anak
Betawi switch from Jakarta Malay to Jakartan Indonesian when speak-
ing to people from outside their communities, so that even most long-
term residents of Jakarta rarely hear ‘real’ Jakarta Malay spoken.18
Moreover, young people shift more permanently to Jakartan Indonesian
‘when they rise socially or have aspirations in that direction’.19
The close contact between Jakarta Malay and colloquial Indonesian
in the capital has led to significant absorption of elements from the for-
mer into the latter, including much that Jakarta Malay borrowed origi-
nally from Javanese, Balinese and Chinese. The colloquial Jakartan
variety of Indonesian has been exerting a significant influence on formal
Indonesian and other informal varieties of the language; via it influences
of Jakarta Malay are felt on the formal standard language. As the capi-
tal city and the centre of government, intellectual life and wealth,
Jakarta has long attracted people seeking their fortune. Jakarta is seen
as progressive, rich and modern; everything about it is considered wor-
thy of imitation, including its language. One writer gives some of the
reasons for the influence of Jakartan Indonesian:
The role of Jakarta as the capital city where the most powerful, the
most wealthy and the most attractive people are thought to live has
been important in popularising the language. In addition, the fact that
Jakarta is the centre for the mass media (television, film, publishing) has
contributed greatly to popularising the lifestyle and values of presti-
gious social groups — values which are conveyed in bahasa Indonesia,
often the Jakarta dialect. Witness how young people from the regions
who stay only briefly in Jakarta nevertheless immediately strive to adapt
their bahasa Indonesia — changes which they carry with them when
they return home.20
To speak like a Jakartan is to be like a Jakartan: up-to-date, pros-
perous and sophisticated, whatever the reality might be. The speech of
Jakarta is particularly popular with the youth as a symbol of generational
solidarity; using it sets them apart from the backward countryside and
allows them to identify with the mystique of the modern metropolis.
Increasingly, a common standard colloquial variety of Indonesian is
being recognised as emerging, based on or the same as colloquial
Jakartan Indonesian. One writer has stated:
The use of Indonesian by educated people living in big towns such as
Jakarta, Bandung, Medan, etc. has brought about the establishment of
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 5 5

modern colloquial prestige Indonesian. The ‘standard’ variety of this
colloquial Indonesian is undoubtedly connected with the speech preva-
lent in the capital.21
Since the 1990s, many variety and entertainment shows on televi-
sion have been using this style almost entirely and it has come to be very
common on talk-back programs on some radio stations. Journalists,
television personalities and politicians use Jakartan terms for particular
effect, to give a humorous, whimsical, intimate or even sarcastic tone to
what they are saying. Dropped into formal speech or a television inter-
view, it can be especially effective for achieving such an effect. During
the Suharto era, it was regularly used in political cartoons in newspapers
to comment on current events, one of the few opportunities in those
times to express, however subtly, opposition to or frustration with gov-
ernment policy and injustice.
Elements of Jakartan are also increasingly appearing in areas earlier
the preserve of formal style, in popular literature, popular songs and
performing arts, and thereby putting pressure on the formal language.22
Colloquialisms are now sometimes found in the formal print media
where they are the words of the writer rather than someone being quot-
ed, as in: Dia juga doyan menyitir buku lain, seperti yang disusun oleh 
A G (‘He also likes to quote other books, like the one compiled by A
G).23 Here the colloquial doyan (like, be fond of) is used without italics
instead of formal suka, something that would not have occurred until
quite recently. This is part of a recent trend whereby use of informal
words by journalists and other writers exposes readers to colloquialisms
in contexts in which they would not previously have occurred.
Combined with the use of colloquialisms on radio and television, this is
inevitably leading to their gradual acceptance in more formal situations.
T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  J A V A N E S E
The Javanese are by far the largest ethnic-linguistic group in the
Indonesian population and have always been the most prominent
group in national political and cultural affairs. It is not surprising, then,
that their language has had a significant influence on Indonesian.
Javanese influence on Malay has had a long history, with contact
between speakers of the two languages dating from at least the time of
Srivijaya (see p. 36). Before the 20th century, this influence was almost
entirely due to borrowing by Malay speakers, including the use of
Javanese words during the writing of Malay versions of Javanese 
1 5 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

literature. Many translated works are from the Hindu period in Java,
before the 16th century, attesting to a long period of cultural 
influence.
Javanese influence increased enormously during the 20th century,
mainly because increasing numbers of Javanese came to speak the lan-
guage, continuing to use many Javanese words and constructions while
doing so.24 When Javanese use Javanese words while speaking
Indonesian, it is not a case of borrowing but simply of using words that
are acceptable and comfortable. In effect, a Javanese word is immedi-
ately acceptable to 40 per cent of the Indonesian population.25 Through
their use by Javanese, many such words and grammatical forms have
become familiar to non-Javanese and have eventually become fully
assimilated into the language, to the extent that Malaysians attending a
conference in Indonesia in 1986 complained that ‘too many Javanese
terms were finding their way into the lexicon of the Indonesian lan-
guage. This development was seen to constitute a barrier to further
efforts on the part of Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei and the Malays in
Singapore to develop a common Malay throughout the entire region’.26
Although it is usually not possible to date when a word became an
assimilated borrowing, some words have certainly been in the language
for a long time. Some early borrowings include:
agung
great
butuh
need
pangeran
prince
perahu
boat
rusak
damage
Javanese ratu (king) was borrowed with the same meaning but 
later changed to ‘queen’, occurring alongside Malay cognate datuk
(chieftain).
Many Javanese words occur alongside Malay words, as partial syn-
onyms in modern Indonesian, sometimes the Javanese form being
favoured by Javanese while the Malay word is more commonly used
among Sumatrans, particularly in regions of traditional Malay. Often,
however, the Javanese word has become the preferred form among all
ethnic groups. Examples include:
bisa
can (occurring alongside Malay dapat)
pintar
clever (alongside Malay pandai)
sapi
cow (alongside Malay lembu)
sore
evening (alongside Malay petang)
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 5 7

Sometimes the Javanese word has a restricted meaning in
Indonesian, as with pesisir, meaning ‘coastal area, shore’, alongside
Malay pantai (beach) and kali, mainly meaning ‘canal’, alongside
Malay sungai (river). Javanese desa (originally from Sanskrit) has
replaced Malay kampung in the meaning ‘rural village’, kampung
coming to refer only to a poorer urban neighbourhood.
More recent borrowings include:
baku
standard
gotong royong mutual support
olahraga
sport
pria
(originally from Sanskrit), a more formal 
alternative to laki-laki (man, male)
tanpa
without
tinja
as a polite form for Malay tahi (faeces)
Many words associated with cooking and foodstuffs have entered
from Javanese, including:
bumbu
spices
gado-gado
mixed vegetable dish
gudek
dish made of jackfruit
pecel, pecal
vegetable dish with peanut sauce
rujak
kind of salad
tempe
soybean cake
terasi
shrimp paste
Numerous words associated with the wayang shadow plays have
been borrowed, including gamelan (orchestra which accompanies
wayang performances) and the word wayang itself, which is cognate
with Malay bayang (shadow). Most of these words have developed
extended meanings in Indonesian and are not restricted to the context
of the wayang, such as lakon (play, story), adegan (episode, scene) and
dalang (narrator and puppeteer), which now has the extended mean-
ing of ‘manipulator, power behind the screen’. The word gara-gara,
meaning ‘commotion’, comes from the word for a wayang scene of
turbulence or war. Through use in expressions like ini gara-garamu
(this is the trouble you’ve caused) it has come to mean ‘just because’,
although in this sense it is mainly journalistic and is probably still
regarded as non-standard by many people.
The names for administrators and administrative districts 
through most of Indonesia are taken from Javanese; for example,
bupati (administrator of a major division within a province), camat
1 5 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

(administrator of a smaller division) and lurah (village head).
In the modern press, Javanese words, italicised if they are felt to be
unassimilated, are frequently used to achieve some particular effect.
Often the use of these words adds an informal tone and some, while
widely used, are still felt to be non-standard, or at least distinctly
Javanese, by most people. For instance, bocah (young child) is used
instead of anak — Javanese distinguishes bocak (child, young person)
from anak (child, offspring), although there is no sign that the distinc-
tion is felt to be necessary by non-Javanese. Other examples include
cilik for kecil (young, little), ngotot, based on otot (muscle), also bor-
rowed from Javanese, instead of bersikeras (persist, be obstinate) and
kangen instead of rindu (long for). It is probable that in many cases
Javanese journalists are unaware that a particular word is not
Indonesian, but also frequently they choose Javanese words because
they do not know an Indonesian equivalent.
A number of interjections and discourse particles from Javanese are
now common in colloquial speech through use by Javanese, such as the
expressions of surprise kok and lho.
Javanese has influenced Indonesian phonology in numerous ways,
including the introduction of the mid-central schwa vowel in final closed
syllables. Malay words with /a/ in the final closed syllable often have cog-
nates in Javanese with the schwa vowel /∂/. Javanese tend to pronounce
such words with /∂/ in Indonesian; for instance, saying dalem for 
traditional Malay dalam (inside) and asem instead of asam (sour). Earlier 
borrowings from Javanese tended to be pronounced with /a/ by non-
Javanese speakers, as in pecal from Javanese pecel (kind of salad with peanut
sauce). However, /∂/ is now common among many non-Javanese,
although this is not necessarily the case in traditional Malay-speaking areas.
In more recent borrowings from Javanese, the mid-central schwa vowel
appears to have been immediately accepted and a form with /a/ does not
occur, as with pilek (have a cold), sumber (source) and kangen (long for).
The use of the verbal suffix -ken instead of the Malay -kan by many
Javanese is strongly condemned by language purists (see p. 139).
Javanese, along with Dutch, has introduced many consonant clus-
ters to Indonesian, including clusters of three consonants, such as njl in
anjlok (plummet), mbr in ambruk (collapse) and mbl in gamblang
(clear; blatant).
Javanese has influenced modern Indonesian grammar in various
ways and this influence is increasing in some cases. The tendency is for
these forms to be used by Javanese in colloquial speech and for this to
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 5 9

be adopted subsequently by others. Such influences are still largely seen
as colloquial, although some of them are gradually penetrating more
formal speech and writing.
The Javanese prefix ke- corresponds in one of its uses to the Malay
ter-, indicating involuntary action, and is often used instead of ter- in
this sense. Thus ketawa will appear for tertawa (laugh) and ketipu for
tertipu (tricked). Use of ke- is still colloquial and is loudly condemned
by purists, although it is beginning to appear in the mainstream press in
a few words.
In Malay, the affixation ke-…-an occurred in a fairly restricted set of
adversative verbs, such as kemalaman (overtaken by night) and kehi-
langan (lose something). Under the influence of Javanese, this set of
verbs has been greatly increased in the usage of some people, with forms
like kebongkaran (be burgled) and kebanjiran (be flooded) becoming
generally accepted. Among Javanese, this affixation is used alongside or
instead of ter- in numerous words, such as ketimbunan instead of ter-
timbun (be buried under something) and kecemaran instead of terce-
mar (be polluted). With some adjectives in Javanese, the affixation can
indicate excess. This usage is now common in colloquial Indonesian,
such as kebesaran (too big) and kegemukan (too fat). While such forms
are still classified as non-standard and not acceptable to everyone, their
use is spreading and may become standard in the future.
In Javanese, a genitive noun is preceded by -e (-ne after vowels),
attached to the head noun, as in omahe Abu (Abu’s house — omah
‘house’). Javanese frequently use the corresponding Indonesian -nya in
such constructions, thus rumahnya Abu instead of rumah Abu (Abu’s
house). In most of its occurrences, this construction is avoided and even
condemned by some non-Javanese. Excessive use is one of the charac-
teristics of bahasa pejabat (see p. 139). It has, however, found increas-
ing acceptance in standard speech, particularly in cases where it acts to
clarify meaning. Thus, while ibu Abu could mean ‘Mrs Abu’ or ‘Abu’s
mother’, the use of -nya makes the construction specifically possessive;
ibunya Abu can only mean ‘Abu’s mother’.
T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  D U T C H
Although the Dutch first appeared in the archipelago at the beginning
of the 17th century, their language did not begin to have a noticeable
influence until much later. In the Moluccas and in Batavia, attempts by
the Dutch to use their language in church services, in schools and in
administration had little success. After a brief attempt in the Moluccas,
1 6 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Dutch was replaced by Malay in school teaching and in religious ser-
vices; in Batavia it was replaced by Portuguese and Malay.
The English grammarian William Marsden noted in 1812 that ‘sev-
eral Dutch terms’ had been adopted into Malay27, presumably as indi-
cation of very limited penetration at that time. Dutch did not begin to
have a significant influence on Malay until the beginning of the 20th
century, when children of the Indonesian gentry began entering
European schools and Dutch was also introduced as a subject at train-
ing colleges for native teachers and pubic servants. With growing
demand among the Indonesian elite for Dutch education and limited
places available for them in European schools, Dutch-language native
schools were established in 1914. With improving means of long-
distance travel, a greater number of Europeans began to enter
Indonesia, resulting in greater Western influence on society. This led to
further demand for Dutch language among the small Indonesian elite,
among whom knowledge of the language was becoming the mark of
status, particularly as the opportunity for Dutch education was largely
confined to the higher class. Proficiency in Dutch also opened the door
to well-paid jobs in commerce and administration, and command of
Dutch was the gateway to European culture.28 By 1930, about 230000
Indonesians spoke Dutch, increasing to about 400 000 with command
of the language in 1941, although this was less than 1 per cent of the
total Indies population.29
There thus emerged a sizeable bilingual population among the edu-
cated leaders of pre-war indigenous society. For many of them, Dutch
was their preferred language and, when speaking Indonesian, the use of
Dutch words was a symbol of prestige and social status. Use of Dutch
words was also a necessity for many topics, there being no suitable
Malay words for discussing politics, economics and science.
Before 1942, many Dutch words entered the language sponta-
neously, without deliberate selection, through such bilingualism. From
the beginning of formal language planning, with the Komisi Bahasa in
1942, a number of Dutch words also entered through the language-
planning process. After independence, Dutch remained the major
source for scientific and technical terms under the Terminology
Commission until 1966, although most of the terms selected were not
taken up by the population in general. Many more words entered spon-
taneously in various domains of everyday life, because they were used by
the educated elite in their spoken and written Indonesian and were
spread by the press.
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 6 1

After independence, Dutch was no longer a medium of instruction
in education and there was pride among Indonesians in having their
own national language. Nevertheless, the use of Dutch among the edu-
cated continued and retained a prestige status. In the 1960s, there was
still a substantial population of proficient speakers of the language; a
study of Indonesian students in the USA, carried out in 1962, found
that 20 of the group of 26 had at least some facility in Dutch.30 One
writer stated in 1979 that ‘the Dutch-educated generation is dead,
dying or about to be pensioned off’.31 Despite such exaggerated claims,
even at the beginning of the 21st century there was a surprising num-
ber of educated people in the older age group, those who had had a
Dutch education up to 1949 or had had the opportunity of tertiary
study in the Netherlands in the 1950s, who were fluent in the language.
Nevertheless, by the late 1950s educated Indonesians were begin-
ning to turn to English. By the mid-1960s, Dutch influence on
Indonesian was drawing to a close as the influence of English began to
grow rapidly (as discussed in Chapter 9).
Among early borrowings from Dutch were kantor (office), kamar
(room), and buku (book). As Dutch customs were introduced, Dutch
words were frequently employed. For instance, Dutch influence on
cooking and eating habits resulted in such items as:
buncis
beans
kol
cabbage
kompor
stove
poding
pudding
sosis
sausage
wortel
carrot
Items of clothing include:
helm
helmet
hem
shirt
kerah
collar (Dutch kraag)
piama
pyjamas
ritsleting
zipper
rok
skirt
selop
slipper (Dutch slof)
The Indonesian legal system is based on that of the Netherlands and
many legal terms are Dutch, such as:
advokat
lawyer
1 6 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

kasasi
overturning of judgment
kasus
case
pleidoi
defence
vonis
sentence
yuris
law graduate
In other areas of modern life introduced by the Dutch, such as med-
icine and education, there has also been significant borrowing. In tech-
nical areas also, many terms are Dutch, including electrical terms such
as:
listrik
electricity
per
light bulb
steker
electrical plug
stop kontak
socket
strom
current
A great many words to do with motor vehicles are Dutch, including:
bensin
petrol
klakson
horn
kopling
clutch
oli
lubricating oil
persneling, versneling
gear
rem
brake
In many spheres of everyday life, Dutch has intruded. The common
words for ‘uncle’ and ‘aunt’ were largely replaced by om (Dutch oom)
and tante, particularly as terms of address. Among a great many every-
day words are:
antre
queue (Dutch aantreden ‘line up’)
asbak
ashtray
gelas
(drinking) glass
handuk
towel
pamili, famili
relatives, (extended) family
restoran
restaurant
setrika
iron
televisi
television
The names of the months, Januari, Februari and so on, are all from
Dutch.
Earlier borrowings tended to be modified to fit with Malay phonol-
ogy and syllable structure. Thus Dutch f and v were replaced by 
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 6 3

p: fabriek became pabrik (factory) and koffer became kopor, koper (box,
suitcase). The Dutch sound spelt u or uu is a high front rounded vowel
that does not exist in Indonesian and borrowings with this sound gen-
erally omitted the lip rounding, leaving i, as in bis (bus — Dutch bus)
and setir (steering wheel — Dutch stuur).
In traditional Malay there were few consonant clusters, these com-
prising word-medial nasal-stop clusters like mp, nt, ngk, and r plus
another consonant, such as in pernah (ever). While borrowing from
Javanese introduced numerous consonant clusters, Dutch also con-
tributed to their acceptance, introducing initial clusters, as in stabil (sta-
ble) and skripsi (thesis), and medial clusters as in pabrik (factory) and
doktrin (doctrine). Medial clusters of even four consonants have been
introduced, as in eksplorasi (exploration).
In early borrowings, final clusters were removed, either by the addi-
tion of a vowel, as in lampu (lamp) and pompa (pump), or dropping of
the final consonant, as in pos (post) and ban (tyre — Dutch band).
Complex clusters could be removed by both adding a vowel and drop-
ping the final consonant, as in dinas (service — Dutch dienst). Clusters
later became acceptable, especially in the pronunciation of those fluent
in Dutch, with words such as pers (press) and helm (helmet) entering
the language. Much inconsistency occurs in acceptance of features of
Dutch phonology, as it does in spontaneous borrowing from other lan-
guages. Thus the final rs is retained in kurs (currency rate — Dutch
koers), but avoided by the addition of a vowel in bursa (stock exchange
— Dutch beurs).
In traditional Malay, the mid-central schwa vowel could not appear
in word-final syllables, whether open or closed by a consonant. While
the schwa vowel entered in closed syllables under the influence of
Javanese and Jakarta Malay, its acceptability was strengthened by bor-
rowings from Dutch, such as liter (litre) and wortel (carrot). Moreover,
borrowings from Dutch introduced word-final schwa, as in the suffix 
-isme, and various common words, like tante (aunt), orde (order,
regime) and kode (code). Alisjahbana pleaded against this, strongly dis-
agreeing with the change to the traditional Malay phonological system,
and insisting on writing a instead of e in final syllables, such as koda,
nasionalisma.32 In this he was unsuccessful; the change has become
entirely accepted in the standard language.
Traditional Malay had a pattern of vowel harmony whereby, among
other things, a high vowel (i, u) could not occur in a final syllable if a
mid-vowel (e, o) occurred in the preceding syllable and a mid-vowel
1 6 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

could not occur in the final syllable if there was a high vowel in the sec-
ond last syllable.33 This system has disappeared in the modern language,
partly as a result of borrowing from Dutch, with words like vonis (pun-
ish) and tenis (tennis) breaking the rule.
With the increase in bilingualism, educated Indonesians tended to
retain more features of Dutch phonology. In more recent borrowings,
f is retained, rather than being replaced by p, as in fraksi (faction — in
a political party or in parliament). The Dutch v is replaced by f rather
than p (although the letter v is retained in writing), as in veto (veto).
Some borrowings, earlier pronounced and spelt with p, have now
replaced this by f, with f or v retained in spelling, as in the Dutch. Thus
earlier Nopember (November) was replaced by November. Uneducated
speakers are still likely to use p instead of f in these words.
In borrowings of scientific words with initial ps, the spelling of the
original is retained, although the p is not pronounced; for example,
psikologi (psychology) and psikiater (psychiatrist).
One-syllable words did not occur in traditional Malay, apart from a
few function words like dan (and) and ke (to). Early borrowings some-
times added a final vowel, such as buku (book). However, a consider-
able number of common Dutch words of one syllable were later
accepted into the language, such as pet (cap), lap (cleaning cloth) and
got (gutter, drain).
In borrowing from Dutch, the tendency has been to follow the pro-
nunciation of the original where possible and to modify spelling of the
word accordingly, as in numerous examples already given. In some
cases, the spelling change to reflect pronunciation is more drastic. This
is particularly common where the Dutch word is itself a borrowing from
French, Dutch having retained French spelling, as in kudeta (coup
d’état — Dutch coup d’etat), kado (gift — Dutch cadeau) and koran
(newspaper — Dutch courant).
A study of borrowings into Indonesian from European languages
published in 1983 identified 6100 borrowings, apparently confined
to items accepted into Standard Indonesian and entering the lan-
guage by the late 1970s, as identified in dictionaries and Pusat
Bahasa publications.34 Of these, 5400 are claimed to be from Dutch
and only 670 from English. The number of Dutch words is impres-
sive, although many of them are restricted to use by small numbers
of educated people or occur only in specialist registers. While the
number of Dutch words in the list is significantly greater than the
number of English loans, the compilers have tended to treat almost
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 6 5

all words that occur in both Dutch and English as being from Dutch.
However, since many of these were not common in the press by the
late 1960s, it is more likely that English was the source for many of
them. For many words there is almost certainly borrowing by people
familiar with Dutch from that language and by others, usually
younger, of the same item from English. By the mid-1960s, Dutch
had almost entirely been replaced by English as a source of innova-
tions in the language. The 1983 wordlist thus could well be regard-
ed as a definitive listing of Dutch borrowings; borrowing from Dutch
was by then a thing of the past. On the other hand, the influence of
English was really only beginning in the 1960s and has been acceler-
ating since then.
The 1983 study did not take into consideration Dutch borrow-
ings into other than Standard Indonesian. In those regional varieties
of Malay where a significant proportion of the population had long
had access to Dutch education, many Dutch words occur in everyday
speech that are unknown in the standard language. As one example,
Manado Malay has many Dutch words in common use, such as:35
fakansi
holiday (Dutch vakantie)
fals
dishonest (Dutch vals)
forek
fork (Dutch vork)
ram
window (Dutch raam)
Besides contributing numerous words directly to the language,
Dutch has also been the source of many loan translations, Indonesian
phrases created on the basis of Dutch models. These include:
kerja sama
co-operate (Dutch samenwerking)
luar negeri
overseas (literally ‘outside the country’ — 
Dutch buitenland)
mengambil 
take over (Dutch overnemen)
alih
rumah sakit
hospital (literally ‘sick house’ — Dutch ziekenhuis)
A number of new suffixes have entered the language through bor-
rowing from Dutch. When words containing affixes (which are called
prefixes if they precede the base and suffixes if they follow the base)
are first borrowed, they are usually taken over as single meaningful
units in the recipient language. Frequently, Indonesian borrowed 
two or more related forms from Dutch, such as aktif (active) and
aktivis (activist), popular (popular) and popularitas (popularity).
1 6 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

While Indonesians using such words are aware of their similarities in
form and meaning, it is not always possible to identify a base form for
members of such sets nor to identify particular parts as affixes. 
When, however, a beginning or ending of a word comes to be used
with a variety of different forms that can stand alone, it takes on the sta-
tus of a prefix or suffix. This has happened with a number of Dutch
affixes, including -isme, borrowed as a part of words like nasionalisme
(nationalism). This has now become an assimilated Indonesian suffix
because it can be applied to new bases, as in sukuisme (tribalism — suku
‘tribe, ethnic group’). The Dutch noun-forming endings -atie, pro-
nounced ‘atsi’, and -isatie were retained as -(is)asi in numerous bor-
rowings, such as nasionalisasi (nationalisation).36 This has become a
particularly ‘successful’ suffix, replacing the Dutch -(iser)ing in words
like modernisasi (modernisation — Dutch modernisering) and later
replacing the English ending ‘-ation’ in words like ekstensifikasi (exten-
sification), as discussed in Chapter 9. The Dutch adjective-forming end-
ing -isch was retained in borrowings as -is, as in dinamis (dynamic) and
dramatis (dramatic). A number of words were borrowed with the
Dutch suffix -teit, but these were later replaced by their original Latin
forms with the suffix -tas, such as universitas (university — Dutch uni-
versiteit) and kualitas (quality — Dutch kwaliteit).
As already mentioned, Dutch has also played an enormous role in
the development of syntax in the formal language, through the influ-
ence of educated bilinguals. In writing, this includes the development
of more complex sentence structure and paragraph organisation. It also
resulted in a significant shift from passive to active constructions. This
trend continued under the influence of English and is discussed in
Chapter 9.
T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  S A N S K R I T  O N  
T H E  M O D E R N  L A N G U A G E
Another phenomenon in the development of modern Indonesian has
been the use of Sanskrit words and phrases. These do not come directly
from Sanskrit, the major source being Old Javanese. Between the 10th
and 15th centuries, there was a prolific literature in Old Javanese, also
called Kawi. Heavily influenced by Indian literature, the scholars of the
Hindu-Javanese period laced their works with Sanskrit forms, much as
did the scribes of Srivijaya. It is from such preserved literature that most
of the new borrowings now referred to as Sanskrit originate. In some
cases, such words are hybrids drawn from Sanskrit and Kawi to form
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 6 7

new words that did not exist in those languages, much as the word ‘tele-
vision’ is composed of the elements ‘tele-’, from the Greek word for
‘far’, and ‘vision’, from the Latin word for ‘sight’, producing a word in
English unknown to speakers of Latin or Ancient Greek.
One group that has provided many new terms based on Sanskrit are
those previously known as the ‘solidarity makers’, the military and polit-
ical leaders, who attempted to promote feelings of nationalism among
the population.37 For such people, Sanskrit terms have been particu-
larly prestigious. They hark back to the glorious days of great Hindu-
Javanese kingdoms, particularly Majapahit, and powerful kings such as
Airlangga and Hayam Wuruk. Terms suggestive of power and legiti-
macy have been much exploited by the military, such as perwira (offi-
cer — Sanskrit prav-ira ‘hero’) and purnawirawan (retired; veteran —
Sanskrit purna ‘complete’ and v-iryav n ‘warrior’), in place of the
mundane alternatives opsir (Dutch officier) and pensiunan (pensioner
— Dutch pensioen with Indonesian suffix -an).
Sanskrit has been used much as Latin sometimes was in Europe. It
has a magical quality for many people, who see it as reinforcing the
power and legitimacy of the state, being controlled as it is by powerful
people with esoteric knowledge. During the Sukarno and Suharto eras,
it was manipulated by political leaders to promote feelings of national-
ism among the population. One commentator has written of these
words:
All of them tend to be used most on occasions of high ceremonial
importance, and to be applied to objects and institutions of the highest
political prestige. While almost none of these words are understood
fully in their original sense, the fact that they are of Sanskritic or Old
Javanese origin is well understood, and therefore the modern institu-
tions are seen as inheriting the prestige and majesty of the originals.38
Created forms for national institutions include the national philos-
ophy Pancasila (The Five Principles) and the national motto Bhinekka
Tunggal Ika (Unity in Diversity). Many forms included Sanskrit num-
bers, such as panca (five), as in Pancasila, dwi (two) as in dwiwarna
(two colours), for the Indonesian red and white flag, and dwifungsi
(two functions — a hybrid of Sanskrit and Dutch), for the dual role of
the military in defence and politics. Other examples include tri (three),
as in tridarma (the three duties), for the responsibilities of institutes of
higher education, and sapta (seven), as in sapta marga (the seven ways),
for the seven principles that the armed forces must obey.
Awards for meritorious service have grandiose Sanskritic names,
1 6 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–   

such as Satyalancana Karya Satya (satya ‘loyal, faithful’, lancana
‘badge’, karya ‘work’), a medal for long distinguished public service,
Mahaputra Adipradana (mahaputra ‘great son’, adi ‘superior’,
pradana ‘first’), the highest order for distinguished service to the
nation, and Bintang Yudha Dharma (bintang Malay ‘star, medal’,
yudha ‘war’, dharma ‘service’), war service medal. The use of pseudo-
Sanskrit in such honours gives an illusion of long tradition, thereby pro-
viding legitimacy to new creations.
After the occupation of Dutch New Guinea, the capital Hollandia
was eventually renamed Jayapura, Sanskrit for ‘Victory City’, the use of
Sanskrit linked to the need to legitimise the takeover.
Many Indonesians, particularly Javanese, have Sanskrit-based
names. Suharto, whose Sanskrit-derived name means ‘good posses-
sions’, named his son Hutomo Mandala Putra (better known as Tommy
Suharto). At the time, Suharto was commander of the Mandala army
unit. The name that he gave his son derives from hutomo, the Javanised
form of Sanskrit utama (principal, eminent), mandala (circle), the
name of the army unit (significantly given a Sanskrit name, being
another instance of the choice of a powerful Sanskrit word), and putra,
meaning ‘prince’ in Sanskrit, but being an honorific term for ‘son’ in
Indonesian. Thus the name means ‘Son of the Leader of Mandala’.
President Sukarno gave his Japanese bride the ‘Indonesian’ name Dewi
Ratna Sari, which consists of three Sanskrit words, meaning ‘goddess’,
‘jewel’ and ‘essence’ respectively. Names from the Hindu epics, the
Mahabharata and Ramayana, are well known to Indonesians.
Technology Minister Habibie, in the last days of the Suharto govern-
ment, had plans for a new Indonesian aircraft to be called Gatotkaca,
after a powerful flying figure in the Mahabharata. When the Indonesian
women’s archery team won a silver medal at the Seoul Olympics in
1988, they were widely proclaimed as the Tiga Srikandi (the Three
Srikandis), after a woman archer in the Mahabharata.
Other institutions exploit Sanskrit in the same way. The Catholic
Church frequently uses it instead of Latin, as in the names of the
Catholic universities Atma Jaya (Victorious Spirit) and Sanata Dharma
(Genuine Good Deeds). A prominent Protestant university also has a
Sanskrit name, Satya Wacana (Faithful to the Word).
Private businesses very often choose Sanskrit names; Hotel Kartika
Candra means nothing more than ‘Star Moon Hotel’, but the eupho-
nious flow of sounds combined with the mystique of Sanskrit gives it a
special prestige. Even lowly leather goods or bicycle shops can have
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 6 9

Sanskrit names, like Surya Jaya (Victorious Sun) or Mitra Setia (Loyal
Friend). Sometimes Sanskrit and Malay words are combined in names,
the Sanskrit element here also adding to the aura of superiority, such as
Gunung Mulia (Noble Mountain) for a book shop or Cahaya Baru
(New Light) for a tailor.
There are other reasons for the use of such pseudo-Sanskrit forms.
As an alternative to borrowings from European languages, they have
considerable attraction. While many sound grandiose, they do not have
a foreign flavour, Sanskrit phonology having been modified to the needs
of Javanese, and they thus often have a native ‘feel’ about them, espe-
cially to Javanese. Sanskrit-based words are felt to be refined and polite,
and so are popular as euphemisms for more blunt native words, such as
payudara (female breasts) for Malay buah dada (literally ‘fruit of the
breast’), and pidana (crime) for Malay kejahatan, which also means
‘evil’. A number of euphemisms occur with the prefixed component
tuna- (lacking), from Sanskrit tunna- (struck, hurt, cut). In borrowings
into Old Javanese, this word had developed the meaning ‘lacking, being
short of’, which it retains in modern Indonesian, as in tunanetra (with-
out sight — netra Sanskrit ‘eye’) instead of buta (blind), tunawisma
(without house — Sanskrit vesma ‘house, building’) instead of gelan-
dangan (vagrant, homeless) and tunakarya (without work — Sanskrit
karya ‘work’) for penganggur (unemployed). Such terms are rarely used
in everyday speech, but do appear in politer formal language.
Tuna- is an example of a new affix entering the language through
modern borrowing from Sanskrit. Among others are antar-, swa-, pra-,
and pasca-.39 While some of these appear in a few older borrowings,
mainly of whole words, it is only since independence that they have
become common and can be recognised as prefixes. Antar- (inter-)
occurs in words like antarpulau (inter-island), antarbenua (interconti-
nental) and antargolongan (inter-group). These words have probably
been created under influence of English terms with the prefix ‘inter-’
(which was borrowed into English from Latin and is cognate with the
Sanskrit form). Swa-, from the Sanskrit sva (self), occurs in a few older
forms but is mainly found in recent introductions, such as swasembada
(self-sufficient), swadaya (self-help) and swalayan (self-service). Pra-,
Sanskrit for ‘pre-’, occurs in such forms as prasejarah (prehistory —
sejarah ‘history’ from Arabic), prasangka (prejudice — sangka ‘think,
suppose’ from Sanskrit), prakata (foreword — kata ‘word’ being an old
borrowing of Sanskrit kath  ‘word, speech’) and prasekolah (preschool
— sekolah from Portuguese). The prefix pasca- was introduced quite
1 7 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E
a–

recently in the meaning ‘post-’ and has become rather productive in the
modern language, as in pascasarjana (postgraduate — sarjana ‘scholar’
from Sanskrit), pasca-pemilu (post-election — pemilu being an abbrevi-
ation for pemilihan umum ‘general election’) and pasca-jajak pendapat
(post-referendum — first used in reference to strife following the 1999
referendum in East Timor).
One modern coinage with the prefix pra- offers an interesting illus-
tration of how obscure the meanings of these forms are to most people.
The word pramugari was coined for ‘airline stewardess’. There are dif-
ferent accounts of the origin of mugari, but it was apparently an Old
Javanese word meaning something like ‘managing affairs’. The word is
popularly reanalysed as consisting of pramu, meaning something like
‘one who serves’ and gari, which seems not to be assigned any mean-
ing. As a result of this false analysis, other terms have been coined with
a component pramu, such as pramuniaga (shop assistant — niaga
‘trade’ from Sanskrit) and pramuwisma (servant — wisma ‘building,
house’ from Sanskrit), although only the original pramugari is in com-
mon use in everyday speech, the others being euphemisms.
The Sanskrit suffix -van (having, possessing), was earlier borrowed
as part of certain words, such as rupawan (handsome — Sanskrit 
r  pa ‘form, shape’) and hartawan (wealthy — Sanskrit artha ‘wealth,
property’). In the modern language, its use has been greatly extended,
coming to be thought of as meaning someone who practises a particu-
lar activity, as in:
dramawan
dramatist
ilmuwan
scientist (ilmu ‘science’ from Arabic ilm)
olahragawan
sportsman (olahraga ‘sport’)
usahawan
businessman (usaha ‘business, enterprise’ from 
Sanskrit)
wartawan
reporter (warta ‘news’ from Sanskrit)
As these examples show, the suffix is not confined to combining
with borrowings from Sanskrit. For these words there are correspond-
ing female forms with -wati, such as olahragawati (sportswoman) and
wartawati (female journalist), although forms with -wan can cover
both male and female.
While many of these neo-Sanskrit forms have been chosen for con-
cepts in cultural areas, borrowings for science and technology are
almost always taken from European languages (apart from early bor-
rowings that sometimes came from Arabic). In some cases, however,
B E Y O N D
P L A N N I N G :
O T H E R
I N F L U E N C E S
O N
T H E
L A N G U A G E • 1 7 1
u–

neo-Sanskrit forms do occur, especially where a native term may sound
too mundane and ‘unscientific’. Thus, instead of everyday matahari
(sun), the Sanskrit word surya has been chosen for scientific communi-
cation, along with derivatives like tata surya (solar system — tata
‘order, arrangement’ from Sanskrit). The Sanskrit derivative angkasa
(sky, heaven) is used in preference to the native langit in scientific con-
texts, such as in angkasa luar (outer space — luar ‘outside’) and angka-
sawan (astronaut).
Not all proposed borrowings from Sanskrit have found favour. As
mentioned, some are refined euphemisms not used in everyday speech.
Pariwisata (tourism) occurs only in official language, turisme being the
everyday word. Some forms devised by planners were not accepted at
all. A number of forms with the prefix nir-, from the Sanskrit for ‘with-
out, free from’, such as nirleka (prehistory — Sanskrit lekha ‘writing’),
were coined by the Terminology Commission, but were not accepted
by the public. The base pirsa, from the Sanskrit original from which
periksa (examine) also comes, occurs in pirsawan (with -wan from
Sanskrit) and pemirsa (with the Malay prefix pe- ‘one who does the
action’). These words were coined for ‘television viewer’; however,
although heard, they are not really able to compete with the Malay
penonton (viewer, spectator). Likewise, the borrowing wahana could
not compete against the Malay kendaraan in the meaning ‘vehicle’.
By the 20th century, direct Indian influence was long past, with
Sanskrit playing no part in the life of the people of Indonesia, except in
Bali. Therefore, modern borrowings from Sanskrit have been deliberate
choices, sometimes by language planners but much more frequently by
others familiar with or having access to Kawi sources. This is unlike the
case of borrowing from English since the mid-1960s, which has largely
been spontaneous, not a result of deliberate choice but by the often
casual use of English words by people directly familiar with the language.
1 7 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

T H E  S TAT U S  L A N G U A G E
Sociolinguists have long pointed out that people who want to exhibit
their familiarity with foreign cultures, especially so-called prestigious
cultures, tend to borrow from the languages spoken in those cultures
as proud evidence of such familiarity. In the 1950s, emphasis was
shifting from Dutch to English among educated Indonesians so that,
carrying out a study in the early 1960s, a sociolinguist was able to
write:
The position of Dutch has changed drastically. Its former official
functions are now filled by Indonesian; its previous educational uses
are now largely filled by Indonesian plus English. English has almost
completely replaced it in its prior function of relating Indonesia to the
rest of the world in politics and business, as has Indonesian in inter-
ethnic communication.1
English influence is not entirely a recent phenomenon in
Indonesia. A few borrowings date from the British period under
Raffles (1811–16), such as dokar (horse-drawn buggy) from English
‘dog-cart’. In Bengkulu (Bencoolen), in southeast Sumatra, a number
of common words still survive from the period when it was a British
colony (1684–1824), including:
belangkit
blanket
duaro
door
kabad
cupboard
stakin
stocking2
9
T H E  I N F L U E N C E  O F  E N G L I S H

From 1918 until the Japanese takeover, English was taught in
Dutch-language secondary schools for non-Europeans, but there seem
to have been very few borrowings during that period. The overwhelm-
ing majority of words from English have been borrowed since indepen-
dence, especially since 1966. The position of English as a world
language, study by many of the elite in English-speaking countries,
opportunities to travel abroad, the availability of English-language pub-
lications, films and television shows, and the occurrence of borrowings
from English in many other languages have all contributed to its influ-
ence on Indonesian. Many terms entering Indonesian from English are
part of a global vocabulary, occurring in many languages in domains of
modern life.3
From the time of independence, the USA has had tremendous eco-
nomic influence on Indonesia. In the early period of independence, it
also sent large numbers of advisors and consultants from a wide range
of disciplines and trained hundreds of Indonesian scholars and govern-
ment officials in American universities. Between 1956 and 1964, from
just two major universities, the University of Indonesia and the
Bandung Institute of Technology, more than 750 staff members stud-
ied in American colleges and universities under US aid programs.4 The
number of Indonesians studying in English-speaking countries rose
rapidly; in 1966, there were 2100, rising to 4000 in 1972, the largest
number in the USA, followed by Australia, with smaller numbers in the
United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand.5 Numbers continued to
rise; by the 1990s, there were more than 17 000 Indonesian students
studying in Australia alone. From the beginning of Suharto’s New
Order regime in 1966, the Indonesian elite had increased opportunities
to travel overseas, participate in international trade and diplomatic
negotiations, attend international conferences and scientific meetings,
and so on, as well as meeting increasing numbers of visitors from other
countries.
A study compiled using official sources up to the late 1970s (see
p. 165) recognised only 670 English words as borrowings. However,
this ignores the large number of words regularly appearing at that time
in the press and being used by educated people. In fact, by the late
1970s, English words were pouring into the language, leading one
commentator, writing in 1977, to refer to the ‘trend towards Indo-
Saxonisation’. He identified ‘the appeal of English as an international
language … The predominance of this language in the global commu-
nication system … The dominance of American technology and the role
1 7 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

of its multinational corporations in the world’s trade’ as important fac-
tors.6 Numbers of global words — words appearing in many languages
— were originally used in Indonesian by educated speakers fluent in
Dutch (which often took them from English), and thus were borrowed
from that source. Later, other (younger) people, familiar with English,
independently borrowed the same items from that language. In such
cases, it is constant reinforcement through familiarity with English that
has resulted in these words becoming fully assimilated. As one example,
many soccer terms came from Dutch, which had taken them from
English, such as kiper (keeper) and suporter (supporter).
A number of words borrowed from Dutch were later replaced
wholly or partially by related, though slightly different, English words
or are now under strong competition from them. Thus earlier borrow-
ings like moril (Dutch moreel) and universil (Dutch universeel) were
largely replaced by forms like moral (moral) and universal (universal);
forms with -is, such as futuristis (Dutch futuristisch) and diplomatis
(Dutch diplomatisch), are now giving way to forms with -ik, such as
futuristik (futuristic) and diplomatik (diplomatic).
Because access to English was at first available mainly to the elite
in society, those who could acquire a good education and travel
abroad, ability in it has always been a mark of social status; to be able
to speak (some) English, like the ability to speak Dutch before it, has
always carried high prestige. Those with some facility in English are
often inclined to show it, revealing themselves to be modern, sophis-
ticated and successful. Those with prestige set the model for others;
high government officials drop English words and phrases into their
speech and are imitated by junior officials. Even people who know lit-
tle English may try to impress by dropping English words into their
conversation.
Although English became a compulsory school subject after inde-
pendence, this has played little part in its success in Indonesia. Until the
1980s, most teachers had limited English proficiency and teaching
tended to be of the same uninspiring grammar-based instruction used
in teaching Indonesian, with the consequence that few people acquired
anything but minimal English skills at school. In universities, where
English is a compulsory subject in most fields of study, the same has
generally been the case, although some better universities began to
show considerable improvement in English teaching in the 1980s, lead-
ing to more students acquiring good English reading skills and some-
times speaking proficiency.
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 7 5

On the other hand, in areas visited by English-speaking tourists,
poorly educated people often become quite proficient in selected regis-
ters of English without any formal instruction when it is important to
earning a living.7 But, overwhelmingly, it is the association of English
with prestige and status that has provided the impetus to acquiring oral
proficiency. For anyone wanting to learn English and having the ability
to pay for it, opportunities began to increase considerably in larger cities
from the late 1960s, with private language schools and tutors in abun-
dance. Organisations such as the Ford and Fulbright foundations of the
USA, the British Council and government agencies from other English-
speaking countries have all played a part in promotion of the language.
With growing prosperity under the New Order government, a mid-
dle class emerged, marked in part by nouveau riche lifestyles and values
of conspicuous consumption. Characteristics of this middle class include
a preference for Western culture, transmitted through the print media,
films, radio and television, rather than traditional culture. The oppor-
tunity to mix professionally and socially with middle-class Westerners,
both within and outside the country, contributed to increased demand
for English lessons and conversation classes.8
Not only is ability in English necessary for status; in many situations,
it is also necessary to avoid loss of face. Speaking English or spicing
one’s speech with English words, phrases and even whole sentences, is
so frequent among educated people that the need to keep up puts enor-
mous pressure on many to acquire such skills. Living in a city, one can-
not escape being constantly exposed to English. Advertisements, in the
press, radio and television and in the streets, frequently contain English
and may be wholly in English. Frequent contact with foreigners, who
rarely have any proficiency in Indonesian, further increases the demand
to perform.
Pressures to learn English were already strong by 1966 and contin-
ued to get stronger, not just for the sake of enhancing prestige, but for
financial security and reward. In many fields, a knowledge of English is
either important or essential. Many businesses require English even of
junior executives and clerks. Advertisements for clerical positions usually
specify English skills and frequently advertisements are wholly in English.
The excessive use of English by many in the educated urban middle
class might lead the observer to suppose that there is a widespread high
level of proficiency in English among this group. In fact, the percentage
of people in the educated class with high-level command of English 
is small, partly because of the poor quality of language teaching in
1 7 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

schools. Government officials will throw English expressions into their
speeches, sometimes without a clear idea of what they mean. While
journalists frequently employ English words and phrases, and quote
others using English, it is not uncommon for them to reveal their own
limited facility in the language. When an English teacher is quoted as
saying that Ia makan nasi means ‘He/she eat rice’ or when a politician
is quoted as saying ‘I am fine and I still live. My life happily’, the jour-
nalist reveals his own limited English, whether or not the error was that
of the person being quoted in the first place.9
T H E  R O L E  O F  T H E  M A S S  M E D I A  
I N  D I S S E M I N AT I N G  E N G L I S H
The role of the mass media in exposing the public to English can
hardly be exaggerated. In the Sukarno era and the early days of the New
Order, journalists had very limited resources for obtaining news, both
from within the country and from overseas. Following the change of
government in 1966, there was a drop in both the number of newspa-
pers and the number of copies printed. However, from the early 1980s,
the number of newspapers increased at a rapid rate (see p. 149).
News magazines also became popular with the urban middle class.
Such magazines, aimed at the educated class wishing to keep abreast of
current affairs, felt free to use English words, assuming that their read-
ers would understand. A study of four 1979 issues of the influential
news magazine Tempo found more than 900 words from European lan-
guages, almost all from English, of which nearly half could be said to be
assimilated by the wide currency that they had in contemporary
Indonesian society.10 From the 1980s, there appeared numerous
lifestyle magazines for particular interest groups among the affluent
middle class, containing much that would be familiar in similar maga-
zines in other countries, devoting considerable space to discussion of
Western (usually American) films and film stars, television shows and
personalities, fashion, travel, cooking, personal advice and so on.
Many stories from overseas in the daily press come from English-
language agencies, like Reuters or United Press International, and with
deadlines to meet journalists frequently do not have time to look for
appropriate Indonesian translations, simply using the English, often in an
Indonesian ‘version’; for instance, replacing the ending ‘-ation’ with
-isasi. Such Indonesianisation of words does not mean that they are nec-
essarily assimilated, but journalists assume their readers will understand.
Use of Anglicisms has not been confined to news from abroad; stories
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 7 7

and articles derived from Indonesian sources were also appearing with
many English borrowings by the late 1960s. The spontaneous use of
English by journalists and their failure to follow the advice of language
planners, or even to find out what that advice is, has long shown the lack
of influence of the planners on the language of the press, as discussed in
Chapter 8. Columns in newspapers and magazines by guest writers
(often academics) and letters to the editor show that educated readers
are just as inclined to employ Anglicisms in their writing as journalists.
A comparative study of the press in 1966 and 1996 found an enor-
mous increase in lexical borrowings from English, as well as syntactic
changes under English influence over the 30 years. The study identified
more than 600 adjectives and more than 500 verbs derived from English
in the 1996 sample, which together comprised 40 per cent of all bor-
rowings identified in the study. This represents a huge increase over the
number of borrowings from English occurring in the print media 30
years earlier, for which period the study identified 126 adjectives and 39
verbs in the samples examined. Many of the adjectives refer to abstract
concepts; for example, signifikan, internal, brutal, brilian, agresif,
domestik, arogan and serius. For most of these, there are no precise syn-
onyms in Indonesian, although quite a number of borrowings occur
alongside very similar established words, as with spesial and khusus, sim-
pel and sederhana. Many of the words identified in this study are far from
fully assimilated, but their frequent use by journalists is leading to
increasingly wide acceptance. The author wrote that these ‘demonstrate
how contributors to the Indonesian print media in 1996 were able to
write linguistically sophisticated and stylistically varied discourses on a
great number of matters relating to new concepts, products and tech-
nologies and do this with a greater degree of lexical economy, diversity
and precision than was possible in 1966’.11 Most of the new adjectives
and verbs relate to the registers of business and economics, education,
national and international affairs, health, science and technology.
The study found that many businesses continue to employ English
words and syntax in their names, such as  Gadjah Mada Department
Store, Blok M Mall, Makmur Fashion Centre, Lin’s Garden Restaurant,
and many others, despite official attempts to discourage the practice.
Such use of English, usually without spelling change, is deliberately done
‘to create a more “international” and “prestigious” corporate image’.12
Women’s beauty is a domain employing many English words and
phrases, such as ‘shower’, ‘waxing’, ‘facial cleanser’, ‘blow-dryer’, ‘lip
gloss’, ‘lipstick’ and ‘shampoo’. That these are given with English
1 7 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

spelling, or a mixture of English and Indonesian spelling (for instance,
‘lipstick’ is usually spelt ‘lip stik’), shows that they are not fully assimi-
lated words and phrases, but are recognised as being English. Their use
is thus a case of code-switching, with the use of English phrases where
no Indonesian equivalent occurs or where one does not present itself
immediately to the writer. Their frequency, however, suggests that such
forms are used effortlessly by educated speakers.
Advertising, in both print and electronic media, has also introduced
large numbers of English words. Advertising takes up a significant
amount of the space in the media. The study of Tempo in 1979, referred
to above, found that advertising averaged about 30 per cent of text.
Advertisements used a considerable amount of English, some in fact
being wholly in English.13 The study of the press in 1996 found that
more than 50 per cent of space in lifestyle magazines, 35 per cent in
daily newspapers and 31 per cent in weekly news magazines was taken
up with advertising, again with many advertisements wholly or par-
tially in English.14
It is quite common in the print media for an Indonesian word or
phrase to be followed in parentheses by the English original, such as
tahan air (waterproof) and tiras surya (sunscreen). Writers clearly make
the assumption that the reader will be more familiar with the English term
than the Indonesian, although in many cases it is difficult to see if any-
thing is achieved by this, as with teh hijau (green tea) and minyak tea tree
(tea tree oil).
In some ways, television is having a greater influence on the
Indonesian language than any other medium. The number of registered
television sets in Indonesia was just 10 000 in 1962, all in Jakarta.
Under the New Order government, television services spread to the rest
of the country, with a million sets by 1980. From the early days, there
were programs from English-speaking countries, usually weekly serials
with subtitles. In 1988, a second television channel began broadcasting
and more soon followed. These greatly extended the variety of pro-
grams, including English-language, mostly American, shows — which
are presented in English with Indonesian subtitles. From the 1980s,
satellite reception greatly increased the number of channels to those
who could afford it, including many international channels broadcast-
ing exclusively in English. Local television programs are in Indonesian,
but the songs on variety and popular entertainment shows are often in
English. This also applies to radio; many of the English-language songs
played have enormous appeal to the youth and the words are learnt by
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 7 9

heart. With young people, American movies are popular and in the
1980s the Indonesian film industry went into significant decline due to
its inability to compete with English-language imports.
A R E A S  O F  B O R R O W I N G
Borrowing from English occurs in some areas of discourse far more
than in others. It is unlikely that Indonesians would borrow words from
English or any other foreign language for an area of traditional culture,
such as the wayang performance. But in registers associated with mod-
ern, cosmopolitan topics, such as fashion, film, science and technology,
borrowing from English is frequent, both in the mass media and among
the general educated public.
At the beginning of the 21st century, absorption of English words
was continuing at a rapid pace. Some of the registers in which English
words commonly occur in the press are given below, each with a few
representative terms from the great many that could be cited. The 1993
edition of the official dictionary, Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia, con-
tains over 10 000 more headwords than the first edition of 1988, the
great majority of which are adopted global terms. Although they occur
in many languages, including Dutch, recent borrowings can almost all
be identified as coming from English.
The following are a few domains in which a large number of bor-
rowings occur, with a few examples given for each.
•
SPORT:
atlit
athlete
final
final
finis
finish
gol
goal
golf
golf
rekor
record
skor
score
tenis
tennis
turnamen
tournament
•
MOVIES:
eksyen
action
sekuel
sequel
selebriti
celebrity
skrining
screening
syuting
shooting
1 8 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

•
MUSIC:
diskotik
discotheque
fans
a fan (from the English plural)
hit
hit
kaset
cassette
merelis album release an album
ngetop
top of hit parade
skor
score
•
POPULAR CULTURE:
aksesori
accessory
fantasi
fantasy
gosip
gossip
joging
jog(ging)
komedi
comedy
kuis
quiz
modeling
modelling
status sosial
social status
•
BUSINESS AND B ANKING:
broker
broker
globalisasi
globalisation
impor/ekspor
import/export
inflasi
inflation
investor
investor
karier
career
komersial
commercial
konglomerat
conglomerate
kreditor
creditor
profesional
professional
stagnasi
stagnation
•
GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS:
aliansi
alliance
birokrasi
bureaucracy
koalisi
coalition
krisis
crisis
kroni
crony
melobi
lobby
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 8 1

•
MILITARY:
Many military terms are from Dutch. However, more recently have
come borrowings from English, including the following associated
with the airforce:
kokpit
cockpit
simulator
simulator
skuadron
squadron
helikopter
helicopter
jet
jet
kru
crew
supersonik
supersonic
•
SCIENCE:
Modern terms have replaced many older terms that are now felt to
be imprecise and old-fashioned. Thus astronomi is now used instead
of ilmu bintang (science of stars), geographi instead of ilmu bumi
(science of the earth), and so on.
•
MEDIC AL:
akut
acute
diabetes
diabetes (earlier kencing manis ‘sweet urine’)
diagnosis
diagnosis
donor (darah) (blood) donor
kolaps
collapse
stress
stress
stroke
stroke
•
COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY:
download
to download
kompatibel
compatible
mem-backup
to back up
meng-email
to email
mengklik
to click
A computer printer is printer, not pencetak, the common word in
other contexts. Whole sentences in discussion of computers may con-
tain barely any Indonesian: Fasilitas ini dapat transfer data dari pon-
sel ke printer dan ponsel lain yang kompatibel means ‘This facility can
transfer data from the mobile phone (ponsel from ‘cell phone’, using
pon rather than assimilated telepon) to compatible printers and other
mobile phones’.
1 8 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Through fast-food chains like McDonald’s and Pizza Hut, terms
such as burger, donut and chicken, with American spelling, are familiar
in large cities. One commentator recounts that, in a Jakarta restaurant,
he asked for gelas susu (a glass of milk), only to be met with puzzlement
from two waitresses. Only when they called in the manager did they
understand that he wanted freshmilk, the term that was on their menu.15
A number of organisations and places have only English names,
such as ICW (Indonesian Corruption Watch — set up after fall of
Suharto), Jakarta Convention Centre, Jakarta Outer Ring Road, and
UPC (Urban Poor Consortium).
T H E  A S S I M I L AT I O N  O F  B O R R O W I N G S
How assimilated are many of the English terms appearing in the media
and in frequent use by educated speakers? That is, how many
Indonesians regard these terms as Indonesianised and not simply as for-
eign words being used either for clarity or to win prestige? In some
cases, this is a difficult question to answer and the answer will differ
from person to person. Many of the terms are frequently used and per-
fectly natural to educated city-dwellers, but would sound foreign and
even unintelligible to people of lesser education, including most rural
people. Many of the terms are used so frequently by educated people in
both writing and speech that they have won acceptance in the official
dictionary, Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia. The 1979 study of Tempo
magazine referred to above suggested that only half the words located
were assimilated in terms of how widely they are used. A significant
number of those listed as non-assimilated would now be regarded as
perfectly acceptable to any educated person; for example, konflik,
narkotik, agresif, surpris and konservatif.
In some cases, a verb is shown to be assimilated or not by whether
the verbal prefix meN- (where N represents any nasal sound) assimilates
to the first sound of the verb base. If the base begins with ‘s’, ‘p’, ‘t’, or
‘k’, this sound is lost. For example:
meN- + tulis Smenulis (write)
With foreign words, the initial consonant is retained. For example:
meN- + kontrol Smengkontrol (to control)
This is largely so that the unfamiliar word remains entirely intact for
recognition. As the word becomes more common, it becomes more
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 8 3

assimilated; increasing numbers of people feel comfortable to use it as if
it were a native word. When this occurs, the normal rules for applying
meN- operate; mengkontrol then appears as mengontrol. Such changes
do not occur instantly. Frequently, the same word will appear in both
forms for years, with some people treating it as assimilated well before
others. This does not only apply to borrowings from English, but also
to earlier borrowings from other languages, including Arabic. The
Arabic borrowing taat (obedient) occurred in the derivative mentaati
(to obey) for a long period, even into the 1990s, although the regu-
larised menaati has now almost entirely replaced it.
When borrowings from English such as target and sukses formed
verbs like mentargetkan (to target, aim at) and mensukseskan (to make
successful), they could not be regarded as yet accepted as Indonesian.
When menargetkan and menyukseskan began to appear in the press and
in speech alongside them, the process of assimilation was well under-
way. Such processes are very visible in the mass media, with competing
forms appearing until eventually there is full integration, with only the
regular form occurring.
Quite a few borrowings have been fully integrated in Indonesian,
but with a meaning different from the English original. Thus success
means ‘successful’ (‘success’ is the derived form kesuksesan), sensor
means ‘censorship’ (the verb mensensor is ‘to censor’). In other cases,
there is a semantic shift, as with:
drop
give funds or goods to areas which need them
duet
two people working as a team (used frequently 
in the press in the late 1990s of President Wahid 
and Vice President Megawati)
grogi
nervous
isu, isyu
rumour (as well as ‘issue’)
juri
member of a jury (‘jury’ is dewan juri, literally 
‘council of jurors’)
kompak
united by feelings of solidarity (of a team or group)
lobi
informal deliberations among members of 
different parliamentary parties
skenario
script (for a movie)
yel
slogan shouted in demonstration
Where a phrase is borrowed from English, the order of words is 
usually changed to conform with Indonesian grammar; normally this
involves placing an adjective after a noun, as with desainer fesyen
1 8 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

(fashion designer), efek domino (domino effect) and krisis moniter
(monetary crisis). Such forms contrast with completely unassimilated
English phrases that retain English word order.
It is common practice in the print media to use italics for a word
that is a borrowing and not felt to be assimilated, whether from a for-
eign language or a regional language like Javanese. Thus, in Akan ada
krisis dan showdown. (There will be a crisis and a showdown), with
showdown in italics in the original, the writer recognises krisis as an
assimilated word, familiar and often used, while showdown is treated as
not (yet) being Indonesian, but a case of an English word being used
where an Indonesian equivalent is not readily to hand. Words italicised
in this way usually retain the spelling of the original, thus showdown
instead of syodaun. This can be compared with syuting for ‘shooting’,
an assimilated word referring to filming. English phrasal verbs can also
occur as verb bases; for example, mem-back up (to back someone up,
support) and me-markup (harga), meaning ‘to mark up (prices)’. The
fact that these forms are usually italicised in the press and retain their
English spelling shows that, while familiar, they are not yet assimilated.
Presumably, if back up becomes fully integrated, it will come to be spelt
bekap — compare the assimilated word beking (backing, support).
Not all foreign forms used by journalists and others succeed in
becoming fully accepted by the community. In some cases, an appar-
ently accepted borrowing is later replaced by an Indonesian equivalent.
Thus earlier mengkover (cover a story — of a journalist) has been entirely
replaced by meliput, a new word based on meliputi (cover something
over). Similarly, mengasembling (assemble, put together) has been
replaced by merakit (originally meaning ‘make a raft’) and prakarsa has
replaced inisiatif for ‘initiative’.
E X C E S S I V E  B O R R O W I N G  F R O M  E N G L I S H
A great many borrowings from English fulfil no communicative need,
expressing concepts adequately covered by existing words. Examples include:
eksis, beside ada (exist)
hipokrit, beside munafik (hypocrite)
kandidat, beside calon (candidate)
opini, beside pendapat (opinion)
prediksi, beside ramalan and prakiraan (forecast, prediction)
reporter, beside wartawan (journalist)
target, beside sasaran (target)
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 8 5

In such cases, the existence of a well-established word would appear
to rule out the need for the English word. However, familiarity with
English in areas associated with modernity and the global village make
it easy for people to use such words, which may push aside existing
words that are not associated with modern life. Such unnecessary
English words have been called ‘markers of modern identity’, revealing
the user to be educated and modern.16
A proliferation of such competing forms is a source of much irrita-
tion to the language planners and others who resent the excessive influ-
ence of English on their national language. But while the press,
advertisers, businesses and other sectors of educated population think
that English terms are more precise, modern and prestigious, the plan-
ners are unlikely to get their way.
One scholar has noted that many borrowings from English are
superfluous from the point of view of communicative efficiency, but
have a conspicuous place by bringing the language into conformity 
with traditional indigenous conceptions of elite speech and speakers. 
He writes:
These borrowings do not help to meet communicative requirements in
a modernizing society as an efficient language so much as they conform
with and furnish evidence of a traditional conception of proper, presti-
gious language use and users, one that is well known to students of
Javanese culture … Like the Sanskritic borrowings … superfluous
Anglicisms can be linked to a traditional Javanese conception of the
relation of esoteric linguistic codes to esoteric knowledge and social
power.17
In this analysis, just identifying status and fashion as the social moti-
vators for the influence of English fails to see the deeper cultural values,
at least for Javanese.
Some borrowings are felt to fulfil a need for a particular concept
that is new to the society or is felt not to be fully or precisely covered
by existing words. Thus fair has, since the late 1990s, become a com-
mon word, somewhat different in meaning from adil (just), bisnis (busi-
ness) is a concept not adequately covered by any existing word, while
transaksi (business deal) is more precise than urusan bisnis, which is a
broader term for ‘business affairs’.
It is not unusual for intellectuals to pepper their speech, not only
with English words, but with whole phrases. The following short sam-
ple, spoken by journalist Mohamad Sobari during a radio interview in
2000, is not atypical:
1 8 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Gus Dur memerlukan transitional period, saya kira something like three
years or so untuk itu … MPR yang anggota-anggotanya sangat selfish,
sangat group oriented dan berfikir tentang short-term projects.
TRANSLATION:
Gus Dur (President Abdurrahman Wahid) needs a transitional period,
I think something like three years or so in order to … The MPR (People’s
Consultative Council) whose members are very selfish, very group ori-
ented and think about short-term projects.
Use of phrases and snippets of English, as in the above example, is
common among educated people and is typical of intellectual debate.
This is a case of code-switching, in which the speaker switches within
the utterance from one language to another and back again. In this way,
English elements, when used frequently enough, can become increas-
ingly integrated, eventually becoming established as fully accepted or
integrated borrowings.
The freedom with which journalists and others have in recent times
been prepared to use English words as bases for derived forms can be
seen in words like me-nothing-kan (do nothing with; treat as nothing),
as in Pak Abdurrahman Wahid me-nothing-kan apa-apa yang kami
sampaikan (Abdurrahman Wahid does nothing with/dismisses what-
ever we convey to him), said by a member of parliament. The word
‘nothing’ has not been borrowed into Indonesian and is another exam-
ple of code-switching — in this case, the English being the base of a
transitive verb with Indonesian morphology. The word is italicised when
reported in the press, with ‘nothing’ separated from affixes by hyphens,
a clear indication that the newspapers do not regard it as an integrated
form. Nevertheless, the constant use of such forms by members of the
educated elite highlights just how willing they are to use English words,
even to the extent of deriving complex words from them.
It is often assumed that excessive or unnecessary use of English is
a phenomenon confined to formal language and the mass media.
However, educated people are probably more likely to sprinkle their
colloquial speech with English words and phrases than their formal
writing and speech. For instance, in formal language ‘mobile phone’
is telepon genggam (literally ‘hand telephone’), ‘airport’ is bandar
udara (a loan translation of the English) and ‘travel agent’ is biro per-
jalanan. In colloquial speech, it is more common to hear ‘hand
phone’, frequently abbreviated to ha pe (h p), ‘airport’ and ‘travel
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 8 7

agent’ for these, forms that are unlikely to be encountered in the
press. While penjualan is the formal word for ‘sales’, people speaking
informally in the business domain are more likely to simply use the
English and, in connection with computers, to use di-save (saved) and
di-on-kan (turned on), where disimpan and dinyalakan are the stan-
dard terms in formal language.18
The following short extracts are taken from unplanned colloquial
conversations between university graduates in Jakarta. As in the exam-
ples of formal speech above, they contain whole phrases in English:
D married sama L dibawah tangan. Jadi nggak ada surat nikahnya.
Beneran itu. It’s not just a rumour, gitu loh, but true.
D married L unofficially. So they don’t have a marriage certificate.
It’s true. It’s not just a rumour, you know, but true.
A:
Gua pengen sekolah ke luar negeri, cuman gua kepikiran 
tentang hubungan gua sama Fido nih.
B:
Iya yah. Long distance relationship tu, tu bener nggak si 
ya? Maksudnya bisa bertahan enggak si?
A:
Ya si … depends-lah.
A:
I want to study abroad, but I’m worried about my 
relationship with Fido.
B:
Yeah. Can there really be a long-distance relationship? 
I mean, could it be long-lasting?
A:
Yes, well … it depends.
Saya seneng banget, liat pesawat tu take off, gitu. Bagi saya tu
impressive skali.
I really like to watch the planes take off, you know. For me that’s
really impressive.
Such conversations are spontaneous and the English is in no way
forced. Constant unplanned use of English words and phrases in this
way reveals familiarity with the English and relaxed confidence in using
it, even if it is not always used correctly.19
A F F I X E S
As mentioned, when a word containing an affix in one language is bor-
rowed into another language, the affix cannot necessarily be treated as
an affix in the borrowing language; frequently the word acts as a single
meaningful unit in the borrowing language. Affixes in such words in the
1 8 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

original language only become affixes in the borrowing language when
their status as separate meaningful units becomes recognised through
use in new words whose base occurs alone. Thus -isasi, borrowed from
Dutch (see p. 167), clearly became a new suffix in Indonesian when
people felt free to add it to words other than those with which it was
originally borrowed, such as Balkanisasi (Balkanisation), where it is
attached to the free word Balkan. In cases like this, users are consciously
using -isasi to produce a new noun meaning ‘cause to be like what the
base indicates’. Hence -isasi has become an established derivational suf-
fix in modern Indonesian. In borrowing English words ending with
‘-(is)ation’, Indonesian replaces the suffix with Dutch-derived -(is)asi;
for example, the English ‘recommendation’ is borrowed as rekomendasi
and ‘globalisation’ as globalisasi.
As well as suffixes, a number of new prefixes can be recognised as
having been accepted as part of the Indonesian system of bound mor-
phemes. Most of these also occur in Dutch, but it is since the decline of
Dutch influence that their frequent use and application to new bases has
become noticeable. The negative prefix de- was used in de-Prabowo-isasi
(de-Prabowoisation) in 1998, a reference to the removal of the influ-
ence of sacked General Prabowo from the military. While the word may
have been short-lived, it demonstrates the freedom that many journal-
ists, commentators and others felt in applying de-, already occurring in
words such as deregulasi (deregulation — besides regulasi ‘regulation’),
to new words.
Other new prefixes in the language include:
dis-
as in disintegrasi (disintegration — besides integrasi
‘integration’) and diskredit (discredit — besides kredit
‘credit’)
in-
as in instabilitas (instability — besides stabilitas
‘stability’) and inkonsisten (inconsistent — besides 
konsisten ‘consistent’)
non-
as in non-migas (not oil or gas), nonmiliter (non-
military) and non-pribumi (non-indigenous)
re-
as in recek (recheck — besides cek ‘check’) and 
reedukasi (reeducation — besides edukasi ‘education’)
Another possible prefix is anti, although this is usually written as 
a separate word and could be regarded as a word meaning ‘opposed 
to; acting against’, as in anti perang (anti-war) and anti Mega
(anti-Megawati).
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 8 9

Popular with journalists and advertisers in the modern language is
the use of such forms as:
ekstra-
as in ekstraketat (extra tight — of security) and 
ekstrahati-hati (extra careful)
mega-
as in megabintang (megastar) and megahit (megahit 
— of a pop song)
multi-
as in multinasional (multinational) and multilevel
(multilevel)
super-
as in supertipis dan superaman (super thin and super 
safe — of a brand of glasses)
ultra-
as in ultraringan dan ultratipis (ultra light and ultra 
thin)
Whether such forms should be regarded as prefixes could be
debated, and some people write them as separate words. They cannot
be regarded as adjectives because, as such, they would follow rather
than precede the noun. To educated city-dwellers familiar with mod-
ern advertising and the language of television and magazines, these
forms are already assimilated and can be added to new words,
although it is doubtful if they are (yet) regarded as Indonesian by less
educated people.
There is now a large number of verbs whose base comes from a
derived noun (in English), not from the verb from which the noun
is derived. Thus, instead of a verb being based on ‘explore’, one is
based on ‘exploration’: mengeksplorasi (to explore). This has become
the preferred form of borrowing where in English a noun is derived
from a verb with the suffix ‘-ation’. Among many other instances
are:
mempublikasikan
to publish (as well as publikasi 
‘publication’)
mendeskripsikan
to describe (as well as deskripsi 
‘description’)
mengidentifikasi
to identify (as well as identifikasi 
‘identification’)
merekomendasikan
to recommend (as well as rekomendasi
‘recommendation’)
The suffix -isasi is now even used to create derivatives that do not
occur in English and that have to be translated by a paraphrase. These
include eufemisasi (the use of euphemisms) and sarkasmisasi (the use
1 9 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

of sarcasm), as in sarkasmisasi sebagai strategi perlawanan antarelite
(using sarcasm as a strategy in conflict among the elite).
Heavy borrowing from English has resulted in a number of other
innovations in verb formation. Derived English words may form
Indonesian verb bases. These can consist of a negativising prefix and
base, as with mendiskreditkan (to discredit — base diskredit) and
menonaktifkan (to make nonactive — base nonaktif), as in Jenderal
Wiranto dinonaktifkan (General Wiranto was put on the nonactive list
— removed from duties). The acceptability of this last form is shown
by its use with other derivatives, such as the noun-forming affixation
pen-…-an: soal penonaktifan Wiranto (the question of the nonactivat-
ing of Wiranto).
L O A N  T R A N S L AT I O N S
English influence has not been entirely in the form of direct borrowing.
A great many Indonesian phrases employ native words based on English
models. Such loan translations — or calques, as they are called — some-
times consist merely of an extension of an existing meaning of a word,
such as bintang (star) for ‘movie star’ and merangkul (hug, embrace)
for ‘encompass’. Many are phrases that are direct translations of the
English, including:
cetak biru
blueprint
kekebalan diplomatik
diplomatic immunity
pencakar langit
skyscraper
pertolongan pertama
first aid
polisi huru-hara
riot police
serangan jantung
heart attack
In recent years, such forms have proliferated. Some would probably
not be clearly understood by most people outside the educated elite,
such as:
kebakaran jenggot
have one’s beard singed
kilas balik
flashback
pembuat keputusan
decision maker
pembunuh berantai
serial killer
perselisihan kepentingan
conflict of interest
posisi kunci
key position
A few common loan translations involve some sort of semantic
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 9 1

shift from the original, such as kambing hitam (scapegoat — literally
‘black goat’, a confusion with ‘black sheep’) and dagang sapi (horse
trading — literally ‘cow trade’, a term that came into vogue during
the political manoeuvring after the fall of Suharto). Some loan trans-
lations are quite long, revealing how prepared many journalists and
others are to adapt English-language phrases rather than simply bor-
rowing the English; for example, sepelontaran batu (dari), meaning ‘a
stone’s throw (from)’, senjata pemusnah massal (weapon of mass
destruction) and membentur-benturkan kepala ke dinding (bash one’s
head against the wall).
It is not infrequent for a common phrase to be a hybrid, with one
component from English and the other component from Indonesian,
as with polusi udara (air pollution), komedi hitam (black comedy) and
konflik agama (religious conflict). In such cases, the phrase itself
occurs under English influence.
G R A M M AT I C A L  I N N O V AT I O N S
Indonesian has undergone a considerable number of grammatical
changes under English influence, even where direct borrowing has
not been involved, of which the following are a few examples.
The function of the affixation ke-…-an, which derives abstract
nouns, such as keanggotaan (membership — from base anggota
‘member’), has been enormously extended. This process began under
Dutch influence, but later increased considerably because of the need
for reference to a greater number and variety of abstract concepts.
This includes its attachment to verbs with the prefixes ter- and ber-,
such as keberangkatan (departure — from berangkat ‘depart’) and
keterbacaan (readability — from terbaca ‘readable’). As another inno-
vation, the negator tidak can now occur within the affixation: ketidak-
akuratan (inaccuracy — tidak akurat ‘inaccurate’), ketidak-berdayaan
(powerlessness — tidak berdaya ‘not powerful, powerless’) and keti-
dak-sesuaian (unsuitability; incompatibility — tidak sesuai ‘not suit-
able, not compatible’).
Journalists, novelists and other writers are inclined to use 
sentences containing various participial clauses, which are common 
in English but until recently were unknown in Indonesian. Use of 
such structures was initiated by journalists translating directly from
English, as with Terletak di dekat pelabuhan, tempat itu sering 
dikunjungi pelaut-pelaut (Located near the harbour, the place is fre-
quented by sailors). Without English influence, this would have to be
1 9 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

expressed with a relative clause: Tempat yang terletak dekat pelabuhan
itu … (The place that is located near the harbour …). Combinations
of prepositions and interrogatives, like di mana? (where?) and untuk
siapa? (for whom), are used by many people as literal translations of
English structures, although condemned by purists, as in Kota
Jakarta, di mana penduduknya bertambah terus … (Jakarta, where the
population continues to grow …) and Pak Saleh, untuk siapa laporan
ini dibuat, … (Mr Saleh, for whom this report was made, …).20
Passive constructions have always been of higher frequency in
Indonesian than in Western European languages and continue to be
so in both formal and informal speech. (In Western languages such as
English, passives, such as ‘The stone was thrown by John’, are much
less common than active constructions, such as ‘John threw the
stone’.) However, under influence of first Dutch and then English,
there has been a marked shift towards use of active constructions in
formal written Indonesian. One study found that more than 60 per
cent of transitive clauses (constructions that can have a subject and an
object) were passive in Classical Malay of the 17th century, which
dropped to 44 per cent in newspapers of the 1970s and even lower in
novels.21 In the following example, the first passage is from the pre-
1978 Catholic Eucharistic text and the second is from the post-1978
version. Both versions have the same meaning. In both versions the
first verb meng-ambil ‘take’ is active; all the other verbs are passive in
the first version, with the prefix di-, and active in the second version,
with the prefix meN-. In the English translation, all verbs are active,
as passives would be quite unnatural. The verbs are underlined in all
versions, with bases separated from affixes by hyphens.
PRE-1978 VERSION:
Yesus meng-ambil roti, di-ucap-kan-nya doa syukur, di-bagi-bagi-nya
roti itu, dan di-beri-kan-nya kepada murid-murid-nya …
POST-1978 VERSION:
Yesus meng-ambil roti, meng-ucap syukur, mem-bagi-bagi roti itu,
dan mem-beri-kan-nya kepada para murid …
TRANSLATION:
Jesus took bread, said a prayer of thanks, divided the bread and gave
it to His disciples …22
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 9 3

R E A C T I O N  T O  E N G L I S H  I N F L U E N C E
The policy of the Pusat Bahasa (Language Centre) is not to borrow
Western words unless there is no local choice. One of the stated reasons
is that the effect on the language of too much Western influence is to
produce a kind of linguistic segregation between the language of the
common people and the educated elite who are familiar with Western
languages, in particular English.23 In the 1990s, the Pusat Bahasa
undertook a campaign against the use of foreign terms for the sake of
prestige only. Among terms it denounced were ‘money changer’, ‘grand
opening’, ‘department store’ and ‘delivery service’. But the
‘Indonesian’ terms it offered as alternatives, such as pedagang valuta
asing (literally ‘foreign exchange trader’) for ‘money changer’, are
unlikely to impress most people who use the English terms.24
Criticism of excessive use of English has long been frequent, even
being expressed in commentaries by journalists, the very ones responsi-
ble for much of the problem! The term bahasa gado-gado (mixed-up
language — gado-gado being a mixed vegetable dish) is derisively used
for the language of officials and others who insert too much English
into their speech and writing. Among criticisms are that the officials
who use such language lack pride in Indonesian and set a poor example
for the public.
The problem of excessive use of English is not a new one. In 1973,
Ali Sadikin, the governor of Jakarta, instructed government officials and
businesses to use Indonesian rather than English in the names of offices
and shops and in their professional terminology.25 In 1984, signboards
with ‘foreign’ words were liable to a fine in Jakarta, a policy reinforced
in 1993.26 Such regulations have had little effect and have needed to be
repeated. In 1995, the government required the Indonesianisation of
the names of all buildings and businesses, with the Pusat Bahasa quickly
producing a guide book of appropriate Indonesian names.27 Most busi-
nesses wanting to use foreign names ignore the regulations and little is
done to enforce them (see examples on p. 178).
Among the educated public and the media there is something of a
double standard in attitudes to the intrusion of English. On the one
hand, their language is peppered with English words and phrases; on
the other, opposition among them to excessive use of English is com-
mon. Letters to the editor sections in newspapers contain many letters
whose writers pride themselves on displaying their knowledge of
English, as well as letters decrying the use of English and its ‘takeover’
1 9 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

of Indonesian. American movies, usually in English with subtitles, are
very popular, yet writers of letters to the editor express concern about
the Western influence on traditional values. Those who use English
excessively and those who complain about it publicly are, of course,
rarely the same people. Nevertheless, both groups tend to belong to the
educated middle class and elite in society. To date, there is no sign that
those unhappy about excessive use of English are in any way influenc-
ing the habits of the majority.
T H E
I N F L U E N C E
O F
E N G L I S H • 1 9 5
Figure 9.1
A satirical look at the influence of English.The caption reads:‘One Nation:
Indonesia, One People: Indonesian, One Language: ?’, while at a national music
festival the singing is in English — note errors in the English (Opini T. Sutanto,
Tempo, 6 November 1982). (Courtesy Tempo magazine)

T H E  L A N G U A G E S  O F  I N D O N E S I A
Indonesia has more languages than any other country in the
Asia–Pacific region, with the exception of Papua New Guinea. West
Papua (Irian Jaya), the Indonesian half of the island of New Guinea, has
at least 200 languages and there are about 350 in the rest of the coun-
try. This gives Indonesia about 550 languages, roughly one-tenth of all
the languages in the world today.
To arrive at the precise number of languages in Indonesia is impos-
sible. One of the main problems is that different researchers have dif-
ferent criteria for deciding whether two regional varieties constitute
dialects of a single language or separate languages. Thus in one classifi-
cation there is a language named Lamaholot, which occurs in a number
of dialects in Flores and nearby islands, while in another study this is
treated as 17 different languages.1 Some sources give a greater number
of languages overall for Indonesia than the roughly 550 mentioned.
One source, which is far more inclined than others to recognise closely
related dialects as distinct languages, claims a total of 714.2 Apart from
the differences in interpretation, the number of languages recognised
has continued to increase as the linguistic situation in the country has
become better understood. For instance, the number of languages
recognised in South Sulawesi gradually increased from seven in 1938 to
28 in 1989.3 Many of the regional forms recognised in the later works
were entirely unknown to the earlier authors, the increase in estimated
language numbers reflecting the ever-increasing depth and detail of
regional surveys by trained linguists.
1 0
R E G I O N A L  L A N G U A G E S  
A N D  T H E  S P R E A D  O F
I N D O N E S I A N

Indigenous languages in Indonesia are recognised as being either
Austronesian (discussed in Chapter 2) or non-Austronesian. The label
non-Austronesian is a term of convenience to cover a large number of
languages, also called Papuan languages, which belong to a variety of
groups whose relationships to each other, if any, have not all yet been
satisfactorily determined. These Papuan languages are spoken on the
island of New Guinea and on nearby islands, westward to Halmahera in
the north and to Timor and surrounding islands in the south. The
largest group of non-Austronesian languages is the Trans New Guinea
family, which has more than 150 members in Indonesia, as well as many
in Papua New Guinea.
The majority of languages in Indonesia are Austronesian, 64 per
cent of the languages in one count (see Table 10.1). The Austronesian
languages belong mainly to the Western Malayo-Polynesian group (see
Figure 2.2). In eastern Indonesia are languages of the Central-Eastern
Malayo-Polynesian group, scattered among non-Austronesian lan-
guages. On the island of New Guinea, Austronesian languages occur
only in a few coastal regions, with Papuan languages occupying the bulk
of the island. All the languages with significant numbers of speakers
belong to the Western Malayo-Polynesian group, including all the lan-
guages whose speakers are estimated to number more than 100 000, as
shown in Table 10.1.4
Table 10.1 
The languages of Indonesia
Number of speakers
Austronesian
Non-Austronesian
Total
More than 1 million
13
—
13
100 000–1 million
35
—
35
10 000–100 000
92
22
114
1000–10 000
127
73
200
200–1000
62
59
121
Fewer than 200
16
36
52
Not known
8
7
15
Total
353
197
550
The figures are not very recent, but details are unlikely to be signif-
icantly different today. The total of 550 languages is, as mentioned,
subject to the qualification that there are different interpretations of
what regional forms constitute distinct languages and some sources give
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 1 9 7

a larger number of languages. The percentage of the entire population
speaking Austronesian languages is, however, significantly higher than
that speaking non-Austronesian languages. The 48 languages with the
greatest number of speakers in Table 10.1 are all Austronesian. A more
recent source than that for Table 10.1 gives 14 languages, all Western
Malayo-Polynesian, as having more than a million speakers, as shown in
Table 10.2.5
Table 10.2
Numbers of speakers of larger languages
Language      Number (millions)
Main areas where spoken
Javanese
75
East & Central Java
Sundanese
27
West Java
Madurese
9
Madura, East Java
Minangkabau
6.5
Southern Sumatra
Buginese
3.6
South Sulawesi
Balinese
3
Bali
Acehnese
2.4
Northern Sumatra
Banjarese
2.1
Kalimantan
Sasak
2.1
Lombok
Toba Batak
2
Northern Sumatra
Makassarese
1.6
South Sulawesi
Lampung
1.5
Southern Sumatra
Dairi Batak
1.2
Northern Sumatra
Rejang
1
Southwest Sumatra
The figures are not likely to be entirely accurate; for some lan-
guages, the number of speakers will have risen and others may have
joined the million-plus group. Thus Gorontalo in North Sulawesi,
given as having 0.9 million speakers, may now have more than a mil-
lion speakers. Some others will have suffered a drop in numbers, as
discussed below. Banjarese is given as having 2.1 million speakers in
the source for this table, yet in the 1990 census the number of
Banjarese speakers, excluding children under five years of age, was
given as 2.75 million.6 The 1980 census, which counted children
under five, gave 1.42 million speakers. This increase, the most signif-
icant rise for any of the major languages in Indonesia, was mainly at
the expense of other Kalimantan languages. The official censuses give
data only on a limited number of the larger languages, as discussed
below.
1 9 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Malay has been excluded from Table 10.2. While regional forms of
Malay, both traditional and post-creole, have an aggregate number of
speakers in the tens of millions, it is impossible to give a meaningful
total. There is uncertainty as to whether all varieties called Malay can
actually be regarded as members of a single language. Table 10.2 lists
Banjarese as a separate language, although it is one of the descendants
of the Malay brought back to Borneo from Sumatra, possibly in
Srivijayan times, and it is still regarded as a form of Malay by many peo-
ple. A linguistic map published in 1983 gives ‘Sumatran Malay’ as hav-
ing ten million speakers, but occurring in 27 dialects, including Deli,
Riau, Kerinci, Besemah, Palembang, Bangka and Belitung.7 Some of
these, like Kerinci and Besemah, are generally recognised as sufficiently
different from other varieties to be classified as separate languages. Also,
Malay is spoken by significant numbers outside Indonesia, unlike any of
the other major languages. The source for Table 10.2 lists Pattani Malay
of southern Thailand as a separate language with a million speakers.
K N O W L E D G E  O F  I N D O N E S I A N
While it had been evident since independence that the percentage of
people who could speak Indonesian had been growing, it was only with
the census of 1971 that a reasonably informed estimate could be made,
with the censuses of 1980 and 1990 allowing a clearer picture of the
continuing growth in numbers of Indonesian speakers. However, there
are numerous difficulties in interpreting the figures.
First, ‘Indonesian’ is not defined. The 1971 census asked, ‘Do you
know Indonesian?’ The following two censuses went into more detail,
asking ‘What is your daily language at home?’ and ‘If not Indonesian, do
you know Indonesian?’ It is clear that, where the language of the home
was a local variety of Malay, people were inconsistent as to whether they
identified this as Indonesian or not. In the 1980 census, people in North
Sulawesi did not regard Manado Malay, the first language of the major-
ity in the capital city Manado and surrounding countryside, as
Indonesian; virtually no one in that region gave Indonesian as their first
language. On the other hand, the majority in the city of Medan, capital
of North Sumatra, gave Indonesian as their first language.8 Clearly, most
people in Medan regarded the local vernacular, a variety of traditional
Malay, as being (a kind of) Indonesian, whereas residents of Manado dis-
tinguished their first language, a development from a creole form of
Malay, from Indonesian. Between 1980 and 1990, in the Moluccas,
Indonesian showed a decline in numbers, whereas ‘other’ languages
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 1 9 9

increased. Apparently, many speakers of Ambon Malay gave their first
language as Indonesian in 1980, but as ‘other’ in 1990.9
Secondly, the answer to the question ‘Do you know Indonesian?’
had to be ‘yes’ or ‘no’; one could not write ‘a little’ or ‘only a region-
al variety’, for instance. Thus the census does not reveal people’s level
of competence in the language. One researcher has written: ‘There
may have been a tendency to answer “yes” as a sign of one’s good cit-
izenship, where “a bit” or perhaps “no” would have been more in
accordance with the facts.’ He adds: ‘If the benevolent response
towards the foreign tourist who manages to stammer a one-word
phrase in heavily accented Indonesian, O, bahasa Indonesianya lancar
sekali! (“Oh, you speak fluent Indonesian!”), is to be taken as indica-
tive of the average Indonesian’s evaluation of linguistic competence,
then the results of the censuses regarding knowledge of Indonesian
should be viewed with some scepticism’.10 In answer to the question
‘What is your daily language at home?’ bilingualism is excluded; the
respondent could only state one language. This distorts the real situa-
tion, as in many homes both a regional language and Indonesian are
used.
Nevertheless, these problems would have been the same for all the
censuses; consequently, comparison of the results is informative.
The numbers of people given as speaking Indonesian, whether as
‘daily language at home’ or otherwise known, in each census are shown
in Table 10.3. Figures are rounded to the nearest million.11
Table 10.3
Numbers speaking Indonesian according to censuses
Year
Indonesian speakers    Total population 
% of population
(millions, rounded)
(millions, rounded) speaking Indonesian
1971
48
118
41
1980
90
146
62
1990
131
157
83
The figures in the 1990 census exclude children under five years of
age. The total population at that time was 190 million. If the 1990 cen-
sus had included young children, assigning them to their parents’ lan-
guage, as in the previous census, the number of Indonesian speakers
would have been given as 158 million.
The figures show a rapid and continuing increase in the absolute
number of people speaking Indonesian, as well as of the percentage of
2 0 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

the total population who can, taken over the 19 years of the three cen-
suses. The figures in Table 10.4 show the increase in various segments
of the population.
Table 10.4
Percentages of Indonesian speakers in various categories
Age group             Census date
1971      1980
1990      1971      1980
1990
Urban males
Rural males
10–49                   87.4
96.9
98.8
54.2
82.1
92.8
50+                      72.6
83.5
88.4
31.4
50.8
65.2
Urban females
Rural females
10–49                   78.7
91.5
96.7
38.9
67.8
85.1
50+                      51.5
59.1
68.5
14.2
20.8
34.8
The census figures show higher percentages of city dwellers speak-
ing Indonesian than rural people. The highest figure is for urban
males in the age group 10–49 years, growing from 87.4 per cent in
1971 to 98.8 per cent in 1990, virtually the entire urban male popu-
lation. Among rural people, the percentage speaking Indonesian was
lower in every category than in the corresponding city category.
Nevertheless, outside cities a dramatic leap in those speaking
Indonesian also occurred over the 19 years; for males under 50 years
of age, it rose to almost 93 per cent.
If the trends continued, by the year 2000 virtually 100 per cent of
urban dwellers under 50 years of age would have been speakers of
Indonesian, whether as a first or second language, with the percent-
age rising to well above 90 per cent in the countryside also, apart from
the elderly. However, the financial and social troubles that struck
Indonesia in the late 1990s have probably had an effect on the trend
— although, without subsequent census data yet available, accurate
figures are not known.
As mentioned, censuses do not indicate the level of competence in
Indonesian. Certainly, for the majority who can be said to be speakers
of the language, their ability is not high and among the more poorly
educated it is confined almost entirely to colloquial speech.
The spread of Indonesian has been partly at the expense of the
regional languages, with an increasing number of city dwellers being
monolingual in the national language. When a family moves to a city,
it is likely that the regional language will be the language of the
home. However, they will be in daily contact with people from other
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 0 1

regions of Indonesia and communication with them is usually in
Indonesian. Their children may speak the regional language in the
home, but will use Indonesian with friends, as well as at school.
When these children set up home, it is most likely that they will speak
Indonesian with their children, possibly alongside the regional lan-
guage. Their own children will probably have only a passive knowl-
edge, if any, of the regional language. The 1990 census shows
37.1 per cent of the urban population speaking Indonesian in the
home, many of whom are monolingual in the language.
Apart from Jakarta, almost every large regional city is in a regional
language area, although cities in traditional Malay-speaking areas, such
as Medan and Palembang in Sumatra, and in post-creole Malay-
speaking areas, such as Manado and Ambon, may be regarded as
exceptions. However, when people move to Semarang, Surabaya or
Yogyakarta in the Javanese-speaking area, or Bandung in the
Sundanese-speaking area, or Makassar (formerly Ujung Pandang) in
the Makassarese-speaking area, for instance, there is usually little incen-
tive for them to learn the local language. As is the case in Jakarta, their
children are educated in Indonesian, electronic and print media are in
Indonesian and, although the majority in the city would be speakers of
the regional language, they are likely to speak Indonesian as well.
Therefore, a newcomer to the place is unlikely to encounter many dif-
ficulties by not being able to speak the local language, although young
children will almost certainly acquire some fluency in it. Thus, increas-
ingly in cities, the language of everyday interaction is a variety of
Indonesian. People moving to reside in a Malay-speaking city are far
more likely to acquire the local Malay variety than they are to learn a
different language, although it could be argued this is simply the acqui-
sition of the local colloquial Indonesian.
Outside the cities, the regional languages often continue to play
an important role, although how important depends on a number of
factors, including the size of the language community. The compari-
son of the 1980 and 1990 censuses in Table 10.5 shows an increase
in the number of people who are first-language speakers of each of
the eight regional languages that were individually listed.
Nevertheless, in percentage terms there is a decrease in all but two of
them. All other languages were grouped together under ‘other’ in
the censuses. They show a very small percentage rise overall. As men-
tioned, the census figures do not necessarily agree with figures from
other sources.12
2 0 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Table 10.5
First-language speakers in the 1980 and 1990 censuses
Language
Number of speakers               Percentage of speakers
(millions)
1980
1990
1980
1990
Javanese
51.4
60.3
41.3
38.8
Sundanese
18.8
24.2
15.1
15.6
Madurese
6.0
6.8
4.9
4.4
Minangkabau
3.0
3.5
2.4
2.3
Buginese
2.9
3.2
2.3
2.1
Batak
2.6
3.1
2.1
2.0
Balinese
2.2
2.6
1.8
1.7
Banjarese
1.4
2.8
1.1
1.8
Other
21.5
27.0
17.3
17.4
Indonesian
14.8
24.0
11.9
15.5
For Indonesian, the percentage of speakers does not appear high.
Nevertheless, it must be remembered that the censuses allowed only
one ‘language of the home’; the majority of speakers of other languages
are also bilingual in Indonesian. The number who stated that they can
speak Indonesian is very much higher, as given in Table 10.3. Table
10.5 shows an increase in the number of speakers for every language
individually specified over the ten years between the censuses.
Nevertheless, in percentage terms there was a slight decline for most of
the languages. Most, but not all, of the decrease results from a shift to
Indonesian. While the table shows no decrease in the number of speak-
ers of the more than 500 ‘other’ languages, the single figure hides a sig-
nificant decline in the number of speakers of many of the languages.
L I N G U A  F R A N C A S  A N D  L A N G U A G E  S H I F T
Apart from Indonesian, the only significant percentage increase in Table
10.5 is that of Banjarese, which increased at the expense of other lan-
guages. In Central and South Kalimantan, numbers of speakers of
smaller languages have declined rapidly, with people switching to
Banjarese as their first language. Banjarese has moved from being the
major lingua franca in the region to being the first language of much of
the population.
The position of Banjarese is a good example of the fact that in com-
munication between different ethnic groups Indonesian is not necessar-
ily the language chosen. In the provinces of South, Central and East
Kalimantan, nearly all speakers of the minor languages, the Dayak lan-
guages, are able to speak Banjarese. It is thus used alongside Indonesian
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 0 3

in inter-ethnic communication. In this case, Banjarese has increasingly
come to be used not only between speakers of different languages but
also by speakers of the same language, at first alongside their own lan-
guage, later in place of it. It has been reported that, by the late 1980s,
the 4000 people of the Paku tribe had practically stopped using Paku as
a result of frequent contacts with speakers of other languages and that
children no longer learnt Paku.13 Thus the significant increase in the
number of Banjarese speakers, from 1.4 million to 2.8 million speakers
according to official censuses, is at the expense of the Dayak languages,
some of which have declined rapidly.
Throughout Indonesia, various languages act as lingua francas,
some over significantly greater areas than others. The island of Sulawesi
is typical of a region where there is a large number of languages, most
with small populations — there are about 80 languages on the island —
and hence the need for languages of wider communication.
In North Sulawesi, particularly in the Minahasa region, Manado
Malay has long been the principal language of inter-ethnic communica-
tion. Its position has become so strong that regional languages are
under considerable and increasing pressure from it. As early as 1925, it
was noted that Manado Malay was increasingly being used in villages
throughout Minahasa at the expense of the local languages.14 As with
Banjarese in areas of Kalimantan, Manado Malay has developed from
being a lingua franca in the region to being the first, and usually the
only, language of most of the population. A listing of languages pub-
lished in 1996 — but obviously based on old information — gives 
30 000 speakers for Ratahan, one of the minor languages of Minahasa.15
But linguists gathering information on Ratahan in 1997 discovered that
only 500 good speakers of the language were left, mostly over 60 years
of age, with a few thousand ‘semi-speakers’.16 It is reported that Bantik,
another Minahasan language, is also threatened with extinction, being
maintained only by older people in five villages that have all recently
been absorbed by the city of Manado.17 Ratahan, Bantik and the other
languages of the region are all in danger of extinction as a result of the
shift to Manado Malay.
Speakers of Buginese, originating in the southeast of Sulawesi, have
migrated in considerable numbers to many coastal regions around the
island and their language has influenced local languages. In South
Sulawesi in particular, it is a contact language among speakers of numer-
ous smaller languages. Kaili, a language of Central Sulawesi, has long
been a lingua franca among different language groups in the area, while
2 0 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Gorontalo, the largest language in the western part of North Sulawesi,
serves the same function among the many small languages in that
region, alongside Manado Malay. Such lingua francas retain their
strength, but usually at the expense of smaller local languages, as has
occurred with Banjarese in Kalimantan.
In the central Moluccas, the disappearing of languages at the
expense of the local Malay has been more drastic than in North
Sulawesi. After centuries as the major lingua franca in the region and the
language of Christian preaching, Ambon Malay has spread considerably
at the expense of local languages. Many Christian villages in Ambon had
switched to Ambon Malay by 1850; from being the language of inter-
ethnic communication it had by then become the language of the home
for many people.18
In West Papua (Irian Jaya) local forms of Malay are spreading to
such an extent that many local languages are endangered. For one lan-
guage it has been reported that no one under the age of 40 uses it; they
all use the local Malay.19
In East Timor, a variety of the Tetum (or Tetun) language has long
been the major lingua franca among a population speaking 19 different
languages.20 The second largest of the East Timorese languages, and
spoken also in the eastern region of West Timor, it exists in a number
of regional dialects. Tetun-Praça, the dialect spoken in the region of the
capital Dili, became widespread throughout East Timor as a second lan-
guage, a role it continued after independence.
T H E  S P R E A D  O F  I N D O N E S I A N
Despite the spread of local lingua francas in some areas, it is the
national language that is putting most pressure on regional languages.
Throughout Indonesia, education has been in the national language
since independence. All people who have had the opportunity for some
education, then, have at least some facility in Indonesian. In cities, espe-
cially Jakarta, there is a growing shift to monolingualism in Indonesian.
People whose work brings them into contact with other ethnic groups
in the context of a modern city will use Indonesian on a regular basis
(although in the context of traditional rural life such contact may be in
the local lingua franca).
There are numerous reports of local languages giving ground to
Indonesian. Just two are mentioned here. In the Lampung-speaking
region of South Sumatra, as early as the 1970s the language was already
little used in the cities, with increasing numbers of young people not using
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 0 5

it at all, although it remained the language of the home in rural villages.21
On the island of Sumba, in southeast Indonesia, only about 20 per cent of
school-age children attended school in the late 1970s. However, by 1994,
100 per cent of eligible children attended school, assisted by a massive
school-building program, better roads and more available public transport.
As in Lampung and elsewhere in the country, education in Sumba has
increasingly exposed young people to Indonesian.22
After the Indonesian takeover of the former Portuguese colony of
East Timor in the mid-1970s, all education was in Indonesian. By the
late 1990s, the situation in East Timor was much the same as in numer-
ous other outlying areas of Indonesia: educated speakers were fluent 
in Indonesian, domestic television and radio broadcasts were in
Indonesian and its position was strengthening in relation to the local
languages. By the time of East Timor’s independence in 1999, more
than 60 per cent of the population were found to be proficient in
Indonesian.
The relationship between Indonesian and the regional languages
has been well described by one scholar:
On the national level, a very important factor that diminishes the pres-
tige of regional languages is the prevalence of diglossia, whereby
Indonesian functions as the national, supra-ethnic, official language,
whereas the regional languages are used for unofficial intra-ethnic com-
munication and local cultural events. Mass education and mass com-
munication, along with the omnipresence of government institutions,
representatives, and regulations, as well as of religious institutions
(given the obligation for an Indonesian citizen to adhere to an official-
ly recognised (world) religion), have created a multitude of domains in
which Indonesian is the only appropriate means of communication.
Domains in which the regional languages are or were appropriate have
been taken over by Indonesian, or have become of secondary impor-
tance. ‘Progress cannot be stopped.’ Modernisation implies cultural
genocide.23
The emergence of an urban middle class since 1949, particularly
since 1966, is an important development in modern Indonesia and it
has had a significant effect on the spread of the national language. The
new middle class, which did not exist in traditional society, has been
defined as educated and having a lifestyle and values that are distinctly
‘bourgeois’.24 Among the middle class there are common patterns of
social behaviour heavily influenced by Western consumerism, as seen in
the housing estates, plazas and campuses of major cities.
It has been observed that there is enormous pressure to use
2 0 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Indonesian in the ‘modern places’ where the middle class are promi-
nent, such as department stores, restaurants and other places that urban
Indonesians consider ‘upmarket and prestigious’. In such places,
employees can become offended if addressed in a local language, even
if it is within the region where the language is spoken. Such is the pres-
sure to use Indonesian that ‘there now seems to be a “taboo” on using
local languages in such “trendy” places’.25 Thus elements of prestige
and modernity combine with other factors to put pressure on city
dwellers to use Indonesian in more and more situations, both in
regional cities and in Jakarta. The shift from Jakarta Malay to Indonesian
among traditional Betawi families is part of the trend (see p. 155).
E F F O R T S  T O  M A I N TA I N  R E G I O N A L  
L A N G U A G E S
There has generally been a feeling of indifference towards the regional
languages in official circles. Emphasis has been on national unity and on
Indonesian as the national unifier. There have been those who have seen
the regional languages as reminders of diversity and, given the frequent
fragility of national unity, this has done little to encourage preservation
of the languages. In areas where there is one large language spoken,
such as Javanese and Sundanese, education for the first three years can
be in that language before it switches to Indonesian. But the great
majority of languages are not used in the education system at all.
Javanese, Balinese and a few other languages have long traditions of
literature and children acquire literacy skills if they have the opportu-
nity for a primary education in regions where those languages are spo-
ken. With the new century there are even moves to increase and
reinvigorate the teaching of Javanese script in schools. However, for the
great majority of languages there is little or no tradition of writing; for
speakers of such languages there is little if any need to write in other
than Indonesian. Under the constitution, the government is expected
to respect and maintain those languages that are respected and main-
tained by their users, as they are part of the national culture.26 In prac-
tice, support for regional languages has been minimal, one of the few
efforts being the teaching of Javanese and Sundanese in some universi-
ties. The Pusat Bahasa sponsors study of regional languages by 
university researchers; however, due to limited funds and training, such
grammatical descriptions and dictionaries as are produced are generally of
poor quality. Of higher standard is research on the languages done at 
PhD level, as well as work done by non-Indonesian linguists. But the
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 0 7

number of such products is not great, given the large number of 
languages, and many still remain undescribed in more than a very 
superficial way.
Moreover, such scholarly research does nothing to maintain and
encourage the use of the languages described and rarely even comes to
the notice of speakers of the languages. There has never been an official
program of fostering use of languages other than Indonesian. What
efforts there might be for particular languages are carried out by local
interest groups and, however well-intentioned these might be, they
achieve very little.
Preservation of languages is linked closely to preservation of the cul-
tures of which those languages are a part. But in the era of modernisa-
tion traditional cultures are becoming increasingly marginalised. A
government directive in 1983 stated that regional languages and arts
are to be respected, in so far as they enrich the national language, arts,
culture and identity. But under the New Order government economic
development was given highest priority and fostering of the national
language was seen as central to development. Thus the 1983 directive
stated that ‘language development and cultivation are to be imple-
mented by compelling the use of good and correct Indonesian’.27
Traditional cultures and arts were seen as playing little part in this
progress, except in so far as they could attract foreign tourists to
Indonesia. The government has thus in practice done little to encour-
age maintenance of regional languages and cultures, both because this
is regarded as playing little part in development and progress and
because of fears of encouraging regional loyalties and jealousies.
As early as 1950, Dutch linguist AA Fokker warned about the dan-
ger of the decline of the regional languages in the face of Indonesian if
nothing positive was done for their maintenance and cultivation.28
Many people continue to be concerned about the plight of the regional
languages, but feel powerless to do anything about it. It has been sug-
gested that regional languages can be preserved if they are used in mod-
ern contexts, including having a role in administration and education.
Under the New Order, this would have been unrealistic and at present,
given greater concerns about regional autonomy and independence and
the ever-present threat of inter-ethnic violence since the fall of Suharto,
it runs counter to concerns for maintaining Indonesia’s unity. Besides,
people who raise such possibilities tend to think only of the major 
languages, which often have a literary tradition and from among whose
speakers many of the educated elite are drawn. But it is instead the 
2 0 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

hundreds of smaller languages that are in most danger of disappearing
and these are the least able to be used in any situation related to devel-
opment, government and education.
Not everyone has been concerned about the fate of minor lan-
guages. Those regional languages that have a sufficiently large number
of speakers, associated with a literary and cultural tradition of their own,
will not disappear. But Alisjahbana wrote that there was no justification
for a language policy that preserves hundreds of languages spoken by
small groups of people by artificial means. Such a policy would turn
Indonesia into a language museum, he said.29
The only realistic way of preserving the regional languages as living
languages of communities would be for a genuine attempt to be made
to maintain the traditional cultures in which the languages are used.
Even this is most unlikely to come from Jakarta. It will probably be the
case that preservation of cultures and languages will have to come from
a real desire among the people themselves. Yet such a desire seems
unlikely. To urban dwellers and even most rural people, acquisition of
some of the advantages of modernisation and development are far more
desirable than clinging to traditional values and ways. One study has
shown that there are many families in Surabaya, a large city in East Java,
where couples speak Indonesian in the home because they see this as
giving their children more advantages and prospects of progress in life.
Similar linguistic changes are occurring in other towns in Java among
young, upwardly mobile families that aspire to a better socio-economic
lifestyle.30 Moreover, people do not have to be upwardly mobile to pre-
fer speaking Indonesian; the mere desire to progress and not to be left
behind is a powerful incentive. The same is true throughout the nation.
All Indonesians, except the very remote and isolated, are surrounded by
pressures to modernise and Indonesian is the language of modernisa-
tion; proficiency in Indonesian is essential for anyone wanting to live
anything but a wholly traditional life.
Even formerly isolated villages, such as in the forests of Kalimantan
and West Papua, now have little hope of retaining their traditional way
of life. They have become increasingly exposed to the modern world,
often through the intrusion of logging and mining companies into their
land. This inevitably leads to social dislocation; in many cases, they are
driven from their lands, which has a destructive effect on their tradi-
tional culture, including their language.
An exception to the weakening position of regional languages is in
some regions with strong breakaway movements. This especially applies
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 0 9

to Aceh, in northern Sumatra. However, in West Papua, another area
with a strong secessionist movement, the need for unity among speak-
ers of several hundred languages maintains the position of Indonesia.
T H E  P O S I T I O N  O F  J A V A N E S E
As the largest regional language in Indonesia, the position of Javanese
is worth separate consideration. While some of the challenges it faces
apply to other languages as well, there are circumstances unique to
Javanese.
The Javanese language is in no danger of disappearing, having by far
the largest number of speakers of any regional language and a strong
and ancient cultural tradition. Between the 1980 and 1990 censuses,
the number of Javanese speakers rose by almost nine million.
Nevertheless, despite the increase in the number of speakers, there was
a decline by 2.5 per cent between the two censuses of the overall
Indonesian population speaking Javanese as their first language. The
great majority of Javanese can also speak Indonesian and this bilingual-
ism is the condition that allows for a shift from maintenance of Javanese
to monolingualism in Indonesian. This has certainly occurred, for
instance, in a great many Javanese families that have moved to Jakarta
and, as mentioned, is also occurring in cities within Javanese-speaking
Central and East Java. As early as 1960, a sociologist commented on the
shift towards Indonesian among Javanese, writing, ‘although the use of
Indonesian for everyday conversation is still mostly confined to the
more sophisticated urbanites, and its use suggests something of an air
of public speaking for most Javanese, it is rapidly becoming more and
more an integral part of their daily cultural life and will become even
more so as the present generation of school children grows to adult-
hood’.31
One study of language use among Javanese lists a number of reasons
why Javanese might use Indonesian instead of Javanese in certain cir-
cumstances.32 Some of the reasons for shift apply to other languages,
while some are peculiar to Javanese.
Indonesian is typically used for prestigious activities, and in using
Indonesian people acquire prestige, or at least see themselves as doing
so. For example, Indonesian is associated with education and moderni-
ty. Therefore fluency in Indonesian gives one the aura of being edu-
cated and modern. Indonesian is also the language of Jakarta, where
people viewed as powerful, wealthy and attractive reside. Speaking like
such people helps one acquire some of their prestige. In the increasing
2 1 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

number of domains associated with modern life, Indonesian is the only
appropriate language. It is used for discussion of technical, legal and
medical matters and anything to do with the global village. It is thus the
register for speaking about new activities and situations. Javanese may
code-switch while discussing such matters, speaking basically Javanese
but incorporating many Indonesian terms. For many modern concepts,
Javanese has no precise term and the Indonesian word comes readily to
mind. In discussing non-traditional activities, such as a family member’s
graduation, Indonesian will likely be used. Since Indonesian is the lan-
guage of education, parents will often speak Indonesian when dis-
cussing their children’s school work or helping with homework. While
children normally speak Javanese to their parents, they have been
observed switching to Indonesian in situations associated with modern
activities, such as when asking permission to go to a pop concert.33
Finally, Indonesian is used when talking to non-Javanese.
The above reasons for shifting to Indonesian are certainly not con-
fined to Javanese. But there are factors specifically associated with the
Javanese language, in particular its complex system of levels (see pp.
104–105), which can lead to shift to Indonesian. In traditional Javanese
society, a person is likely to retain the same social status and live in the
same area for life. In traditional life, therefore, people know their place
and know what style of language is appropriate on different social occa-
sions. In modern society, social status relative to others is often less cer-
tain. Indonesian can serve as a means for avoiding use of Javanese with
fellow Javanese to avoid awkward social situations resulting from the
close bond between the language and traditional Javanese culture.
The following two situations illustrate this. In class a teacher and
student speak Indonesian to each other. Outside the class the teacher
uses Ngoko (the familiar Javanese style) to the student, who responds
in Krama (the respect style). Later, the student obtains a university
degree or high-ranking position. He continues to use Krama to his
former teacher, but the teacher can no longer use Ngoko; his former
pupil is now a higher-status adult. In his uncertainty as to the appro-
priate form to use in the new social relationship, he will almost cer-
tainly switch to Indonesian. In the traditional administration, a
superior addresses inferiors in Ngoko. In a modern business or govern-
ment department, use of Ngoko to a white-collar worker is out of the
question, although the junior office worker does not have sufficient
status to be addressed by his superior in Krama. In this situation, use
of Indonesian is the solution.
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 1 1

In modern Indonesia, a person of humble background has increased
opportunities for an education, travel and achieving higher status. A
person from a peasant background or from a remote area where a dis-
tinctly dialectal form of the language is spoken, and whose speech will
reveal his origins, may have little confidence in speaking to social supe-
riors in Javanese. Such a person will thus have a strong tendency to
switch to Indonesian. In this case, use of Indonesian is not so much a
device for gaining prestige, but rather a device for concealment.
T H E  P R E S E N T  S TAT E  O F  I N D O N E S I A N
In many ways, especially in its grammatical elaboration and incorpora-
tion of affixes from both Sanskrit and European languages, Indonesian
has moved far away from its Malay roots. Since the name ‘Indonesian’
was proclaimed in 1928, the language has undergone development at a
speed experienced by few other languages in history, changing more
than it did in the preceding 500 years.34
The language has been undergoing rapid changes since indepen-
dence, although there may have been some slowing in the rate of
change since the 1980s, by which time the language had by and large
achieved the planners’ major goal of reaching a level of adequacy
required of a language used as a means of modern communication. In
the words of the director of the Pusat Bahasa, it was achieving ‘a level
of functional equality with other languages which may be called fully
developed languages’.35
The sophistication of the language in any domain of academic dis-
course can be seen, for instance, in any mainstream newspaper or jour-
nal, as in the following example:
Sudah pasti bisa diduga bahwa persoalan politik setelah periode pemerin-
tah Orde Baru yang otoriter tidak berhenti begitu saja. Keruntuhan
institusi politik lama dan ketiadaan institusi baru yang legitimate
menyebabkan proses stabilisasi politik berlarut-larut. Bahkan, TNI yang
selama ini dianggap sebagai institusi paling solid juga mengalami per-
soalan sama: kegamangan menatap era baru. Semua kisruh politik itu
berdampak pada proses pemulihan ekonomi dan sosial secara lebih luas.
Ekonomi masyarakat menjadi korban ketidakstabilan politik yang sam-
pai saat ini belum pasti ujungnya.36
TRANSLATION:
It can certainly be assumed that political problems following the
period of the authoritarian New Order government will not simply go
away. The collapse of old political institutions and the absence of legit-
2 1 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

imate new institutions have caused the process of political stabilisation
to drag on indefinitely. Moreover, the armed forces, which until the
present have been considered the strongest institution, are experienc-
ing the same problem: a feeling of helplessness gazing at the new era.
All this political disorder is having an impact on the process of broader
economic and social restoration. The economic life of the common
people is a victim of political instability whose end point cannot at pre-
sent be determined.
Despite the adequacy acquired by formal Indonesian as a national
language, however, there is still much to be achieved in the standardis-
ation process. Many educated speakers are tolerant of or indifferent to
careless usage as well as variation in the formal language. The develop-
ment of full standardisation will only emerge from consensus on what is
‘good and correct’ language. This will require improved education,
especially in literacy skills. Social sanctions against incorrect usage, as
occur in Western societies, will also be important.
T H E  F U T U R E  O F  I N D O N E S I A N
In 1998, the Minister for Education and Culture asserted that by the
year 2010 there would be 215 million Indonesians, all of whom would
be speakers of the national language. At that time, the future appeared
clear: knowledge of Indonesian would have continued to increase above
the 83 per cent who claimed to speak the language in 1990 and the
number of people with genuine fluency in the language would also have
continued to rise. Since then, events in Indonesia may have changed the
situation. The collapse of the Suharto regime was accompanied by social
upheaval in many parts of the country. Some see this as presaging the
break up of the country, which would certainly have an enormous effect
on the future of the national language.
The main change to date has been the breakaway of East Timor,
which gained independence in 1999. The interim government had to
make a choice as to the official language of the new nation. It could
have been Indonesian, leaving in place the situation obtaining until
then. However, there was little support for this; there had been strong
resentment of Indonesian rule and Indonesian was seen in much the
same light as Dutch had been viewed by the Indonesian nationalists
when they were contemplating a national language. As the language
of what was seen by the majority of East Timorese as the colonial
power it could not receive the commitment and loyalty of the popu-
lation. An Asia Foundation survey in 2001 found only 3 per cent of
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 1 3

the East Timor population wanted Indonesian as their official lan-
guage, even though 63 per cent of the population had some level of
proficiency in it.37
English was often suggested for the national language, given the
closeness of Australia and the role of English as the international lan-
guage of wider communication. Surprisingly for many, the new govern-
ment chose Portuguese to be the national language. Before the
Indonesian take-over in 1975, Portuguese was the official language and
the language of what little education there had been. Although
Portuguese had been the language of the previous colonial power, the
negative aspects associated with this seem to have been lost in the inter-
vening decades of Indonesian control. Portuguese was, for many in the
Timorese leadership, the language of resistance to Indonesian rule.
Whether Portuguese will have a lasting place cannot be judged yet.
Most young people do not know the language, with no more than
15 per cent of the entire population having reasonable proficiency in it.
Those educated during the Indonesian period felt their acquisition of
Indonesian to have been wasted and expressed much frustration at the
thought of having to learn a new language. Reportedly, English classes
are at least as popular as Portuguese classes, many seeing fluency in
English as essential to obtaining employment, particularly with foreign
companies. Nevertheless, the government appeared determined to go
ahead with its plans and in mid-2001 announced that it would recruit
more than 700 Portuguese language teachers, who were actively sought
in Portugal and Brazil.
With the marked increase in the influence of English following inde-
pendence and an emotional reaction against all things Indonesian
among many East Timorese, ability in Indonesian is now falling, partic-
ularly as it is no longer used in education. Nevertheless, given East
Timor’s geographic position and exposure to Indonesia, the language
will inevitably remain of some importance.
One can only speculate on the future of Indonesian in other regions
that might gain independence. The two strongest breakaway move-
ments are at the opposite extremes of Indonesia: West Papua and Aceh.
West Papua is basically an undeveloped region where more than 200
languages are spoken. For communication within the new country, a
national language would have to be found. It seems most improbable
that it could be anything other than Indonesian. It might be, however,
that it would revert to its original name of Malay.
Aceh differs from West Papua, and from East Timor, in that the 
2 1 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

overwhelming majority of people are speakers of a single language. Aceh
nationalists associate their language with what they see as their distinc-
tive differences from Indonesia. Should the province gain independence,
Acehnese would be a major language in any possible future administra-
tion. Nevertheless, Indonesian — which Acehnese nationalists always
refer to as Malay — would remain strong. Malay was the language of lit-
erature and of the royal court in Aceh for many centuries and knowledge
of it has long been widespread. Any future Acehnese state would be small
and dependent in many ways on links with Indonesia and Malaysia,
ensuring a continuing strong role for Indonesian.
Within Indonesia, the position of the language will further
strengthen as the number of the population who are classified as able to
speak the language, however that is interpreted (see p. 199), approach-
es 100 per cent. It will further encroach on the roles of the regional lan-
guages, many of which are in danger of disappearing.
One major question is the future of the diglossic state of the lan-
guage. While diglossia can remain stable for centuries, there are cases
where there is a drift away from the rigid division between high and low
varieties of a language, as has occurred in Greece in recent decades. In
almost all cases, the position of the prestige variety weakens at the
expense of the low vernacular.
Colloquial Jakartan Indonesian is acquiring the status of a prestige
variety of informal Indonesian, for reasons discussed in Chapter 8, a
trend that has continued into the new century. The breakdown in the
previous fairly strict separation of High and Low Indonesian could
eventually lead to the disappearance of diglossia, although any such
trend is certainly at a very early stage. Further, there are factors militat-
ing against this tendency. Until the present, all education has been
strictly in high style and this is acting against the breakdown of diglos-
sia in domains associated with education. Nevertheless, this could
change. As mentioned, large sections of the community feel alienated
from the formal language. The intellectualisation of formal language, in
the mass media and other areas of formal discourse, has led to much of
it being unintelligible to a considerable extent to less well-educated
people. Without an improvement in the general level of education in
the country, this barrier will remain. This situation is unlikely to change
while there is diglossia, with proficiency in the high variety largely deter-
mined by opportunities for education. If authorities ever conclude that
the national interest would be better served by a more positive attitude
to colloquial speech, as advocated by Harimurti Kridalakasana (see 
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 1 5

p. 141), the result could well be a major shift away from the high vari-
ety in the education system, which would have profound consequences
for the future of the language.
The linguistic study of colloquial Indonesian has only recently
begun (see p. 122), and only by non-Indonesian specialists. However,
the interest of overseas colleagues will probably begin to influence the
way Indonesian linguists, including those associated with the Pusat
Bahasa, view the language. In fact, one has called recently for
Indonesian scholars to begin studying this form of the language.38 If
such a development commences, it could well enhance the respectabil-
ity of the low variety among those associated with language and educa-
tion policy, leading to recognition for a role for colloquial speech in
education. If this occurs, it will contribute to a breaking down of the
diglossic gulf between formal and informal Indonesian.
Whatever the future of diglossia, Jakartan Indonesian will continue
to influence regional varieties and will become increasingly accepted as
a colloquial standard.
One possible direction for the language in the future is closer inte-
gration with the official Malay of Malaysia. This seems a remote possi-
bility. The influence of neo-Sanskrit, Javanese and Jakarta Malay, as
discussed in Chapter 8, continue to lead Indonesian further away from
Malaysian Malay. If in future Indonesian more closely resembles
Malaysian and Brunei Malay, it will be because of its influence on those
languages; convergence is likely to be because of change in Malaysian
and Brunei Malay rather than in Indonesian. Its position within the
Malay world is somewhat akin to that of American English in the
English-speaking world, with the American variety exerting consider-
able influence on others while taking very little from them in return.
Internationally, Indonesian will remain of very limited significance.
Despite the fact that it is the sole official and national language of the
fourth most populous nation in the world, it has no prospects of acquir-
ing international importance. Since the economic collapse of 1997 and
subsequent social and political turmoil, Indonesia’s international posi-
tion has slipped from the low level it was already at. Indonesian remains
an important LOTE (language other than English) in the Australian
education system, at both secondary and tertiary levels, but is of no
more than minor interest elsewhere in the world and of no interest at
all in most countries. In Australia, interest in the language has dropped
dramatically since the height of its popularity in the mid-1990s, when
Indonesia was widely seen as a stable, rapidly developing and increas-
2 1 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

ingly friendly neighbour. Following the economic and social upheavals
of the late 1990s and the violence in many parts of the country, espe-
cially in East Timor in 1999, the image of Indonesia in Australia dete-
riorated significantly, with a predictable drop in interest in learning the
language. In some universities, interest was so low by 2002 that there
was doubt their courses would continue. In New Zealand, the last
Indonesian course, at Auckland University, closed in 2001.
Nevertheless, the decline will not be fatal and Indonesian will remain an
important LOTE. In the state of Victoria, Indonesian retains its posi-
tion as the LOTE with the largest number of students in secondary
schools.
******
The future of the Indonesian language will be bound up with the future
of the Indonesian state. If Indonesia remains unified and prospers, so
too will its national language. If the nation fractures, the language will
remain but will travel in different directions in the various polities. Its
future, then, is dependent on the ability of the Indonesian-speaking
peoples to resolve their current difficulties. The language has been an
essential element in the unification of the archipelago; now that unity
will be essential to the future state of the language.
R E G I O N A L
L A N G U A G E S
A N D
T H E
S P R E A D
O F
I N D O N E S I A N • 2 1 7

1
INTRODUCTION
1
Fishman (1978: 333). 
2
William Liddle, quoted by Errington (1998: 4).
3
Adelaar (1996b) discusses the history of Malay in Malaysia. 
4
Discussed in more detail by Prentice (1978, 1990).
5
Omar (1978, 1993) discusses language planning in Malaysia.
6
Prentice (1978: 32).
7
Dardjowidjojo (1998: 37).
8
The Australian, 6 November 2002.
9
Adelaar and Prentice (1996: 677).
10 The great variety of Malay types, many of which have not yet been described,
are discussed by Adelaar and Prentice (1996).
11 Others have advocated avoidance of the term Bahasa Indonesia, including
Prentice (1978: 22). Moeliono and Grimes (1995: 445) write: ‘the official
term “Bahasa Indonesia” is correct when writing or speaking in Indonesian,
“Indonesian” is the preferred term when speaking or writing in English, and
“Bahasa” by itself is to be studiously avoided’.
12 Cited by Sutherland (1968: 124).
13 Dalton (1978: 23).
14 Jones (1998: 74).
15 Hall (1972: 151).
16 Alisjahbana (1976: 106).
17 Abas (1987: vii)
18 See Sneddon (2000: 77–79) for a discussion with examples.
19 Dixon (1997: 118). 
20 Dalton (1978: 23).
21 Winstedt (1962: Preface).
22 Peacock (1973: 79).
23 Anderson (1966: 105–106).
24 Sarumpaet (1980: vi).
25 Moeliono (1994a: 209) comments on this attitude. 
26 Two teaching texts (Wolff et al. 1992 and Johns 1996) incorporate a limited
amount of informal language material. One teaching text, entitled Colloquial
Indonesian (Atmosumarto 1995), is misnamed, being a course devoted
entirely to the formal variety of the language. The TIFL (Teaching
Indonesian as a Foreign Language) materials produced at the University of
E N D N O T E S

New South Wales and made available to others provide a considerable
amount of good informal material, but contain no description of this variety.
Problems in teaching informal Indonesian are discussed by Sneddon (2001).
2
MALAY AND THE AUSTRONESIAN LANGUAGE FAMILY
1
Clark (1990), Ross (1995) and Tryon (1995a, 1995b) have general discussions
of the Austronesian languages, their interrelationships and linguistic character-
istics.
2
Figures are from Tryon (1995b: 16–17), who gives a total of 270 million
speakers of Austronesian languages. 
3
Dates in this section are drawn from a number of sources, principally Blust
(1984–85) and Bellwood (1995).
4
Ross (1995: 95–99) discusses the Austric and Austro-Tai theories.
5
Discussion of the reconstructions is from Blust (1977) and (1984–85). Blust
(1984–85) and (1995) considers in some detail the social life and physical envi-
ronment of the Austronesian ancestors from the linguistic evidence.
6
The subgroupings of Austronesian languages presented here are from Blust
(1978) and several subsequent publications, such as Blust (1984–85). The
hypothesis is generally accepted by others, e.g. Clark (1990: 177). The linguis-
tic evidence for the subgroupings is summarised by Tryon (1995b). The his-
tory of comparative-historical study of the Austronesian languages and
theoretical issues are discussed by Blust (1990).
7
Bellwood (1995: 101).
8
The diagram follows Blust (1984–85: 46).
9
Blust (1984–85: 59).
10 Adelaar (1995: 77).
11 Adelaar (1995: 82).
12 Adelaar (1992a) and (1995) has done much to establish the interrelations of
the Malayic languages.
13 Collins (1998: 3).
3
OLD MALAY
1
Bellwood (1995: 107). 
2
Van Leur (1955: 92–99) first recognised the active role of Malays in maritime
trade. See also Hall (1981: 18).
3
Wolters (1967: 242). Much on the early history of the Malays is drawn from
Wolters, although this work contains much speculation where hard facts are
unavailable.
4
Bellwood (1995: 107).
5
Information on the Borneo inscriptions is from de Casparis (1986) and
Supomo (1995).
6
Andaya and Andaya (2001: 17).
7
Supomo (1995: 298). 
8
Wolters (1967: 158). 
9
Teeuw (1959: 146).
10 The inscriptions are discussed by Coedes (1930, 1964) and de Casparis (1950,
1986). Adelaar (1992b) also discusses the Telaga Batu inscription of AD 686.
11 Coedes (1964) discusses the various interpretations by scholars of the meaning
of the text.
12 The spelling here generally follows Emais (1975: 230). The word-for-word
translation is based on that of DJ Prentice (unpublished), while the full trans-
lation is based on that of Coedes (1964: 25). However, what is produced here
is not identical to that in any one source. The Syaka date 604 corresponds to
AD 682.
13 I-tsing is discussed by Wolters (1967), Supomo (1995) and, more briefly, by
Hall (1981: 37–38, 49).
E N D N O T E S • 2 1 9

14 Recent archaeological study has shown that present-day Palembang was indeed
the site of the capital of Srivijaya, as long believed (Manguin 1993).
15 Hall (1981: 50).
16 The distinction is made by Prentice (1978).
17 Hall (1981: 64).
18 Described by de Casparis (1950: 50–73). 
19 Described by Bosch (1941).
20 Described by Postma (1992).
21 Wolff (1976) discusses the Malay influence on Tagalog.
22 Hall (1981: 70).
23 Andaya and Andaya (2001: 33).
24 Teeuw (1961: 11). Teeuw (1959: 148–49) also discusses the Pagarruyun
inscription.
25 Steinhauer (1980: 354–55).
26 AH Johns, quoted by Jaspan (1964: 6).
27 Van Leur (1955: 99).
28 Collins (1998: 45).
29 Gonda (1973) gives a detailed discussion of Sanskrit borrowings in Indonesia.
Spitzbardt (1970) and Jones (1984) have shorter discussions. 
4
THE CLASSICAL MALAY PERIOD
1
Andaya and Andaya (2001: 55). 
2
Hall (1981: 221).
3
Hall (1981: 222).
4
Teeuw (1959: 149). The poem is discussed by Marrison (1951).
5
The stone is discussed in detail by Paterson (1924) and Blagden (1924).
6
The translation of the text is by Blagden, provided by Paterson (1924: 256). A
better translation is ‘Great Exalted Divinity’ (Collins 1998: 12).
7
Paterson (1924: 255). 
8
The translation deviates in a few places from the transliteration, sometimes —
as in the first line — taking into consideration alternative interpretations, as
commented on by Paterson (1924: 257).
9
Jones (1986) discusses the different traditions of writing.
10 The discussion on Malacca in this and following sections draws particularly on
Andaya and Andaya (2001).
11 Edited and translated by Cortesao (1944).
12 The best-known is the ‘Raffles text’, Winstedt (1938), translation by Brown
(1952). 
13 Andaya and Andaya (2001: 34).
14 Wolters (1970: 116).
15 Andaya and Andaya (2001: 39).
16 Adelaar and Prentice (1996: 674).
17 Edwards and Blagden (1930) provide the list and commentary. The list is also
discussed by Collins (1998: 14–15).
18 Steinhauer (1980: 356). 
19 Steinhauer (1980: 371).
20 Grimes (1994: 255).
21 Steinhauer (1980: 356). Bausani (1960) provides the list and commentary.
22 Blagden (1930: 87).
23 Ricklefs (1976: 129).
24 Discussion, transcriptions and translations of these letters are from Shellabear
(1898).
25 Teeuw (1959: 149–50).
26 Teeuw (1959: 150).
27 Proudfoot and Hooker (1998: 22) and Winstedt (1958a) discuss the dates of
the different versions.
2 2 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

28 Proudfoot and Hooker (1998: 22).
29 Proudfoot and Hooker (1998: 22).
30 The Romanised text is from Winstedt (1938:93) and the translation from
Brown (1952: 93).
31 Lyons (1968: 9).
32 For instance, Abas (1987: 20) has a map showing the Indonesian province of
Riau as the area where Riau Malay is ‘spoken natively’.
33 Gil (1994).
34 Shellabear (1913: 49–50).
35 Jones (1998: 74).
36 Winstedt (1958b: 141).
37 Salleh (1998: 81).
38 The text is taken from Abdullah (1960: 64–65). The very free translation is by
Hill (1970: 78–79).
39 Discussed by Adelaar (1996a: 695–96) and Jones (1984), from which most
examples are taken.
40 Jones (1984: 11).
41 Gonda (1973: 60; 161).
42 Jones (1984: 12). Most of the examples are drawn from Jones.
43 Collins (1998: 41–45) provides commentary and a page of the dialogue.
44 Grijns (1999: 55).
45 Rafferty (1984: 250).
46 Lim (1988). Chinese influence is also discussed by Adelaar (1996a: 698–99).
Examples of borrowings are taken from Lim (1988) and Jones (1984).
5
EUROPEAN INFLUENCES BEFORE THE 20TH CENTURY
1
Collins (1998: 26).
2
Prentice (1978: 19). Adelaar (1996a: 699–700) also discusses Portuguese and
Portuguese creole in the archipelago.
3
Adelaar (1996a: 700).
4
Prentice (1978: 19) gives their number at the time he wrote as about 5000.
5
Most of the words listed here are taken from Grijns et al. (1983) and Jones
(1984).
6
Grijns et al. (1983).
7
Salea Warouw (1985).
8
Collins (1998: 29). 
9
Discussed by Collins (1998: 41–45).
10 Discussed by Collins (1992).
11 The following discussion draws heavily on Hoffman (1979).
12 Valentyn, quoted by Hoffman (1979: 69).
13 Hoffman (1979: 71).
14 Collins (1998: 55).
15 Hoffman (1979: 73).
16 Hoffman (1979: 75).
17 Maier (1993: 49).
18 Vikør (1983: 52).
19 Adam (1995: 81).
20 Teeuw (1961: 24).
21 Grijns (1996: 371).
22 Hoffman (1979: 83–84).
23 Hoffman (1979: 84).
24 The role of the early vernacular press in the development of the language is dis-
cussed by Adam (1995).
25 Grijns (1991a: 71).
26 The variety of Malay language publications is discussed by Collins (1998: 64).
27 Adam (1995: 58).
E N D N O T E S • 2 2 1

28 Van Ophuijsen’s role is discussed by Hoffman (1979: 87–89). His spelling sys-
tem is discussed by Grijns (1981: 3–4).
29 Hoffman (1979: 87).
30 Alisjahbana (1976: 77–78).
31 Maier (1993: 54).
32 Maier (1993: 55).
6
THE 20TH CENTURY TO 1945
1
Moeliono (1993: 130).
2
Adam (1995: 87).
3
Anwar (1980: 170).
4
Drewes (1981: 97). 
5
Heryanto (1995: 48). 
6
Teeuw (1979: 53). Teeuw (1972) discusses Balai Pustaka’s role in the devel-
opment of Indonesian literature.
7
Drewes (1981: 97–102).
8
Teeuw (1979) discusses Iskandar’s role in Balai Pustaka.
9
Teeuw (1979: 14).
10 Oetomo (1991: 55).
11 Drewes (1981: 99).
12 Salmon (1981) discusses this literature, including a bibliography. Maier (1991)
also sympathetically discusses this literature and its increasing isolation from the
mainstream. 
13 Teeuw (1972: 121).
14 Discussed by Grijns (1991a: 57–58).
15 Grijns (1991a: 60).
16 Teeuw (1972: 115).
17 Teeuw (1979: 7). 
18 Grijns (1991a: 70) discusses these influences.
19 Grijns (1998: 298). 
20 Siegel (1987: 186, 188). Grijns (1991a: 69) applies the concept to ‘general cul-
tivated Malay’.
21 Adam (1995: 105).
22 Moeliono (1993: 132). 
23 Moeliono (1993: 134).
24 Yamin’s speech is quoted by Tabrani (1974: 313). 
25 Tabrani (1974: 313).
26 Moeliono (1993) discusses the Youth Congress in detail.
27 The words berbangsa yang satu in the second pledge are usually translated
‘belong to one nation’ (e.g. Teeuw 1979: 22, Anwar 1980: 15). However, the
focus was not on the importance of one state, but on the oneness of the vari-
ous ethnic groups of the archipelago. ‘People’ is thus a more appropriate trans-
lation for bangsa than ‘nation’. Further, ‘nation’ overlaps in meaning with
‘fatherland’ (tanah tumpah darah) in the first pledge. Abas (1987: 1) translates
(tanah) tumpah darah as ‘nation’ and bangsa as ‘people’. The word menjun-
jung in the third pledge literally means ‘carry on the head’, but also ‘respect,
hold in high esteem, uphold’. It is sometimes translated ‘revere’, although this
English word has a stronger meaning, reflecting menjunjung tinggi, literally
‘uphold highly’, which was not used in the pledge.
28 Foulcher (2000) discusses in detail the ‘reworking’ of the Sumpah Pemuda
under successive regimes to suit their ideology.
29 Grijns (1991a: 50).
30 Sukarno (1965a: 67).
31 The Javanese system of speech levels is more complex than indicated in this
brief statement. The system is described by Wolff and Peodjosoedarmo (1982). 
32 Anderson (1966: 104).
2 2 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

33 Anderson (1966: 104).
34 Moeliono (1993: 129).
35 Cited by Anwar (1980: 24). Comments on Alisjahbana’s philosophy are mainly
drawn from Anwar, Teeuw (1979) and Alisjahbana’s own writings.
36 The discussion of Pujangga Baru draws largely on Sutherland (1968). 
37 Sutherland (1968: 108).
38 Alisjahbana (1976: 29–30). 
39 Alisjahbana (1978b: 17). 
40 Teeuw (1979: 31).
41 Moeliono (1993: 138). Moeliono discusses the Congress in detail. 
42 Abas lists the decisions of the Congress (1987: 180–81).
43 Teeuw (1979: 8). 
44 Grijns (1991a: 53–54).
45 Nieuwenhuis’s comments are translated by Maier (1993: 61, 62). 
46 Teeuw (1979: 6).
47 Anwar (1980: 31).
48 Discussion of the Japanese period draws heavily on Anwar (1980).
49 Abas (1987: 1, 10).
7
LANGUAGE PLANNING
1
Liddle (1996: 93).
2
The early days of language planning are discussed by Muljadi (1978), Anwar
(1980), Moeliono (1994a), and Dardjowidjojo (1998).
3
Moeliono (1994b: 385).
4
Muljadi (1978: 214).
5
The publications are discussed by Teeuw (1961: 70–72).
6
Vikør (1983: 69).
7
Moeliono (1994a: 209).
8
Ferguson (1959: 336). 
9
Ferguson (1959: 332).
10 Among the few studies of informal Jakartan Indonesian is the analysis of some
discourse particles by Wouk (1998, 1999) and a brief description by Ewing (to
appear). Gil (1994) discusses colloquial Riau Indonesian.
11 Halim (1981: 7).
12 Femina, 18–24 June 1998, p. 24.
13 Lauder (1998: 73).
14 Heryanto (1995: 5).
15 The controversies are discussed by Anwar (1980: 108–18).
16 Anwar (1980: 112).
17 Anwar (1980: 117–18).
18 Anwar (1980: 116). The resolutions of the congress are given by Abas (1987:
196–206).
19 The spelling reforms are discussed by Kridalaksana (1974) and Vikør (1983).
20 Hooker (1993: 272).
21 Muljadi (1978: 215).
22 The work of the Pusat Bahasa is discussed in detail by Craig (1987).
23 Alisjahbana’s efforts to preserve the traditional Malay phonological patterns are
discussed by Grijns (1981).
24 Alisjahbana (1976: 72).
25 See Moeliono (1994a: 208), where he argues for this approach.
26 Kompas, 17 October 1986, pp. 1, 8. Alisjahbana’s statement and the reaction
are discussed by Anderson (1987) and Craig (1987: 103–104).
27 Kompas, 18 October 1986, p. 6.
28 Heryanto (1995: 14).
29 Alisjahbana (1978b: 191). 
30 Craig (1987: 69).
E N D N O T E S • 2 2 3

31 Suprapto (1989) compares resolutions of the first five congresses. 
32 Moeliono (1993: 138–40) discusses the failure of planners to implement the
resolutions of the congresses.
33 Craig (1987: 153). 
34 For the third edition of Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia, see Alwi et al.
(1998). For the second edition of Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia, see Tim
Penyusun Kamus (1993).
35 Alisjahbana (1965). 
36 Sneddon (1996: 69–98).
37 Voskuil (1996: 20).
38 Moeliono (1994a: 206).
39 Steinhauer (1994: 777).
40 Moeliono (1994a: 208).
41 Moeliono (1994a: 210).
42 Samsuri (1978: 314).
43 Moeliono (1994a: 207).
44 Alisjahbana (1978b: 201).
45 Madya (2000). 
46 McCawley (1974: 118).
47 Madya (2000).
48 Heryanto (1995: 43). Heryanto discusses aspects of bahasa pejabat.
49 Translated by Hooker (1993: 272).
50 Hooker (1993: 273).
51 Foulcher (2000: 394).
52 Heryanto (1995: 50).
53 Cited by Steinhauer (1980: 368). 
54 Tata Bahasa Baku (1998: 349), compared with Sarumpaet (1977: 12), who
states that using adalah in adjectival constructions is ‘a common mistake’.
55 Tata Bahasa Baku (1998: 342), compared with Samsuri (1981: 8) and Johns
(1978: 226), who both disallow this use of -kan.
8
BEYOND PLANNING: OTHER INFLUENCES ON THE LANGUAGE
1
Anwar (1980: 124–35) discusses Sukarno’s language. Many of the phrases and
words mentioned also occur in Sukarno’s writings, such as Sukarno (1965b).
Political aspects of Sukarno’s language are mentioned by Anderson (1966) and
Hooker (1993: 282–84). 
2
This should be vivere pericolosamente. Perhaps the shorter (ungrammatical)
form just sounded more effective to Sukarno.
3
Anwar (1980: 132).
4
Acronyms and other abbreviations are discussed by Dardjowidjojo (1979).
5
Stevens (1973: 80).
6
Cited by Schwarz (1994: 144).
7
Kompas Online, 5 March 1997. 
8
Figures are from Hill (1994: 14, 83).
9
Jakarta Post, 25 April 2001, editorial.
10 Goenawan Mohamad, editor of Tempo magazine, in an interview with Craig
(1987: 51).
11 The distinction is made by Stevens (1973: 74).
12 Alisjahbana (1976: 122).
13 The seminar was reported by Kompas, 5 March 1997 p. 10.
14 Prokem is discussed by Chambert-loir (1984).
15 Wallace (1979: 70).
16 Grijns (1983: 39).
17 Mahdi (1981).
18 Grijns (1983: 38). Grijns (1981, 1983, 1991b) most insightfully articulates the
distinction between Jakarta Malay and modern Jakartan Indonesian. The his-
2 2 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

tory and position of Jakarta Malay is briefly discussed by Ikranegara (1980).
Descriptions of Jakarta Malay grammar are Ikranegara (1980) and Muhadjir
(1981). There is also a Jakarta Malay–Indonesian dictionary (Chaer 1976).
19 Oetomo (1990: 69).
20 Oetomo (1990: 71).
21 Anwar (1980: 154).
22 Adelaar and Prentice (1996: 678).
23 Tempo, 17 March 2002, p. 71.
24 Numerous examples here are taken from Poedjosoedarmo (1982), who dis-
cusses Javanese borrowing in detail.
25 Steinhauer (1980: 369).
26 Anderson (1987: 3).
27 Jones (1984: 26).
28 Steinhauer (1980: 368–69).
29 de Vries (1988: 123–24).
30 Tanner (1967).
31 Smithies (1982: 107).
32 Grijns (1981: 7).
33 Adelaar (1992a: 10) discusses vowel harmony in traditional Malay.
34 Grijns et al. (1983).
35 Salea Warouw (1985).
36 This suffix is discussed in detail by de Vries (1984).
37 Lowenberg (1983: 79).
38 Anderson (1966: 111).
39 Jones (1984: 7–8) discusses these forms in detail.
9
THE INFLUENCE OF ENGLISH
1
Tanner (1972: 139). 
2
Anwar (1980: 148).
3
The entry of global terms into Indonesian is discussed by Grijns (1999).
4
Lowenberg (1994: 232).
5
Salim (1977: 80).
6
Salim (1977: 78).
7
Lowenberg (1994: 235).
8
Dick (1985) discusses the Indonesian middle class and its values.
9
The examples occurred in the news magazine Forum Keadilan, 5 December
1999, p. 38 and 12 March 2000, p. 90 respectively.
10 Smithies (1982: 106).
11 Warrillow-Williams (2001: 153).
12 Warrillow-Williams (2001: 159–60).
13 Smithies (1982: 111).
14 Warrillow-Williams (2001: 102). 
15 Grijns (1999: 60).
16 Lowenberg (1994: 241).
17 Errington (1986: 346).
18 Hoed (2000: 5).
19 The conversations were recorded in Jakarta, discussed by Sneddon (2001,
2002).
20 Examples in this paragraph are taken from Moeliono (1994b: 385–86).
21 Kaswanti Purwo (1992: 4).
22 The example, with translation, is from Verhaar (1989: 260).
23 Marcellino (1993: 21).
24 Grijns (1999: 65).
25 Muljadi (1978: 215), Anwar (1980: 104).
26 Heryanto (1995: 41).
27 Hoed (2000: 6).
E N D N O T E S • 2 2 5

10 REGIONAL LANGUAGES AND THE SPREAD OF INDONESIAN
1
Reported by Steinhauer (1994: 755).
2
BF Grimes (1996).
3
Esser (1938), Friberg and Laskowsky (1989).
4
Based on Dixon (1991: 241).
5
Based on Tryon (1995a: 17).
6
Steinhauer (1994: 783)
7
Wurm and Hattori (1983: map 38).
8
Nababan (1985: 13).
9
Steinhauer (1994: 764). The discussion in this section relies heavily on
Steinhauer’s analysis of the census data.
10 Steinhauer (1994: 759).
11 Figures for 1971 and 1980 are from Nababan (1985: 3). Figures for 1990 and
all figures in Table 10.4 are from Steinhauer (1994: 760).
12 Extracted from Steinhauer (1994: appendix).
13 Steinhauer (1994: 771).
14 Adriani (1925: 143).
15 BF Grimes (1996: 665).
16 Himmelman and Wolff (1998: 3).
17 Steinhauer (1994: 770).
18 BD Grimes (1991: 141).
19 Steinhauer (1994: 769).
20 Thomaz (1981: 57).
21 Walker (1976: 1).
22 Kuipers (1998: 137).
23 Steinhauer (1994: 773).
24 Dick (1985: 73).
25 Oetomo (1990: 70).
26 Anwar (1980: 137).
27 Heryanto (1995: 38).
28 Fokker (1950: 45).
29 Cited by Teeuw (1979: 33).
30 Oetomo (1990: 69).
31 Geertz (1960: 259).
32 Wolff and Poedjosoedarmo (1982), on which the following discussion is largely
based.
33 Kartomihardjo (1979: 212–19) reports on the use of Indonesian in discussing
school work and in other modern activities.
34 Prentice (1978: 33).
35 Moeliono (1986: 69).
36 Forum Keadilan, 5 September 1999, p. 66.
37 Jakarta Post, 20 May 2002, p. 3.
38 Kaswanti Purwo (1997: 61).
2 2 6 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Abas, Husen (1987) Indonesian as a unifying language of wider communication: a
historical and sociological perspective. Pacific Linguistics series D, no. 73.
Australian National University, Canberra.
Abdullah, bin Abdul Kadir Munshi (1960) Hikayat Abdullah vol. 1. Malaya
Publishing House, Singapore.
Adam, Ahmat B (1995) The Vernacular Press and the Emergence of the Modern
Indonesian Consciousness (1855–1913). Cornell University Press, New York. 
Adelaar, K Alexander (1992a) Proto-Malayic: the reconstruction of its phonology
and parts of its lexicon and morphology. Pacific Linguistics series C, no. 119.
Australian National University, Canberra.
____ (1992b) The relevance of Salako for Proto-Malayic and for Old Malay epigra-
phy. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 148/3–4: 381–407.
____ (1995) Borneo as a cross-roads for comparative Austronesian linguistics. In
Peter Bellwood, James Fox & Darrell Tryon (eds) The Austronesians: Historical
and Comparative Perspectives. Department of Anthropology, Australian
National University, Canberra, pp. 75–95.
____ (1996a) Contact languages in Indonesia and Malaysia other than Malay. In SA
Wurm, P Mühlhäusler & DJ Tryon (eds) Atlas of Languages of Intercultural
Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas. Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin, pp. 695–711.
____ (1996b) Malay: the national language of Malaysia. In SA Wurm, P
Mühlhäusler & DJ Tryon (eds) Atlas of Languages of Intercultural
Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas. Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin, pp. 729–33.
Adelaar, K Alexander & Prentice, DJ (1996) Malay: its history, role and spread. In
SA Wurm, P Mühlhäusler & DJ Tryon (eds) Atlas of Languages of Intercultural
Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas. Mouton de Gruyter,
Berlin, pp. 673–93.
Adriani, N (1925) De Minahasische talen. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 81: 134–64.
Alisjahbana, S Takdir (1949) Tatabahasa Baru Bahasa Indonesia. Dian Rakyat,
Jakarta.
____ (1965) The Failure of Modern Linguistics in the Face of Linguistic Problems of
the Twentieth Century. University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur.
____ (1966) Indonesia: Social and Cultural Revolution. Oxford University Press,
Kuala Lumpur.
R E F E R E N C E S

____ (1976) Language Planning for Modernization: The Case of Indonesian and
Malaysian. Mouton, The Hague.
____ (1978a) The concept of language standardisation and its application to the
Indonesian language. In AQ Perez, AO Santiago & Nguyen Dang Liem (eds)
Papers from the Conference on the Standardisation of Asian Languages, Manila,
Philippines. Pacific Linguistics series C, no. 47. Australian National University,
Canberra, pp. 19–41.
____ (1978b) Dari Perjuangan dan Pertumbuhan Bahasa Indonesia: Kumpulan
Esai 1932–1957. Dian Rakyat, Jakarta.
Alwi, Hasan, Dardjowidjojo, Soenjono, Lapoliwa, Hans & Moeliono, Anton M
(1998) Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia. 3rd edn. Balai Pustaka, Jakarta.
Andaya, Barbara Watson & Andaya, Leonard Y (2001) A History of Malaysia. 2nd
edn. Palgrave, Hampshire.
Anderson, Benedict R (1966) The languages of Indonesian politics. Indonesia 1:
89–116.
Anderson, Edmund A (1987) Indonesian language month 1986: tempest at the
forum. New Language Planning Newsletter 1/3: 1–3.
Anwar, Khairid (1980) Indonesian: The Development and Use of a National
Language. Gadjah Mada University Press, Yogyakarta.
Atmosumarto, Sutanto (1995) Colloquial Indonesian. Routledge, London.
Bausani, Alessandro (1960) The first Italian–Malay vocabulary by Antonio
Pigafetta. East and West (new series) 11/1: 229–48.
Bellwood, Peter (1995) Austronesian prehistory in Southeast Asia: homeland,
expansion and transformation. In Peter Bellwood, James J Fox & Darrell Tryon
(eds) The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives. Department
of Anthropology, Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 96–111.
Blagden, CO (1924) A note on the Trengganu inscription. Journal of the Malayan
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 2/3: 258–63.
____ (1930) Two Malay letters from Ternate in the Moluccas, written in 1521 and
1522. Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies 5: 87–101.
Blust, Robert (1977) Austronesian cultural history: some linguistic inferences and
their relations to the archeological record. NUSA: Studies in Indonesian and
Languages in Indonesia vol. 3. Atma Jaya University, Jakarta, pp. 25–36.
____ (1978) Eastern Malayo-Polynesian: a subgrouping argument. In SA Wurm &
Lois Carrington (eds) Second International Conference on Austronesian
Languages: Proceedings. Pacific Linguistics series C, no. 61. Australian
National University, Canberra, pp. 181–234.
____ (1984–85) The Austronesian homeland: a linguistic perspective. Asian
Perspectives 26/1: 45–67.
____ (1990) Summary report: linguistic change and reconstruction methodology in
the Austronesian language family. In Philip Baldi (ed.) Linguistic Change and
Reconstruction Methodology. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 133–53.
____ (1995) The prehistory of the Austronesian-speaking peoples: a view from lan-
guage. Journal of World Prehistory 9/4: 453–510.
Bosch, FDK (1941) Een Maleische inscriptie in het Buitenzorgsche. Bijdragen tot
de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 100: 49–53.
Brown, CC (1952) The Sejarah Melayu or Malay Annals, translated from Raffles
MS 18. Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 25/2–3.
Casparis, JG de (1950) Inscripties uit de Cailendra-tijd (Prasasti-prasasti dari
zaman Cailendra). A. C. Nix, Bandung.
____ (1986) Some notes on the oldest inscriptions of Indonesia. In CMS Hellwig
& SO Robson (eds) A Man of Indonesian Letters: Essays in Honour of Professor
A. Teeuw. Foris, Dortrecht, pp. 242–56.
Chaer, Abdul (1976) Kamus dialek Melayu-Jakarta-Bahasa Indonesia. Nusa Indah,
Jakarta.
Chambert-Loir, Henri (1984) Those who speak Prokem. Indonesia 37: 105–17.
2 2 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Clark, Ross (1990) Austronesian languages. In Bernard Comrie (ed.) The Major
Languages of East and South-East Asia. Routledge, London, pp. 171–84.
Coedes, G (1930) Les inscriptions Malaises de Crivijaya. Bulletin de l’Ecole
d’Extreme-Orient 30: 29–80.
____ (1964) A possible interpretation of the inscription at Kedukan Bukit
(Palembang). In John Bastin & R Roolvink (eds) Malayan and Indonesian
Studies: Essays Presented to Sir Richard Winstedt on his Eighty-fifth Birthday.
Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 24–32.
Collins, James T (1992) The Malay of the oldest Malay grammar: dialectology and
internal evidence. Jurnal Persatuan Linguistik Malaysia 5: 72–82.
____ (1998) Malay, World Language: A Short History. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka,
Kuala Lumpur.
Cortesao, A (1944) (ed.) The Suma Oriental by Tome Pires series 2, vols 81 and 90.
Hakluyt Society, London.
Craig, Polly (1987) Bahasa menunjukkan bangsa. BA Honours thesis, Department
of Indonesian and Malayan Studies, University of Sydney.
Dalton, Bill (1978) Indonesia Handbook. Moon Publications, Vermont.
Dardjowidjojo, Soenjono (1979) Acronymic patterns in Indonesian. In Nguyen
Dang Liem (ed.) South-East Asian Linguistic Studies vol. 3. Pacific Linguistics
series C, no. 45. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 143–60.
____ (1998) Strategies for a successful national language policy: the Indonesian
case. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 130: 35–47.
Dick, HW (1985) The rise of a middle class and the changing concept of equity in
Indonesia: an interpretation. Indonesia 39: 71–92.
Dixon, RMW (1991) The endangered languages of Australia, Indonesia and
Oceania. In Robert H Robins & Eugenius M Uhlenbeck (eds) Endangered
Languages. Berg, Oxford, pp. 229–55.
____ (1997) The Rise and Fall of Languages. University of Cambridge Press,
Cambridge.
Drewes, GWJ (1981) Balai Pustaka and its antecedents. In Nigel Phillips & Khaidir
Anwar (eds) Papers on Indonesian Languages and Literatures. School of
Oriental and African Studies, London, pp. 97–104.
Edwards, ED & Blagden, CO (1930–32) A Chinese vocabulary of Malacca Malay:
words and phrases collected between AD 1403 and 1511 (?). Bulletin of the
School of Oriental Studies 6: 715–49.
Emeis, MG (1975) Bunga Rampai Melayu Kuno. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka,
Kuala Lumpur.
Errington, J Joseph (1986) Continuity and change in Indonesian language devel-
opment. Journal of Asian Studies 45/2: 329–53.
____ (1998) Shifting Languages: Interaction and Identity in Javanese Indonesia.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Esser, SJ (1938) Talen, Langues, Sprachen, Languages. In Atlas van Tropisch
Nederland sheet 9b. Koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap,
Batavia.
Ewing, Michael C (to appear) Colloquial Indonesian. In K Alexander Adelaar &
Nikolaus Himmelmann (eds) The Austronesian Languages of Asia and
Madagascar. Curzon, London.
Ferguson, Charles A (1959) Diglossia. Word 15: 325–40. Reprinted (1972) in P
Giglioli (ed.) Language and Social Context. Penguin, pp. 232–51.
Fishman, Joshua A (1978) The Indonesian language planning experience: what
does it teach us? In S Udin (ed.) Spectrum: Essays Presented to Sutan Takdir
Alisjahbana on his Seventieth Birthday. Dian Rakyat, Jakarta, pp. 333–39.
Fokker, AA (1950) Indonesia dan dunia. Pembina Bahasa Indonesia 3/2: 35–47.
Foulcher, Keith (2000) Sumpah Pemuda: the making and meaning of a symbol of
Indonesian nationhood. Asian Studies Review 24/3: 377–410.
Friberg, Timothy & Laskoswke, Thomas (1989) South Sulawesi languages. In JN
R E F E R E N C E S • 2 2 9

Sneddon (ed.) Studies in Sulawesi linguistics part I. NUSA: Studies in
Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 31. Atma Jaya University, Jakarta,
pp. 1–17.
Geertz, C (1960) The Religion of Java. Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois.
Gil, David (1994) The structure of Riau Indonesian. Nordic Journal of Linguistics
17: 179–200.
Gonda, J (1973) Sanskrit in Indonesia. International Academy of Indian Culture,
New Delhi.
Grijns, CD (1981) Jakarta speech and Takdir Alisjahbana’s plea for the simple
Indonesian word-form. In Nigel Phillips & Khaidir Anwar (eds) Papers on
Indonesian Languages and Literatures. School of Oriental and African Studies,
London, pp. 1–34.
____ (1983) Language use in three neighbourhoods of Tanah Abang: the speaker’s
view. In James T Collins (ed.) Studies in Malay Dialects part I. NUSA: Studies
in Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 16. Atma Jaya University,
Jakarta, pp. 37–51.
____ (1991a) Bahasa Indonesia avant la lettre in the 1920s. In Hein Steinhauer
(ed.) Papers in Austronesian Linguistics no. 1. Pacific Linguistics series A, no.
81. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 49–81.
____ (1991b) Jakarta Malay. KITLV Press, Leiden.
____ (1996) Van der Tuuk and the study of Malay. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 152/3: 353–81.
____ (1998) Between brackets: on vocabulary building in Batavia cc. 1930. In Mark
Janse (ed.) Productivity and Creativity: Studies in General and Descriptive
Linguistics in Honor of E.M. Uhlenbeck. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp.
297–315.
____ (1999) Indonesian terminology and globalisation. Archipel 58: 47–71.
Grijns, CD, de Vries, JW & Santa Maria, L (1983) European loan-words in
Indonesian. KITLV Press, Leiden.
Grimes, Barbara Dix (1991) Exploring the sociolinguistics of Ambonese Malay. In
Ray Harlow (ed.) VICAL 2: Western Austronesian and Contact Languages:
Papers from the Fifth International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics.
Linguistic Society of New Zealand, Auckland, pp. 131–68.
____ (1994) Cloves and nutmeg, traders and wars: language contact in the Spice
Islands. In Tom Dutton & Darrell T Tryon (eds) Language Contact and
Change in the Austronesian World. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 251–74.
Grimes, Barbara F (1996) (ed.) Ethnologue: Languages of the World. 13th edn.
Summer Institute of Linguistics, Dallas.
Grimes, Charles E (1996) Indonesian: the official language of a multilingual nation.
In SA Wurm, P Muhlhausler & DJ Tryon (eds) Atlas of Languages of
Intercultural Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas. Mouton
de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 719–27.
Halim, Amran (1981) Intonation in relation to syntax in Indonesian. Pacific
Linguistics series D, no. 36. Australian National University, Canberra.
Hall, RA (1972) Pidgins and creoles as standard languages. In JB Pride & Janet
Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Penguin, pp. 142–53.
Hall, DGE (1981) A History of South-East Asia. 4th edn. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Heryanto, Ariel (1995) Language of development and development of language:
the case of Indonesian. Pacific Linguistics series D, no. 86. Australian National
University, Canberra.
Hill, AH (1970) The Hikayat Abdullah: An Annotated Translation. Oxford
University Press, Singapore.
Hill, David T (1994) The Press in New Order Indonesia. University of Western
Australia Press, Perth.
Himmelmann, Nikolas & Wolff, John U (1998) Toratán (Ratahan). Lincom
Europa, Munich.
2 3 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Hoed, Benny H (2000) Kedudukan bahasa Indonesia dan tantangan abad yang
akan datang. Linguistik Indonesia 18/1: 1–14.
Hoffman, John (1979) A foreign investment: Indies Malay to 1901. Indonesia 27:
65–92.
Holmes, Janet (2001) An Introduction to Sociolinguistics. 2nd edn. Pearson
Education, Harlow, England.
Hooker, Virginia Matheson (1993) New Order language in context. In Virginia
Matheson Hooker (ed.) Culture and Society in New Order Indonesia. Oxford
University Press, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 272–93.
Ikranegara, Kay (1980) Melayu Betawi Grammar, NUSA: Studies in Indonesian
and Languages in Indonesia vol. 9. Atma Jaya University, Jakarta.
Jaspan, MA (1964) Rejang Ka-Ga-Nga Texts. Australian National University,
Canberra.
Johns, Yohanni (1978) Bahasa Indonesia: Langkah Baru, A New Approach.
Australian National University Press, Canberra.
____ (1996) Bahasa Indonesia: Langkah Baru, A New Approach Book Three. A. S.
Wilson.
Jones, Russell (1984) Loan-words in contemporary Indonesian. In JWM Verhaar
(ed.) Towards a Description of Contemporary Indonesian: Preliminary Studies
part II. NUSA: Studies in Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 19. Atma
Jaya University, Jakarta, pp. 1–38.
____ (1986) The origins of the Malay manuscript tradition. In CD Grijns & SO
Robson (eds) Cultural Contact and Textual Interpretation. Foris Publications,
Dordrecht, pp. 121–43.
____ (1998) Malay: the lingua franca. In John H McGlynn (ed.) Indonesian
Heritage: Language and Literature. Archipelago Press, Jakarta, pp. 74–75.
Kartomihardjo, Soeseno (1979) Ethnography of communication codes in East Java.
PhD thesis, Cornell University.
Kaswanti Purwo, Bambang (1992) Perkembangan bahasa Indonesia. Unpublished
seminar paper, Yogyakarta University.
____ (1997) Ihwal bahasa tak baku: bahasa yang baik dan tidak benar? Atma nan
Jaya 10/3: 49–63.
Kridalaksana, Harimurti (1974) Spelling reform 1972: a stage in the process of
standardisation of bahasa Indonesia. In AQ Perez, AO Santiago & Nguyen
Dang Liem (eds) Papers from the Conference on the Standardisation of Asian
Languages, Manila, Philippines. Pacific Linguistics series C, no. 47. Australian
National University, Canberra, pp. 305–17.
Kuipers, Joel C (1998) Language, Identity and Marginality in Indonesia: The
Changing Nature of Ritual Speech on the Island of Sumba. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Lauder, Multamia (1998) Indonesia’s linguistic diversity. In John H Glynn (ed.)
Indonesian Heritage: Language and Literature. Archipelago Press, Jakarta, pp.
72–73.
Leur, JC van (1955) Indonesian Trade and Society: Essays in Asian Social and
Economic History. W. van Hoeve, The Hague.
Liddle, R William (1996) Leadership and Culture in Indonesian Politics. Allen &
Unwin, Sydney.
Lim, Sonny (1988) Baba Malay: the language of the Straits-born Chinese. In Hein
Steinhauer (ed.) Papers in Western Austronesian Linguistics no. 3. Pacific
Linguistics series A, no. 78. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 1–61.
Lowenberg, Peter H (1983) Lexical modernization in Bahasa Indonesia: function
allocation and variation in borrowing. Studies in the Linguistic Sciences 13/2:
73–86.
____ (1994) The forms and functions of English as an additional language: the case
of Indonesia. In Abdullah Hassan (ed.) Language Planning in Southeast Asia.
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 230–51.
R E F E R E N C E S • 2 3 1

Lyons, John (1968) Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Madya, Suwarsih (2000) Pembentukan manusia Indonesia yang cerdas dan beradab
lewat pengajaran bahasa. Paper presented to the PELLBA Conference, Atma
Jaya University, July 2000.
Mahdi, Waruno (1981) Some problems in the phonology of metropolitan
Indonesian. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 137/4: 399–418.
____ (2000) Review of A Teeuw (1998). Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en
Volkenkunde 156/1: 154–66.
Maier, HMJ (1991) Forms of censorship in the Dutch Indies: the marginalization
of Chinese-Malay literature. Indonesia (Special number: The role of the
Indonesian Chinese in shaping modern Indonesian life), pp. 67–81.
____ (1993) From heteroglossia to polyglossia: the creation of Malay and Dutch in
the Indies. Indonesia 56: 37–65.
Manguin, Pierre-Yves (1993) Palembang and Sriwijaya: an early Malay harbour-city
rediscovered. Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 66/1:
23–46.
Marcellino, M (1993) Penyerapan unsur bahasa asing delam pers. Paper presented
at the Sixth National Language Congress, Jakarta, October, 1993.
Marrison, GE (1951) A Malay poem in old Sumatran characters. Journal of the
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 24: 162–65.
McCawley, Peter (1974) Some suggestions for aid to Indonesian universities.
Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 10/3: 108–22.
Moeliono, Anton M (1986) Language development and cultivation; alternative
approaches in language planning. Pacific Linguistics series D, no. 68. Australian
National University, Canberra.
____(1993) The first efforts to promote and develop Indonesian. In Joshua A
Fishman (ed.) The ‘First Congress’ Phenomenon. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp.
129–42.
____ (1994a) Indonesian language development and cultivation. In Abdullah
Hassan (ed.) Language Planning in Southeast Asia. Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka,
Kuala Lumpur, pp. 195–213.
____ (1994b) Contact-induced language change in present-day Indonesian. In
Tom Dutton & Darrell T Tryon (eds) Language Contact and Change in the
Austronesian World. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 377–88. 
Moeliono, Anton M & Grimes, Charles E (1995) Indonesian (Malay). In Darrell T
Tryon (ed.) Comparative Austronesian Dictionary: An Introduction to
Austronesian Studies part 1, fascicle I. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 443–57.
Muhadjir (1981) Morphology of Jakarta dialect, affixation and reduplication.
NUSA: Studies in Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 11. Atma Jaya
University, Jakarta.
Muljadi, SW Rudjiati (1978) The standardisation of Bahasa Indonesia. In AQ
Perez, AO Santiago & Nguyen Dang Liem (eds) Papers from the Conference on
the Standardisation of Asian Languages, Manila, Philippines. Pacific Linguistics
series C, no. 47. Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 213–18.
Nababan, PWJ (1985) Bilingualism in Indonesia: ethnic language maintenance and
the spread of the national language. Southeast Asian Journal of Social Sciences
13/1: 1–18.
Oetomo, Dede (1990) The Bahasa Indonesia of the middle class. Prisma 50:
68–79.
____ (1991) The Chinese of Indonesia and the development of the Indonesian lan-
guage. Indonesia (Special number: The role of the Indonesian Chinese in shaping
modern Indonesian life), pp. 53–66.
Omar, Asmah Haji (1978) The use of the Malaysian national language in a multi-
lingual society. In S Udin (ed.) Spectrum: Essays Presented to Sutan Takdir
Alisjahbana on his Seventieth Birthday. Dian Rakyat, Jakarta, pp. 532–46.
2 3 2 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

____ (1993) The First Congress for Malay. In Joshua A Fishman (ed.) The Earliest
Stage of Language Planning: The ‘First Congress’ Phenomenon. Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 181–97.
Paterson, HS (1924) An early Malay inscription from Trengganu. Journal of the
Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 2/3: 252–58.
Peacock, James (1973) Indonesia: An Anthropological Perspective. Goodyear
Publishing, Pacific Palisades, California.
Poedjosoedarmo, Soepomo (1982) Javanese influence on Indonesian. Pacific
Linguistics series D, no. 38. Australian National University, Canberra.
Postma, Antoon (1992) The Laguna copper-plate inscription: text and commen-
tary. Philippine Studies 40: 183–203.
Prentice, DJ (1978) The best chosen language. Hemisphere 22/3: 18–23, 22/4:
28–33.
____ (1986) Lexicography and colonialism: a Southeast Asian case-study. In CMS
Hellwig & SO Robson (eds) A Man of Indonesian Letters: Essays in Honour of
Professor A. Teeuw. Foris, Dortrecht, pp. 305–15.
____ (1990) Malay (Indonesian and Malaysian). In Bernard Comrie (ed.) The
Major Languages of East and South-East Asia. 2nd edn. Routledge, London,
pp. 185–207.
Proudfoot, Ian & Hooker, Virginia (1998) The Malay writing tradition. In John H
McGlynn (ed.) Indonesian Heritage: Language and Literature. Archipelago
Press, Jakarta, pp. 22–23.
Rafferty, Ellen (1984) Languages of the Chinese of Java — an historical review. The
Journal of Asian Studies 43/2: 247–72.
Ricklefs, MC (1976) Banten and the Dutch in 1619: six early ‘pasar’ Malay letters.
Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 39/1: 128–36.
Ross, Malcolm M (1995) Some current issues in Austronesian linguistics. In Darrell
T Tryon (ed.) Comparative Austronesian Dictionary: An Introduction to
Austronesian Studies part 1, fascicle 1. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 45–120.
Salea Warouw, Martha (1985) Kamus Manado-Indonesia. Department of
Education and Culture, Jakarta.
Salim, Ziad (1977) The growth of the Indonesian language: the trend towards
Indo-Saxonization. The Indonesian Quarterly 2: 75–93.
Salleh, Muhammad Haji (1998) Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir Munsyi. In John H
McGlynn (ed.) Indonesian Heritage: Language and Literature. Archipelago
Press, Jakarta, pp. 80–81.
Salmon, Claudine (1981) Literature of Malay by the Chinese of Indonesia.
Association Archipel, Paris.
Samsuri (1978) Takdir’s Tatabahasa Baru Bahasa Indonesia and the writing of
Indonesian grammars. In S Udin (ed.) Spectrum: Essays Presented to Sutan
Takdir Alisjahbana on his Seventieth Birthday. Dian Rakyat, Jakarta, pp. 310–32.
____ (1981) The roles of Indonesian ø, -i and -kan suffixes in advancements. Paper
presented at the Third International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics,
Den Pasar.
Sarumpaet, JP (1977) The Structure of Bahasa Indonesia. 3rd edn. Sahata, Box Hill,
Victoria.
Schwarz, Adam (1994) A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia in the 1990s. Allen &
Unwin, Sydney.
Shellabear, WG (1898) An account of some of the oldest Malay MSS. now extant.
Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 31: 107–51.
____ (1913) Baba Malay: an introduction to the language of the Straits-born
Chinese. Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 65: 49–63.
Siegel, Jeff (1987) Language Contact in a Plantation Environment. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Smithies, Michael (1982) The vocabulary of the elite: an examination of contem-
porary loan words in Indonesian. Indonesian Quarterly 10/2: 105–13.
R E F E R E N C E S • 2 3 3

Sneddon, JN (1996) Indonesian Reference Grammar. Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
(Published outside Australia as Indonesian: A Comprehensive Grammar.
Routledge, London.)
____ (2000) Understanding Indonesian Grammar. Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
____ (2001) Teaching informal Indonesian: some factors for consideration.
Australian Review of Applied Linguistics 24/2: 81–95.
____ (2002) Variation in informal Jakartan Indonesian: a quantitative study. Paper read
at the Ninth International Conference on Austronesian Linguistics, Canberra.
Soebadio, Haryati (1969) New Sanskrit loan formations in Bahasa Indonesia.
Cultural Forum 9/3–4: 22–30.
Spitzbardt, Harry (1970) Sanskrit loan words in the Bahasa Indonesia. Journal of
Oriental Research 36: 29–47.
Steinhauer, H (1980) On the history of Indonesian. In AA Barentsen, BM Groen
& R Sprenger (eds) Studies in Slavic and General Linguistics vol. 1. Rodopi,
Amsterdam, pp. 349–75.
____ (1994) The Indonesian language situation and linguistics: prospects and pos-
sibilities. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde 150/4: 755–83.
Stevens, Alan M (1973) Bahasa Indonesia: modernization and nationalization. Asia
30: 70–84.
Sukarno (1965a) An Autobiography (as told to Cindy Adams). Bobbs-Merrill, New York.
____ (1965b) Dibawah Bendera Revolusi. Panitya Penerbit, Jakarta.
Supomo, S (1995) Indic transformation: the Sanskritisation of Jawa and the
Javanisation of the Bharata. In Peter Bellwood, James Fox & Darrell Tryon
(eds) The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives. Department
of Anthropology, Australian National University, Canberra, pp. 291–313.
Suprapto, Riga Adiwoso (1989) Perubahan sosial dan perkembangan bahasa.
Prisma 18: 61–115.
Sutherland, Heather (1968) Pudjangga Baru: as aspect of Indonesian intellectual
life in the 1930s. Indonesia 6: 106–27.
Tabrani, Mohamad (1974) Konggres Pemuda Indonesia pertama: 30 April 1926
s/d 2 Mei 1926. In Subagio Reksodipuro & H Soebagijo (eds) 45 Tahun
Sumpah Pemuda. Yayasan Gedung-Gedung Bersejarah Jakarta, Jakarta, pp.
307–18.
Tanner, N (1967) Speech and society among the Indonesian elite: a case study of a
multilingual community. Anthropological Linguistics 9/3: 15–39. Reprinted
(1972) in JB Pride & Janet Holmes (eds.) Sociolinguistics: Selected Readings.
Penguin, pp. 125–41.
Teeuw, A (1959) The history of the Malay language. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land-
en Volkenkunde 115: 138–56.
____ (1961) A Critical Survey of Studies on Malay and Bahasa Indonesia. KITLV
Bibliographical Series 5. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
____ (1972) The impact of Balai Pustaka on modern Indonesian literature. Bulletin
of the School of Oriental and African Studies 35/1: 111–27.
____ (1979) Modern Indonesian Literature vol. 1. 2nd edn. Martinus Nijhoff, The
Hague.
____ (1998) De Ontwikkeling van een Woordenschat: Het Indonesisch 1945–1995.
Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen, Amsterdam.
Thomaz, Luis Filipe (1981) The formation of Tetun-Praça, vehicular language of
East Timor. In Nigel Phillips & Khaidir Anwar (eds) Papers on Indonesian
Languages and Literatures. School of Oriental and African Studies, London,
pp. 54–83.
____ (1993) The Malay Sultanate of Melaka. In Anthony Reid (ed.) Southeast Asia
in the Early Modern Era: Trade, Power and Belief. Cornell University Press,
New York, pp. 69–90.
Tim Penyusun Kamus (1993) Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia. 2nd edn. Balai
Pustaka, Jakarta.
2 3 4 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Tryon, Darrell T (1995a) The Austronesian languages. In Darrell T Tryon (ed.)
Comparative Austronesian Dictionary: An Introduction to Austronesian Studies
part 1, fascicle 1. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 5–44.
____ (1995b) Proto-Austronesian and the major Austronesian subgroups. In Peter
Bellwood, James J Fox & Darrell Tryon (eds) The Austronesians: Historical and
Comparative Perspectives. Department of Anthropology, Australian National
University, Canberra, pp. 17–38.
Verhaar, John WM (1978) Some notes on the verbal passive in Indonesian. NUSA:
Studies in Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 6. Atma Jaya University,
Jakarta, pp. 11–19.
____ (1989) Syntactic ergativity in contemporary Indonesian. In Bambang
Kaswanti Purwo (ed.) Serpih-serpih Telaah Pasif Bahasa Indonesia. Kanisius,
Jakarta, pp. 200–81.
Vikør, Lars (1983) Language policy and language planning in Indonesia and
Malaysia. In Thomany Svensson & Per Sørensen (eds) Indonesia and Malaysia:
Scandanavian Studies in Contemporary Society. Curzon, London, pp. 47–74.
Voskuil, Jan Eckhard (1996) Comparative morphology: verb taxonomy in
Indonesian, Tagalog and Dutch. PhD thesis, Leiden University.
Vries, JW de (1984) Adaptaton of polymorphemic loadwords: the case of words
ending in -asi in Indonesian. Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
140/4: 476–96.
____ (1988) Dutch loadwords in Indonesian. International Journal of the Sociology
of Language 73: 121–36.
Walker, Dale F (1976) A grammar of the Lampung language; the Pesisir dialect of
Way Lima. NUSA: Studies in Indonesian and Languages in Indonesia vol. 2.
Atma Jaya University, Jakarta.
Wallace, Stephen (1979) The linguistic modernization of Jakarta. In Gloria Davis
(ed.) What is Modern Indonesian Culture? Centre for International Studies,
Ohio University, pp. 69–88.
Warrillow-Williams, David (2001) English influence on the development of
Indonesian in the print media, 1966–96. PhD thesis, Griffith University.
Winstedt, RO (1938) The Malay Annals or Sejarah Melayu. Journal of the Malayan
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 16/3.
____ (1958a) Malay histories. Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic
Society 31/3: 127–40.
____ (1958b) Munshi ‘Abdu’llah. Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal
Asiatic Society 31/3: 141–44.
____ (1962) An Unabridged Malay–English Dictionary. 4th edn. Marican & Sons,
Singapore.
Wolff, John U (1976) Malay borrowings in Tagalog. In CD Cowan & OW Wolters
(eds) Southeast Asian History and Historiography: Essays Presented to D. G. E.
Hall. Cornell University Press, New York, pp. 345–67.
Wolff, John U & Poedjosoedarmo, Soepomo (1982) Communicative Codes in
Central Java. Cornell University Press, New York.
Wolff, John U., Utomo, D & Fietkiewicz, D (1992) Beginning Indonesian through
Self-instruction. Cornell University Press, New York.
Wolters, OW (1967) Early Indonesian Commerce: A Study of the Origins of
Srivijaya. Cornell University Press, New York.
____ (1970) The Fall of Srivijaya in Malay History. Lund Humphries, London.
Wouk, Fay (1998) Solidarity in Indonesian conversation: the discourse marker kan.
Multilingua 17/4: 379–406.
____ (1999) Gender and the use of pragmatic particles in Indonesian. Journal of
Sociolinguistics 3/2: 194–219.
Wurm, SA & Hattori, Shirô (eds) (1983) Language Atlas of the Pacific Area part 2.
Japan Area, Philippines and Formose, Mainland and Insular South-east Asia.
Australian Academy of the Humanities, Canberra.
R E F E R E N C E S • 2 3 5

Abdullah, bin Abdul Kadir Munshi  
71, 90
acronyms  144, 145–49
Alisjahbana, Sutan Takdir  15, 106–7,
108, 112, 117, 130–32, 134, 138,
151, 164, 209
Ambon Malay  85, 200, 205 
see also Malay in the Moluccas
Amir Hamza  107
Amir Sjarifoeddin  108
anak Betawi 154–55
Anglo-Dutch treaty  8, 86
Arabic
influence on Malay/Indonesian  
53, 57, 59, 74–76, 90, 118, 184
script  13, 53, 59, 62, 74, 91 
Armijn Pane  107, 108
Austro-Asiatic languages  26
Austronesian languages  22–31,
197–98
Baba Malay  77
Badudu, Yus  142
Bahasa dan Budaya 118
bahasa gado-gado 140, 194
bahasa pejabat 139–40, 151
Balai Pustaka 95–97, 98, 103, 105,
107, 108, 125, 131
Bandung Institute of Technology  174
Bazaar Malay, see Low Malay
Belenggu 107, 108
Berg, CC  127
Betawi Malay, see Jakarta Malay
Bintang Hindia 99
Bintang Oetara 89
Bintang Timor 90
Bogor inscription  43
brabbeltaal, see ‘gibberish’ Malay 
Brunei Malay  13, 61, 216
see also Malay in Brunei
Buddhism, see Hindu and Buddhist
influence
Bulan Bahasa 102, 133, 139
Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian 
languages  29, 197
Central Malayo-Polynesian languages
29, 31
Centre for Language Cultivation and
Development, see Pusat Bahasa
Chinese influence on
Malay/Indonesian  77–78, 154
Chinese Malay wordlist 59, 74, 76, 77 
Classical Malay  9, 42, 57, 60, 64,
67–68, 86, 70–71, 74, 92, 94,
107, 127, 151, 193
colloquial Indonesian  10, 11, 18–20,
121–25, 142, 155, 187–88, 193
see also Jakartan Indonesian
Commissie voor de Volkslectuur, see
Balai Pustaka
Dayak languages  32, 203–4 
Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka 13
Dienst Maleisch, see Service Malay
diglossia  9, 92, 121–25, 135, 141,
152, 206, 215–16
Dutch
education in  87, 89, 93–94, 101,
103, 106, 110, 111–12, 117,
161–62, 166
influence on Malay and Indonesian
I N D E X

94, 97, 98, 99, 111, 118, 126, 130,
160–67, 173, 175, 189, 192, 193
use of  80, 84, 85, 86, 87, 89,
93–94, 97, 100, 101, 103–04, 106,
110–11, 162, 173
Dutch-Indies Teachers’ Association  110
Dutch-Native schools  94, 110, 161,
174
Eastern Malayo-Polynesian languages
29
Ejaan Republik 116
Ejaan yang Disempurnakan 128
English, influence on Malay and
Indonesian  11, 131, 132, 140,
150, 151, 162, 165, 166, 167,
172, 173–95
English East India Company  64
Ferguson, Charles  121, 122 
Fifth Indonesian National Language
Congress  134
First Congress of Malay  12
First Indonesian National Language
Congress  134
First Indonesian Youth Congress  100
Fokker, AA  86, 89, 208
formal Indonesian  10, 17, 18–19, 99,
121–25, 137, 138–39, 141–42,
151–52, 154, 155, 156, 167, 
187, 215
Formosan languages  27–29, 30
Gadis 152
Galvão, Antonio  61
Gandasuli inscription  43
General Cultivated Malay  97–99
‘gibberish’ Malay  88, 89, 94
‘golden letter’ to King James I  65, 
66, 71
Graafland, N  88
Habibie, BY  169
Hatta, Mohammad 110, 112, 115
Heryanto, Ariel  140
High Malay  9, 84–85, 87–88, 89–90,
92, 94, 98, 102–3, 106, 125
see also Riau Malay
Hikayat Hang Tuah 68
Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai 67
Hikayat Seri Rama 67
Hindi, influence on Malay  72–73 
Hindu and Buddhist influence on
Malay culture and language  20,
34–36, 37, 45, 46, 53, 57 
Hokkien Chinese  77–78, 154 
Hooykaas, C  110
Houtman, Cornelis de  82, 83
Houtman, Frederick de  31, 83
Hurgronje, Snouck  91
Hutomo Mandala Putra  169
Indo-European languages  24, 51
Indonesia Merdeka 100
Indonesia Raya 101
Indonesian 
as language of unity  5–7, 9, 100,
102, 113, 134, 140, 141, 207, 216
as national language  5–7, 9, 10, 
14, 15, 17, 87, 100, 103, 106,
113–14, 117, 119, 124, 128, 129,
131, 140–41, 162, 186, 201, 205,
206, 208, 213, 216, 217
attitudes to  10, 119, 120, 129, 131,
141–42
codification  120–21, 129, 136
grammar  108, 113, 117, 120, 122,
126, 127, 129, 133, 134–37,
142–43, 150, 152
in education  111–12, 116–17, 120,
121, 124, 126, 127, 129, 134,
137–39, 141, 151, 205–6, 211,
214, 215–16
in national development  7, 102,
124–25, 128–29, 140, 149, 151,
208
misconceptions about  14–18
monolingualism in  201, 202, 205,
210
pride in, see attitudes to
taught as a foreign language  18–20,
141, 216–17
see also colloquial Indonesian, formal
Indonesian, Jakartan Indonesian,
language planning, Malay, standard
Indonesian, standardisation of
Indonesian
informal Indonesian, see colloquial
Indonesian
Inilah bahasa Indonesia yang benar
142
Intisari 142
Iskandar, Nur Sutan  95, 126
Islam 
arrival  44, 52–53
influence  52–57, 61, 74
see also Arabic
I-tsing  40–41
Jakarta Malay  77, 153–55, 164, 207
Jakartan Indonesian  77, 121–22,
153–56, 188, 215–16
I N D E X • 2 3 7

Japanese occupation  9, 110, 111–13,
115
Javanese
in education  87, 104, 117, 207 
influence on Malay and Indonesian
85, 139, 144, 151, 153, 154, 155,
156–60, 164
Jawi, see Arabic script 
Johor Malay, see Riau Malay 
Jong Indonesie 100
Jong Java 100, 102
Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia 134,
136, 180, 183
Kamus Umum 116, 136
Kan-t’o-li 36, 44
Kartamihardja, Achdiat  127
Kartini 152
Kawi, see Old Javanese
Kedukan Bukit inscription  37, 38
Keng Po 101
Kern, H  89
Kitab Logat Melayu 91, 94
Komisi Bahasa 112–13, 115, 120,
130, 161
Komisi Istilah 117–18, 161, 172
Kompas 149, 150
Kota Kapur inscription  39
Krama 105, 211
Kridalaksana, Harimurti  141, 215
K’un-lun 41
Laguna inscription  43
Lancaster, Sir James  64
Language Centre, see Pusat Bahasa
Language Month, see Bulan Bahasa
language planning  6, 9, 10, 13, 
21, 92, 99, 108, 112–13, 
115–21, 122, 124, 125, 
128–39, 150, 161, 172, 
178, 212
dissemination to the public  132–34,
142–43, 150
influence in education  119, 122,
125, 128
influence on the media  131,
132–33, 144, 150
Latin script/orthography  13, 53, 83,
91, 94
Layar Terkembang 107
Lembaga Bahasa dan Budaya 117,
128, 132
Leydekker, M  85 
Lindschoten, Jan Huygen van  61
lingua francas other than
Malay/Indonesian  203–5
Low Malay  9, 42, 77, 82, 84, 85, 88,
89–90, 93, 95, 97, 99, 105, 125
Magellan  61, 63
Mahabharata 169
Malay
choice as national language of
Indonesia  5, 6, 100, 101–3, 105–6
creole and post-creole varieties  9,
42, 60, 63, 85, 98, 105, 199, 202
Dutch disputes about  84–86, 88–89,
93, 109–10
in Aceh  52, 59, 64–66, 68, 83, 88,
215 
in Brunei  6, 11, 13, 63, see also
Brunei Malay
in education under the Dutch  9, 84,
85, 87–88, 91–92, 95, 98, 105,
110, see also School Malay
in Java  43, 45, 85, 86, 87, 93, 97 
in Malacca  57–59, 68
in Malaysia  6, 8, 11–13, 128, 131,
153, 216
in the Moluccas  59–63, 79, 83–85,
88, see also Ambon Malay, Ternate
Malay
in Singapore  6, 8, 11, 13, 119, 131
in Srivijaya, see Old Malay
lingua franca varieties  33, 41, 42,
60, 63, 77, 84, 85, 93, 154
literature  45, 57, 58, 59, 63, 64,
65–72, 95–96, 103
origins  7, 31–32
see also Baba Malay, ‘gibberish’ Malay,
High Malay, Jakarta Malay, Low
Malay, Old Malay, Riau Malay,
School Malay, Service Malay, 
standardisation of Malay
Malay Annals, see Sejarah Melayu
Malayic languages  31–32
Malayo-Chamic languages  31
Malayo-Polynesian languages  27–30
Manado Malay  82, 153, 166, 199,
204
Mangunwijaya YB  138
Marco Polo  44
Marsden, William  161
mass media  121, 123, 129, 131,
132–33, 139, 144, 148, 149–52,
156, 174, 176, 177–80, 183
Mataharie 90
Matra 152
Medan Bahasa 118
Melanesian languages  30
Melayu dinas, see Service Malay
Melindo spelling  128
2 3 8 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

Membina bahasa Indonesia baku 142
Micronesian languages  30
Minye Tujuh inscription  45, 52, 72, 74
Minangkabau influence on Malay
94–96, 97, 107
Mode 152
Moeliono, Anton  129–31, 133, 136,
137
Munshi Abdullah, see Abdullah, bin
Abdul Kadir Munshi
nationalists, use of Malay/Indonesian
97, 99–101, 106
newspapers  89, 97–98, 99, 107, 112
Ngoko 105, 211
Nieuwenhuis, GJ  109
Non-Austronesian languages, see
Papuan languages
see also mass media
Oceanic languages  22, 25, 29–30
Old Javanese  36, 46, 67, 167, 170–72
Old Malay  36–38, 43, 45, 46 
Ophuijsen, CA van  91–92, 94, 95, 108
grammar  92
spelling system  91–92, 95, 99, 115
Pacific languages, see Oceanic languages
Pagarruyung inscription  45
Pallava script  34, 36–37, 45, 104
Papuan languages  30, 42, 62–63, 77,
85, 197–98
Partai Nasional Indonesia 100
Pasar Malay, see Low Malay
Pattani Malay  13, 199
Pembina Bahasa Indonesia 117
Pemuda Indonesia 100
Peranakan Chinese  90, 96
Perfected Spelling, see Ejaan yang
Disempurnakan
Perhimpunan Indonesia 100
Persian influence on the language  74,
76–77
Pigafetta, Antonio  53, 61–62, 63
Poerwadarminta  116
Polynesian languages  30
Portuguese
creole  79–80
in East Timor  80, 206, 214
influence on Malay/Indonesian
80–82
Proclamation of Independence  114,
115
Prokem 153
Proto-Austronesian  23–24, 28
Proto-Indo-European  24
Pujangga Baru 106–8, 117
Pusat Bahasa 129, 131–32, 133, 134,
140, 142, 150, 165, 194, 207,
212, 216
Pusat Pembinaan dan Pengembangan
Bahasa, see Pusat Bahasa
radio, see mass media
Radio Republik Indonesia 126
Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford  71, 82,
86, 173
Ramayana 169
regional languages of Indonesia  5–6,
122, 196–99, 200, 202–10
Riau Malay  8, 9, 68, 69, 70, 84, 86,
87, 88, 89, 92, 94, 98, 109, 125
see also High Malay
Riau-Johor Malay, see Riau Malay
Rinkes, DA  95
Ruyll, Albert  83
Sadikin, Ali  194
Sanskrit, influence on
Malay/Indonesian  37–38, 40, 51,
52, 72–73, 74, 167–72
School Malay  92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 99,
103, 107, 145
school teachers, influence on the 
language  94, 95–96, 137
Second Indonesian National Language
Congress  127, 132
Second Indonesian Youth Congress  5,
9, 101–2, 108, 119
Sejarah Melayu 57–58, 67, 68–69
Service Malay  85, 86, 88, 97
Seventh Indonesian National Language
Congress  139
Sixth Indonesian National Language
Congress  134
Sobrani, Mohamad  186
Soepratman, Wage Rudolph  101
Soerat Chabar Betawie 90
Soerat Kabar Bahasa Melaijoe 89, 90
Soewandi  112, 116
spelling system  116, 127–28
South Halmahera-West New Guinea
languages  29, 30
spelling, see Ejaan yang Disempur-
nakan, Ophuijsen, Soewandi
standard Indonesian  10, 11, 15, 77,
82, 90, 135–36, 137, 165, 166
standardisation
of Indonesian  7, 9–11, 119–20,
134–36, 137, 140, 151, 152
of Malay  68, 70, 87–89, 91–92, 93,
95, 96, 99
I N D E X • 2 3 9

see also language planning, standard
Indonesian
Suharto  128, 139, 140, 147, 150,
151, 169
Sukarno  100, 103, 112, 113, 114,
128, 142–43, 147, 169
Sulalat u’s-Salatin, see Sejarah Melayu
Sultan Abu Hayat of Ternate  62–63
Sultan Ala’u d-Din Shah of Aceh  64
Sultan Perkasa Alam Johan of Aceh
65, 66
Sultan of Tidore  63
Suma Oriental 57–58
Sumpah Pemuda 5, 101–2, 108, 133,
140
Sundanese
in education  87, 117, 207
influence of  85
syair 68
Tabrani, Mohamad  100–2
Tai-Kadai languages  26
Tamil influence on Malay  73
Tata Bahasa Baku Bahasa Indonesia
134–35, 136, 142–43
Tatabahasa Baru Bahasa Indonesia
117, 135, 137
television, see mass media
Tempo 150, 177, 179, 183
Terminology Commission, see Komisi
Istilah
Ternate Malay  63
see also Malay in the Moluccas
Third Indonesian National Language
Congress  133
Tome Pires  57, 58
Trengganu inscription  45, 46, 53, 54,
55–57, 65, 74
Tuuk, HN van der  87–88
United East India Company, see
Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie
University of Indonesia  174
Valentyn, François  85
Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie
(VOC)  82–83, 84, 85, 86
Volkslectuur, see Balai Pustaka
Volksraad 106, 109, 119
vowel harmony  164–65
Wahid, Abdurrahman  149, 151, 187
Wall, H von de  70, 87–88
Werndly, G  85
Western Malayo-Polynesian languages
29, 30–31, 197–98
Winstedt, Richard  17
Xavier, Francis  61, 79
Yamin, Muhammad  100–1, 127
Youth Pledge, see Sumpah Pemuda
2 4 0 •  T H E
I N D O N E S I A N
L A N G U A G E

