
theory of society, volume 2


Cultural Memory
in
the
Present
Mieke Bal and Hent de Vries, Editors


THEORY OF SOCIETY
VOLUME 2
Niklas Luhmann
Translated by Rhodes Barrett
stanford university press
stanford, california

Stanford University Press
Stanford, California
English translation ©2013 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior 
University. All rights reserved.
Theory of Society, Volume 2 was originally published in German under the title 
Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Band 2 © Suhrkamp Verlag Frankfurt am Main 1997.
The translation of this work has been published with the assistance of the 
­Volkswagen Foundation.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of 
Stanford University Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Luhmann, Niklas, 1927-1998, author.
  [Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. English]
  Theory of society / Niklas Luhmann ; translated by Rhodes Barrett.
       2 volumes cm.--(Cultural memory in the present)
  “Originally published in German under the title Die Gesellschaft der ­Gesellschaft.”
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-8047-7159-7 (cloth : alk. paper)--
  ISBN 978-0-8047-7160-3 (pbk. : alk. paper) (vol. 2)
 1.  Sociology. 2.  Social systems. 3.  Communication.  I. Title. II. Series: Cultural 
memory in the present. 
  HM590.L84513 2012
  301--dc23	
	
	
	
	
	
2012021883
  ISBN 978-0-8047-8727-7 (electronic)
Typeset by Bruce Lundquist in 11/13.5 Adobe Garamond

Contents
4.	Differentiation
1
	4.1.	 System Differentiation
1
	4.2.	 Forms of System Differentiation
10
	4.3.	 Inclusion and Exclusion
16
	4.4.	 Segmentary Societies
27
	4.5.	 Center and Periphery
42
	4.6.	 Stratified Societies
50
	4.7.	 The Outdifferentiation of Functional Systems
65
	4.8.	 Functionally Differentiated Society
87
	4.9.	 Autonomy and Structural Coupling
108
	4.10.	Irritations and Values
115
	4.11.	 Societal Consequences
124
	4.12.	 Globalization and Regionalization
127
	4.13.	 Interaction and Society
131
	4.14.	 Organization and Society
141
	4.15.	 Protest Movements
154
5.	 Self-Descriptions
167
	 5.1.	 The Accessibility of Society
167
	5.2.	 Neither Subject nor Object
169
	5.3.	 Self-Observation and Self-Description
175
	5.4.	 The Semantics of Old Europe, 1: Ontology
183
	5.5.	 The Semantics of Old Europe, 2: The Whole 
and Its Parts
196

viii    Contents
	5.6.	 The Semantics of Old Europe, 3: Politics and Ethics
209
	5.7.	 The Semantics of Old Europe, 4: The School Tradition
220
	5.8.	 The Semantics of Old Europe, 5: From Barbarism 
to Critique
223
	5.9.	 The Reflection Theories of Functional Systems
226
	5.10.	 Differences in Media Semantics
242
	5.11.	 Nature and Semantics
246
	5.12.	 Temporalizations
251
	5.13.	 Flight into the Subject
263
	5.14.	 The Universalization of Morality
277
	5.15.	 The Differentiation of “Nations”
283
	5.16.	 Class Society
289
	5.17.	 The Paradox of Identity and Its Unfolding 
Through Differentiation
293
	5.18.	 Modernization
305
	5.19.	 Information and Risk as Descriptive Formulas
310
	5.20.	The Mass Media and Their Selection 
of Self-Descriptions
314
	5.21.	 Invisibilization: The Unmarked State 
of the Observer and How It Shifts
323
	5.22.	 Reflecting on Autology: The Sociological Description 
of Society in Society
335
	5.23.	 So-Called Postmodernity
345
Notes
351
Index to Volume 2
439
Index to Volume 1
447

theory of society, volume 2


4
Differentiation
1. System Differentiation
Since its inception, sociology has been concerned with differentia­
tion.1 The term alone deserves attention. It stands for the unity (or estab­
lishment of the unity) of difference. Older societies, too, had naturally 
observed differences; they distinguished between town dwellers and coun­
try dwellers, between nobles and peasants, between the members of one 
family and those of another. But they were satisfied to note the differing 
qualities of beings and ways of life and to form corresponding expecta­
tions, as they also did in dealing with things. The concept of differentiation 
allowed a more abstract approach, and this step toward abstraction is likely 
to have been caused by the nineteenth-century tendency to see unities and 
differences as the outcome of processes—whether of evolutionary develop­
ments or (as in the case of politically united “nations”) of purposive action.
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, this concept of differen­
tiation made it possible to switch from theories of progress to structural 
analysis, while nevertheless adopting the economist’s belief in the produc­
tiveness of the division of labor. Talcott Parsons’s general theory of the ac­
tion system still built on this concept, which offered a key formula both 
for analyzing development (increasing differentiation) and for explaining 
modern individualism as the result of role differentiation. It led Georg 
Simmel to analyze money, Émile Durkheim to reflect on changes in the 
forms of moral solidarity, and Max Weber to develop his concept of the ra­
tionalization of different orders of life such as religion, the economy, poli­

 
  Differentiation
tics, and eroticism. The dominance of the differentiation concept proves 
useful precisely because it does not exclude seemingly disparate theoreti­
cal approaches—to development, to individuality, to value criteria—but 
rather gives access to them. In sum, differentiation is necessary to maintain 
cohesion under conditions of growth.
The differentiation concept enabled modern society to admire and 
criticize itself. It could regard itself as the irreversible outcome of history 
and look to the future with a great deal of skepticism. For Simmel as for 
Weber, highly developed “form” is a correlate of differentiation, as is the 
emergence of individuality for practically all the classical sociologists. At 
the same time, however, form is not to be had without a disturbing loss of 
meaning: it always involves restriction and renunciation; and individual­
ity does not make the individual what he would like to be, but produces 
the experience of alienation. Together with individual particularity, aware­
ness develops of what this particularity does not entail, generating, since 
the end of the nineteenth century, various theories of a plural self, of con­
flict between personal and social identity, or of contradictory socialization.
This overdetermination through connectivity options is, however, at 
the cost of conceptual clarity.2 I therefore limit the concept to the special 
case of system differentiation, thus making it more difficult to draw over­
hasty conclusions about individual behavior from structural problems in 
societal differentiation. Naturally, this does not prevent us from speaking 
of role differentiation or differentiated taste, of conceptual differentiation, 
or of terminological differentiation in a quite general sense. Everything 
that is distinguished can, if we mean the result of the operation, also be 
described as difference. However, my thesis is that other differentiations 
arise from the differentiation of systems and can therefore be explained 
by system differentiation; and this is so because every operational (recur­
sive) connection of operations generates a difference between system and 
environment.
If a social system emerges in this manner, I speak of it differentiating 
out [ausdifferenzieren] against what this process then makes into the envi­
ronment. Such outdifferentiation can, as in the case of the societal system, 
take place in the unmarked space of meaningful possibilities (that can be­
come open to marking only through differentiation), hence in the oth­
erwise unlimited world. But it can also take place within already formed 
systems. This is the only case I shall call system differentiation, or, when 

Differentiation    
considering the difference mentioned, internal differentiation of the sys­
tem concerned.
System differentiation is thus nothing other than recursive system for­
mation, the application of system formation to its own result. The system in 
which further systems arise is reconstructed by a further distinction between 
subsystem and environment. From the perspective of the subsystem, the 
rest of the comprehensive system is now environment. For the sub­system 
the overall system now appears to be the unity of the difference between 
subsystem and subsystem environment. In other words, system differentia­
tion generates intrasystemic environments. To employ a now familiar term, 
we are dealing with the “reentry” of the distinction between system and en­
vironment into what has been distinguished, into the system.3
It is important to understand this process with the necessary preci­
sion. It does not involve the decomposition of a “whole” into “parts,” in ­either 
the conceptual sense (divisio) or the sense of actual division (partitio). The 
whole/part schema comes from the old European tradition,4 and if applied 
in this context would miss the decisive point.5 System differentiation does 
not mean that the whole is divided into parts and, seen on this level, then 
consists only of the parts and the “relations” between the parts. It is rather 
that every subsystem reconstructs the comprehensive system to which it 
belongs and which it contributes to forming through its own (subsystem-
specific) difference between system and environment. Through system differ­
entiation, the system multiplies itself, so to speak, within itself through 
ever-new distinctions between systems and environments in the system. 
The differentiation process can set in spontaneously; it is a result of evolu­
tion, which can use opportunities to launch structural changes. It requires 
no coordination by the overall system such as the schema of the whole and 
its parts had suggested. Nor does it require all operations carried out in the 
overall system to be distributed among subsystems, so that the overall sys­
tem can then operate only in the subsystems. Even a highly differentiated 
society allows a great deal of “free” interaction. The consequence is a differ­
entiation of societal system and interaction systems that varies with the dif­
ferentiation form of society.6
The differentiation process can thus begin somewhere or other and 
somehow or other and reinforce the deviation that has arisen.7 One settle­
ment among many comes to be preferred where the advantages of central­
ization are mutually reinforcing, so that finally a new distinction develops 

 
  Differentiation
between town and country. It is only this development that makes other set­
tlements into “villages” as opposed to the town, villages that gradually adjust 
to the idea that there is a town where people can live differently than in the 
village and that, as the environment of the village, modifies its possibilities.
In the context of system differentiation, every change is therefore a 
double, indeed, multiple, one. Every change to a subsystem is also a change 
to the environment of other subsystems. Whatever happens, happens in 
multiplicity—depending on the system reference.8 Thus a rapid decline 
in the demand for labor in the economy brought on by economic develop­
ments or competition can induce an increase in rationality and efficiency, 
while in the political system, in the families affected, in the educational 
system of schools and universities, or as a new subject of research for schol­
ars (“the future of work”) it can set off quite different causal series on ac­
count of changes in the environment of these systems. Even though it is the 
same event for all systems! This sets off enormous dynamization, almost 
explosive reactive pressure, against which single subsystems can protect 
themselves only by erecting high thresholds of indifference. Differentiation 
therefore necessarily increases both dependence and independence under 
the specification and systemic control of the aspects in which one is depen­
dent or independent. As a result, subsystems develop exclusively as opera­
tionally closed autopoietic systems.9
Switching from the whole-part schema to that of system-­environment 
in analyzing society facilitates the coordination of systems theory and evo­
lution theory.10 It provides better insight into the morphogenesis of com­
plexity. It shows more precisely how unity can reenter itself by means of 
distinctions; and it leaves completely open how many such possibilities 
there are, and whether and in what form they can be coordinated.
In many other regards, too, systems theory offers a greater wealth of 
logical structure than the tradition of thinking in wholes and parts. It can 
(and must), for example, distinguish between system-­environment rela­
tions and system-system relations (tradition knows only the latter). Only 
with the distinction between system and environment does the system cap­
ture the unity of the world or the unity of the comprehensive system, and 
it does so by means of a self-referential distinction. With ­system-system re­
lations (e.g., between family and school) it captures only segments of the 
world or of society. However, it is this very segmentariness that makes it pos­
sible to observe the given other system as system-in-its-own-­environment 

Differentiation    
and hence to reconstruct the world or society from the perspective of ob­
serving observations (second-order observation). In the environment of 
other systems, the system that observes them is also to be found. The over­
all system that opens up these perspectives thus puts pressure on itself, so 
to speak, to reflect.11
In the system-system relations permitted by a societal order of differ­
entiation, only such structural couplings can exist that do not cancel out 
the autopoiesis of subsystems. This is true, for example, of relations be­
tween villagers in segmentary societies, and for relations between castes or 
estates of birth [Geburtsstände] in hierarchical orders, and, in much more 
complex and complicated forms, also of relations between the functional 
systems of modern society. What functions as structural coupling in rela­
tions between subsystems is, however, also a structure of the comprehen­
sive system of society. This justifies describing societal systems above all in 
terms of their form of differentiation, for this is the form of structure for­
mation that determines and limits what structural couplings between sub­
systems are possible.
Finally, switching from the whole-part schema to the system-­
environment schema changes the value of the “integration” concept. In old 
European thinking, there was no special term for this, for integration of the 
parts was presupposed in the wholeness of the whole as ordinata ­concordia 
[well-ordered concord], and expressed with regard to single phenomena as 
their nature or essence.12 Classical sociology reformulated the problem as a 
more or less regular relationship between differentiation and integration. 
Differentiation, it was claimed, could not be carried to the extreme of com­
plete indifference. “Quelques rapports de parenté,” in Durkheim’s view,13 
followed alone from the circumstance that the differentiation of a system 
was at issue. Parsons put it this way: “Since these differences are conceived 
to have emerged by a process of change in a system . . . the presumption is 
that the differentiated parts are comparable in the sense of being systemati­
cally related to each other, both because they still belong within the same 
system and, through their interrelations, to their antecedents.”14 The con­
cept of integration is, however, mostly left undefined,15 and, as critics have 
pointed out, ambiguous.16 Inadequately considered premises for consensus 
often feed into the empirical conditions for integration.17 As a result, the 
term continues to be used to express perspectives of unity or even expec­
tations of solidarity and to urge appropriate attitudes—in the old Euro­

 
  Differentiation
pean style! The historical process is described as one of emanation: out of 
homogeneity comes heterogeneity, and heterogeneity replaces homogene­
ity by requiring differentiation and integration at the same time.18 Under 
such circumstances, mobility is often claimed to assume the function of 
integration, and “mobilization” is therefore considered one of the crucial 
recipes for modernization policy in developing countries (as long as the 
chaotic consequences of migration and urbanization do not demonstrate 
the contrary).
However, a normative concept that promotes or at least approves of 
integration must face growing opposition in societies that are becoming 
more complex. Retaining such a concept imposes paradoxical or tautolog­
ical, self-implicative formulations.19 Communication of the precept (and 
how else is it to become reality?) will provoke more “noes” than “yesses,” 
so that the hope of integration finally leads to rejection of the society in 
which one lives. What then?
To avoid such overinterpretation, I take integration to mean no more 
than reduction in the degrees of freedom of subsystems due to the external 
boundaries of the societal system and the internal environment of this sys­
tem they define.20 For every autopoietic system that differentiates out gen­
erates internal indeterminacies, which structural developments can either 
augment or reduce. Under this definition, integration is hence an aspect 
of dealing with or using internal indeterminacies at the level of both the 
overall system and its subsystems.
Unlike the societal system, its subsystems have two environments: 
that external to society and that internal to society.21 So defined, integra­
tion is neither a value-laden concept nor “better” than disintegration. Nor 
does it refer to the “unity” of the differentiated system (which, purely in 
terms of conceptual logic, follows from the fact that, although there can 
be more or less integration, there cannot be more or less unity). Integra­
tion is hence not commitment to a unity perspective, let alone a matter of 
“obedience” on the part of subsystems to central authorities. It lies, not in 
the relation of “parts” to the “whole,” but in the shifting, also historically 
variable adjustment of subsystems to one another. Degrees of freedom can 
be restricted by the conditions of cooperation, but even more strongly by 
conflict. The concept is therefore not directly concerned with the differ­
ence between cooperation and conflict: it is superordinate to this distinc­
tion. The problem of conflict is the excessive integration of subsystems, 

Differentiation    
which mobilize more and more resources for the dispute, withdrawing 
them from other fields; and the problem of a complex society is then to 
ensure sufficient disintegration.
Such restriction can develop where connections come into play—
connections between operations or connections between operations and 
structures—without consensus being required.22 This saves attention in 
psychic systems and the coordination of intentions in the social system. 
The “restriction” is not noticed. This is a relief. On the other hand, it 
makes any change to the “tacit collective structure,” as it is often called, 
more difficult. Accidents or failures are often needed to produce aware­
ness that reliance had been placed on coordination that had not necessar­
ily occurred.
If we look into the conditions for integration/disintegration, we 
ultimately encounter a temporal relation. For everything that happens 
(if considered from a temporal point of view) happens simultaneously. 
The consequence is, first, that simultaneous events cannot mutually in­
fluence or control one another; for causality requires a time difference 
between cause and effect, hence a crossing of the temporal boundaries 
of what happens simultaneously. On the other hand, the unity of an 
event, an accident, an action, an eclipse of the sun, or a thunderstorm 
can take very different forms depending on the interests of observers. It 
is not necessary to heed system boundaries. Tabling a budget in parlia­
ment can be an event in the political system, in the legal system, in the 
system of the mass media, and in the economic system. This means that 
integration takes place continuously in the sense of the mutual restric­
tion of the degrees of freedom enjoyed by systems. But this integration 
effect is limited to single events. As soon as we take account of pre­history 
and consequences, as soon as we thus cross the time boundaries of what 
happens simultaneously and take recursions into account, the magnetic 
field of the system acts on identification; the legal act of introducing 
the draft budget is then something other than an occasion for reports 
and comments in the media, something other than the political symbol­
ization of consensus and dissent, something other than what the stock 
markets perceive. In the pulsation of events, systems integrate and dis­
integrate themselves from one moment to the next. If repeated and then 
anticipated, this may influence the structural development of the sys­
tems involved. Humberto Maturana speaks of “structural drift.” But the 

 
  Differentiation
operational basis for integration/disintegration remains the single event, 
which is identified simultaneously at a given moment in a number of sys­
tems. No action can be adequately planned, no communication success­
fully launched without mastering this complicated mechanism, however 
biased the interest-driven and systemically conditioned contributions 
may prove to be.
Integration is thus a state of affairs fully compatible with the auto­
poiesis of subsystems. There are innumerable event-like operational cou­
plings, which continuously produce and dissolve relationships between 
systems. Monetary payments, for example, are and remain operations of 
the economic system in the recursive network of previous and subsequent 
payments.23 But to a certain extent they can be made available for political 
conditioning in the recursive network of political targets and political con­
sequences. In this way, systems continually integrate and disintegrate, being 
only momentarily coupled and immediately released for self-­determined 
follow-up operations. Such temporalization of the integration problem is 
the form that highly complex societies develop to process dependencies 
and independencies between subsystems at the same time.
On the operational level, societal differentiation therefore demands 
the constant signaling of distinctions. In tribal societies, such distinctions 
are partly decided by the area of settlement to which people belong; but 
a highly developed kinship terminology is also used, setting boundaries 
against more distant relatives or nonrelatives. The special status accorded 
strangers communicates boundaries. In aristocratic societies, great value is 
placed on the distinctive characteristics of the noble way of life, and the 
distinctions are chosen so as always to connote the negative side, what is 
“common” or “uncouth.” Now all the more, communications in function­
ally differentiated society must convey attribution and demarcation as­
pects; but perceptible signs can no longer be used for this purpose, or only 
to a very limited extent. For example, if, as often happens with technology, 
a lack of well-founded scientific knowledge puts investment at risk, under­
standing for precisely this distinction is necessary if the right decisions are 
to be made. To orient oneself on the otherness of the other does not suffice. 
The difference itself demands attention. The distinction itself has to define 
the operation; this distinction and no other.
This often suggests dedifferentiation, or that differentiation theory 
lacks realism.24 And it is true that communication of a distinction gives 

Differentiation    
expression to the context of what is distinguished. But precisely to the con­
text of what is distinguished. Unity (of the operation) and difference (of 
the observation schema) have to be actualized in one move. Only thus can 
differentiation be reproduced. The forms of societal differentiation there­
fore differ depending on what distinctions are imposed on observations to 
maintain their connectivity as operations.
As I have repeatedly stressed, the societal system can use communi­
cations only as intrasystemic operations, and cannot communicate with 
the extrasocietal environment. But this does not apply for intrasocietal re­
lations shaped by differentiation. There are accordingly communications 
that cross intrasystemic boundaries. In the course of societal evolution, 
this leads to a growing need for organization. For a system can commu­
nicate with its environment only as organization, that is to say, only in 
the form of representation of its own unity.25 This disposition to form or­
ganizations continues under the conditions of functional differentiation 
within functional systems, for example, for firms placing products on the 
market or having to procure needed resources on the market; or for all 
sorts of groupings in society that, once the state has been organized, seek 
to defend their interests vis-à-vis the latter. As on relations between society 
and interaction,26 the evolution of societal forms of differentiation27 hence 
has a long-term, virtually irreversible impact on relations between society 
and organization. This is the point at which classical sociologists (Robert 
­Michels, Max Weber) had identified “bureaucracy” as a condition of mod­
ern societal structure.
Finally, it should be remembered that the theory of system differen­
tiation I have outlined and will be elaborating in what follows deals with 
communications and not with actions. Whoever observes actions will typi­
cally be able to attribute them to a number of systems, not least because 
the actor himself functions physically and mentally as the point of attri­
bution and because an action can, depending on motives and effects, par­
ticipate in several functional systems. Whoever takes action as their point 
of departure will therefore have difficulty understanding the theory of sys­
tem differentiation at all, and, like Richard Münch, see only “interpenetra­
tions.”28 Only if we switch from action to communications does it become 
necessary to define the elementary entities of system formation recursively 
with reference to other operations of the same system. An action theoreti­
cian can be satisfied to establish an intention, a “meant meaning” of action.

 
  Differentiation
2. Forms of System Differentiation
The historical wealth and empirical diversity of premodern societies 
condemns to failure any classification of epochs and hence any attempt 
to define them. There is nevertheless no disputing that something like 
differences between types exist, or that there are development sequences 
that build on preceding advances and that have been surpassed in mod­
ern society, however we define it. The concept of system differentiation, 
which I introduced in the previous section, will help us explore this diffi­
cult terrain. I have therefore stressed the structural wealth and rich pros­
pects of the concept and its openness to evolutionary change. For more 
concrete analysis, we need to complement it with the concept of forms of 
differentiation.
I use “form” here, too, in the sense introduced in chapter 1 of vol­
ume 1. A form is a distinction that separates two domains. The system 
concept itself refers to the distinction between system and environment. 
I shall speak of differentiation form when dealing with how the relation­
ship between subsystems in an overall system is organized. We therefore 
have once again to distinguish between system-environment relations 
and system-system relations. In system-environment relations, a system, 
that is to say, the inside of the form “system,” faces an “unmarked space” 
(George ­Spencer-Brown), which cannot be accessed or indicated—except 
as empty—from the system. Reference to “the environment” contributes 
nothing to system operations. “The environment” gives no information. It 
is only an empty correlate of self-reference. If we are dealing with system-
system relations, however, indicatable entities do occur in the environment. 
In this case, too, the system cannot cross its boundaries operationally (if it 
did it would have to operate in the environment), but it can observe, that is 
to say indicate what specific states of affairs in the environment (other sys­
tems) are specifically relevant for it. In the relationship between system and 
environment, the system operates universalistically, in the form of a cross-
section of the world. In relations between systems, it operates specifically, in 
certain, contingent modes of observation.
The concept differentiation form is concerned with the latter case. It 
is therefore not concerned with how the world is reconstructed from the 
perspective of a system or how the overall system is reconstructed from 
the perspective of a subsystem. It does not indicate what could be called 

Differentiation    
the retotalization of the system in itself. But it is concerned with a very sim­
ilar state of affairs (and for this reason precise distinctions are important).
I therefore speak of the form of system differentiation where from 
the perspective of one subsystem it is apparent what another subsystem 
is, and the subsystem defines itself through this distinction. The form of 
differentiation is thus not only a division of the comprehensive system; it 
is rather the form by which subsystems can observe themselves as subsys­
tems—as this or that clan, as nobility, as the economic system of society. 
The difference formed (distinguished) in this manner hence also repre­
sents the unity of the comprehensive system of society, which we then do 
not have to observe separately. But how is the other side of the distinction 
saved from arbitrariness, separated from “everything else that exists”? How 
can other subsystems be determined by means of a distinction that then 
etches itself into the world of everything else? Nobility and commons or 
politics and economy.
To understand how this happens, recourse must be taken to the dif­
ferentiated societal system that guarantees the unity of the distinction sep­
arating the subsystems and realizes itself in this structural requirement. 
Relations between subsystems have a form if the overall system determines 
how they are ordered. The theory of system differentiation does not suggest 
that this determination of form has to take place, and certainly not that any 
single form is provided for this function. But forms can be and regularly are 
found for ordering differentiation relations in the same way for all subsys­
tems. The totality of internal system-environment relations by which soci­
ety multiplies itself would be too complex for this purpose. Determining 
the form of the relationship among systems is a simplified version that then 
serves to structure the overall system and thus orientates communication.
Without being able to assert and justify the need for a dominant dif­
ferentiation form in every societal system, I consider it the most important 
societal structure, which, if it can impose itself, determines the evolutionary 
possibilities of the system and influences the formation of norms, further 
differentiations, self-descriptions of the system, and so forth. Differentia­
tion forms for the evolution of society are important for two inter­related 
reasons. The first is that there are limited possibilities for development 
within prevailing differentiation forms. Thus in segmentary societies, larger 
segmentary entities can also form, for example, tribes at the level above 
households and families; or, in stratificationally differentiated societies, 

 
  Differentiation
further status hierarchies within the basic difference between nobility and 
commons. However, such possibilities of growth come up against what one 
is tempted to call organic barriers. Further evolution is then impossible, or 
requires transition to another form of differentiation. But a subsystem is 
not replaced within a differentiation form by a subsystem from another dif­
ferentiation form; this would destroy the form, that is to say, the marking 
of the difference. Within segmentary orders, a family household can enjoy 
particular prominence, even gaining hereditary eminence (e.g., as a priestly 
or chiefly family), but it cannot be replaced by nobility, because this would 
require a transition from exogamy to endogamy and thus quite different di­
mensions. Nor can the nobility be replaced by the state or science as sub­
systems of a functionally differentiated society. At such breaking points, 
evolution requires a sort of latent preparation and the emergence of new 
orders within the old until they are mature enough to become apparent 
as the dominant societal formation, depriving the old order of credibility. 
This means not least that mixes of several differentiation forms are typical, 
indeed, evolutionarily necessary, even though spectacular changes in type 
occur only when dominant forms are superseded.
I speak of the primacy of a differentiation form (and this, too, is not 
necessary for a system) where it can be established that one form regulates 
the deployment of others. In this sense, aristocratic societies are differ­
entiated primarily by stratification, but they maintain segmentary dif­
ferentiation in households and families to enable the nobility to practice 
endogamy and thus distinguish noble families from other families. In the 
case of functional differentiation, we still find stratification in the form of 
social classes and center-periphery distinctions, but they are by-products 
of the endogenous dynamics of functional systems.29
Few differentiation forms have so far developed in the history of soci­
ety. It seems that in this field, too, a “law of limited possibilities” applies,30 
even though it has yet to be constructed in a logically conclusive manner 
(e.g., by cross-tabulation). If we disregard that the earliest societies were 
presumably oriented only on the natural distinctions of age and gender 
and otherwise lived in hordes, four differentiation forms can be demon­
strated, namely:
(1) Segmentary differentiation from the viewpoint of the similarity of soci­
etal subsystems, distinguished on the basis of either descent or residential 
communities, or a combination of the two.

Differentiation    
(2) Differentiation in terms of center and periphery. This allows for dissimi­
larity, which at the same time transcends the principle of segmentation, 
thus providing for a multiplicity of segments (households) on both sides 
of the new form (centers within a tribal structure inhabited only by an 
eminent family, like the “strongholds” of Scottish clans, are not yet such a 
case, although they do prefigure it).
(3) Stratificatory differentiation from the point of view of dissimilarity in 
rank between subsystems. The basic structure of this form also lies in a 
two-sided distinction, that between nobility and commons. In this form, 
however, the distinction would be relatively unstable because easy to re­
verse.31 Stable hierarchies such as the Indian caste system or the estates 
system of the late Middle Ages constitute, however artificially, at least three 
levels to produce an impression of stability.
(4) Functional differentiation from the viewpoint of both the similarity and 
dissimilarity of subsystems. Functional systems are alike in their dissimilar­
ity. This implies renouncing all macrosocietal criteria for relations between 
them. There is now neither a single dissimilarity, as in the case of center 
and periphery, nor a macrosocietal form for the transitive relationing of all 
dissimilarities that avoids circular, recursive relationships. Such relations 
are now perfectly typical and normal.
The catalog of forms is established with the aid of the distinction 
between similar and dissimilar. This distinction applies only for what is 
comparable, only for systems and not for system-environment relations (it 
makes no sense to describe the environment as “dissimilar” to the system). 
This is why I have limited the theory of differentiation forms to system-
system relations.
There is obviously no theoretical justification for this catalog. Nor 
can the development of other forms in the course of development be ex­
cluded. But it is plausible that evolving societies find few stable forms of 
system differentiation and tend to prefer a tried and tested one. The rea­
son is that recursive procedures (in this case, the application of system for­
mation to the result of system formation) tend to generate “eigenstates.”32 
Whether this succeeds can be neither theoretically deduced nor empir­
ically predicted, any more than can the number of eigenstates. Things 
have to be tried out, and this is precisely what societal evolution has done. 

 
  Differentiation
Where certain system relations already exist, their further development is 
more probable than a transition to another differentiation form. A further 
settlement is more likely to come into being alongside existing settlements 
than a manor house or a post office. This makes it at least probable that, 
on the basis of such problems of connectivity and compatibility, evolution 
will tend to develop existing patterns, which then themselves regulate the 
chances for other differentiation forms. This in fact means raising the ques­
tion of the conditions under which society accepts the reconstruction of its 
own unity by means of an internal difference. And we can assume it to be 
vital for the relevant distinction to be appropriate for use in all perspectives 
of the system, to be susceptible to reduction of the concomitant complex­
ity, and certainly—in the case of a new, emergent difference—for there to 
be sufficient suitable, preadaptive structures.
Our catalog of forms also shows that the evolution of society can­
not choose arbitrary sequences. We cannot exclude regressive develop­
ments (e.g., the retribalization of advanced Central and South American 
civilizations after the Spanish conquest). At any rate, any abrupt transi­
tion from segmentarily to functionally differentiated societies is unlikely.33 
Such preparative conditions give the impression of a sequence of epochs 
from archaic-tribal societies to advanced civilizations and modern soci­
ety.34 Looking back on developments in Europe, this might seem a plau­
sible reconstruction, but radical simplification is needed to arrive at such a 
description, as we shall see.
That the types mentioned do not form a linear sequence is shown 
alone by the fact that, since the advent of advanced civilizations, various 
differentiation forms have been realized around the world in awareness of 
one another. The nomadic peoples to the north of China knew of the Chi­
nese empire—and vice versa. Black African tribal structures fell under the 
influence of Islam long before colonization. With very few exceptions, only 
recently discovered, there are no societies of completely autochthonous or­
igin. We must nevertheless go back to the various forms of differentiation 
to ascertain their limits. I hence substitute for the all-too-simple (and easy 
to refute) thesis of increasing differentiation that of changes in differentia­
tion form, in which suitable opportunities lead to more complex forms (in 
particular to forms incorporating dissimilarities) compatible with greater 
differentiation, but that also bring structural dedifferentiation into play—
thus not achieving more differentiation in every regard (consider only the 

Differentiation    
reduction in kinship roles and kinship terminologies in the course of such 
development). Such a development increases the complexity of the soci­
etal system. It makes more and more diverse communications possible to 
the extent that more improbable differentiation forms take on the integra­
tion of the system. Evolutionary advances that can reduce greater com­
plexity therefore have to have been introduced or subsequently developed: 
writing, money, bureaucratic organization, to name three examples. At the 
same time, internal distances grow with corresponding losses of experi­
ence. Whereas in segmentary societies everyone at home can imagine how 
things are elsewhere, this possibility is lost where society is reconstructed 
in terms of internal dissimilarities. The internal demand for information 
increases accordingly. In other words, structural restrictions are reduced in 
order to attain greater complexity, with the result that intransparency, the 
need for interpretation, and self-descriptions of the system develop with­
out being able to regain what had previously been self-evident.
Forms take their toll and require the structural limitations of what 
is compatible under their aegis to be respected. At the same time, they re­
veal destabilizing tendencies as the condition of stability—for example, 
wealth formation outside the divisions provided for. Normally, a norma­
tive apparatus develops to suppress deviations. They can appear only in 
conspicuous, abnormal, nonconsensual form, as religiously and morally 
problematic. But this is not a reliable preventive mechanism. Under excep­
tional circumstances, destabilizing elements can be so normal that a new 
form of stability begins to emerge and a new form of differentiation devel­
ops from an early one. In systems theory we also call such a switch in the 
form of system stability catastrophe.
Furthermore, this form catalog can help support the thesis that 
changing, more demanding forms of system differentiation lead to fur­
ther differentiation of the societal system. A first differentiation will have 
been based on natural distinctions of age and gender and will have exper­
imented with other possibilities—for example, family formation on the 
basis of the obvious need to provide children with fathers. For the enti­
ties of segmentary differentiation, there is no longer an exact equivalent 
in the environment, even if dwelling places, villages, fields, and so on can 
be attributed. As internal differentiation switches from similar to dissimi­
lar, internally provoked monitoring and follow-up costs increase, and the 
related communication obliges society even more strongly to distinguish 

 
  Differentiation
itself from its environment. More and more activities relate to other ac­
tivities of the same system, while dependence on the environment is re­
duced or made contingent on internal dispositions.35 Stratified societies 
boast of their specifically human order, distance themselves from the world 
of animals or that of primitive man, but still base the distinction on a 
continuum of meaning grounded in religion or cosmology. The function­
ally differentiated society of modern times has to do without this, so that 
it can no longer identify either with regions or with concrete humans in 
their physical-mental being. A maximum of internal subsystem dissimilar­
ity and autonomy also brings a maximum of diversity to society and en­
vironment. Only a clear and operationally uncrossable boundary between 
system and environment can now prove convincing. We are now gradually 
coming to realize that this cannot mean that society has become indepen­
dent of its environment and gaining growing “control” over it.
Forms of differentiation are, after all, forms of the integration of so­
ciety. Society is not integrated by a precept of unity, not by reformulating 
its unity as a postulate but in the form of reconstructing its unity as dif­
ference. The dominant form of differentiation then also regulates how the 
unity of society can be seen in society and what restrictions on the freedom 
of individual subsystems arise from it. Whereas, on the basis of the classical 
concept of integration, modern society would have to be described as dis­
integrated because it can no longer agree internally on any substantive con­
cept of unity, the conceptualization I propose offers the opposite diagnosis. 
Modern society is overintegrated and accordingly endangered. Although it 
enjoys unmatched stability in the autopoiesis of its functional systems, for 
everything is possible that is compatible with this autopoiesis, it is suscep­
tible to self-irritation to an extent unknown in any earlier society. A multi­
tude of structural and operational couplings ensures the mutual irritation 
of subsystems, and, owing to the form of functional differentiation, the 
overall system has renounced regulatory intervention in these events.
3. Inclusion and Exclusion
In the light of widespread skepticism about the reach of systems the­
ory, David Lockwood has proposed distinguishing between system inte­
gration and social integration.36 The former is concerned with the internal 
cohesion of differentiated systems, the latter with relations between psy­

Differentiation    
chic systems (individuals) and social systems. This distinction is certainly 
justified, but in its present form has not got us very far. It does no more 
than draw attention to the distinction.
I have transferred the subject of system integration to a distinction 
between forms of system differentiation, which control how subsystems 
refer to one another and depend on one another. I shall replace social in­
tegration by the distinction between inclusion and exclusion. “Society” re­
mains the system of reference. We are accordingly not dealing with access 
to interactions or organizations.37
Here, too, we can turn to a sociological tradition. Drawing on stud­
ies by T.H. Marshall on the development of citizenship rights,38 Parsons 
posits a general concept of inclusion. In formal terms, he states: “This re­
fers to the pattern of action in question, or complex of such patterns, and 
the individuals and/or groups who act in accord with that pattern com­
ing to be accepted in a status of more or less full membership in a wider 
solidary social system.”39 Parsons is chiefly interested in the evolutionary 
process of substituting inclusions in ever larger and more complex enti­
ties, which he sees as a requirement for the evolutionary increase in differ­
entiation.40 The conditions for inclusion vary with societal differentiation. 
In modern society, they have to provide for more possibilities than in tra­
ditional societies and can no longer be organized hierarchically, that is, 
linearly. The growing complexity of society (which Parsons attributes to 
political revolution, industrial revolution, and educational revolution) ac­
cordingly also appears to dissolve classical, fixed inclusion patterns and to 
individualize inclusion more strongly.
One has the impression that society offers possibilities for everyone 
to be included, the only question being under what conditions and how 
they turn out to be; which means to say, how similarity (for all) and dis­
similarity are conveyed depending on recognition and success.41 The self-
assessment of modern society thus follows the similar-dissimilar schema. 
However, the elaboration of the inclusion concept is wanting. Parsons typ­
ically fails to take adequate account of the negative case of categories. I 
therefore formulate the problem on the basis of the distinction between 
inclusion and exclusion.
Inclusion is to be understood as a form whose inner side (inclusion) 
is marked as the opportunity for the social consideration of persons42 and 
whose outer side remains unmarked. There is therefore inclusion only if 

 
  Differentiation
exclusion is possible. It is only the existence of nonintegrable persons or 
groups that renders social cohesion visible and makes it possible to ­specify 
conditions for it.43 To the extent that inclusion conditions are specified 
as a form of social order, however, the opposite can also be identified, 
namely, who is excluded. As counterstructure, this opposite then conveys 
the meaning and justification of the form of social order. The “untouch­
ables” in the Indian caste hierarchy are the most striking example. They 
neither constitute a special caste nor are plebeians who produce nothing 
but offspring, or an underclass available for exploitation. The untouchables 
provide a symbolic correlate for the structure of the inclusion order based 
on purity laws and rituals. The excluded do not even have to be a very nu­
merous group; they need only be numerous enough to ensure that they are 
present everywhere, showing how necessary the purity laws are.
However differently the inclusion-exclusion form may be institu­
tionalized in various historical and cultural contexts and then regarded 
as normal, the general requirements of our theory of operationally closed 
systems have in any case to be respected. Inclusion therefore cannot mean 
that parts or processes or single operations of a system take place in an­
other. It means rather that the societal system provides for persons and as­
signs them to positions in the framework of which they can act in keeping 
with expectations; to put it somewhat romantically, where they can feel at 
home as individuals.
Parsons sees sociocultural evolution as an increase in adaptive up­
grading, differentiation, and value generalization.44 Without disputing 
such views, we substitute for an all-too-linear concept the question of what 
the inclusion-exclusion variable has to do with the system differentiation of 
society. From this point of view, differentiation forms are rules for repeat­
ing inclusion and exclusion differences within society, but at the same time 
they are forms that presuppose that one participates in differentiation and 
its inclusion rules, and that one would not excluded from them.
In segmentary societies, inclusion arose from membership in one of 
the segments. There was limited mobility, but hardly any chance of sur­
vival for the individual outside all social classification.45 Inclusion was con­
sequently differentiated segmentarily, more or less effectively excluding 
exclusion. In stratified societies, the regulation of inclusion passed to so­
cial stratification. A person found his social status in the stratum to which 
he belonged. This differentiated inclusion. The regulation of inclusion-­

Differentiation    
exclusion, by contrast, continued to take place at the segmentary level. It 
was the responsibility of families and (for dependents) of family house­
holds. Somewhere or other, a person was at home by birth or acceptance. 
Exclusion was possible, for example, for reasons of economic distress or 
for the lack of marital prospects. There were numerous beggars. Depend­
ing on structural layer, monasteries, “dishonorable” professions,46 and mil­
itary and merchant navies were able to recruit their personnel from among 
the excluded. The last takers were the pirate ships of the Central Ameri­
can island world. Even in the Middle Ages, but particularly in early mod­
ern times, a considerable number of people would have been involved.47 
The space of exclusion is to be recognized above all by the interruption of 
reciprocity expectations. Solidarity with the excluded could be achieved 
only artificially, in the performance of religious duties and in the prospect 
of salvation, and, conversely, the excluded were provoked to all sorts of 
tricks and deceit, whose observation inspired the literature on simulation 
and dissimulation and a mistrust of mere appearance disseminated by the 
printing press.48 This could only reinforce the impression that people with­
out status and without discipline, without lord and without family were a 
danger to society. In early modern times this gave rise to an almost insol­
uble political problem for cities and territorial states. The reaction, as we 
know, was the attempt to organize work. But the basic pattern persisted: 
system differentiation ensured differences in the space of inclusion. What 
was not covered by this remained an undifferentiated residuum.
Despite all the problems this order raised, the social differentiation 
of families in terms of social strata seems to have kept the situation under 
control. Even the explicit or merely fortuitous assignment of persons to 
positions of dependence without family or family household was still reg­
ulated in terms of stratification, and a religious or work-organizational 
meaning framework ensured that the social order was not called into ques­
tion with respect to its exclusion effects. However, whereas in the case of 
exclusion in simple tribal societies all contact could be prevented by ex­
pulsion or outlawing, this was no longer the case in advanced civiliza­
tions with urban settlements and aristocratic rule. The inclusion-exclusion 
difference was now reconstructed within society. Social cohesion had to 
rely on sedentariness, on regular interaction to form reliable expectations; 
but this in turn required exclusions that could not be ignored in society 
or completely shut out from marginal communication. To some extent, 

 
  Differentiation
­recruitment took place from within this space; to some extent, traveling, 
roaming, moving from place to place, had social functions and could no 
longer in itself be taken to indicate exclusion. Traveling journeymen were 
not an instance of exclusion; they enlarged the labor market, providing 
greater differentiation of occupations and guilds. Categorization also in­
creased in the space of exclusion.
In addition to the tools for regulating inclusion-exclusion that were 
entrenched in the system of stratified households, the law of the Roman 
Empire had, since its Christianization, also provided a mechanism for ex­
clusion on religious grounds. The introduction to the Codex Iustiniani 
(C 1.1.1.) laid down who could call himself a Catholic Christian. All her­
etics were considered mad and foolish and declared disreputable (infames). 
Although the law gave precedence to God in dealing with them, this did 
not appear to work reliably enough, and imperial law intervened: “divina 
primum vindicta post etiam motus nostri, quem ex caelesti arbitrio sump­
serimus, ultione plectendos” (we order them to be punished by vengeance, 
first by divine revenge, then also by the revenge of our own power, which 
we have taken up from heavenly decree). After the disintegration of impe­
rial power, the legally well-organized Church took upon itself decide ques­
tions of “excommunication,” with serious secular consequences. Religious 
exclusion, easy to avoid in the normal conduct of life, then set the frame­
work within which practically effective intrasocietal inclusion and exclu­
sion could be handled “in a Christian manner.”
The transition to functional differentiation used this intrasocietal rel­
evance of the distinction between inclusion and exclusion together with 
the elaborated distinctions in respect to the nonsedentary; but it went far 
beyond this, provoking changes whose extent is only now apparent. As 
with every form of differentiation, it was left to the subsystems to regulate 
inclusion. But this now meant that concrete individuals could no longer be 
concretely placed. They had to be able to participate in all functional sys­
tems depending on the functional area in which and the code under which 
their communication was introduced. Communication was assigned to a 
specific functional system simply by the meaning vested in certain com­
munications, by the fact of dealing with a payment or wishing to influence 
a decision by government authorities or wanting to decide what was right 
or wrong in a particular case. Individuals now had to be able to participate 
in all such communications and accordingly switch their couplings with 

Differentiation    
functional systems from one moment to the next. Society consequently 
no longer offered them any social status that also defined what the indi­
vidual “was” in terms of origins and quality. It made inclusion dependent 
on highly differentiated communication opportunities, which could no 
longer be coordinated reliably and, above all, permanently. In principle, 
everyone ought to have legal capacity and an adequate income in order to 
take part in economic life. Everyone ought as a participant in political elec­
tions be able to react politically to his experience. Everyone able to do so 
should receive at least elementary schooling. Everyone has a right to a min­
imum of social security, medical care, and a decent burial. Everyone is able 
to marry without having to seek permission. Everyone is able to choose a 
religious faith or none. And anyone who fails to participate in inclusion is 
individually responsible for not taking advantage of the opportunities for 
doing so. Modern society thus, at least initially, avoids perceiving exclu­
sion, the other side of the form, as a sociostructural phenomenon.
If inclusion without exclusion, inclusion of “the” human being in “so­
ciety” is then conceived of, a totalitarian logic is needed that replaces the 
old logic of division into species and genera (such as that into Greeks and 
barbarians).49 A totalitarian logic demands elimination of its opposite. It 
demands uniformity. Now all human beings have to be made into human 
beings, vested with human rights and provided with opportunities. Such 
a totalitarian logic amounts to a logic of time. Differences in living condi­
tions cannot be ignored, but as a problem they are seen in relation to time. 
Whereas dialectical developments are hoped for, possibly with revolutionary 
aid, growth is aspired to on the assumption that a quantitative “more” will 
make better distribution possible; or greater efforts in “development aid” or 
“social welfare” are made to enable laggards to catch up. Within the totali­
tarian logic of inclusion, exclusions manifest themselves as “residual” prob­
lems, so categorized to avoid calling the totalitarian logic into question.50
The new order of inclusions brings dramatic change to the self-con­
ception of individuals. In the old world, inclusion was concretized by 
social position, whose normative requirements only then offered the pos­
sibility of more or less meeting expectations. Nobody found themselves in 
a situation of having to explain who they were. Among the upper classes, 
it sufficed to announce one’s name; in the lower strata of society, people 
were known in the places where they lived. Living a respectable life could 
be a problem, and in this regard, everyone was likely to have confessions 

 
  Differentiation
to make. But this was well known—not least because of the public institu­
tion of confession. At any rate, people did not have to deal with situations 
in which life itself was grounded in mere appearance. Appearance, sham 
quality, and hypocrisy were addressed only in the sixteenth century and es­
pecially the seventeenth century, encouraged (in literature) by the theater, 
by a market that permeated the entire economy, and by the promotional 
mechanisms of courtly centralism. Since Don Quixote, the novel had re­
flected on the situation to which they gave rise. The individual lived his 
life in accordance with what he read. He achieved inclusion by copying 
what he read.51
More typical of today are situations in which we have to explain who 
we are; in which we have to send test signals to discover the extent to which 
others are in a position to judge whom they are dealing with. “Education” 
or signals are therefore needed that point to the assets at a person’s dis­
posal, and “identity” and “self-realization” become problems. The literature 
therefore distinguishes between physical-mental existence and “social iden­
tity.” A person can therefore not really know who he is, but has to find out 
whether his own projections find recognition. And he therefore seeks and 
appreciates intimate social relations in which he is known and accepted 
with all his inclinations and shortcomings.
In chapter 5, I shall be returning to the corresponding changes in the 
semantics dealing with the position of the individual in society. It should 
only be noted that the semantics, the “official memory” of society, ad­
dresses the conditions for inclusion and at best presents exclusions as cau­
tionary examples, not describing them with appropriate care as part of 
societal reality. This is still apparent today in the neglect of this inclusion-
exclusion distinction in sociological theory.
In the old order, the human being was understood as a social being, 
and privates was consequently seen as inordinatus [disordered] (and thus in 
the exclusion space). As a human being (or at any rate as a Christian), one 
had a soul and, unlike other living beings, was endowed with reason. These 
attributes spanned all differentiations and enabled one to recognize one’s 
social status as one’s inborn nature, and to hope for compensatory justice 
in the hereafter. In the first half of the eighteenth century, this semantics 
was superseded by a functionally equivalent metaphysics of happiness.52 
However differentiated in its realization, societal inclusion was thus en­
sured in advance by creation and nature. And since this was so due to the 

Differentiation    
nature of the human being, corresponding demands could be made. The 
individual had no excuse.
In the eighteenth century, the postulate of human rights assumed the 
function of an inclusion semantics. The thrust of human rights was against 
the old differentiations; they brought together the inclusion conditions of 
all functional systems, thus representing a “humane” principle neutral to 
difference. Freedom and equality were now to obtain because all restric­
tions and all inequalities were determined only by the codes and programs 
of individual functional systems and there were therefore no longer any 
directives addressing the whole of society;53 and probably also because no 
one could tell anyone else in advance what use his action would ultimately 
be. Here, too, exclusion, the other side of the form, co-occurs out of the 
spotlight. If we adopt the ideology of human rights, the only problem of 
modernity appears to be that these rights have not yet been adequately re­
alized, and above all not everywhere in the world. But the severity of living 
conditions in the prisons and workhouses of the eighteenth century, and 
the rapid increase in penal legislation and capital punishment are in pecu­
liar contrast to the mood of the enlighteners and moralists. It is clear that 
this combination of extremes could be only a transitional solution.
At the same time, grounds for exclusion and normative semantics 
were decoupled. Neither religious heresies, breaches of the law, nor other 
deviations now led to exclusion from society. Society burdened itself with 
this problem. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries still found mixed 
solutions: the statutory definitions of offenses were multiplied;54 diagnoses 
of pathologies were elaborated; and offenders were put to death or trans­
ported.55 But, in the light of criteria in increasing need of legitimation, 
the trend was toward considering deviations from the norm as an intra­
societal problem, treating them above all as a matter for therapy and of 
consequence control and allowing exclusion simply to “happen” as a nor­
matively unjustifiable fact.
One noteworthy exception to this persistent failure to reflect on ex­
clusion is to be found in Calvinism and its ramifications in South African 
racial ideology.56 Throughout the world, these notions are felt to be obso­
lete, in both their religious and political connotations, and they are cur­
rently being abandoned under the pressure of human rights postulates. 
But this conceals rather than solves the problem of exclusion. Certainly, 
we can no longer formulate it in terms of the original difference between 

 
  Differentiation
the justified and the condemned, but it can hardly be denied that it con­
tinues to exist as a structural problem also and especially in modern soci­
ety. Any impartial look at those regions of world society euphemistically 
termed developing countries will convince us of this; even, as the case of 
Brazil shows, where industrialization is far advanced.
The idealizing postulate of the full inclusion of all human beings in 
society blinds us to serious problems. With the functional differentiation 
of the societal system, regulation of the relationship between inclusion and 
exclusion has passed to functional systems, and there is no longer a central 
authority (however much politics seeks to appropriate this function) to su­
pervise the subsystems in this regard. Whether and how much money is 
available to the individual is decided in the economic system. What legal 
claims a person can assert and with what prospect of success is a matter for 
the legal system. What is to be seen as a work of art is decided in the art 
system, and the religious system sets the conditions under which the indi­
vidual can consider himself religious. What is available to the individual in 
the way of scientific knowledge and in what forms (e.g., as tablets) arises 
from the programs and successes of the science system. Since participation 
is possible under all these conditions, we can nurture the illusion of an un­
precedented level of inclusion. In fact, however, this is not only a matter of 
more or less, or of an unavoidable discrepancy between expectations and 
realities. It is rather that exclusion effects develop at the edges of systems, 
which at this level can lead to a negative integration of society. For factual 
exclusion from a functional system—no work, no income, no papers, no 
stable intimate relationships, no access to contracts and to the legal protec­
tion of the courts, no possibility of distinguishing between electoral cam­
paigns and carnival events, illiteracy, inadequate medical care and food 
supplies—limits what can be achieved in other systems and defines larger 
or smaller sections of the population, who are often set apart residentially 
and hence kept out of sight.
Sociologists typically tend to define this problem of the exclusion 
of large numbers, indeed, the vast majority, of the population from par­
ticipation in functional systems as one of class rule or social stratification. 
They thus remain captive to the usual thrust of their own preconceived 
opinions. But, like the semantics of human rights, this, too, plays down 
the problem, amounting in the final resort to complaint without end or 
addressee. Stratification had its own inclusion and exclusion mechanisms, 

Differentiation    
and was able, with much farther-reaching and more accepted, albeit dif­
ferent, inclusion, to ensure that the exclusion problem was marginalized, 
however many homeless people, beggars, vagrants, destitute clerics, or de­
serted soldiers were abroad. Even in pure numbers, exclusion problems 
today have taken on quite different dimensions. They also have a different 
structure. They are the direct result of the functional differentiation of the 
societal system insofar as they go back to function-specific forms of devia­
tion amplification, to positive feedback, and also to the circumstance that 
multiple dependence on functional systems intensifies the exclusion effect. 
Without an address, one cannot register for school (India). People who 
cannot read and write have hardly any chance on the labor market, and 
serious discussion (as in Brazil) about depriving them of the franchise be­
comes feasible. People who find no accommodation outside shanty towns 
enjoy no legal protection in emergencies; but landlords are also unable to 
assert their rights if eviction from such areas would provoke too much un­
rest politically. Many such examples can be cited, and they demonstrate 
links across all functional systems. Exclusion integrates far more strongly 
than inclusion—integration in the sense defined as restriction of the de­
gree of freedom for selection. As a consequence, society is—quite contrary 
to the situation under the stratification regime—more strongly integrated in 
the lowest stratum than in upper strata. It can renounce degrees of freedom 
only “down below.” Its order, by contrast, is based on disintegration, on 
the decoupling of functional systems. And this could also be why stratifica­
tion no longer tells us anything about the order of society but only shapes 
individual destinies.
The abundant material available suggests that in some regions of the 
world the inclusion-exclusion variable is about to take on the role of a 
metadifference and to mediatize the codes of functional systems. Whether 
the distinction between right and wrong comes to bear at all, and whether 
it is treated in accordance with programs internal to the legal system, then 
depends primarily on prior filtering by inclusion-exclusion; and not only 
in the sense that the excluded are also excluded from the law but also in 
the sense that others, especially politicians, bureaucracies, and the police, 
not to mention the military, decide at their own discretion whether they 
want to abide by the law or not.57 Although this does not completely in­
hibit the autopoiesis of the law, which under present-day conditions would 
be inconceivable, it does lead to considerable uncertainty in expectations 

 
  Differentiation
and to constant orientation on other factors. The same applies for the gov­
ernment-opposition code of the political system, which is not decided (or 
not only) in political elections, and for the many sources of income or pos­
sibilities for protecting assets against inflation independent of the market, 
which also depend on the inclusion-exclusion distinction—with the result 
that even a well-considered anti-inflation policy often remains ineffectual 
because attitudes to the economy cannot be regulated via the market and 
via intervention in the parameters of market events.
Whereas human beings count as persons in the space of inclusion, 
in the space of exclusion they seem to count only as bodies. The symbi­
otic mechanisms of the communication media lose their specific attribu­
tion. Physical force, sexuality, and the elementary, compulsive satisfaction 
of needs are given free rein and direct relevance without being civilized by 
symbolic recursion. More contingent social expectations can then no lon­
ger be excluded. People are guided by short-term time horizons, by the 
immediacy of situations, by the observation of bodies. This also means 
that the time-extending reciprocity expectations that have always applied 
in the inclusion space cease to apply, even provoking the decay of family 
ties. This might distantly recall very ancient orders. But in actual fact, it 
is now a side effect of functionally differentiated society and is irritating 
primarily because it strikingly reveals the limits to the claims of functional 
systems to universal competence for society.
We cannot expect this problem to be solved within single functional 
systems; firstly, because inclusion is conceivable only against the back­
ground of possible exclusion, and, secondly, the problem of the mutual 
intensification of exclusions cannot be attributed to any single functional 
system. A new, secondary functional system could therefore be expected to 
develop that concerns itself with the exclusionary consequences of func­
tional differentiation—be they at the level of social welfare or at that of 
development aid.58 The resource-dependence of these efforts—from an 
economic, political, and also religious point of view—is, however, so strong 
that it is doubtful whether we are dealing with an extant societal subsystem 
or with scattered endeavors at the level of interactions and organizations. 
It is clearly no longer a matter of charity or poor relief in the traditional 
sense, but of efforts to achieve structural changes (under the motto “help­
ing people to help themselves”). Perhaps we are witnessing the birth of a 
functional system.

Differentiation    
To sum up, the evolutionary improbability and riskiness of a form of 
societal differentiation are shown by, among other things, how they cope 
with the difference between inclusion and exclusion and can use their own 
forms to stabilize different, less integrated inclusion. What is at issue is, 
not least, whether and how feedback from the space of exclusion to the 
space of inclusion can be avoided or transferred into normal evolutionary 
trends, into the structural drift of subsystems.
4. Segmentary Societies
We are insufficiently informed about primitive, archaic societies. 
Our knowledge about tribal (or segmentary) societies comes essentially 
from colonized territories or from areas that have in other ways been in­
fluenced by advanced civilizations.59 What is certain, however, is that seg­
mentary differentiation need not necessarily have been the initial form 
of human community and has not dominated history to the exclusion of 
others as far as we know. It is an evolutionary advance of a particular type, 
namely, the effectuated primacy of a certain form of system differentiation.
Segmentary differentiation arises when society is divided into basi­
cally similar subsystems, which mutually constitute environments for one 
another. This presupposes family formation, in whatever form. The family 
constitutes an artificial entity through the natural differences of age and 
gender, and does so by incorporating these differences. There was society 
even before there were families. Rather than society being put together out 
of families, the family constitutes a form of social differentiation.
The simplest form requires a system with only two levels: families 
living apart from one another and society, which in this case we can also 
call a horde. Simple demographic processes suffice for genesis and repro­
duction. When population growth produces too many people, the system 
can reproduce itself by division and resettlement.60 The reconstitution of 
such forms in the aftermath of disasters is also possible without difficulty, 
and this gives societies with little control over nature and low defensive ca­
pacities a sort of reproduction guarantee. Larger entities with a three-level 
structure of families, villages, and tribes can choose whether to define their 
unity primarily in terms of kinship or of the area inhabited. All attempts to 
reduce segmentation to one of these principles can be considered to have 
failed.61 We mostly find mixed forms with corresponding earth cults and 

 
  Differentiation
ancestor cults, as well as greater spatial mobility of kinship groups, or kin­
ship mobility, for instance, in the form of adoption and naming, depend­
ing on whether the territorial principal or the kinship principle dominates. 
Since kinship (in contrast to factual residence) is symbolically manipulable, 
combinations are easy to make, and the descendants of immigrants will be 
able to engineer their way into the kinship group after a time. The form 
of segmentary differentiation remains constant, and descent, as long as it 
goes beyond the family living together, is not much more than a symbolic 
construction of membership-nonmembership in the segments of society.
Segmentary differentiation presupposes that the position of individu­
als in the social order is fixed and cannot be changed by performance.62 This 
is the basis for a multiplication of social entities, which can no doubt always 
be translated into the individuals composing them. Within this framework, 
there are nevertheless differences in individual reputation and even changes 
in clan and family membership by adoption. What is excluded, however, 
is the integration of individuals in the course of a career. Permanently as­
cribed status is the precondition for all further elaborations, for symmetries 
and asymmetries, for dualistic oppositions, for ritual functions, and for all 
possible luxuriating supplements, which in this manner always have a fixed 
reference to individuals. Ascribed status is a rule for an order in which peo­
ple know one another.
Segmentary differentiation is likely to have been a precondition for 
the transition to regularly practiced agriculture, the so-called Neolithic rev­
olution. Probably the most important change in human history, this revo­
lution took place “equifinally” in many places around the globe. The causes 
of this transition from a life of plenty to a life of travail and risk are un­
known: it is very unlikely that the possibility of feeding more people served 
as an “attractor.” Even in societies without clear family formation, we find 
a sort of garden economy, but agriculture on a larger scale would have re­
quired the division of land and of labor to be able to rely on appropriate so­
cial structures. Only the politically enforced labor of later societies restored 
partial independence,63 but this required surplus production in agriculture.
The process of segmentary differentiation can be applied to its own 
result, and can thus be recursively repeated. Through families and settle­
ments, tribes and possibly tribal confederations can then develop. How­
ever, this growth, which may ultimately reach hundreds of thousands of 
people, diminishes the communication density of the entity. Finally, it 

Differentiation    
operates only on occasion, above all, in the event of conflict between sub­
units, and otherwise has an only symbolical presence. The smallest units 
continue to be responsible for meeting all the normal needs of daily life 
and maintaining cooperation with neighbors. The advantage is that even 
larger groupings can be described on the pattern of the difference between 
mini-units that can be experienced every day. They may have a name and 
an origin myth pointing to a country or ancestors; but any structural self-
description of the societal system going beyond this is superfluous in view 
of the mere repetition of the differentiation principle. No change in or­
dering principle occurs for greater aggregates. The functions of amalga­
mations diminish with their increasing size. In borderline cases, even the 
“tribe” is no more than the overall area within which linguistic compre­
hension is possible.64 Ethnic denominations remain fuzzy and variable.65 
If need be, society can abandon comprehensive groupings and shrink to 
a smaller format without losing its ability to survive; and it can also cope 
with the loss of many segments through famine, war, or secession. The 
remnants still have the possibility of making an almost unconditional new 
start.66 To distinguish it from hierarchies, Aidan Southall called this type 
of societal structure “pyramidal.”67
The main function of larger groupings is to organize support in the 
event of conflict—and to weaken it. Normative expectations are, after all, 
counterfactual expectations; they are expectations that, not adjusting to 
disappointments, are upheld.68 This is scarcely possible without the pros­
pect of support in the event of conflict. However, tying the normativiza­
tion of expectations to the prospects of support sets narrow limits to the 
specification of expectations (and thus to lawmaking). For how can others 
be expected to offer support for highly specific expectations and in corre­
spondingly rare situations? This makes it necessary, first, to generalize the 
sense of expectations and, second, to develop motives for support among 
people not affected. This is done by appealing to group solidarity and by 
broadening it through the pyramidal nesting of society.69 But this again 
leads evolution into a dead end, to a normalization of the improbable 
that no longer suffices for further evolution. For this order of willingness 
to provide support is directed more toward arbitration than toward legal 
evolution; it is thus more concerned with the immediate consequences 
of conflict resolution than with long-term effects; and it then blocks the 
specification of normative expectations through self-interest and indif­

 
  Differentiation
ference on the part of those required to provide support. The only way 
out of this dead end is to organize political support for disappointed legal 
expectations.
It seems that this difficulty of establishing legal norms in the form 
of fixed decision rules has to do with the multifunctional use of existing 
institutions. For multifunctionality means participating in widely differ­
ing sorts of situation. This in turn prevents the universalization and speci­
fication of the properties that define situations. Experience and memory 
dominate the properties of situations. Cases then differ so much that no 
overall decision rules can be abstracted out. Not even the structures that 
control the differentiation of society (above all descent) can be translated 
into a fixed definition of legal positions.70 This is not due, for example, to 
the “inadequacy” of procedures directed primarily toward the opportunis­
tic settlement of disputes. Indeed, these very procedures are adequate for a 
society that, because of such multifunctional contextualization, is unable 
to work out structurally adequate decision rules. The path to differentiat­
ing a legal system is blocked, and here as elsewhere any further evolution 
is improbable.
The difficulty of abstracting rules and distinguishing between rules 
and actions are elements of a far more general condition of communica­
tion. As long as writing is not available, all communication has to be face 
to face. It can rely on properties of the situation visible and known to those 
present, and that therefore do not have to be mentioned; indeed, they can­
not even be specially mentioned, because doing so would provide no in­
formation and would thus be manifestly superfluous. Modes of expression 
are employed that are permeated with what linguists call indexical expres­
sions.71 This saves and prevents generalizations. Situations experienced one 
after the other are as such collectively comprehensible. The schemata or 
scripts can change from situation to situation without this being felt to be 
inconsistent.72
Segmentary societies, too, show tendencies to increase their systemic 
complexity. But they point in another direction. The picture painted so far, 
which provides only for differences of size and foundation principle (kin­
ship, territory), becomes much more complex as soon as we take ascribed 
differentiations into account. They can include marriage restrictions and 
their framework. Society tolerates no uncertainty about family formation 
in the next generation. Age groups, men’s houses, or other quasi-­corporative 

Differentiation    
organizations may also be differentiated, and forms of institutionalized 
conflict management developed, or roles differentiated, under certain cir­
cumstances with roles (priest, chief) becoming hereditary in families for 
whom this is a distinction. Such additional differentiations change noth­
ing in the basic structure of segmentary differentiation, but adapt it to the 
problems that arise. They still have to rely on compatibility with segmen­
tary differentiation, but they make the overall pattern of tribal societies ex­
traordinarily complex by comparison. The impression is that, regardless of 
demographic and other environmental conditions, experiments are being 
made with forms of which few will survive the transition to other forms of 
differentiation.
Since segmentary differentiation divides society into similar subsys­
tems, their demarcation must have been a particularly difficult problem; 
for on the other side of the boundary, in other families or other villages, 
people do not basically live any differently. This could explain why special 
value was placed on symbolizing boundaries—partly by marking, partly 
by designating special places (e.g., for barter), partly through the sym­
bolic design of transitions or through the recognition of special status for 
strangers as guests. Even after the advent of stratification or town-country 
differences, spatial and temporal localities were used to symbolize differ­
ences as long as the basic structure for all forms of differentiation lay in 
family economies (households). Even in more ancient Greek culture, we 
find elaborated boundary symbolism and a competent divinity, Hermes, 
who was at home on Olympus and in the underworld and called boundar­
ies to mind by breaching them in his capacity as the god of merchants and 
thieves. The symbolism of sedentariness or boundary-crossing also defined 
the boundary of the sacred, and with its public visibility and social accep­
tance, it will have performed functions that were later assumed by the civil 
law institutions of property and contract.
Just as the subsystems of these societies were defined in terms of 
kinship relations and/or territoriality, societies themselves saw their own 
boundaries in terms of the people and the territories that belonged to 
them. In this sense, society consisted of people whose individual particu­
larity was known and, as recent research has shown, was highly respected.73 
Personality was accorded with name, responsiveness, and the capacity to 
assume obligations. It was a function of social relations, and increased in 
proportion to the contribution made by smaller segments.74 We can recog­

 
  Differentiation
nize a Dinka without having an idea about the totality of all Dinkas,75 just 
as we can distinguish a red wine glass from a white wine glass without any 
notion of the totality of all red wine glasses. A being who could not be de­
fined socially was not a person but an alien, presumably hostile, being, and 
there was no group concept of humanity that could absorb this. We still see 
the problem in the reasons for which later societies had to develop a sort 
of law of hospitality, an aliens law, finally, a ius gentium [law of nations].
Personality was apparently accorded where double contingency was 
perceived and had to be regulated. This largely means that personality cor­
related with possibilities for communication. On the one hand, however, 
there were strangers toward whom one could develop no expectations, and 
with whom one could accordingly not communicate. Then everything was 
possible and everything was allowed. And on the other hand, there were 
communication partners, hence relationships of double contingency, in 
areas that we would now exclude: gods and spirits, the dead (especially fam­
ily members), certain plants and animals, indeed, even inanimate objects.76 
Personality came into being wherever the behavior of others was imagined 
to be chosen and to be communicatively open to influence through one’s 
own behavior. Early societies seem to have experimented with the relation­
ship between societal boundaries and communicatively manipulable con­
tingency, and only modern society has made the two congruent.
All societies know not only language but also condensed modes of 
expression in language such as names or terms, sayings, situational defini­
tions and formulas, proverbs and tales for saving communication worth 
preserving for reuse. I call such condensations “semantics.” Segmentary so­
cieties find special forms for this, partly because writing does not exist or is 
not used and the oral tradition poses particular problems,77 partly because 
segmentary differentiation sets certain conditions of form, which have to 
be translated into communication. In other words, even tribal societies 
without written language had to develop a social memory that made recog­
nition of the same and repetitions possible without having to rely on much 
too unstable neurophysiological and psychological mechanisms.78 Memory 
relied firstly on a known space. It assumed topographical forms and only 
later used specially created symbolic forms.79 It was based primarily on ob­
jects and on stagings like rites or festivals that were sufficiently typified to 
be recognizable in a significance that transcended the situation. Special em­
bellishments (ornaments, procedures) often served to mark the objects or 

Differentiation    
quasi-objects. Repetitions gave occasion for embroidering, for involutive 
and monotonous elaboration. Feasts were occasions for narrating myths, 
legends, genealogies, and adventures from days of yore—­always on the as­
sumption that the material was well known and familiar. If this function of 
remembering and confirming lapsed, the familiar forms of the objects, for 
instance, houses or tools, also lost their obligatory nature; and feasts lost 
their form and degenerated into occasions for individual escapade.
Social memory cannot simply be equated with modern concepts like 
religion or art. But it also does not develop without being entrenched in 
social functions that have to be repeatedly performed, often in the event 
of isolated and unpredictable cases, which, precisely because they occur ir­
regularly, require regularity in treatment, and hence memory. The devel­
opment of style markings is one of the earliest advances, probably already 
in parallel to cognitive symbolization.80 More demanding forms are to be 
found even in very early societies. I shall limit myself to two examples from 
the abundant material: magic and norms of reciprocity. The first has to do 
with external relations, the second with internal relations; in the one case, 
we are dealing with an area of meaning that advanced civilizations call re­
ligion; in the other, where a distinction is possible between rules and be­
havior, we are dealing with law. I also choose my examples to document 
that the existence of an originally purely sacred legal culture cannot be as­
sumed. Beside fas [divine law], there is always ius [human law].
Tribal societies formed within narrowly drawn boundaries, in a small 
world with an everywhere tangible difference between familiar and unfa­
miliar. Behind the mountains and a spit deep in the earth, another world 
began in which old certainties could fail. The limited reach of possibilities 
for linguistic understanding played a role.81 Religion comes into being as 
a first attempt to provide a place for the unfamiliar in the familiar—be it 
bones in the men’s house that allowed ancestors to be identified and deac­
tivated.82 People had a rather pragmatic, situation-specific attitude toward 
such matters. Initially, social techniques of secrecy, of restricted access, of 
restricted communication appeared to suffice to identify sacred objects or 
names. Only gradually did situations combine into various sorts of mythi­
cal narration; and only at a very late stage did an explicitly symbolic un­
derstanding of things holy develop that had to do with the unity of a 
difference (e.g., of statue and meaning).83 Even Christians still had their 
problems with this issue.

 
  Differentiation
With a trope from the arsenal of George Spencer-Brown’s calculus 
of forms,84 we can also describe religion as “reentry” of the distinction be­
tween the familiar and the unfamiliar in the familiar.85 It is then easy to 
assign magic to this domain. For magic is not, as often assumed, a sort of 
additional causality supplementing incomplete technological knowledge 
(in awareness of its incompleteness!). Magic offers the possibility of par­
allelizing familiar causalities in the unfamiliar through practices that are 
in turn available as familiar.86 Magical action is accordingly often accom­
panied by appropriate speech, as if this were the form in which the unfa­
miliar can be handled; but this naturally does not mean that the magician 
believes the words are instrumental in the effectiveness of the means.87 
What is at issue is not symbolizing this difference but its operational ex­
ecution in practical life.
Magic is thus not concerned with a certain type of purpose or effect 
that one seeks to attain by apposite means, through a sort of special tech­
nology; the problem lies in the unusual nature of events that indicate the 
proximity of the unfamiliar and that have to be treated accordingly. Ex­
planation and treatment on the basis of natural causal knowledge are by 
no means suspended but only doubled up by a supplementary sense of the 
unusual, surprising, undeserved, and so on. Moral ascriptions and respon­
sibilities are also subject to societal control and therefore are beyond the 
reach of magic.88 You cannot excuse yourself for misdeeds on the grounds 
that you were bewitched.89
If semantically elaborated, the assumption of magical competence 
therefore involves denying chance, the accidental that appears to mani­
fest itself on the surface of the familiar world. There is no sense of the ac­
cidental, there are no accidents; for if no cause for the unexpected can be 
found the familiar world, the cause must lie in the unfamiliar. It is the very 
structural similarity of segments that makes differences in what happens to 
them (e.g., death or childlessness, material failures or losses) directly visible 
and needful of interpretation. Late archaic societies then interpreted what 
resisted correction by magic through religions of fate,90 from which only 
monotheism would provide salvation.
It would therefore be wrong to assume that a magical worldview was 
gradually supplanted by a rational worldview with scientifically monitored 
causalities. That Greek science arose alongside the belief in magic, merely 
adding a technique of second-order observation,91 shows the persistence of 

Differentiation    
the quite different distinction between familiar and unfamiliar. Only the 
printed word was to put a slow end to this; for it accustomed society to re­
alizing that a great deal more can be known and be familiar to someone or 
other than anyone can know.
The telling of myths had a very similar function. Strictly speaking, 
self-description cannot be attributed to segmentary societies that had no 
written language, because life as it was lived was too self-evident for com­
prehensive thematization.92 But myths replaced and obviated the commu­
nication form of self-description by telling something different, something 
strange, never experienced, which, as it were, represented the other side of 
the familiar forms and in this sense completed them. It was communica­
tion; but it was not communication that conveyed information and made 
something unknown known. What was essential was precisely to recall fa­
miliarity with the unfamiliar, a repeated renewal of astonishment. Although 
for this reason there are variations that arose from repeated narration, there 
was no erosion in the sense that the audience already had the information 
and repetition therefore no longer had any informational value. It is also 
understandable that myths prefer the form of paradox—for example, unity 
generates itself and other things—because precisely this reactualizes aston­
ishment and leaves no room to ask whether the information is true or not.
Although myths tell of a founding age in which the order now prevail­
ing was created and rendered binding, this primeval time is a different time 
than that of the present and provides for no relation of historical continuity 
or, in this sense, for history. Nor does it offer the prospect of another future. 
It is concerned with safeguarding what is close in what is distant and with 
confirming that things are the way they are. Although the narrative style of 
mythical tales presents a sequence, it seeks no contact with the present. A 
need to fill the interim between the age of myth and the present appears to 
arise only when serious conflicts arise in the present (e.g., on the occasion 
of migrations or conquests), and the past is used as a foil for legitimation.93 
And only when writing is available does greater consistency need to be en­
sured and a history generated for a society or a genealogy for a family.
In religious developments such as myths and rites that guard the 
boundary to the unfamiliar, magic and the basic norm of reciprocity regu­
lated segmentary societies internally. This regulatory mechanism covered 
both cooperation and conflict, thus vesting this distinction so important 
in handling life with norms for exchange and for limiting revenge.

 
  Differentiation
The notion of reciprocity apparently correlated with the similarity of 
subsystems imposed by the differentiation form on all levels of inclusion. 
However big the entities might be, relations between them had to be sym­
metrical and reversible, for otherwise asymmetry would in the course of 
time generate dissimilarities and change the differentiation form. Asym­
metries, for instance, in age or gender or in economic and demographic 
fate, were absorbed in even the smallest entity, the family, or cushioned by 
supplementary institutions (marriage rules, corporations, liberal celebra­
tions, etc.). The rest were referred to the norm of reciprocity, which al­
lowed time-related asymmetries to be seen as symmetries.
The recognition of reciprocity requirements was universal in segmen­
tary societies.94 Before the development of redistributive administrative 
systems, reciprocity had an “energy averaging”95 function in social systems. 
This included forms of sharing surplus opportunities by means of which 
the risks of excessive variation were avoided or balanced out.96 The se­
mantic and structure-generating advantage of reciprocity lay in the inter­
nal indeterminacy of doubled contingency, which was open to all possible 
conditionings. Reciprocity in simple societies cannot therefore be ade­
quately understood as either a norm or at the level of the “will of the par­
ties.” Its development into normative expectations and rational calculation 
on the part of participants was only a consequence of institutional fitness, 
and this lay in its open conditionability. It is therefore not only a means 
for shaping the future (a notion that came to be accepted legally only in 
the nineteenth century) but a construction of ties and constraints for prob­
lems that arose in the life of the community. And with the constraints the 
opportunities that would not exist without them also became apparent.
For this very reason, double contingency interpreted as reciprocity 
and in the use of reciprocity to legitimize the binding force of exchange 
relations is well suited for obtaining sustainable conditionality. Reciproc­
ity appears to be the most important means for binding time. Social time 
begins with the gift. It divides time into remembering and expecting and 
for the present knows nothing in between: postponement, delay, wait­
ing for opportunities. Every gift creates a temporarily unbalanced situa­
tion. Pure presents (that do not trigger duties of gratitude) are unknown. 
And since society has no beginning but communicates in a recursive net­
work of memories and expectations, there is, strictly speaking, no “vol­
untary” performance that is not also counterperformance that demands 

Differentiation    
counter­performance. When it comes to conflicts, the same principle ap­
plies negatively.97 There might well have been a beginning, but revenge 
then generates revenge, and there is no normative regulatory mechanism 
that could bring about a decision on the rights and wrongs of the case re­
gardless of who started and who reacted. There is only limitation of the ac­
ceptable extent of gifts or injuries.
In both positive and negative relations, the principle of reciprocity 
also has a cosmological dimension. In relation to gods, spirits, or other 
otherworldly powers, it takes the form of sacrifice. A sacrifice can serve to 
propitiate the gods if behavior has aroused their ire, or to gain their favor 
for projects that need their support. In both cases sacrifice assumes that the 
maxim of reciprocity also applies for relations with the beyond, and is rec­
ognized and thus confirmed by the gods.
In society, the permanent asymmetry of time has the function of main­
taining the social balance and thus of safeguarding the similarity of subsys­
tems. Every entity can get into difficulty or need help in particular situations 
(e.g., building a home). In this way, surpluses can be converted into grati­
tude, can in this sense be saved if not naturally then socially.98 Differences 
in needs can level out in the course of time. To this extent, reciprocity is a 
counterinstitution to scarcity and the functional equivalent of credit.
This combination of temporal and social asymmetries to regain sym­
metry is considered so important that immediate and precise counterper­
formance (in the sense of our payment) is seen as unseemly, as is rejection 
of a gift to avoid the resulting obligations. Objective criteria of equivalence 
are therefore lacking (if we disregard such exceptions as ceremonial or sym­
bolic exchange relations and the exchange of women).99 This problem, too, 
is shifted into time, is postponed, and in a certain sense time therefore 
serves as a functional equivalent of the abstractness and indeterminate use 
of money. The more closely and intimately a relationship is lived out (e.g., 
in the home), the more unspecific is the relation between gift and recip­
rocation, the more important is a lasting obligation, and the more inap­
propriate are summing and offsetting. As social distance increases and the 
crucial importance of the relationship decreases, the modalities for offset­
ting obligations can be handled more specifically.100 In this regard, too, the 
“pyramidal” structure of the societal system comes to bear.
The universal distribution and structural adequacy of reciprocity does 
not, however, allow us to conclude that this principle is acknowledged and 

 
  Differentiation
formulated as a rule. We may not even presume that rules and behaviors 
can be distinguished from one another at all.101 Corresponding states of af­
fairs are experienced on much more concrete levels of meaning and are also 
given different names.102 There is, in other words, no conceptual formula­
tion that could suggest criticism of the principle, questions about the con­
ditions and limits of its application, or a search for alternatives. Giving and 
helping are socially self-evident practices. We can plausibly assume that 
this does not exclude a calculating or even manipulating awareness; at any 
rate, giving may not be openly presented as a way to impose dependence.
Segmentary societies with all their institutions, with their possibili­
ties of expanding and shrinking, with the magic parallelization of causal­
ity, and with reciprocity as a form of resymmetrizing temporal and social 
asymmetries, are geared to remain the way they are. This holds true for 
their own semantics, but it becomes fully clear only when we observe them 
to discover what they cannot themselves observe. No other order is con­
ceivable for them, and they must see any move to introduce one as wrong, 
as a deviation, as dangerous, to be avoided and combated. Thus any an­
nouncement of a claim to leadership (in the direction of political differen­
tiation) meets with resistance or at least with latent hostility, which is easy 
to organize. Differences in wealth and rank between families cannot be 
prevented with certainty from developing; where they do so, they may give 
birth to patron-client relations, which prepare the ground for the political 
centralization of leadership roles. But even if this happens (and there is a 
great deal of evidence to this effect), it does not yet mean that leadership 
roles are vested with decision-making and sanctioning powers. Where this 
takes place in “chiefly societies,” we can perhaps speak of the evolutionary 
restabilization of a prepared differentiation. At any rate, there are not yet 
any large groups of equal rank such as we find in stratified societies.
In the terminology of systems theory, we call the relatively rapid tran­
sition of a system to another principle of stability a catastrophe.103 In pre­
cisely this sense, evolution, if it affects the form of differentiation, leads to a 
societal catastrophe. The development of societies that gives primacy to 
­center-periphery differentiation and/or stratification is such a catastrophe, 
mitigated, however, by the fact that rural life continues under the conditions 
of segmentary differentiation and few functions are transferred to the city or 
to a ruling stratum. In such cases, we speak of “peasant societies,” and as re­
gards country dwellers, there is even talk of one-class societies.104

Differentiation    
Given the present state of knowledge, it is difficult to find a satisfac­
tory causal explanation for the development of stratification. There will 
presumably have been various, “equifinal” initial situations; and we would 
then have to ask where a given egalitarian, segmentarily differentiated so­
cial order is sensitive to radical change. Older theory had explained the 
transition from segmentary to stratified societies in terms of the demo­
graphic growth of the population.105 In the light of the empirical evidence, 
this cannot be upheld.106 And even if we take not the size of the popula­
tion but its density into account, a connection between this factor and the 
development of stratification can be empirically disproved.107 Research is 
similarly uncertain about other supposedly decisive causes that had been 
considered, such as ecological diversity or agriculture.108 The importance 
of trade in externally produced prestige goods has recently been discussed 
as a possible cause and as a factor in stabilizing differences in rank.109 This 
view fits in well with the question of how the stabilization mechanisms of 
segmentary societies can be blocked. Prestige goods can neither be distrib­
uted egalitarianly nor destroyed as surplus in ritual celebrations. Moreover, 
they can only be acquired in long-distance trade, and access to this trade is 
easy to restrict. Finally, they can be used within society better than a larger 
amount of self-produced goods to symbolize higher status (that there is 
good archaeological evidence for them may also have played a practical 
role in research). This concept naturally presupposes that in a broader con­
text there is already a sort of center-periphery differentiation even in seg­
mentary societies that affects the production of and trade in prestige goods 
on the periphery. Renouncing a causal explanation, we turn to the struc­
tural problems of segmentary societies. This makes it easier to identify the 
points of departure for reversing the order, whatever the concrete causes 
for activating these possibilities might be.
Perhaps the most important starting point is the reversibility of situ­
ations, which is presupposed by the similarity principle of segmentation 
and by the reciprocity rule. It can be cancelled out by armed force superim­
posing one ethnic stratum on another. But autochthonous developments 
are also conceivable. Some families become much wealthier in terms of 
land, goods, and followers. Whoever expects help from them can no longer 
repay “like by like.” He pays with recognition of the difference in rank, as it 
were, by a perpetuated debt of gratitude, which then motivates him to ac­
cept commensurate duties and to pledge obedience.110 An increasing bur­

 
  Differentiation
den of information and decisions can be handled by established differences 
in rank, with activity in this field both giving expression to and restabiliz­
ing the difference in rank. The system crosses a threshold beyond which 
only positive but not negative feedback now functions. Given the relevant 
preadaptive advances, this can happen very fast.111 Deviations from simi­
larity are no longer felt to be disturbing and consequently eliminated (e.g., 
through “celebrations” with destruction of surpluses); their advantages are 
discovered and developed, and legitimized by interpolating a history be­
tween the mythical age and the present. Difference in rank itself takes on 
the nature of the unspecific debt of gratitude applicable to many oppor­
tunities. Precisely the “unnaturalness” of the similarity premise, which is 
constantly put to the test by a wide range of influences, makes such a rever­
sal to the opposing principle probable if it is not prevented. The transition 
is achieved by disinhibition of the inhibition of a natural development,112 
and it thus assumes the relatively drastic form of structural change.
Segmentary societies, too, have abundant differences in rank (e.g., 
on grounds of age or imbalances in reciprocity relations) and develop more 
or less stereotyped forms for giving expression to them in interaction.113 
Differences in rank, for instance, between chiefly families and other fam­
ilies are in themselves, however, not stable evolutionary advances. They 
may be determined, for example, by control of trade in prestige goods or 
through production relations, and may be abandoned when these con­
ditions change.114 At any rate, they do not constitute a step that would 
normally lead to a stratified society. They tend rather to prepare the dif­
ferentiation of specifically political roles and functions.115 In any case, we 
can say that even tribal societies experiment with the recognition of dif­
ferences in rank and a corresponding deformation of reciprocity relations. 
In stratified societies, such forms can be adopted and further developed as 
preadaptive advances. Initially incomprehensible behavior does not have 
to be reinvented. However, a transition to using rank as a form of system 
differentiation presupposes that an upper stratum differentiates out and a 
subsystem of society forms in which internal reactions are handled differ­
ently from interactions with the intrasocietal environment of the system. 
When this happens, no kinship relations are recognized any longer be­
tween upper and lower strata, not even distant ones. This makes it nec­
essary to marry only within one’s own social stratum (endogamy). And 
then forms of deference, the recognition of superiority or precedence, can 

Differentiation    
be further differentiated depending on whether they concern members of 
one’s own stratum or are to be handled across class boundaries (it can be 
extremely unsuitable for a peasant to treat the son of his lord the way this 
son treats his father).
In any case, the use of rank difference as a form for system differen­
tiation revolutionizes society—even if the differentiation out of an upper 
stratum initially changes nothing in how the lower stratum lives. A num­
ber of occasions can be imagined that bring a segmentary society to the 
brink of such radical structural change. One is based on the redundancy 
of possible contacts to be found in even the smallest society.116 This pro­
duces sociometric patterns with corresponding dissimilarities. Some mem­
bers are more popular, more capable, are more in demand as partners than 
others, and therefore have more chance than others to choose among their 
contacts and to demand something even for their willingness to make con­
tact, for example: recognition of their opinions or unreciprocated coopera­
tiveness. Leadership structures in very simple societies appear to be based 
on this “star mechanism.” This will normally be a short-term opportu­
nity that is endangered simply by being taken. It is also conceivable for a 
chieftain to hold the position for life, and, more rarely for his son to be 
given preferential access to the role,117 up to and including heritability of 
the office in certain families. Sometimes the status of the chiefly family is 
established by its successfully claiming sole access to the hitherto unoccu­
pied place that symbolizes the unity of the tribal society, for example, in 
the form of a common ancestor or founder.118 This has frequently led to 
chiefly societies vesting such an office with powers (but generally not with 
the power to make collectively binding decisions) without developing so­
cial stratification.
A second mechanism can be described as “parasitical.” Precisely the 
prevailing customs and practices can display the advantages of deviation. 
Every order is based on exclusion, and a symmetrical order is based on the 
exclusion of asymmetries. This offers an opportunity that could not arise 
at all without distinct exclusions, namely, the possibility of discovering and 
using ordering advantages in what is excluded. It is well-structured orders 
that show up the opposite—not similarity but dissimilarity—and offer, if 
put to the test, the opportunity for bifurcation, the chance to embark on 
a different path that, once taken, can make irreversible history.119 Para­
sites can thus develop that take advantage of such possibilities, quite in the 

 
  Differentiation
sense proposed by Michel Serres.120 A parasitical order comes into being 
that, almost unnoticed, transmutes from exception or deviation into pri­
mary order—only to become parasitizable in its turn. “Evolution produces 
the parasite, which in turn produces evolution.”121
All this merely names structure-dependent possibilities, a constant 
noise, as it were, on the margins of a societal order that is firmly held in the 
framework of segmentary differentiation. The transition to another differ­
entiation form requires, first, preadaptive advances on this basis. But there 
must also be causes, such as those discussed in the (unfortunately mis­
named) “theories on the origin of the state.”122 One of these circumstances 
could be the violence in late archaic societies that increased with produc­
tivity,123 which demonstrated the weakness of conflict management in seg­
mentary societies, as well as their inferiority to societies already militarily 
organized. For further development or, more precisely, for the selection of 
societies amenable to evolution, there are then two fundamentally differ­
ent possibilities: stratification can develop under the principle of kinship if 
higher strata manage to impose endogamy. Under the similarly widespread 
territoriality principle, dissimilarities in the spatial order can arise, differ­
entiation into urban center and periphery. Setting very different priorities, 
all advanced civilizations use both principles, just as segmentary societ­
ies could not do without order on the basis of kinship connections or the 
­spatio-territorial definition of their entities.
5. Center and Periphery
In premodern times, advanced civilizations were based on differen­
tiation forms able to take account of and exploit dissimilarities at struc­
turally crucial points. When fully developed, they used both stratificatory 
differentiation and center-periphery differentiation. In this respect they 
could be described as aristocratic societies or also as urban societies, even 
though the attributes applied to only a small section of the population.
The beginnings of center-periphery differentiation were already to 
be found in segmentary societies, above all, when such a society assumed a 
dominant role in long-distance trade.124 But this did not yet call segmen­
tary differentiation into question. This happened only when the dominant 
position of the center was used to establish other forms of differentiation 
and, above all, greater role differentiation (“division of labor”).

Differentiation    
Center-periphery differentiation resulted when centers differentiated 
out. It was, as it were, at home in the center. The center with its own ad­
vances and differentiations therefore depended more on this differentia­
tion form than did the periphery. The periphery retained the segmentary 
differentiation of family households and was therefore able to survive even 
without a center.
Depending on the intensity of contacts, additional differentiations 
could occur within the periphery. A half-periphery then had closer rela­
tions with the center, chiefly of exploitation but also of protection; whereas 
little more was known of the more distant periphery than that it existed.125 
There could also be a multiplicity of centers, one of which exercised hege­
mony over the others. Such repetitions also localized sensitivities to change. 
Unlike differences in rank, they were not necessarily a mark of stability.
Also and especially when the form of differentiation is regarded as 
the decisive property of a societal formation, it should be remembered that 
this does not suffice to describe the genesis and problems of these highly 
cultivated societal systems. Apart from nutritional and demographic con­
ditions, another factor has to be taken into account that complicates the 
picture. Compared with segmentary societies, the number and complex­
ity of external contacts made possible by the formation of a center (but 
also of an upper social stratum) increased immensely. The system had to 
provide the necessary information processing capacity and organize it hi­
erarchically. This also increased the sensitivity to information that had an 
only indirect impact. At the operational level, the possibilities for com­
munication grew, which in a number of cases resulted in the formation 
of large territorial empires. They were naturally far fewer in number than 
segmentary societies but still numerous enough to make the development 
of evolutionary competition and selection conceivable.126
Even in the archaic world of tribal societal systems, communication 
was possible beyond system boundaries—communication with neighbor­
ing tribes, even a certain amount of long-distance trade. There were even 
first signs of larger systems forming, but they were then identified con­
cretely in space and were not seen as differentiated systems with external 
boundaries. Even in tribal societies, cosmology was accordingly geared to a 
center-periphery distinction; or at least segmentary societies saw themselves 
as the (sole) center of the world and as the designated point of reference 
for the creation of the world and humanity. This changed with the spread 

 
  Differentiation
of cross-border communication. There had already been far-­reaching trade 
relations between tribal societies. I shall speak of a new form of differ­
entiation only where structural peculiarities in centers are determined by 
the maintenance of a difference between center and periphery,127 based in 
modern terms, for example, on capital accumulation.128
We know little about the transitional period, for archaeology, like 
ethnology, with its investigative focus on isolable entities, has paid little 
attention to this process.129 The insipid term “diffusion” has been applied 
to farther-reaching relations that have left on-site traces. However, we may 
postulate that the growing complexity of crossborder communication and 
its increasing consequences had at least three effects: (1) the emergence 
of forms of territorial differentiation, (2) reflection (typically in religious 
form) on one’s own identity and distinctness, and (3) an interest in effec­
tively controlling events beyond the borders, thus a tendency toward ex­
panding territorial rule. There were accordingly centers that elaborated a 
symbol-bound, meaningful priority for the center from which they could 
pursue missionary goals, while others limited themselves to organizing 
power and resources, to exploiting the periphery.130 A multinational se­
mantics relating to empire building came into evidence in the Near East at 
the latest in the second millennium bce.
Research on ancient Mesopotamia has demonstrated such a develop­
ment through its semantic (“geographical”) results.131 The oldest model ap­
pears to have consisted in a strict separation of habitable and inhabited land 
from the surrounding wilderness. In one’s own, civilized land, people could 
live, build, establish cults. Here there was memory and civilization. The 
environing wilderness was full of surprises and horrors. This was still the 
model underlying later reports about the heroic expeditions of kings into 
the wilds. Expeditions could have been military or commercial in nature. 
They were styled as heroic deeds and made the subject of legends because 
the environment was still taken to be a dangerous, unknown wilderness. 
As trade grew, this geography shifted to a description of traffic routes. The 
semantics of the transport route had the advantage of giving expression to 
proximity (accessibility) and distance (otherness) in one symbol. It did not 
have to rely on identifiable linear boundaries drawn in space between cen­
ter and periphery. Center and periphery remained a form of difference.
The extension of communication possibilities beyond the bounds 
of the empire made it necessary to distinguish between people who be­

Differentiation    
longed to one’s own sphere and those who lived beyond the borders. This 
required, first, a generalized concept of humanity (with consequences for 
the cosmology in force in the empire, and, in particular for religion) 
and divisions that were conceived from the perspective of the center and 
confirmed its self-conception.132 We could speak of a universal seman­
tics based on the particular. At any rate, the world had to be completed 
through differences and through an awareness of boundaries, and not 
only, as in segmentary societies, by assuming that similar conditions con­
tinued under the “and so forth” principle, but by incorporating the other­
ness of the other.133
However, the literature offers no clear picture about the external 
boundaries of such major complexes, empires, or “world systems”; widely 
differing results are forthcoming depending on whether trade, military 
control, or cultural diffusion is assumed to be the underlying rationale.134 
This can be answered with the thesis that the boundaries lay where the 
center saw them, regardless of how neighborly contacts might unravel on 
the periphery. And the center had to decide the extent to which, for exam­
ple, trade interests required military protection and how relations between 
bases and the surrounding territories were to be handled.
At any rate, the low degree of control over communication prevented 
the development of a political order that could be seen as a precursor of the 
modern territorial state.135 Very typically—and in unrelated cases—the cen­
ter saw its task as cultivating the cosmic relations of society, performing 
the appropriate rites, and maintaining a corresponding politico-religious 
bureaucracy, leaving the regulation of economic relations and disputes to 
family economies and possibly to corporations specially established for the 
purpose (temples and guilds). It is not by chance that, under these condi­
tions, neither civil law nor the market-type conditioning of individual con­
duct developed.
Formally, the center-periphery schema has widely varying applica­
tions. We can take cities as centers. We then inevitably have to recognize a 
multitude of such centers with corresponding (rural) peripheries. Another 
example is the formation of empires, which can regard themselves as the 
center of the world and relegate everything else to the periphery. Until well 
into the nineteenth century, for instance, China considered itself to be the 
“one empire under heaven,” and not, for example, a culture—let alone one 
country among others. The differentiation form was thus also a cosmology.

 
  Differentiation
Little is known about the inception of empires.136 The spread of com­
munication practices beyond tribal boundaries will have been encouraged 
by trade. It will also have been promoted by the military necessities of se­
curity and by cultural (religious, missionary) expansion, especially after 
the invention of world religions. A secondary development was the noma­
dization of peripheral regions that lived under the influence of an empire 
and not infrequently copied imperial governmental institutions.137 Ports 
in foreign territory and the “dual economies” to which they gave rise are 
also to be seen in this context.138 Probably the most striking characteris­
tic of these empires themselves was their bureaucratic form of government 
and the stratification reduced to differences in wealth and opportunity it 
concealed.
No high communicative density can be assumed internally either. 
The majority of the inhabitants of such empires were presumably quite 
unaware that they lived in an empire (which we can easily visualize with 
the aid of maps). Imperial ideologies, such as the Confucianism of China 
or the scriptural world religions remained largely unknown or were famil­
iar only in popular derivations; and members of the bureaucratic elites are 
also unlikely to have taken much interest in what was happening in the 
heads of simple folk.
In order to define the concept of empire more precisely, I shall take 
it to mean historically a quasi-natural by-product of the expansion of pos­
sibilities for communication. As we have seen, the lack of definitive bor­
ders therefore belongs to the form of empire. Instead of borders, we find 
horizons that determine what can be attained and vary accordingly.139 An 
empire is thus the meaning horizon of communications, of the communi­
cations of bureaucratic elites, who assume their empire to be unique and 
accept spatial boundaries, if at all, only as temporary limitations to their 
factual sphere of influence. The (provisionally) last instance of such an em­
pire is likely to have been the Soviet Union, in the context of the Commu­
nist (Third) International and a scientifically predicted world revolution.
Such bureaucratic empires could possibly be seen a special differen­
tiation form not provided for in our catalog. But they only constituted an 
elaborated form of the center-periphery differentiation with the empire 
and imperial bureaucracy as the center. At any rate, these empires experi­
enced structural problems, namely, with diffusion and control, typical of 
this differentiation form.140 The written word was indispensable for keep­

Differentiation    
ing track at least at the center and for consolidating the communications 
issued from there.141 Writing systems like the Chinese or a standard lan­
guage (the Akkadian of cuneiform, Arabic in African territorial empires, 
Latin in the Holy Roman Empire of the Middle Ages) will have been 
important, making the network of records and messages independent of 
the vernacular and able to operate without translation problems. On the 
whole, however, the thematic reach and degree of control that could be 
achieved should not be overestimated. The effective possibilities for com­
munication (the postal system of the Roman Empire is to be seen as an 
enormous effort in this context) remained limited and did not suffice for 
the factual exercise of power. The authorities had to make do with col­
lecting tribute, recruiting forced labor, and engaging in punitive action 
resembling military campaigns. Given the limited information and con­
trol possibilities, obtaining obedience by merely threatening sanctions was 
practically excluded. For this reason the power potential actually available 
was low, and occasional but drastic action encouraged the rural population 
to adopt a contact avoidance stance and to maintain primarily segmentary 
differentiation.142 It was also typically difficult to keep the local aristoc­
racy under control—for example, through enforced presence from time to 
time in the capital (Japan). The differences that arose between the cultural 
centers of the empire and rural life are all the more striking: a clear motive 
for the emergence and self-interpretation of so-called Hochkulturen [high 
cultures].143 A corresponding split in the semantics into high tradition and 
little tradition, or gradation on a folk/urban continuum was the result.144
In the center, stronger, wide-ranging sorts of differentiation and 
facility sharing developed.145 This favored and was enabled by a devel­
opment that could be described as the densification of interaction net­
works.146 Internally more complex as well as regionally more extensive 
contacts were maintained at the center of empires than under the local 
conditions prevailing on the periphery. Local conditions, including lan­
guage, could differ enduringly from place to place and remain ignorant of 
conditions elsewhere. National languages developed only with the print­
ing press. The center justified itself as center in terms of a cosmological 
construction. The written recording of authoritative texts gave rise to in­
fallible semantic stability. Even during the chaos of war during the mi­
gration period, people in Rome spoke of the Pax Romana and hired the 
invading barbarians without further ado as mercenaries.

 
  Differentiation
One of the most important aspects of the center-periphery schema 
was that it enabled stratification in the center (whether in sufficiently large 
cities or in relation to empire building) far beyond what had been pos­
sible in small societies of an older type, in particular the possibility for a 
nobility to separate themselves off through endogamy, while retaining the 
exogamy precept of segmentary societies for the individual family. Since 
relatively few families could belong to the nobility if resources were to 
suffice and the distinction were not to be devalued through overexten­
sion, stratification required a sufficiently large marriage market, thus a 
larger territorial catchment area or a more densely populated capital. In 
this regard, one side of the center-periphery distinction, the center, also 
offered a chance for other forms of differentiation, above all stratification, 
to develop. It was, in brief, a differentiation of differentiation forms, with 
persisting segmentary differentiation in the country and established strat­
ificatory differentiation in the city.147
Empires can therefore combine two differentiation forms on the basis 
of dissimilarity and develop them in this combination: center-­periphery 
differentiation and stratification. The bureaucracy-based government that 
empires develop is the form that makes this combinatory gain possible 
by differentiating itself. For this reason, contemporaries concentrated, as 
historians were later to do, on the glories of this unitarist form of bureau­
cratic government, which made rule by the ruler possible and also legiti­
mated itself through him. Above all, the stratificatory structure of society 
was visually but not functionally relegated to the background. The bu­
reaucracy, which regarded itself officially as the center, formed the visible 
structure of the empire and was responsible for its religious and ethical 
self-presentation. The exercise of political power and of religion was not 
to be separated. The position structure of the bureaucracy required and 
enabled a considerable degree of mobility, so that stratum differentiation 
was concealed and prevented from structural and semantic closure.148 But 
it had an indirect impact by regulating access to educational and career 
opportunities. Last but not least, protection played a considerable role 
in social stratification as an internal instrument of power and a coupling 
mechanism.
In any case, stratification remained so strong that an extensive empire 
could be governed neither with nor against the nobility. The governmental 
system could not operate solely with delegated power,149 it had to rely on 

Differentiation    
independent, local sources of power, which meant the landed property of 
the nobility. Rules such as the selection of provincial governors from fami­
lies who were not established locally and their frequent replacement reflect 
this problem. Under these conditions, rivalry often developed within the 
nobility itself, factions formed, kings were assassinated, and whole families 
were eradicated in a vicious circle in which the nobility sought to influence 
government affairs and the king sought to maintain control over those by 
whom he wished to be influenced.150 Early modern raison d’État theory 
was still essentially determined by this view of the problem,151 even though 
the modern state had already begun to undermine it structurally (and not 
only in the form of political consultancy).
Descriptions of the world and the empire elaborated under these 
conditions proceeded from the center, but for the sake of completeness 
also covered the periphery and everything that needed to be considered 
beyond the order typical of the empire. They claimed exhaustiveness (and 
hence excluded alternatives). They cut across dissimilarities, territorialized 
them and thus established the unity of the different through an invented 
spatial order. With modern eyes we read them as an unfolded paradox re­
solved into spaces. The extraordinary longevity and stability of these order 
models can therefore probably be explained by the structural relevance of 
the problem of the unity of the different in the empire and by the effective 
satisfaction of a semantic need of the ruling classes.
Society was not in every case inspired to build empires through the 
extension of the communication space. Geographical conditions, for in­
stance in the Aegean,152 frontier regions between empires, and the case 
of Israel made exceptions possible, exceptions with far-reaching conse­
quences for semantic innovation. Parsons calls these “seed-bed societies.”153 
However, they can also be described in terms of the differentiation forms 
­center-periphery and stratification. They were urban societies and aris­
tocratic societies. But deviation from the typicality of empire apparently 
sufficed to enable a high degree of self-critical semantics to develop—in 
Israel in the form of prophecy, in Greece in the form of a novel, writing-
bound pursuit of knowledge,154 and in both cases in the form, not tied to 
established positions, of second-order observation: of observation of ob­
servation. However, these societies were not prepared for a switch of dif­
ferentiation form, for a new “catastrophe,” and, contrary to the Europe 
of early modernity, semantic innovations found no point of takeoff there.

 
  Differentiation
The evolutionary potential of bureaucratic empires, as of other forms 
of advanced civilization, is considered to have been relatively low. With a 
remarkable dynamic of rise and fall, with frequent geographical shifts of 
center, and with a precarious balance between political authority, religious 
elites, and an aristocracy based on ownership of the land, circular devel­
opments tended to emerge, variations in the framework of the stabilized 
dissimilarities, but no transition to a fundamentally other form of differ­
entiation. Collapses led to attempts to reestablish the differentiation form 
of center and periphery and, within it, stratification.155 Functional com­
plexes, especially religion and (after the introduction of coined money) the 
money economy, adapted to this order and its territorial regimes. After all, 
it is hard to imagine that religion or trade constituted a different, indepen­
dent society. Or when it came to such notions as Saint Augustine’s theory 
of the two civitates, it had to be made clear that only one of these kingdoms 
could be of this world and the other was for the hereafter.
Signs of a change emerged only when a number of functional sys­
tems began to differentiate out with operational autonomy at approxi­
mately the same time, no single one accordingly forming the new society; 
the societal order had to adapt to the difference between functional sys­
tems. This took place under the umbrella of the old differentiation forms 
only in early modern Europe.
6. Stratified Societies
In advanced civilizations, all societies that possessed writing were aris­
tocratic societies. However diverse the economic basis for distinguishing 
an upper class, there is no disputing that there was an upper stratum and 
that its existence and distinction was honored in communication. There 
were important differences in the degree to which the formal “bureau­
cratic” order of an imperial system or a city government of the Greek-
Hellenistic type took this into account. But even where this was not the 
case, and value was placed on formal-objective recruitment or on equal 
participation by all citizens, the upper stratum of society had much more 
privileged access and much stronger influence; in China, for example, be­
cause it alone could guarantee the education necessary for a career; and in 
Greece because its more extensive regional contacts were indispensable.156 
The situation was similar in the cities of the Italian Middle Ages and the 

Differentiation    
early Renaissance, where the “people” could still divest the aristocracy (still 
landsässig, subject to the territorial sovereign) of power—as in Genoa—but 
this in fact amounted to replacing the old families with a new class of no­
bility. The upper stratum produced by stratificatory differentiation was an 
order of families, not of individuals, and thus a social distinction awarded 
for birth and following. And what is important in comparison to notions 
of order in force today is that membership of a social stratum had a multi­
functional effect, bundling advantages and disadvantages in practically all 
the functional areas of society, and thus erecting almost insurmountable 
barriers to functional differentiation.
I shall speak of stratification only when society is to be represented as 
a hierarchy in which order without differences in rank has become unthink­
able.157 Since the upper class no longer recognized any family relations with 
members of the lower stratum or regarded them as embarrassing anomalies, 
society could no longer be described in terms of common descent as a kin­
ship system. This notion was superseded by that of differences in rank nec­
essary for social order—not least with regard to relations between different 
societies. A stratified society thus necessarily abandoned the idea that soci­
ety itself was a kinship context. This enabled it to accept centralized politi­
cal rule and a religion governed by a clergy, and to reduce their relationship 
with the hierarchy of families to recruitment issues.
Stratification was based on accepted differences in wealth. Stratifica­
tion also required the upper class—and this, too, demonstrated rank—to 
be relatively small and nevertheless capable of holding its own.158 Moreover, 
endogamy was practiced to mark the discontinuation of kinship lines (but 
naturally also for economic reasons). Endogamy made it possible to aban­
don rigid marriage rules such as those often found in segmentary societies, 
and thus provided for more structural flexibility in choosing a spouse. Mar­
riages could now be used to establish family alliances, enabling the upper 
stratum to adapt to changing historical situations and above all to internal 
instability. In the terminology of the time, it was a political society (societas 
civilis), whose members maintained their own houses, knew one another 
directly or indirectly, and had no difficulty establishing contact should the 
need arise. Contacts within the upper class were marked by specific behav­
ior free of dissimilarity, which did not prevent existing differences in rank 
(which a peasant would have been quite unable to discern) from being ex­
pressed. That the difference now underpinning society—in contrast to seg­

 
  Differentiation
mentation and center-periphery differentiation—had to renounce spatial 
representation demonstrated the improbability of such an order. This re­
quired the abstraction of symbolization, which was often secured by polit­
ico-theological parallel constructions, thus operating with cosmic analogies. 
Above all, it required stylized interaction between social strata through 
forms of deference, often also in language, in determining who could take 
the initiative and decide the topic of interaction; all in all, an ongoing, both 
ceremonial and practical communicational reproduction of differences in 
rank among the parties present. Stratification was also reproduced by being 
constantly brought to mind when people of differing rank were together.
It is difficult to imagine that an upper class, however small, “gov­
erned.” The order prevailing in earlier societal formations, tribal and chiefly 
societies, could not be superseded by stratification alone. In stratified so­
cieties, there was therefore always a concomitant political centralism. The 
current status of research leaves it open whether the upper class created 
political centralism to protect its privileges or whether political centralism 
constituted those participating in it as an upper class, or, with China in 
mind, whether contact with the learned political bureaucracy was reserved 
to the upper class.159 This problem has been discussed under the curious 
heading of the “origin of states.”160 At any rate, from the point of view of 
the history of society, no pronounced stratification developed without par­
allel political centralism. To this extent, the transition to stratified societies 
also prepared the way for a political system to differentiate out functionally.
From a formal point of view, hierarchical stratification involved two 
series, which were, however, presented as one.161 There was a top-down series 
seen from above and a bottom-up series seen from below. This ­doubling-up 
was manifested in widely differing modes of experience. It also follows that 
the upward extension of the hierarchy by generating better rank positions 
always produced worse rank positions as well; and that a rise in position 
necessarily meant that positions left behind were now lower and people pre­
viously of equal rank now had to be treated as lower in rank. This paradox of 
the double series was, however, concealed by describing the hierarchy as an 
objective graded order in which each member could occupy only one posi­
tion and the order of positions was semantically completed by assumptions 
about differing qualities (nature) and differing expectations (morality).
For reasons of space and the availability of material, I limit myself in 
the following analysis to the case of a society that gave particular primacy to 

Differentiation    
stratification as a form of societal system differentiation: the Europe of the 
late Middle Ages and early modernity. Under the uneasy conditions that had 
prevailed after the migration period and in the early Middle Ages, there had, 
of course, also been an upper social stratum endowed with authority and 
property. But the feudal order that developed in this context brought a re­
markable break with older social structures, which had primarily been based 
on kinship. Kinship was substituted by the relation between lord and vassal, 
a relation of rank, which held its own against family interests in the face of 
considerable difficulties and restrictions. The same change was mirrored in 
the Church by donations and foundations and insistence on the celibacy of 
priests. There has since been no differentiation in Europe based primarily on 
families and clans, and hence segmentary in nature. The feudal order also 
made considerable changes in membership possible, above all enabling the 
initially unfree ministeriales and knights of low birth to rise into the nobility. 
Only in the course of the Middle Ages did descent establish itself as an au­
thoritative criterion for membership in the nobility, compensated for by oc­
casional, later more frequent, political ennoblement; and this made ­nobilitas 
and then nobility into a comprehensive demarcation concept to guide mar­
riage practices and political recruitment. In what follows, I assume the estab­
lishment of this consolidated form of an aristocratic society without being 
able to take account of the considerable regional differences.162
If the thesis that the primacy of a differentiation form also shows up 
the fractures where parasites can feed, bifurcations develop, and new, his­
torically significant paths are embarked upon is correct, then it is not by 
chance that the catastrophe of the modern age took place here and no­
where else. Also to be kept in mind in this context is the European pecu­
liarity of corporatively constituted estates, a system that ensured that the 
estates had a say in the incipient territorial state, thus making deals pos­
sible on privileges, which, however, brought a strong degree of collective 
visibility and vulnerability. If organizational and legal arrangements are 
laid down, this always suggests that they can be changed. All in all, it is 
therefore not surprising that the societal system converted to the primacy 
of functional differentiation only in Europe.
This is, of course not sufficient explanation. We must also take histori­
cal and situational conditions into account, for instance, geographical dif­
ferences, preadaptive structural advances (e.g., the special importance of the 
law), the subjection of the nobility to the territorial sovereign [­Landsässigkeit], 

 
  Differentiation
and a high degree of incipient nonidentity between religion, the money 
economy, and political territorial governments, which exploded the imperial 
form. Comparison with the caste system of India also shows that European 
stratification was not based on a religiously ritualizable concept of purity, 
but had its sources in the ownership of land, and ultimately only in the legal 
order.163 Admitting all these favorable conditions: in a ­centuries-long pro­
cess, the dominant form of estate differentiation demonstrated what was 
no longer of any use and what had proved to be a hindrance and ultimately 
superfluous to the extent that the functional systems that were differentiat­
ing out were able to organize their own autopoiesis. What was no longer 
of any use was the political factor of landownership (land could, after all, 
also be bought and sold and managed rationally, taking investment costs 
into account); what was above all no longer needed were sons and relations 
with noble families. Although the Royal Society of London particularly wel­
comed “gentlemen” as members, it was because they had more time than 
business people.164 And in the second half of the eighteenth century, we find 
texts that laud the special qualities of the scions of noble families, but seem­
ingly only in exploring what use they could possibly be put to, for example, 
as officer material for the armed forces or as diplomats.
In seeking to describe the special differentiation form of stratified 
societies, we must first abandon or limit the concept of stratification cur­
rent in sociology. The term is usually applied to a hierarchy of positions 
of every sort that is based on the differentiating distribution of material 
and immaterial advantages, even where the concept is used not in “class-
theory” terms in the context of criticizing inequitable distribution, but in 
connection with theories of differentiation.165 In contrast, I apply the term 
to the internal system differentiation of society and speak of stratification 
where and to the extent that subsystems of society differentiate themselves 
from other systems of their intrasocietal environment in terms of differ­
ence in rank. And stratificatory differentiation has primacy only where 
other modes of differentiation (above all, the segmentary differentiation of 
family households) are geared to stratification.
Stratification also developed, not through the decomposition of a 
whole into parts (as it has mostly been described in the literature), but as 
a result of an upper stratum differentiating out and closing itself off. Clo­
sure was achieved primarily through endogamy (which was, however, often 
infringed). But the upper stratum of society also had to “distinguish” itself 

Differentiation    
semantically from the lower stratum—from a lower class that, of course, 
initially did not even know it was or was becoming one. Therefore only 
the upper class needed an elaborated special semantics, a specified self-­
description, genealogies, and awareness of its characteristics. This is why it 
is easier to recognize the upper stratum than the lower stratum in histori­
cal retrospect. Homogeneity was a matter of elaborated criteria in the first 
case, but in the second, it was the result of living at the subsistence level. The 
upper class was selective in terms of way of life, style, and taste. The lower 
class had to cope with the necessities of life. The upper class kept hunting 
dogs, the lower class, mules; the upper class slept late, the lower class had to 
be up before dawn.166 The upper class was “susceptible de plusieurs formes,” 
as one observer put it with regard to the “ame bien née,” going on to re­
mark disdainfully of the lower class: “il y a du rustique et du stupide d’estre 
tellement pris à ses complexions qu’on ne puisse jamais en relacher un seul 
point.”167 Of course, any descriptions of the lower class (rare as they are) 
were descriptions by the upper class; just as any descriptions of women were 
descriptions by men.
Subsystem formation that was recognizable to everyone involved and 
communicatively practicable required intrastratum homogeneity across 
differences in rank to be differentiated externally, and this differentiation 
form could be said to enjoy primacy only if it could be upheld for all situ­
ations as a way of life, as an ethos. This took place formally through de­
scription of the noble way of life.168 It implies the assertion of a difference 
in rank imposed in the conduct and behavior of social strata toward one 
another.169 However, intrastratum similarity is not to be understood as 
spreading harmony and concord; it structured and increased the prospect 
of both cooperation and conflict, and precisely the old European aristo­
cratic ethos with its stress on values such as valor and honestas, as well as its 
educational aims such as eloquentia did indeed exhibit pugnacious traits. 
Cooperation and conflict were based on the segregation of the upper class, 
and thus on the concentrated disposal over resources.
However much moral criteria were stressed, indeed, emphasized 
as the sole correct basis for characterizing nobility, this naturally cannot 
mean that the distinction between nobles and commoners is to be equated 
with the distinction between moral and immoral. As elsewhere, system 
differentiation made greater differentiation possible in other regards—
classifications, distinctions.170 But vertical classification could lead to 

 
  Differentiation
power ascriptions or to moral judgments that were not in line with reality. 
And here, too, selectivity and the preoccupation of the discussion on cri­
teria with the upper class had its effect: it presented what was expected of 
the nobility and took the distinction between upper and lower classes for 
granted. The lower class might well have lived by other moral standards.
The general implications of stratification for all circumstances of life 
and for cooperation and conflict are shown by the fact that membership 
of a social stratum was determined by birth, in other words by family and 
person: stratification regulated the inclusion of people in society by deter­
mining inclusion in and exclusion from subsystems. An individual could 
belong to only one class, and this membership excluded him from other 
classes. This being-relation that defined the noble as such was recast in terms 
of nature. The quality of the nobility was “inherent and naturall.”171 This 
may be surprising given the practice of awarding and recognizing titles; but 
in the view of the time the king acted as iudex [judge]. ­Ennoblement was 
thus a matter of “recognizing” quality, not of performing a constitutive act 
of will. Moreover, the old European concept of nature covered the case of 
a nature that knew itself and thus motivated itself to comply with its own 
nature. What is more, nature was set in this context not against artifice but 
against opinion, and therefore excluded nobility from being constituted by 
mere self- or third-party assessment.
Stratification in Europe was based largely on legal distinctions. But it 
was also confirmed by what was to be seen in everyday life. It was demon­
strated by differences in clothing, behavior, and accommodation. This visi­
bility made planned intervention possible, including urban planning on the 
basis of stratificatory differentiation.172 Whatever in the field of norms was 
susceptible to deviation, and thus to criticism, was given facticity and put 
in evidence in the tangible world. This substantiated that the individual was 
not the issue but the necessary visible manifestation of the order of society.
A person was recognized as noble if born into a noble family, and the 
family was recognized as noble if its forebears were born noble. No plebeian 
could become noble simply through moral virtuosity.173 That would really 
have sown confusion. A peasant remained a peasant however capable and 
wealthy he might be,174 and a philosopher was also only a philosopher.175 
In antiquity, such views had been concealed by the assumption that origin 
(archē) determined essence [Wesen] and that descent (as displayed in gene­
alogies) consequently guaranteed similarity of nature. Until well into early 

Differentiation    
modern times, the past—in this context the excellence of one’s ancestors—
belonged to the present in a way difficult for us to imagine today. Even au­
thors who saw outstanding ability as the essence of nobility assumed that 
the memory and model of ancestors sufficed to make descendants noble as 
well.176 Especially in Athens, the “democratization” of the nobility concept 
(the aretē [excellence or virtue] of every citizen) merely extended but did 
not suspend the notion. In the Middle Ages this tradition was preserved 
as a textual tradition, but supplemented by stronger juridification through 
the dependence of rights on status. This decidedly legal arrangement also 
shows that the accompanying discussion about the moral qualities of the 
nobility was meant to legitimate status, not define it.177 The criterion of 
birth had played a both indispensable and questionable role, and most 
contemporary literature on nobility addressed the consequent problems. 
In a very influential passage, Aristotle referred to old wealth (i.e., acquired 
by birth) and virtue as criteria of “noble birth.”178 These two criteria were 
often coupled. When, for example, merit (mérite) was mentioned, birth 
was often connoted as meritorious in itself. And if virtue was stressed as a 
criterion of nobility (particularly in the Italian Renaissance), it did not au­
tomatically pave the way to advancement, and where it did, it was the old, 
enduring virtue that was called for.179 The descent-virtue schema should 
therefore not be interpreted in the sense of old-new. Whoever wished to 
earn merit without being well-born had to learn first how it was done, and 
all his life he was marked as a man who practiced what he had learned. 
Thus the link between wealth and virtue or birth and merit for Aristotle 
and all who followed him was considered normal, so that deviations could 
be recognized and eliminated; it was in keeping with nature.
There was naturally no overlooking the fact that these criteria were 
not necessarily consistent, and that there were black sheep even among 
noble progeny;180 what mattered in the first place was to settle what was 
expected of whom. The nobility had accordingly to be prepared by up­
bringing for their prescribed way of life. Apart from giving him an appro­
priate education, care had to be taken that the noble was not corrupted 
by work, by keeping too long hours, or by hunger;181 inherited wealth was 
needed for this purpose. The moral form of the additional component also 
ensured structural protection: if a noble went wrong, he was to blame and 
not society, indeed, not even his family. At a time when the nobility had 
already become an institution of the state, it could finally even be admitted 

 
  Differentiation
that the criterion of birth served only legal purposes: it enabled people to 
be clearly assigned to social strata.182 This in turn excluded vices not pun­
ishable by law as grounds for losing noble status; for, according to Henry 
Peacham, for one,183 vice was too widespread.
The twin criteria of birth and virtue also showed that it would be 
wrong to define traditional societies as those in which status was ascribed 
and modern societies as those in which status was achieved.184 As our ex­
ample shows, the distinction itself makes sense above all for societies that 
regulate inclusion through stratification and for this very reason draw at­
tention to special merit.185 It is therefore not only the one side of this 
distinction that is particularly stressed. In Parsons’s terminology, the “di­
mension” of quality/performance attracts special attention, while other 
pattern variables are less in view. For modern society, geared to individual 
careers, this distinction is less important. It can at best be argued that as­
criptions can “nevertheless” not quite be eliminated.
Finally, the form of concrete inclusion that took the total person into 
account also determined how morality was presented in the literature. The 
models held up for emulation were kings, princes, or other persons of the 
highest birth, for they alone could reasonably be claimed to be inwardly 
free of the shackles of life, they alone had a destiny of their own. At the 
same time and for this very reason, their destiny was fully their own. There 
was no difference (depending on the awareness situation) between ascrib­
able and nonascribable aspects, and therefore no difference between mer­
ited and unmerited destiny. This may have to do with the circumstance 
that in the oral epics, the heroes were treated as ancestors of either the tribe 
or the patron who had ordered the recitation—and not as exemplary indi­
viduals.186 The “exemplariness” of the heroes and above all their use in the 
context of noble genealogies was already to be found in societies with an 
oral tradition, but was then to be fixed and selectively systematized in writ­
ing under the constraints of consistency.187 This showed itself in a moral­
ity more strongly attributable to principles of behavior, to attitudes, to an 
ethos; not only in the praiseworthy efforts of heroes but also in their ability 
to accept their fate. This “fatalistic” aspect could then be commended to 
the lower classes, who had no choice in the matter anyway.
Despite the importance of intrastratum similarity (e.g., dueling eli­
gibility [Satisfaktionsfähigkeit]) it should not be assumed that the classes 
perceived their relationship as one of dissimilarity; for this would presup­

Differentiation    
pose that the members of one class could compare themselves with mem­
bers of another on the basis of common criteria, finally to conclude that 
they are dissimilar. In the abstract definitions of the ordo principle, we find 
the distinction between similar and dissimilar; for ordo means above all 
harmony despite dissimilarity. Moreover, reflections on the subject of jus­
tice following Aristotle required a distinction to be made between similar 
and dissimilar.188 But for the everyday understanding of the time, it was 
simply a matter of different sorts, different kinds of people, and other­
ness was a quality, not a relation. The legal order therefore knew no over­
arching precept of similarity and considered it quite normal for unlawful 
acts, particularly criminal offenses, committed by higher-ranking persons 
against lower-ranking victims to be judged differently than in the converse 
case.189 The “tit for tat” rule in dealings across differences in rank found 
just as little application. Differences between people were not perceived in 
terms of the similar/dissimilar schema, but in terms of differing rights and 
duties toward one another. And this distinction was then “moralized.”190 
In the event of disturbances in relations, unrest, and rebellions, there were 
no leveling tendencies (which always announced the transition to mod­
ern society) but only reactions to deterioration in one’s own situation that 
was blamed on the other side.191 Members of another social stratum were 
different from oneself; they were of different birth and of different qual­
ity. This was taught not least by the organism metaphor then so popular. 
Even nowadays, no one would think of describing head and stomach as 
“dissimilar.” One rather prefers to waive any comparison between organ­
ism and society.
Differentiation in terms of social stratum did not mean that, com­
pared with segmentary societies, subsystems were more independent of 
one another. The opposite was true. More demanding forms of differentia­
tion—and this is particularly true for functionally differentiated modern 
society—always have to be able to combine enhanced independence with 
enhanced dependence; thus restricting even more the range of forms then 
still possible. In other words, each form of differentiation requires and de­
velops forms of structural coupling adapted to it; that is to say, forms that 
intensify contacts and hence mutual irritations between subsystems while 
excluding or marginalizing other possibilities.
The form in stratified societies that channeled dependence and made it 
compatible with independence was the “economic” unit of the household.192 

 
  Differentiation
The household, as supply and distribution community, was close to con­
sumption, so that its interests were obvious. The roles provided for, even 
when written records on what was expected of each existed, were geared to 
face-to-face interaction and were subject to moral judgment. The special 
function of the household for the structural coupling of independence and 
dependence in relations between classes could explain why in Europe the rel­
atives of the head of the household were not in turn differentiated internally 
by rank. Indeed, there is not even a special concept or term for demarcating 
and denoting the noble family (in the present-day sense of “family”) within 
the household.193 The doctrine that wife, children and servants were subject 
to the head of the household sufficed, but this did not lead to the conclu­
sion that there were differences in social rank within the core family;194 the 
latter was regarded rather as a part of a broader kinship context covering 
many households. At the already relatively large princely courts of the late 
Middle Ages, the familia of the prince was a narrower circle of intimates, to 
which, for example, scholars or artists could be admitted by formally declar­
ing them familiaris. This served as a form of distinction, if not the first step 
toward ennoblement, but clearly had nothing to do with kinship.195
The importance of households for stratified societies cannot be over­
estimated. Households, not individuals, were the entities with which 
stratification had to do. That they were ordered therefore had to be presup­
posed—both in the kinship relations of the family in the narrower sense 
and in relations with household staff. In order to copy the societal hierar­
chy into the household, corresponding relations of rank within the house­
hold were required, differentiated in terms of the schemata husband-wife 
(lord-lady), father-children, master-servant. In this order, the subordina­
tion of the wife to the husband was inevitable (which naturally had noth­
ing to do with actual power relations). Whoever placed value on equality 
of the sexes therefore had to practice celibacy or recommend a household­
less community of women.196
Another function for the order of households was to provide op­
portunities for individual mobility. Individual upward mobility was indis­
pensable for demographic reasons alone, but also because of conspicuous 
differences in ability. As long as the fixed localization of households in es­
tates was upheld and the age of the family contributed to its social rank, 
mobility could be accepted as an exception, even though it occurred rel­
atively frequently in times of demographic or political crisis. According 

Differentiation    
to the basic principle of estate-based society, rank ascription was fixed 
and mobility was permissible at best on extrasystemic grounds: families 
died out, positions had to be filled, and individual ennoblement was styl­
ized as “recognition,” as correction of a natural ascription error. However, 
with the consolidation of modern territorial states, ennoblement became 
a more and more frequent, calculated act. The mobility of the system was 
increased for intrasystemic (mainly political) reasons.
Finally, the household was the system for which society could pro­
vide relatively great (albeit essentially respectful) liberty of interaction such 
as political society could never allow itself. In the household, members 
of various classes, dependents and nondependents, worked together. And 
above all women found their place and recognition. Unlike in the Indian 
caste system, no complicated system of contact rituals was needed for this 
purpose. And unlike in China, the household with its welfare/promotion 
and deference/obedience structure was not also a religious community (an­
cestor worship) and consequently not a model for society as a whole.197 
The strict separation of politics and economics kept the two types of sys­
tem apart; for political purposes only the independence and availability 
of the head of the household was taken over from the household order. 
Responsibility for their own economy, for their own livelihood was there­
fore among the political duties of those who constituted political society 
(thus, “reentry” of the distinction between economics and politics into 
politics).198 This was also the case when judicial and other public functions 
were performed in the household of the nobility while the head was absent 
on a diplomatic mission or lived at court. In any case, this channeling of 
the mutual dependence between social strata was in turn based on the seg­
mentary differentiation of households and thus on a structural separation 
that now, however, was of secondary importance from a social (or should 
we rather say “political”) point of view. It was not done in good society to 
chat about one’s own household.
The normative structure of the household stressed the necessity of 
government (=order) and the right to a livelihood. These claims could be 
differentiated by class; they were thus adapted to stratificatory differen­
tiation. But not to the money economy. With the transition to a money 
economy and the growing dependence of manorial economies on the 
market, standards began to waver, resulting in growing conflict between 
the expectations of landlords entitled to service and the rural population 

 
  Differentiation
under obligation to provide it, but also with a right to their own liveli­
hood.199 Only the modern concept of property brought an (often quite 
violent) solution to such conflicts.
In a broader sense, transcending the economic function of the 
household, patron-client relationships performed a similar function.200 
They made it explicitly possible to exploit differences in rank to the mu­
tual advantage of the parties. They were suitable for linking the country 
with political centers but, over and above this, quite generally for mobi­
lizing voluntary personal help. Like the uncle-nephew relationships to be 
found in segmentary societies, their crucial function was to bridge differ­
ences, which is where their attraction and advantages lay. Patron-client re­
lationships reorganized reciprocity for this purpose, taking stratification 
for granted. They also served to mediate between the order of stratifica­
tion and the emerging territorial state.201 This was particularly important 
because, with the exception of courts, there were no local administrative 
organizations to which the center could have issued instructions. In the six­
teenth century, the printing press opened up an alternative. It was to offer 
other possibilities of information,202 enable the emergence of a new “po­
litical humanism” (Thomas More, Erasmus of Rotterdam, Claude ­Seyssel) 
independent of service at court,203 and in religious matters, it was to rec­
ommend the population to follow other magnets than the magnates.204
To begin with, stratification required a simple difference, that be­
tween the nobility and the common people. There were people with and 
without dignitas.205 Asymmetry was intensified by keeping numbers low 
and increasing access to resources at the top. In this context, differenti­
ations developed within differentiations, above all, refined distinctions 
within the nobility important for marriage purposes or in ceremonial mat­
ters, but that can hardly be considered subsystems within subsystems. It 
was only when society became more complex in the thirteenth century 
that a clear difference emerged between the high nobility and the low no­
bility, which was then to generate further distinctions.206 Differences in 
rank of various sorts also developed among commoners.207 Greater eco­
nomic mobility and the capacity for protest among dependents (slaves, 
serfs, coloni, and others required to perform labor), as well as the demand 
for labor on the manor and in urban crafts generated a need for new dis­
tinctions in the “late feudalism” period, even in the lowest stratum of so­
ciety. When the political literature mentioned populus, popolo, peuple, or 

Differentiation    
“people,” it was usually referring to independent householders, and here, 
too, marriages were made in keeping with the rank of the partner, espe­
cially in terms of dowry and property. On the two sides of the basic dis­
tinction, it is difficult to discern further subsystems in subsystems. Instead, 
the distinction between city and country comes to bear. Criteria for addi­
tional differentiation also differ depending on the underlying estate order: 
among the nobility largely artificial and ceremonial differences in rank 
were upheld, among the urban classes, distinctions were made in terms 
of occupation, and among peasants, after the lapse of feudal status defini­
tions, in terms of the amount of land owned. At any rate, the repetition of 
ranking within the systems separated by differences in rank made rank an 
everyday experience, and in all aspects of life, people were well advised to 
find out and take into account whether the contact they were making was 
upward, downward, or among equals. In the terminology of the time, this 
required “political” knowledge.
In comparison, the theory of the three estates (clergy, nobility, and 
the third estate) was a semantic artifact.208 In fact, the higher clergy was 
recruited from the nobility and offered little opportunity (presumably no 
more than the military) for advancement.209 The “third estate” was only a 
contrasting concept—the “unmarked space” from which the nobility was 
distinguished. The theory of the three estates therefore concealed the fun­
damental duality of stratificatory difference, serving to represent a func­
tional distinction (orare, pugnare, laborare), describing differences in moral 
expectations, and then, with emergence of the territorial state, differences in 
legal position. And because of the very clarity with which these characteris­
tics were set out, it plainly documented the obsolescence of the old world.
All societies have to withstand demographic pressures. Segmentary 
societies do so by remaining independent of their own size, by growing 
and shrinking and by hiving off segments or accepting new segments. 
In stratified societies, a high degree of mobility between social strata is 
added to balance out demographic losses in the upper class. And even if 
the life expectancy of the nobility was likely to have been higher than in 
other strata of society, all the more nobles died without offspring in war 
or cloister. It is now accepted that stratification was compatible with high 
mobility for the individual and the individual family.210 High childhood 
mortality, epidemics, and violent death would have forbidden inhibiting 
mobility. This is particularly evident when one considers that individu­

 
  Differentiation
alized family interests were at stake. The distinction between virtue and 
birth as noble qualities that had persisted since the Middle Ages apparently 
served to structure social advancement interests and thus to inform and 
legitimate political ennoblement.211 The question could only be how mo­
bility was controlled and how the leveling of stratification through mass 
upward and downward mobility was to be prevented. In China, this had 
been achieved through the top-down promotion of individuals (sponsor­
ship). In Europe, the more status-conscious rule (undermined by regional 
exceptions) held that a man who married above or below his station could 
not acquire the rank of his wife. This allowed relaxation of the endogamy 
rule and in individual cases permitted necessary adjustments (above all 
in the high nobility) by politically raising the rank of the lucky aspirants. 
Generally speaking, advancement was not to be justified on purely eco­
nomic grounds.212 However, there is also no disputing that creditors of the 
crown were often compensated with titles of nobility, and impoverished 
nobles could fertilize their fields by marrying daughters of the wealthy 
bourgeoisie. Not least of all, ennoblement could be used as a territorial 
policy tool—for example, in consolidating the Savoyard territories ruled 
from Turin into a modern territorial state with the aid of ennoblements 
and in the statutory regulation of nobility status,213 the reception of the 
Bohemian nobility in Vienna after the Thirty Years’ War, or the ennoble­
ment of Scottish clan chieftains by the English crown as a reward for be­
trayal. All this was accepted but corrected by particular esteem for old 
families and by a delay of generations in acceptance of the new nobility. 
But delaying recognition meant that families and not only individuals had 
to prove their worth. On the whole, society overestimated the stringency 
of its divisions and thus the statics of its structure by regarding shifts from 
one rank to another as special cases.
That mobility was more likely to be upward than downward is obvi­
ous for demographic reasons alone. Only the small upper class, not the rest 
of the population, had to compensate for losses, and there was naturally 
more interest in rising than falling. But there was the problem of the im­
poverishment of noble families, who were unable to maintain their accus­
tomed way of life. And there was the legal institution of dérogeance, which 
stripped nobles of their titles for engaging in socially degrading activities, 
notably trade or nonagricultural production. This ban and the sanctions it 
entailed could not really be enforced, even in France, if only for reasons of 

Differentiation    
regional differences;214 but it obviously had to be insisted on because the 
exemption from taxes enjoyed by the nobility could not be extended with­
out limitation to trade and industry.
The often claimed (and in older society also noted) contradiction be­
tween stratification and mobility is, however, an artifact of observation and 
description. It arises only if the social system of society is taken to consist 
of people who might then change their social status. If, by contrast, we as­
sume that society merely reproduces communication, the problem solves 
itself. To remain stable, internal differentiation then only required stable 
regulation of communication with a distinction between inside and out­
side, and this stability was compatible with strong fluctuation in member­
ship as long as new arrivals knew or could learn what was important for 
their new status. Although society could then recognize when its mode of 
differentiation was threatened by too much mobility and could attempt to 
counter it by isolation (as it did especially in the late sixteenth and early 
seventeenth centuries), the increase or decrease in mobility for one reason 
or another was in itself no indicator of instability in stratificatory differen­
tiation. Indeed, mobility and adequate elasticity safeguarded the old dif­
ferentiation form. What obviously could not occur was for an entire class 
to rise as a whole in rank.215 But if the old order was not destroyed by the 
rise of a new class, what did bring about its demise?
7. The Outdifferentiation of Functional Systems
My answer is the “outdifferentiation” [Ausdifferenzierung] of func­
tional systems.216 In the context of evolution theory, we must first accept 
the extreme improbability of individual functional systems endowed with 
autopoietic autonomy differentiating out of society, let alone the overall 
system of society transferring primacy to functional differentiation, pro­
cesses that set off irreversible, self-dependent structural changes. It makes 
little sense to ask why no capitalist economy developed in the agrarian em­
pires of world history217—as if there were a natural trend toward rational 
economic activity that was somehow inhibited, only to be set free in me­
dieval Europe. Instead, I assume that we are dealing with the emergence 
of a new form of societal differentiation that is based on neither segmen­
tary nor rank differentiation (tending rather to destroy them) and that can 
therefore find no support in the society in which it develops.218

 
  Differentiation
It is difficult to date the beginnings because they can hardly be dis­
tinguished from what we call preadaptive advances. The semantics of 
implementation—hardly surprisingly—initially drew on traditional con­
ceptuality. What is important is that at some point or other, the recursiv­
ity of autopoietic reproduction began to take hold and achieved closure, 
after which only politics counted for politics, only art for art, only aptitude 
and willingness to learn for education, only capital and profit for the econ­
omy, and the corresponding intrasocietal environments—which included 
stratification—were now seen only as irritating noise, as disturbances or 
opportunities.
It can be assumed that the pronounced stratificatory differentiation 
that developed in the course of the Middle Ages with the emergence of an 
“estate-based” society initially favored the switch to functional differentia­
tion. For stratificatory differentiation made it possible to concentrate re­
sources in the upper stratum of the system—not only economic resources 
but also those in the media of power and truth. Among other things, it 
allowed the politico-legal regulation of “dependent” labor, partly in the 
country, but also in the forms of guilds with their own hierarchical struc­
tures. Where not tied to the Church, such resources could be used innova­
tively and had fixed legal form. Especially for Europe, this made property 
particularly important, the meaning of which had shifted since the four­
teenth century from possession to availability.219 Even today, “class society” 
is still often understood in terms of property. However, there was an acute 
scarcity of labor in the fourteenth and early fifteenth century due to the 
plague, which obliged many landowners to lease out their land to peasants 
and to make do with a correspondingly reduced income (not all the prob­
lems of the nobility in the late Middle Ages were due to incipient func­
tional differentiation). However, the status of legally secured property was 
not affected by the problems of working the land.
Another, equally important precondition was likely to have been that 
kinship relations in Europe had not developed clan structures. The indi­
vidual family remained isolated. There was therefore no safety net to bal­
ance out differences in needs and capabilities and to regulate everyday life. 
Where clan structures developed, they could protect daily life from the in­
trusion of market orientations, legal regulation, and political intervention. 
This cushioning effect was not necessarily absolute; but it did hinder recur­
sively operating functional systems from developing for the economy, the 

Differentiation    
law, and politics. In Europe, trends toward functional system formation 
were able to penetrate everyday behavior and to reward innovation (e.g., in 
agricultural technology) individually through market success, and the law 
was able to amplify such developments by imposing restrictions.
What made functional differentiation unusual was not least that spe­
cific functions and their communication media had to concentrate in a 
subsystem with universal competence; hence in a new combination of uni­
versalism and specification. The Middle Ages had managed with role dif­
ferentiation and with semantic distinctions. Because the unity of society 
was ensured by stratification, different forms of truth (e.g., religious, phil­
osophical, rhetorical) were tolerated within the medium of truth; or within 
the medium of money, different currency systems were accepted for local 
trade and long-distance commerce with conversion rates that differed lo­
cally; or within the medium of power, different islands of politically rel­
evant power formation were accommodated, namely, the Holy Roman 
Empire, the Church, cities, and territorial states. However, the resulting 
coordination difficulties within functions grew, and the reaction was an at­
tempt to improve the internal coordination of functional systems, to give 
them a monopoly of the given communication medium and to waive co­
ordination between them; the fiction of an enduring hierarchical order hid 
the seriousness and “catastrophic” nature of this reorganization until well 
into the eighteenth century.
Nor can it be presupposed that society was redivided by a sort of 
structural revolution and thus converted to functional differentiation. It 
is hardly conceivable that the switch from one form of differentiation to 
another could follow a plan. Differentiations began in a societal environ­
ment that favored them. They were not necessarily mutually presupposed, 
even though the sequence in which they took place was not accidental. 
This process gave rise to numerous difficulties in relations between func­
tional systems—problems occurred and solutions were found, and struc­
tural and semantic innovations took place, testing the new order before it 
became established. Unlike in China, empire building in Europe was pre­
vented by resistance from the Church, by rejection of a political theocracy; 
and this also excluded the political control of far-reaching economic rela­
tions (that is, trade).220 Already in the Middle Ages, the money economy 
had eluded territorial-political control and organized an international di­
vision of labor, which in turn affected the political destiny of territories.221 

 
  Differentiation
The unity of imperium and dominium, of command and landownership, 
was lost. The machinery of government had to tap new sources of money, 
and this is likely to have been one of the factors that destabilized the dual 
bureaucracy of secular and ecclesiastical rule, which had been based each 
on separate landownership.
The prevention of theocratic empire building in Europe made it pos­
sible to use regional, linguistic, and cultural differences to experiment with 
approaches to functional differentiation.222 The transition to agricultural 
and craft production, and finally to industrial production for a market, 
could not take place everywhere at the same time. A system for art dif­
ferentiated out in Italy in the fifteenth century under the quite untypical, 
special conditions of competition among small princely courts and repub­
lics,223 and the emergence of an art market in England in the late seven­
teenth century profited from the exceptional situation that collectors in 
the British Isles were dependent on imports. The Protestant schism, along 
with the religiously motivated interest in art policy and education followed 
the borders traced by military conflict and politically frozen. The law was 
celebrated as a national peculiarity only—but decidedly—in the common 
law of England, and in this manner secured against the Crown in a devel­
opment from Coke to Mansfield, which in turn prevented any notion of a 
written constitution from taking root.
From the late Middle Ages on, there were differentiations on a re­
gionally limited (and therefore less risky) basis that had a functional ori­
entation and were no longer subject to hierarchical stratification. The 
changes mainly affected the nobility, not in the form of competition from 
another upper stratum, but through the gradual devaluation of the dif­
ference that separated the nobility from the common people. Among the 
rural population and craftsmen in the cities, it can be assumed that con­
ditions remained the same until well into the modern age. This was the 
case for family formation, religious ties, and the legal organization of liv­
ing conditions. Initially at risk was above all the segment differentiated 
out of society whose emergence had constituted the form and evolution­
ary improbability of stratificatory differentiation: the upper class. Despite 
the stress on the accustomed differences in rank, only this upper stratum 
had to face the fact that the emerging functional systems did not have 
to rely on the nobility, and that the nobility could have no part in their 
differentiation.

Differentiation    
Already in the fifteenth century, politics in the territorial states gained 
remarkable independence of religion—even in the face of the spectacular 
conflict between emperor and pope and the conciliar conflict within the 
Church. It had the councils observed by its emissaries and came to treat 
religious disputes more and more as political issues, even as political op­
portunities.224 Since massive promotion by the printing press, that is to say, 
since the sixteenth century, science had also been taking its distance from 
religion—for example, through an emphatically propounded concept of 
nature, by exercising a liberty of skepticism and inquisitive innovation that 
could have been brought to bear neither in politics nor in religion. The law 
was activated for many of the problems produced by this development, 
for example, in the form of property and contract law for the freedom 
needed in the money economy, or public law for the transition to reli­
gious tolerance, and through these very services, it gained independence 
from political power. Such tensions and changes caught the attention of 
contemporaries. At the same time, they concealed the fact that an overall 
movement developed in these conflicts between emerging functional sys­
tems, namely, the parallel differentiation of a multiplicity of functional 
systems. And only when enough functions of the societal system were cov­
ered could the new order be interpreted on its own terms.
Just as in the transition from tribal to highly cultivated societies, the 
conditions of transformation can best be identified through the structural 
problems of the differentiation form realized. We look first at the political 
system, which as it differentiated out came to call itself the “state.”
There had long been political government in both empires and cities, 
but only in the transition from the late Middle Ages to early modernity did 
it experience marked new impetus in differentiation that made it indepen­
dent of stratification. In the older order, political government seemed to be 
the order of society itself. The alternative to it would have been chaos. The 
ruler was an element in a cosmologically grounded order, which as nature 
and morality set him limits. The knowledge demanded of the ruler was 
therefore primarily knowledge of his own virtuous competence.225 In Latin 
terminologies that distinguish between rex and tyrannus, the ruler is the le­
gitimate ruler alone. The same holds for potestas.226 And when dominium 
is mentioned, this term suggested inclusion of disposal over economic re­
sources, but always within the framework of the law.227 The bold charac­
terizations of the prince as above the law and entitled to make law at will 

 
  Differentiation
were political rhetoric, misunderstood quotes from Roman thought, and 
never really influenced state practices.
The real problems lay not in the legal order, which could be modi­
fied as need be; they lay in the relation of political government to the dif­
ferentiation form of society, to stratification. In maintaining that only the 
legitimate prince was a prince (and the tyrant consequently was no prince 
but a misfortune, a divine punishment, an evil to be eliminated), the legal 
order guaranteed the right of resistance. And the nobility naturally claimed 
the right to judge for itself and decide accordingly. This had been the mo­
tive for the struggles for liberation conducted by the Dutch against the 
Spaniards, and to begin with for the English revolution in the 1630s,228 
which then, however, took a different course. Even Richelieu had difficult 
in combating this view. In a way, it could itself no longer grasp, no longer 
observe or describe, the law served to uphold the primacy of stratificatory 
differentiation.
From a structural point of view, this corresponded to the enduring 
problem of political rivalry. The ruler could be replaced at any time by a 
rival—from his own family, from the high nobility, by an external poten­
tate, a military adventurer, the head of his own administration. Machia­
velli having provided the new prince, in particular, with good (some would 
say bad) counsel, the raison d’État literature around 1600 was still preoccu­
pied by this problem, thus hindering separation of dynastic interests and 
the interests of the state.229
But political rivalry depended on stratification. It required aspirants 
to be preselected by the upper class (even if Caesarian characters were occa­
sionally able to exploit special opportunities), while stratified society pro­
vided constant cause for rivals to put in an appearance. If the will was 
there, the occasion would present itself—dissatisfaction could always be 
mobilized. The position of the nobility was based on its own economy, 
on autonomous, armed households and a corresponding following. What 
was to be done and not done was decided by the lord himself. He saw his 
relationship with the king as one of followership [Anhängigkeit] not de­
pendence [Abhängigkeit]. He could terminate his followership should the 
king’s conduct give him reason to do so. In such cases, it was much easier 
to form alliances and build up political rivals, for the circle of people in­
volved was small and able to interact. In precisely this sense, the king had 
only legitimate potestas.

Differentiation    
Under these circumstances, real politics was made and exploited 
above all in patron-client relationships—partly to generate loyalty in one’s 
own territory, partly to intervene conspiratorially in other territories.230 
The resource available to the prince was the award of titles and offices; 
other prominent figures were limited to a mediatory role. This was partic­
ularly the case in a period of transition when the state still had no reliable 
local civil service to do its bidding, but was also no longer able to rely on 
the power of the nobility localized in ownership of the land. Thus, with the 
aid of centralized patronage, local client systems developed, which the pa­
tron used—or not—in the service of the central authority.231 By present-
day criteria, this system would be described as “corruption,”232 but it had 
the important advantage for further development of creating, along with 
interest in political selection, opportunities for advancement independent 
of birth. Although tied to hierarchical notions of order, patron-client rela­
tions, constantly having to be renewed, already undermined the stratifica­
tory differentiation of society.
Against this background, the Tugendspiegel [mirrors of virtue] for 
princes and courtiers reflected something else, as well, namely, the fear of 
rivalry. The typical ambivalence to be found in catalogs of virtues (strict­
ness and leniency, thrift and generosity, justice and equity) called for ac­
tion commensurate with the situation. The raison d’État literature was also 
to address this problem—for example, with the recommendation not to 
enforce the law if doing so were to lead to dangerous unrest or if the op­
ponents were too strong. Prudentia was the appropriate concept. The term 
denoted the astuteness of taking into account that there is a past and a fu­
ture, and both good and bad people. Concepts such as prudentia or ratio 
status recommended the ruler to exercise simulation and dissimulation. He 
had, it was said, to preserve the secrets of power (arcana imperii). But the 
secret of authority was that it was none.
By the mid-seventeenth century, the conditions for constantly moni­
toring rivalry had ceased to apply.233 Although it would take a long time 
before the political system itself adopted the principle of rivalry under the 
heading “political opposition,” thus earning the right to call itself “democ­
racy” (also in a new sense of the term), what this was to codify had first 
be installed; and this took place in the form of the administrative state 
and the rule of law [Rechtsstaat].234 In the course of this development, 
the nobility, as well as the political system, had to renounce the idea that 

 
  Differentiation
ethical virtue, determined by the values of the nobility, could find direct 
expression in political activity. The resistance to Machiavelli’s ideas shows 
how difficult this renunciation was. The result was that politics conceded a 
­raison d’État of its own, with enclaves for immoral action (in emergencies). 
Morality, in contrast, was privatized in accordance with a long-standing 
teaching of the Church.
The feudal-law heritage of the Middle Ages manifested itself above 
all in the enduring legal quality of noble status. In the Holy Roman Em­
pire, political developments (and not, for example, an evolution of the 
stratification system as such) divided the nobility into the princely or at 
least “immediate” nobility [reichsunmittelbar, subject directly to the em­
pire] and the nobility of the territorial states, who had to find some sort of 
arrangement with the given territorial sovereign, whereas the imperial no­
bility [Reichsadel ], remaining a personal association, ossified in this form. 
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, this produced a legally com­
plicated, convoluted order of estates and states, which could be described 
neither as aristocratic rule nor as sovereign monarchy.235 In medieval Italy, 
local, urban republican disputes between the nobility and the people led 
to the development of widely differing political conditions, which pro­
voked first of all legal debate (Bartolus, Baldus), and after consolidation of 
the territorial states a semantico-ideological discussion236—both of which 
were to have a considerable impact on the nobility literature. The pre­
adaptive advances toward greater political commitment among the no­
bility included the practice of political ennoblement, first introduced on 
a large scale at the Burgundian court in a haze of knightly romanticism 
and civiltà, a notion imported from Italy.237 The legal form of dispensa­
tions and privileges is likely to have been just as important, marking that 
derogation from a generally binding legal state of affairs was possible for 
good reason. But this did not necessarily mean the nobility could be dis­
ciplined politically. Honor, for example, was an element still beyond the 
ambit of politics.238 Only the financial straits in which the nobility found 
themselves as the money economy spread were to make them more depen­
dent on politics, while bringing new problems for the territorial state: rec­
ognition of noble status now “applied” only for the territory in which the 
family was at home.239 However, comparative studies show that widely dif­
fering notions of nobility had been passed down in different countries,240 
so that nobles had to seek recognition of their status abroad as well as at 

Differentiation    
home. In France, the main reason behind efforts to obtain state recogni­
tion of the old nobility or to obtain a title was likely to have been tax ex­
emption.241 This required legal precision on the basis of highly detailed 
criteria.242 Offices to be filled politically also became an increasing prob­
lem for stratification—partly because competent applicants were preferred 
to the nobility, partly because a special type of nobility (noblesse de robe) 
emerged as a consequence.243 Not least of all, the many subtle distinctions 
within the nobility obliged the state to intervene in disputes, and it be­
came the practice to demand written evidence, which tended to consist in 
official documents and state registration.244 All this must gradually have 
given the nobility the idea that privilege depended on the state, and in the 
salons of the eighteenth century, formalities were accordingly no longer in­
sisted upon too rigorously.
The result of this transformation process found expression in the idea 
of the sovereign state. It was characterized by limitation of the limitations 
of state power. One now accepted only territorial borders, but then uncon­
ditionally. All other limitations ceased to apply, which only meant they 
were situationally politicized and entered into the political calculus of “rea­
son of state.” This task was the self-preservation of political power, which 
meant safeguarding the rule of the governing dynasty, but also and above 
all safeguarding territorial integrity. Like a net, this new principle of state 
borders was superimposed on the old order of stratification, obliging it to 
fit in with one state or another—above all, if the upper class wished to re­
tain political influence. Since the second half of the sixteenth century, the 
literature dealing with the nobility sought a compromise between nobil­
ity and the territorial state—strikingly in line with the reform of the rela­
tionship between religion and politics that found expression in the same 
period in the Council of Trent. The nobility was recommended as a state 
institution for disciplining government. It increasingly legitimized itself in 
terms of the commonweal, a formula also used by the political system. It 
now reserved itself only one “right,” which absorbed a great deal of energy, 
namely, the right in matters of honor to violate the law in duel. Agree­
ment was also reached, even among lawyers, that the law need not be en­
forced in all cases against high-ranking nobles.245 And in one well-known 
text [Montesquieu’s De l’esprit des lois], which already pronounced in favor 
of the separation of powers, we still find the statement: “point de monar­
che, point de noblesse; point de noblesse, point de monarche. Mais on a 

 
  Differentiation
un despote [no monarch, no nobility; no nobility, no monarch. But one 
has a despot].”246
The conduct of war was now also only a political problem. Society 
delegated the decision to the political system (which is still the case today, 
although weapons that can destroy mankind and politically uncontrolla­
ble local massacres are involved). Where religion showed a propensity for 
violent conflict to assert or generate the true faith, it had to find a politi­
cal proponent, and politics was increasingly reluctant to conduct wars of 
truth. Insofar as religion provoked aggression, this had to be fought out in 
“church political terms,” or subjectively internalized in the form of rigorist 
demands.247 Even religion became a differentiated system.
In the economy, a tendency toward functional differentiation de­
veloped quite differently. Once trade had developed beyond the traffic in 
prestige goods of tribal societies dealing in only few products, politics had 
nowhere managed to successfully monopolize or even control it or the 
profits gained. This was also the case for what Karl Polanyi248 has described 
as “redistributive” economic systems.249 In one way or another, the sta­
tus system of society had to come to terms with various bases for prestige, 
namely, nobility, politico-bureaucratic power, and commercial wealth, and 
it seems that stratification, which included marriage, operated as a tool for 
balancing out these tensions. This experience was repeated with the grow­
ing development of the money economy in the Middle Ages too. Politics 
and the economy could no longer be brought to coincide (even though the 
term dominium vacillated between the two). Government was not yet ter­
ritorially consolidated, and trade crossed boundaries wherever they were 
drawn. Not agriculture but the money economy (which in England al­
ready included agriculture) developed its own dynamics beyond political 
control. The donation and foundation economy of the early Middle Ages 
stagnated—despite efforts to give monetary expression to its salvation mo­
tives. The use of money increased so strongly in the course of the Middle 
Ages that much more was up for sale than today: salvation, government 
posts, state sources of income. Money seemed to be on its way to becom­
ing the medium. Structural relicts of the old distinction between house 
and trade began to manifest themselves as disturbances, for example, in 
the complicated currency and conversion problems of long-distance trade, 
which ultimately led to the invention of new financial instruments. Sur­
plus money that could no longer be employed in urban politics (as the 

Differentiation    
Medici had still been able to do on a large scale in the fourteenth century) 
forced itself on state and nobility, provoking the debt crises of the fif­
teenth and sixteenth centuries.250 Like the state, but with poorer prospects 
than the tax state, the nobility found itself in state of persistent imbalance. 
Nobles constantly had to make payments that generated their own insol­
vency; but they neither wished nor were permitted to make payments that 
enabled them to regain solvency through profitable investment. The no­
bility found itself more and more strongly involved in the economy that 
was differentiating out of society—but only on the debit side. ­Although 
the upper class had always had economic difficulties and required political 
refinancing, the simultaneous emergence of the economic system and the 
political system hampered the traditional symbiosis of politico-­economic 
resource control in the upper class, finally putting an end to it. This, too, 
may well have favored widespread tendencies to make recognition of no­
bility independent of fluctuating fortunes and instead to rely on state 
registration.
But this was not where the problem lay that affected the development 
of the economy itself. The innovation was not increasing dependence of 
the nobility on money but increasing independence of money from the no­
bility. Transactions mediated by markets rapidly multiplied in early mod­
ern times. The local or regional differentiation of markets was remolded or 
even replaced by commodity-specific (and thus purely economic) differ­
entiation of markets for silk, grain, and, finally, even for pictures, prints, 
and sculpture. The term “market” therefore ceased to be only a name for 
certain places where transactions were permitted, becoming the name of a 
form denoting the intrinsic logic of transactions on which no further social 
characteristics depend.251 Thus began the orientation of the economy on 
consumption, that is to say, on itself, that has persisted to this day. It freed 
the enhancement of economic performance from external directives, above 
all, from the resource demands of the upper class or from periodic famine, 
robbery, or war. These sources of demand retained their importance, but 
they now manifested themselves as consumption indicated by the mar­
ket, and thus as opportunities for production and investment. The driving 
force now lay in the complementary consumer and producer roles of the 
economy (like those in other areas, such as government/subject, teacher/
pupil, artist/connoisseur). The entire population was promised access to the 
one side of this role schema, in this case to consumption, depending not on 

 
  Differentiation
stratification but on purchasing power. The other was free for specialization 
qua organization or qua training and profession.
The economy learned to regenerate itself by systemic means, that is 
to say, through prices (including money prices = interest). It became in­
creasingly independent of the sources of wealth covered by stratification. 
From then on, the prices paid counted as the objective framework of all 
economic calculation and thus of all calculation in economics. Despite 
religious objections, the interest problem was solved, even though sensi­
tive souls remarked that one benefited from interest income even on Sun­
days.252 The gigantic flows of American precious metals in the sixteenth 
century were to be ascribed neither to social status nor to merit; they ar­
rived, as it were, by chance, and the consequences developed an initially 
incomprehensible dynamic of their own. The economy reacted with dis­
balances, with price increases, with the devaluation of precious metals, 
and hence by market processes. The classical means of placing money in 
luxury or war were at the same time a means of becoming indebted when 
prices were rising. The Dutch appear to have found a both astonishing 
and paradoxical solution. Precisely because they had no natural resources 
of their own, they had been able to build up a flourishing economy—a 
major enigma, especially for English economic theorists in the seventeenth 
century. That new financial instruments, new forms of money creation, 
could play a role was realized, but could not really be processed theoreti­
cally.253 The solution accordingly lay neither in state funding nor in costly 
and lucrative colonial expeditions but in developing product markets and 
investing in the appropriate means of production. This needed a purely 
economic form of calculation, with an eye to the profitability of invest­
ment, which required valorization of the profit motive. The economy was 
controlled, not by the feudal lord of the feudal lord, not by the prince 
as paramount owner; decisions were made on the basis of entrepreneur­
ial profit and loss considerations, so that sales, that is to say, the market, 
guided production. The outdifferentiation of the economic system was 
therefore first perceived in the intrinsic logic of trade,254 and Adam Smith 
still wrote of a “commercial society.” In the seventeenth century, the de­
bate on interest shifted from theologico-legal problems of permission to 
the internal economic consequences of charging interest. Work, too, was 
no longer the consequence of original sin, and thus a circumstance of life, 
but the condition and product of internal economic processes; a shift in 

Differentiation    
thinking was therefore necessary from the effort/leisure schema to the em­
ployment/unemployment schema. Ultimately, the markets now decided 
on success (and not diligence, good work, or the quality of English or Ital­
ian cloth), and everything—from wages and investment to monetary pol­
icy and public debt had to be subordinated to them.255
Regardless of whether the nobility was allowed to take part in busi­
ness with its own capital or not, the autopoiesis of the economy now devel­
oped in the sense of an independent, structurally determined system. The 
decisive factor was money payments. But money spent had to be replaced 
to maintain solvency. And if income from one’s own landed property did 
not suffice, if managed in the traditional manner, and political sources of 
money could not be multiplied at will, payments had to be calculated to 
bring monetary returns—in other words, one had to invest for profit. The 
economy left only one alternative to profitable production and to trade: 
paid work. This was out of the question for the nobility.
Meanwhile, the monetization of the economy had gone far beyond 
the basic field of monetary transactions (things could be acquired only for 
money). Above all, technologically demanding production required bigger 
and bigger capital input, some 25 to 30 percent of output. Such amounts of 
money could not be raised by reinvesting company profits alone. The level 
of borrowing increased and hence dependence on fluctuations in the inter­
national financial markets. Thus a world-society centralism emerged, which, 
however, manifested itself not in norms or directives but in fluctuations and 
consequently in the form of dissipative structures. It was on this develop­
ment that the Soviet Empire ultimately foundered, first economically and 
then politically.
These roughly outlined changes that developed as the economic 
system differentiated out clearly show how strongly this process had ini­
tially been determined by the stratified structure of society. Although long-­
distance trade with the notorious difficulties of allocating gains among the 
strata of society had been one of the most important starting points, it was 
the upper classes who were initially most affected by these changes. The 
lower strata of society were affected only after a considerable lapse of time. 
The privatization of common land and the emancipation of the peasantry—
both movements that put the full risk of production on the shoulders of the 
individual farmer—took full effect (with considerable regional differences) 
only in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In the industrial economy, 

 
  Differentiation
too, the share of home production—be it in craft undertakings or through 
a domestic system—decreased only gradually.256 The quantitative turning 
point came only in the nineteenth century (at least in Germany). And only 
then did it really make sense to shift the description of society from the se­
mantics of differentiation in terms of estates necessary for order to the prob­
lematic fatality of a class differentiation that could no longer be justified.
In the logic of capital and labor, the old differentiation form of strat­
ification no longer had a place. From the last third of the eighteenth cen­
tury, there was more and more talk of social classes, and Marx was to relate 
this terminology to the distinction between capital and labor.257 But this 
could only mean describing society as a whole from the special perspective 
of the economy.
The widespread complaints about the luxury of the upper classes in 
early modernity are also a good indicator of the tension between strati­
fication and the economy that was differentiating out. This was particu­
larly evident in England, where the misguided economic propensities of 
the nobility were less the subject of criticism than consumption by social 
climbers displaying a way of life they could not (yet) really afford econom­
ically.258 Sustained stratification consumed economic resources, which to­
ward the end of the seventeenth century provoked the counterargument 
that it also created jobs. However, society continued to be seen as stratified 
by its nature, and the problem was accordingly described in moral terms 
as misconduct.
A special market deserves special attention, namely, the market for 
the products of the new printing press. Here we see particularly clearly 
how the new technology brought the problems of functional differentia­
tion to a head. Printing stepped up the development of a supplementary 
technology, the technology of reading ability. This ability could no longer 
be restricted to the subject matter of given functional systems. Whoever 
could read the Bible could also read polemical religious tracts, newspapers, 
and novels. If the economy now regulated what printed material was to be 
produced and sold, other communication spaces lost control over commu­
nication. Religion and politics were particularly affected, and they sought 
(more or less unsuccessfully) to defend themselves by censorship or the 
threat of sanctions (“libel” under common law and complementary stat­
utes). But this required decision-making criteria that could no longer draw 
on a common knowledge of the world but had to be developed and where 

Differentiation    
necessary changed in the religious system, in the political system, and in 
the legal system in keeping with their specific functions.
For the middle classes, as for workers employed outside the home, 
the outdifferentiation of the economy meant that gainful employment and 
family life were separated, at least in space and time.259 The function of co­
ordinating work passed from the master (the head of the household) to the 
market, leaving the master, at most, the job of interpreting market data. 
Depending on how gainful employment was organized in each case, this 
separation was to become normal in the eighteenth and nineteenth centu­
ries. Perhaps even more drastically than worries about income sources, it 
affected the nobility’s way of life and self-conception, and still in the early 
nineteenth century, at least some sections of the nobility placed value on 
heading a house, that is to say, they rejected the distinction between work­
ing life and private life as a distinction, even though they had long been in 
the employ of the state.260
A great deal of research has been done on another functional area, 
namely, on the emergence of the intimate, marriage-based nuclear family; 
but the findings are controversial, especially on the dating of this develop­
ment.261 Comparatively speaking, it must be assumed that special condi­
tions had developed in early modern Europe that accommodated personal 
inclinations in marriage, especially the relatively late marrying age, the ac­
ceptability of the unmarried state, the requirement of economic indepen­
dence or a secure livelihood, and the notion of founding a family in each 
generation. This ensured a certain degree of differentiation—but not for 
the nobility or for the well-to-do upper stratum of society. In other ways, 
too, account had to be taken of household economy conditions. And we 
could certainly not describe the personal affection that was to decide the 
issue as “romantic love.” Love was to be exalted as a passion sovereign 
in its domain only in the seventeenth century and initially only in extra­
marital relations.262 Marriage without parental consent was still well nigh 
impossible in the eighteenth century (which did not exclude an attrac­
tive young man from seducing a rich heiress and finding a priest to marry 
them). Only in the course of the eighteenth century did Europe adopt the 
idea, unusual throughout the world, that love should decide who married 
whom, following the models presented in novels and including the nobil­
ity. Only now did the principle of marriage, at least theoretically, neutralize 
intervention by social stratification.

 
  Differentiation
Studies of this sort have also been undertaken on other functional 
systems. Everywhere we find the switch to endogenous dynamics and the 
abandonment of premises that had been secured by stratification. To some 
extent, this took place without reflection or intention—as when the reli­
gious system, as Americans have noted, still recruited 90 percent of its saints 
from the upper class in the sixth to twelfth centuries, but only 29 percent 
in the nineteenth century.263 Science developed a new concept of evidence, 
which did not have to rely on language, not on the trivium of the schools, 
not on the old rhetoric, and thus eluded class-dependent provision for ed­
ucation. Since then science has developed, one could say, on the basis of 
implausible evidence. The old concept of securitas switched from subjec­
tive to objective—from old connotations of insouciance (even frivolity) 
to secured knowledge and ability,264 thus also escaping the sphere of what 
could be influenced by stratification. Clear, distinct ideas or verification 
by experiment were now the order of the day. All this meant that the old 
(chiefly Italian and, somewhat later, French) discussion about whether the 
nobility was distinguished more by arms or by letters (arme/lettere) lost in 
importance; at any rate, it no longer entered the debate on scientific issues, 
although it sufficed for a while to legitimate amateur scientific inquiry by 
the nobility. But even in England, where the issue had attracted particular 
attention, it was not permitted to go any further, and certainly not to a loss 
of common sense. As Shaftesbury said of the student of mathematics: “All 
he desires is to keep his Head sound, as it was before.”265
It is also striking that the most important innovational movements 
of the sixteenth century, the Protestant Reformation and political human­
ism, had been initiated and borne by middle-class circles and not by the 
nobility. This might have been because printing played a key role and, at 
least to begin with, the aristocratic code of conduct did not provide for 
writing books and having them printed. Shaftesbury, too, signaled that he 
made only reluctant use of this new form of communication.266
With these developments, but also with the emergence of large cities 
that took the economic and cultural lead, signs lost their certain reference. 
Birth, old wealth (in the form of landownership), and hereditary social 
rank continued to be recognized, but were supplemented, indeed, side­
lined, by new, uncertain criteria like manners and appearances, which were 
easier to manipulate. This was clearly reflected in the discussion on values 
in the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries to which, for example, 

Differentiation    
Baltasar Gracián contributed. Reflections on art, sociability, and moral­
ity addressed these problems, “desubstantializing,” as it were, the order of 
stratification. The category of good taste sought to absorb this loss of so­
cial authority and unquestioned discernment, bringing social selectivity 
into play once more, but in more flexible form and with justification that 
was now no more than contention. An art market developed, especially 
in England,267 as well as professional art criticism with the function of ab­
sorbing uncertainty.268 Status symbols required new forms of legitimation. 
Criteria such as bienséance or goût/taste sought to channel the new prob­
lems back into the old order of stratification. But they were now criteria 
that presupposed learning—nowadays we would say socialization—and in 
any case could not be acquired by birth.
Already in the eighteenth century, a primary division of society in 
terms of social strata could no longer really be asserted. Although the offi­
cial account of society still insisted on the old divisions, especially with the 
aid of legal qualifications, police-state regulations, and fiscal statistics,269 
it could no longer capture development tendencies either structurally or 
semantically by such means. What was now called progress or Enlighten­
ment dissolved the old orders. The French Revolution no longer had to 
impose this fact, it had only to register it and give it recognition in the self-
description of society.270 From the last third of the eighteenth century on, 
functional systems superseded the premises of stratification, and stratifica­
tory influences were neutralized with increasing purposiveness—as with 
the legal invention of general legal capacity or the switch in the education 
system to public schools for the entire population, and then, in the nine­
teenth century, with the establishment of a fully organized examination 
system specializing in the knowledge and abilities acquired in the schools 
and universities themselves. Today, the process can be regarded as com­
pleted. For functional systems, origins played hardly any role, and in the 
case of more highly structured eigencomplexity—as in the legal system—
this also held true for the given other roles of participants.271
The nobility had initially reacted “involutively,” in other words, with 
the intensified use of old means in new situations, of genealogy and her­
aldry.272 An elaborate “handwriting” specific to the nobility emerged,273 
a language of coats of arms and weapons, of devices and emblems, of titles 
and ceremonial privilege and disprivilege, with a related code of honor, 
which provoked a sort of “hypercorrective” learning process (as the lin­

 
  Differentiation
guists would say).274 Birth was emphasized as an essential and indispensable 
(as well as legally easy to handle) criterion, whereas moral merit remained 
open to dispute; it was desirable but not decisive.275 Advancement was ac­
cordingly no longer conceivable on grounds of competence (about which 
lawyers like Bartolus had always had their doubts), but only through en­
noblement. In early modernity, on the other hand, particularly in the six­
teenth century, the age was seen as one of decline. For the nobility, this 
meant that each family had to regenerate its standing in each generation 
through competence (= morality) if it were not to go under with the pass­
ing of time. With all these changes, the nobility came to terms with the 
“absolute state,” while enabling the latter to use not only judicial reform 
but also the nobility for the purposes of political consolidation. The need 
to make a greater effort to educate noble progeny in the specificities of the 
noble way of life was stressed, and led to the founding of appropriate estab­
lishments.276 Downward closure was clearly marked.277 The response to the 
knowledge spread by the printing press was to reject “pedantry”278 and cul­
tivate orality, wit, and aphorism, the stylistic tools of La Rochefoucauld.279 
Above all, contempt for profit-making business was maintained (except in 
England and Italy). It was based on the Aristotelian definition that only 
old (inherited) wealth counted.280
Probably the most striking innovation was, however, the almost neu­
rotic emphasis placed on “honor” and its defense in provoked duels. This 
striking insistence on honor, unusual in its intensity, is best understood if 
one considers what it was distinguished from, namely, from action deter­
mined by chance and opportunity, from “fortune.” Honor made action 
consistent, grasping opportunities made it dependent.281 With the concept 
of honor, the nobility reacted to the growing variety of economic and po­
litical circumstances to which it was more strongly exposed than other so­
cial strata. At the same time, precisely because of this defensive function, 
the concept remained one specific to the nobility. Honor showed no con­
sideration, not even for a person’s own family or his own life. This excess 
was an indication that the old orders were failing, that mere descent no 
longer offered the individual enough possibilities to express himself, that 
individual vulnerability was growing—and that “aristocratic” forms of ex­
pression and repression were sought for all this.282 Only in the eighteenth 
century was this norm to be reduced at the behavioral level to that of the 
homme aimable without profile. As far as honor was concerned, we now 

Differentiation    
read that this century was not particularly remarkable.283 For now, under 
the more flexible circumstances of the political opposition, literary taste, 
economic fluctuation, in which landownership finally counted only as a 
sort of capital investment, honor became a variety of loan,284 which one 
could employ for many still undecided purposes—not least for making 
useful contacts. The once essential distinction between the opposing con­
cepts of honestas and utilitas was superseded by social prestige. Whatever 
the individual noble might have thought, the literature of the eighteenth 
century gives the impression that social relations, sentiments, and sympa­
thies were now calculated individually in terms of what they brought, and 
that this was the only way in which the stability of the societal order could 
be sustained.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century, all attempts to secure 
social influence in the old manner through knowledge about people were 
just as antiquated. One had to know the names and faces of others; about 
their love affairs and debts, their leanings toward freethinking or devout­
ness; who was in favor or disgrace at court, who had a passion for the 
theater; about people’s family connections and regular contacts. But such 
knowledge required the social stratum to be self-contained and for the 
power of disposal over resources to be concentrated there. The growing 
complexity of society put members of the nobility under more and more 
pressure; they found themselves in a situation where private personality 
and the role behavior specific to each functional system were differentiat­
ing more and more. Under such conditions, it was not enough to know 
some thousand people and to keep tabs on them by talking about them. 
But what else could the nobility do? Even at the end of the eighteenth cen­
tury, the aristocracy was admired for its interactional skills, but the areas in 
which such accomplishments counted for something were rapidly shrink­
ing.285 The estates system found its last hold in the law—probably because 
the law had to find concrete substitute answers to questions to which it 
had responded. The General Law for the Prussian States of 1794 still pre­
supposed and confirmed the estates system.286 At the same time, however, 
the very decisions that had to be taken in codifying the law—not to men­
tion “revolutions”—showed that there were other ways to organize society.
The involutive, defensive behavior of the nobility faced the evolution 
of functional systems, which increasingly gained the upper hand. Society 
as a whole was exposed more and more strongly to the inclusory pull of 

 
  Differentiation
its functional systems. What was important was decided there, and each 
functional system determined itself what matters it would deal with, what 
rules it would apply in communicating, and thus what positions it would 
assign to people. Both generalizations independent of social strata (general 
legal capacity, nationality, academic qualifications) and distinctions inde­
pendent of social strata role played a role. These distinctions were above all 
new or newly prominent role asymmetries such as ruler/ruled (with refer­
ence to the state and not to social position), producer/consumer, teacher/
pupil, doctor/patient. Access to such roles naturally continued to depend 
on social stratum. At the same time, the new asymmetries delegitimated 
the old asymmetries of the estates system, showing that society had trans­
ferred primacy from stratification to functional differentiation.
The outdifferentiation of function-specific role complementarities 
changed not only the inclusion process. As inclusion changed, so did what 
society considered rational; in other words, what could reasonably be de­
manded of the individual in the way of reasonable behavior. Just as inclusion 
has to do with rationality, exclusion has to do with irrationality. Rational­
ity-irrationality semantics were modeled on inclusion-exclusion rules. It 
was this circumstance that, in the transition from stratificatory differen­
tiation (oriented on other own roles) to functional differentiation (geared 
to complementary roles of others), brought about a profound switch in se­
mantics and above all a novel individualization of rationality demands. The 
outcome was the welfare utilitarianism of the seventeenth century directed 
toward both this world and the next.287 In every regard, what now counted 
was performance and utility maximization (again including the salvation 
calculus and with the sin level under constant surveillance), but no longer 
the “quality” of a person resulting from the role as a whole.
The individual therefore became himself the authority who decided 
what sort and degree of engagement was reasonable for him. For the then 
priority case of religion, Sir Thomas Browne had this to say:
there is no Church whose every part so squares onto my Conscience; whose Arti­
cles, Constitutions, and Customs seem so consonant unto reason, and as it were 
framed to my particular Devotion, as this whereof I hold my Belief, the Church 
of England; to whose Faith I am a sworn Subject, and therefore in a double Obli­
gation subscribe onto her Articles, and endeavour to observe her Constitutions. 
Whatsoever is beyond, as points indifferent, I observe according to the rules of 
my private reason, or the humour and fashion of my Devotion; neither believ­

Differentiation    
ing this, because Luther affirmed it, or disapproving that, because Calvin has 
disavouched it.288
The repetition of “I” and “my” indicates that the individual makes himself 
the starting point for that to which he believes he owes his faith, his reason, 
and his organizational membership.
To put it in abstract theoretical terms, we could say that the scope 
for combining the time dimension and the social dimension increased in 
all functional systems, so that the individual was required to mediate. In 
the political system, this found expression in the sovereignty of collectively 
binding decisions (that also bound the decider) with procedural regulation 
of their application to themselves. In the legal system, this corresponded 
to the full positivization of law and the freedom of contract. The economy 
tied all transactions to payments, thus making access to scarce goods no 
longer dependent on social status but restricted only by having to hand 
over another, artificially scarce good, namely, money, in exchange. Science 
accepted the hypothetical nature of all truth, thus exposing what was to be 
recognized by society to variation over time. In all these cases, what was at 
stake was, within their mutual tension, to provide more options for com­
bining the time and social dimensions (and thus to provide socially effec­
tive time constraints). But the price of this gain was conditions that could 
be set only in the individual functional system: a precarious, momentarily 
achievable political consensus, a market price, an (in principle amendable) 
law, or a school book providing the basis for instruction. The evolutionary 
“attractor” that achieved this was higher complexity. Within this scope, the 
temporal and social constraints of the old world liquefied, and what had 
once been a convincing hierarchy now seemed no more than useless rigid­
ity. The notion of rationality now adopted the name “Enlightenment.” It 
sought to bind the individual through his own insight—and no longer 
through the demands of his rank and not yet through what promised suc­
cess in the functional systems.
At the latest in the eighteenth century, new forms of socialization 
developed, initially in the “bourgeoisie,” who no longer assumed that the 
child was defined by his origins and only had to be protected against se­
duction and corruption and provided with abilities appropriate to his 
station. More and more reliance was placed instead on inner values, on 
preparation for a still uncertain future, on a person’s own powers of dis­
cernment, on “education.” In consequence, the influence of stratification 

 
  Differentiation
on societal conditions had to be fundamentally restructured. The new con­
cept of “social class” that began to emerge from the eighteenth century 
provided little information in this regard; indeed, as a mere classificatory 
concept it tended rather to conceal the true mechanisms, even though so­
cial effects, even “collective action” were ascribed to classes with all sorts 
of mystification. At any rate, in nineteenth-century Europe, we no lon­
ger find any social stratification based on family households—not even in 
England.289 In fact, membership of a social stratum now had an effect only 
on the reach of individual contacts and on individual careers, and was for its 
part reproduced through careers. Social integration was hence mediated by 
organizations—by schools and universities, through opportunities for ad­
vancement in occupational organizations, through better individual apti­
tude for articulation in political parties, toward the police or before courts; 
and, not least, through better convalescence careers in hospitals. Thanks to 
innumerable statistical studies, we are well informed about this stratum-
specific selectivity. Its interpretation has, however, been mismanaged by 
collective ascription to social classes. What is essential—also as an obstacle 
to politically inspired countermeasures—is that decisions were now made 
on the subject in innumerable organizations, which might well consider 
it rational to be guided by a person’s origins and their visible signs. And 
what was above all decisive was that in modern society career (and no lon­
ger morality!) had become the most important mechanism for integrating 
individuals and society.290 This is true, of course, for upward careers; but 
naturally also for stagnating and downward careers, and for dropping out; 
they, too are series of events in which what has been achieved affects what 
is still possible. Careers are therefore forms in which social distinctions of 
starting positions and self/other selection are temporalized, that is to say, 
become a past that is significant for the future in all points of change. If 
stratification influences this process and no longer acts as the primary form 
of defining societal subsystems, this means that modern societies cannot be 
compared with traditional societies. We cannot even say whether the func­
tional differentiation of society and its dependence on organizations has 
made it more or less important. Conditions are too different.
Since every functional system now has to negotiate the relationship 
between temporality and sociality within itself, every functional system 
can claim to represent society; but only for its own sphere. With Gordon 
Pask, we can refer to the result as “redundancy of potential command”;291 

Differentiation    
but there are no longer any reductions available for this: neither to an 
apex nor to a center of society. Substitute notions are on offer. In the eigh­
teenth century, people were “patriots” from Scotland to Poland.292 The 
nineteenth century espoused nationalism. But these new forms, which 
sought to understand society once again as centered on politics, foun­
dered on the state itself, or, to be more precise, on the territorial segmen­
tation of the political system of a society that had now irreversibly become 
world society. The representation of unity in unity had depended on the 
differentiation form. It had to be abandoned. What superseded it was not 
so easy to recognize.
8. Functionally Differentiated Society
I define modern society in terms of its differentiation form, thus dis­
sociating the concept from the attempts to capture its characteristic quality 
hitherto undertaken in modern society. Treatment of these self-­descriptions 
is postponed to the following chapter. Let it suffice for the present to say 
that modern society is to be understood as a functionally differentiated so­
ciety, and that the following inquiries into functional differentiation seek 
to give substance to the concept.
There are always links between the outdifferentiation of a system and 
its internal differentiation, for internal differentiation chooses forms to 
which nothing in the environment corresponds. Functional differentia­
tion is the most radical form in which this rule takes effect, since there are 
naturally no divisions in the environment adapted to the functions of the 
system. If society switches from stratification to functional differentiation, 
it also has to do without the demographic correlates of its internal differ­
entiation pattern. It can then no longer distribute the people who con­
tribute to communication among its subsystems as it had been able to do 
under the stratification schema or center-periphery differentiation. People 
cannot be attributed to functional systems in such a way that each belongs 
to only one system—the law, the economy, politics, the education system. 
Consequently, it can no longer be claimed that society consists of people; 
for people are clearly to be accommodated in no subsystem of society, and 
hence nowhere in society.293 For this very reason, the parallel semantics 
stresses the (natural!) independence of the individual as a subject of rights 
and point of reference for self-referential, rational calculation. As a result, 

 
  Differentiation
human beings have to be understood as the environment of the societal 
system (as has been done here from the outset), thus severing the last link 
that appeared to guarantee the matching of system and environment.294
Functional differentiation is based on an operational closure of func­
tional systems, including self-reference. Functional systems accordingly 
put themselves into a state of self-generated indeterminacy.295 This can find 
expression in system-specific media such as money and power, which can 
take various forms. It also manifests itself in the dependence of the present 
on a still unknown future. System complexity hence always has two sides 
to it, one determinate, the other indeterminate. This gives the operations 
of the system the function of determining the still indeterminate, and of 
regenerating indeterminacy.
With the transition to functional differentiation, society renounces 
imposing a common difference schema on subsystems. Whereas in the case 
of stratification, each subsystem has to define itself through a difference in 
rank from others, only thus gaining its identity, in the case of functional 
differentiation, each functional system determines its identity itself—doing 
so, as we shall see, through an elaborate semantics of self-­interpretation 
[Selbstsinngebung], reflection, autonomy. For the rest, society can then be 
considered only as the environment of the functional system and not as 
a specific subordinate or superordinate domain. But this does not mean 
that the dependence of subsystems on one another decreases. On the con­
trary, it increases. But it takes the form of difference between system and 
environment; it can no longer be specifically normativized, can no longer 
be legitimated for society as a whole as an essential condition for order. It 
now consists in general and highly differentiated dependence on constantly 
changing, intrasocietal environmental conditions.
Functional differentiation means that the perspective of unity under 
which a difference between system and environment is differentiated out 
is the function that the outdifferentiated system (and not its environment) 
fulfills for the system as a whole. The complicatedness of the systems-­
theoretical definition also shows the improbability that lies in the matter 
itself, sparing us unnecessary controversy if taken duly into account. The 
function relates to a problem of society, not to the self-reference or self-­
preservation of the functional system. Although it leads to the outdifferen­
tiation of a special system-environment relationship in society, it is fulfilled 
only in the functional system and not in the environment of the functional 

Differentiation    
system. This also means that the functional system monopolizes its func­
tion for itself and counts on an environment being not responsible or in­
competent in this regard. In other words, functional differentiation stresses 
the difference between the various referential problems; but this difference 
varies from the viewpoint of the individual functional systems depending 
on which difference between functional system and intrasocietal environment 
it refers to. For science, its environment is scientifically incompetent but 
not politically incompetent, economically incompetent, and so forth. To 
this extent, every functional system has to do with a differently composed 
intrasocietal environment, precisely because every functional system is dif­
ferentiated out for a specific function.
As a form of societal differentiation, functional differentiation there­
fore emphasizes the dissimilarity of functional systems. But they are similar 
in this dissimilarity. This means that the overall system renounces impos­
ing an order (e.g., a hierarchy) on relations between functional systems. 
The metaphor of “equilibrium” is also of no use and only obscure the fact 
that society can no longer regulate relations between its subsystems but 
has to abandon them to evolution, and thus to history. This obviously has 
consequences for the understanding of time and history, and above all in 
dramatizing the relationship between past and future.
Older sociological theory had defined functions as a condition for 
the continued existence [Bestand ] of the societal system.296 It is not clear 
what exactly was meant. It would not make an essential difference if we 
were to replace “continued existence” by “autopoiesis.” Functions can only 
be defined with regard to a structurally determined system, and the struc­
tures of the societal system are historically variable in the framework of 
what the autopoiesis of the system allows. This also excludes theoretically 
deducing a function catalog from concepts such as action (Parsons), so­
cial system, or society. One can only proceed inductively, testing in a sort 
of cognitive experiment how the societal system would have to change its 
structures to maintain its autopoiesis if certain functions were no longer to 
be fulfilled—for example, securing the future supply of scarce goods or le­
gally safeguarding expectations or collectively binding decision-making or 
education beyond spontaneous socialization. I shall therefore speak, not of 
conditions for continued existence, but of referential problems that have 
to be handled in one way or another if society is to maintain a certain level 
of evolution and also fulfill other functions.

 
  Differentiation
The outdifferentiation of a single subsystem for a single function 
means that this function enjoys priority for this (and only for this) sys­
tem and is superordinated to all other functions. Only in this sense can 
we speak of functional primacy. For the political system, for example, po­
litical success (however operationalized) is more important than anything 
else and in this context a successful economy is important only as a con­
dition of political success. At the same time, this means that, on the level 
of the comprehensive system of society, no universally valid hierarchy of 
functions can be established that is binding for all subsystems. No hierar­
chy also means no stratification. All functional systems are rather enjoined 
to overestimate themselves in relation to others but to waive any macroso­
cietal binding force for this self-evaluation.
On the basis of their functional primacy, functional systems achieve 
operational closure, thus forming autopoietic systems within the auto­poietic 
system of society. At first glance this seems to run counter to the concept of 
autopoiesis, and naturally it does not mean that functional systems do not 
communicate, that they do not have to rely on society as regards language 
and much else. Nevertheless, recursive closure and the reproduction of the 
functional system’s own operations can be achieved through the network 
of its operations by the function being made the distinctive point of self-­
reference and by the use of a binary code that is used in no other system. 
Under these conditions, it is possible to distinguish the operations belong­
ing to the system with sufficient practical clarity, and thus to mark off the 
system’s own autopoiesis externally. As with the communication concept, 
doubts can arise—for example, as to whether a communication is meant 
politically, whether it seeks to raise a legal issue or prepare an economic 
transaction. Normally, however, the system’s own network suffices to set­
tle such questions. Recourse is had to earlier communications or follow-up 
communications are anticipated.
Functional orientation does not suffice for this purpose. While func­
tional systems establish themselves in society through their function and 
refer to society with the description of their function, they require a fur­
ther tool, a binary code,297 to form their own autopoiesis. Each of the two 
concepts, function and coding, describes a contingency schema, but they 
do so in very different ways. Whereas a function makes comparison with 
functional equivalents possible, coding regulates the oscillation between 
positive and negative values, thus the contingency of the evaluations on 

Differentiation    
which the system orients its own operations. Whereas with a functional 
orientation the system defends the superiority of its own options (provision 
for the future through money and not through God; education through 
schools and not through socialization), via the negative value of its code, 
it reflects on the need of criteria for all its own operations. Specification of 
the function therefore requires additional coding whose function consists 
precisely in safeguarding the continuation of autopoiesis and in prevent­
ing the system from running aground in reaching a goal (end, telos) and 
ceasing to operate. Functional systems are never teleological systems. They 
refer each operation to a bivalent distinction—to the binary code—thus 
ensuring that a follow-up communication is always possible for switching 
to the opposing value. What has been ascertained as right can serve in con­
tinuing communication to raise the issue of right and wrong anew, for ex­
ample, to demand a change in the law. What seemed to be true may on the 
basis of new data or new theories require revision. What appeared to ben­
efit the political opposition can, if all too obvious, prove an argument in 
favor of the government for that very reason. It is not the system’s orienta­
tion on its own unity that ensures that its own operations can connect over 
time with its own operations, but only orientation on its own difference. 
This is because operations have to be carried out as selections.
Binary codes are in a strict sense forms, which is to say two-sided 
forms that facilitate switching from one side to the other, from value to op­
posing value and back by distinguishing themselves as forms from other 
forms. They are not “point attractors” but “cyclical attractors.” They bring 
the positive and the negative value into a symmetrical, circular relationship, 
which symbolizes the unity of the system, while opening the cycle to inter­
ruption.298 This allows the system to grow through the interruption of its 
own circularity and to introduce ever-new conditionings in reaction to oc­
currences that help one decide whether something is to be described as posi­
tive or negative.
But codes do not depict any reality of values; they are simple duplica­
tion rules. They provide a negative correlate for all information (which they 
themselves constitute) that falls within their ambit (which they themselves 
define). For example: true/false; beloved/unloved; having property/not hav­
ing property; passing exams/failing exams; exercising authority/being sub­
ject to authority, and so forth. Everything covered by the form of the codes 
is accordingly seen as contingent—as possible in some other way, too. In 

 
  Differentiation
practice, this generates a need for decision rules that lay down the condi­
tions under which the value or opposing value is attributed to true or false. 
Such rules are called programs. The distinction between codes and pro­
grams, we can now say, structures the autopoiesis of functional systems 
in an unmistakable way, and the resulting semantics differs fundamentally 
from traditional teleologies, notions of perfection, ideals, and value rela­
tions. This is apparent not least in the logical structure. For every code also 
realizes a rejection value in relation to all others. But this is not to say that 
the value of other values is denied and that value conflicts in Max Weber’s 
meaning of the term have to occur. Only the other form, only the other dis­
tinction is rejected; or, to quote Gotthard Günther, to whom I am much 
indebted in this context: “The very choice is rejected.”299 States of affairs of 
this type cannot be captured by a bivalent logic alone—which makes un­
derstanding all the more difficult. Observation tools with greater logical 
structural diversity are needed. And only this makes much of the old and 
new European semantics appear obsolete.
This concept of rejection also allows us to clarify the relationship 
between binary codes and morality (and thus the relationship between 
functional systems and morality). It must be possible to reject the form of 
morality, too. This in turn does not mean that morality is no longer to be 
important in society but only that the codes of the functional systems have 
to be fixed at a level of higher amorality.300 It must not be morally better to 
be in power than in the opposition. It must not be morally better to pro­
pound a true theory than a false one. And the law, too, must place value on 
a negative verdict not leading to moral disqualification. Only when this is 
accepted does one see the onset points of morality in binary coded systems, 
too, above all where the binary coding itself is undermined—for example 
by doping in sport, by intimidating judges, by forging data in empirical re­
search. Morality also finds its way in unchecked. A moral lapse by a mem­
ber of the ruling party is a political stroke of luck for the opposition, and 
although ethical objections cannot transform truth into falsehood, they 
can hamper research funding.
On the basis of their codes, functional systems carry out their own 
autopoiesis, and it is only this that allows them to differentiate out.301 It 
is obvious to every observer that autopoiesis in a causal sense (and only 
an observer sees causality) is both dependent on and independent of the 
system environment: dependent, to use an old cybernetics formula, with 

Differentiation    
regard to energy, and independent with regard to information. Autopoi­
esis consists in the reproduction (= production from products) of the 
elementary operations of the system, for example in payments, in legal as­
sertions, in communications about learning performance, in collectively 
binding decisions, and so on. Such elementary operations owe their dis­
tinct quality, their distinctiveness in relation to the elements of other sys­
tems to their being constituted within the contingency scope of a specific 
code (and not, for example, to their indicating its positive value). They 
are always produced in relation to form. Injustice, too, is determined by 
the legal system, untruth by the science system, and the code excludes 
only third possibilities. The binary code (together with the exclusion of 
third values) is continuously reproduced by all operations of the system, 
and the system fulfills its function with the ever-new operations that this 
makes possible.
If and to the extent that functional differentiation is realized, no 
functional system can therefore assume the function of another. Func­
tional systems are self-substitutive orders. Each presupposes that the other 
functions are fulfilled elsewhere. To this extent there are also no possi­
bilities for mutual control, because this would to a certain degree imply 
that one functional system assumes the functions of others. What Schil­
ler notes on the relationship between politics and art or science is proto­
typical for all intersystemic relations: “The political lawmaker can block 
their domain, but he cannot rule therein.”302 Depending on how strongly 
functional systems have to rely on one another, their relations can involve 
destruction but never instruction.
The operational closure of functional systems never excludes identi­
fying certain events as operations in several systems at the same time. Nor 
does it exclude an observer from then seeing them as a unity. Thus money 
payments normally serve to meet a legal obligation, while altering the legal 
situation as regards property.303 But events that take place simultaneously 
in several systems remain tied to the recursive networks of the various sys­
tems, are identified by them, and therefore have a quite different history 
and a quite different future depending on which system carries out the op­
eration as a unity. Where money comes from, and what the recipient does 
with it subsequently have nothing at all to do with the legal aspect of the 
transaction. Only the recursivity of the operational context of the indi­
vidual systems identifies the operation as an element of the given system.

 
  Differentiation
As with all autopoietic systems, here, too it is the operations that set 
the boundaries of the system. By happening, they determine what belongs 
to the system and what belongs to the environment. But because they can 
do this only in the recursive network of earlier and possible later opera­
tions of the same system, they must at the same time observe the system on 
the basis of the difference between system and environment. They define 
themselves (and this happens purely factually, and happens only if it hap­
pens and happens only the way it happens), but in doing so they require 
the distinction between self-reference and other-reference in order to ob­
serve this definition.
Descriptions of the world are therefore always formulations of the 
other-reference of specific systems, and consequently depend on how self-
reference is dealt with. The world description of the science system, for 
example, uses the schema of (conceptually denotable) elements and re­
lations between these elements;304 in sociology, for instance, actions and 
statistically processed relations. Science takes what can be captured by 
this schema to be reality (however much others might object) because the 
world itself remains invisible and cannot defend itself. As will be seen, we 
therefore have to resign ourselves to a multitude of equally valid descrip­
tions of the world.
The distinction between self-reference and other-reference is in “or­
thogonal” relation to the binary code. This means that both references can 
be assigned both values of the code. In other words, there is no special link 
between the positive code value and other-reference. The unity of the dis­
tinction between self-reference and other-reference can be conceived of 
only in an “imaginary space,”305 which means that the unity of this dis­
tinction is not operational in the system that uses it. But it can neverthe­
less function as one side of a further distinction, namely, as a component 
of the distinction between reference and code.
This insight requires far-reaching changes in the traditional semantics 
and has considerable ramifications for the self-description of functional sys­
tems and hence of modern society. Truth, for example, is not to be under­
stood as a criterion for ordering other-references of knowledge (adaequatio, 
correspondence theory) but refers to the distinction between self-reference 
and other-reference (constructivism). Any definitional link between truth, 
meaning, and (other-)reference has to be waived.306 Law can no longer 
be understood as a means for protecting interests (= other-­reference), for 

Differentiation    
there are lawful interests and unlawful interests, and concepts can also be 
used in conformity with or contrary to the law (= self-reference). And just 
as the distinction between analytic and synthetic truth loses its old mean­
ing, going back to Kant, in the theory of science, the distinction between 
the jurisprudence of concepts [Begriffsjurisprudenz] and the jurisprudence 
of interests [Interessenjurisprudenz] does so in legal theory.307 Instead, we 
find much more abstract distinguishing between distinctions. In the eco­
nomic system corresponding problems arise with the now key concept of 
transaction. The term refers to the unity of self-reference (payments) and 
other-reference (benefits in kind, services, satisfying needs) of the eco­
nomic system; and it is obvious that the property code have/have-not has 
to be presupposed twice on each side of the transaction in relation to pay­
ments and in relation to benefits in kind.308
These examples from science, law, and the economy show how very 
much the current discussion is already concerned with the problem indi­
cated; they also show that the debate in different academic disciplines has 
been proceeding in isolation and that the unity of the underlying problem 
has not been recognized nor the necessary degree of abstraction achieved. 
It is therefore not realized that these problems, striking in their diversity 
and similarity, arise as structural problems of a functionally differentiated 
society.309
On the basis of the distinction between these distinctions, namely, self-
reference/other-reference and the positive value/negative value of the code, 
the functional systems of modern society generate and reduce the complex­
ity relevant only for them, only for the system concerned. On the basis of 
the distinction between references, they recognize on the self-reference side 
how the system is determined by its structures and operations. The system is 
and remains autopoietic. But it expands and shrinks with the extent of the 
operations that, in this manner, it does not recognize but actually carries out.
In this sense, autopoiesis is an either/or principle of system forma­
tion. There are corresponding systems or there are not—for the economy, 
the law, politics, science, and so forth. But the sociologically more inter­
esting question is how much inward expansion society thus generates and 
can take, how much monetization, juridification, scientification, politi­
cization; and how much at the same time (instead, e.g., of monetization 
alone); and on the other hand, what would happen if functional systems 
were to shrink, if demonetization, deregulation, and so on were to occur.

 
  Differentiation
For autopoiesis to continue, the simple distinction between self-­
reference and other-reference suffices. Just as a consciousness must not 
confuse itself with objects, the law cannot operate as an autopoietic system 
if it constantly confounds legal obligations with mere wishes or with condi­
tions of moral respect or disrespect. It must also be asked what possibilities 
there are for observing systems when subsystems form. For purely logical 
reasons, there are three possibilities: (1) observation of the overall system 
to which the subsystem belongs, (2) observation of other subsystems in 
the intrasocietal environment (or of other systems in the external environ­
ment), and (3) observation of the subsystem by itself (self-observation). To 
enable these various system references to be distinguished, I shall call ob­
servation of the overall system function, observation of other systems per­
formance, and self-observation of a system reflection.310
These distinctions are very important for practical orientation. Con­
siderable semantic confusion results if they are not kept apart. Thus the 
concept “state” serves for internal self-description (reflection) of the politi­
cal system311 and should not be confounded with the societal function of 
the system to make collectively binding decisions. Such confusion leads to 
a hypertrophic consciousness of the state [Staatsbewusstsein].312 Something 
similar happens if no distinction is made between performance and func­
tion for the economic system. The economy is then described as the ex­
traction of materials from the natural environment and as the satisfaction 
of the needs either of people or of other functional systems of society. But 
this describes the performance of the system, not its function, which is to 
ensure future supply under conditions of scarcity. If these two concepts are 
confounded, the peculiar temporal reference of the economy becomes in­
comprehensible and the most ingenious invention of modern society, the 
money economy, comes to be described as “materialistic.” In the field of 
science, an unfortunate distinction is drawn between applied research and 
basic research; ultimately, it is a question of the difference between perfor­
mance and function. If this is not recognized, what is approved as “basic 
research” is tolerated only as theoretical work, and the system then suffers 
from the indigestible experience that greater repute and worse funding are 
to be gained with basic research than with applied research.313
Particular attention needs to be paid to performance, especially when 
distinguishing it from function fulfillment. For this is where the follow-up 
facilities for more demanding, hierarchical concepts of integration lie. If we 

Differentiation    
wish to observe performance on the input or output side of systems (by 
which I always mean functional systems, not organizations), at least two 
systems have to be taken into consideration—in their varying interreliance. 
Since we cannot assume that functional systems observe one another with 
comprehension, that is to say, reconstruct one another from within, and 
since, even if this were possible, it would take far too long, functional sys­
tems have to observe performance dependency and motivation within them­
selves and take cognizance of them in the form of irritations—for example, 
in the training level of young people to be integrated into the economy; in 
the pure duration and unpredictability of judicial proceedings that render 
out-of-court settlements or circumvention procedures worthwhile; in varia­
tions in the level of tax revenues; in the political opportunism of support for 
science and its narrow time horizon, which is difficult to coordinate with the 
duration of research; in demographic fluctuation due to family or pharma­
ceutical factors; in other words, always in facts that can be used as indica­
tors—hence always too late to exercise influence on causes or (which would 
anyway be possible only at the level of organizations) to negotiate. All in 
all, performance relations between systems in modern society present a very 
complex picture, which cannot be attributed to principles (e.g., exchange 
principles). And although this is the mechanism that guides the dynamics of 
societal integration,314 modern society quite clearly waives bringing its own 
unity to bear in these relations, for instance, in the form of notions of har­
mony or justice. Under these circumstances, integration is nothing other 
than variation of the limitation of what is possible at the same time.
I shall not go into further detail at this point; such a discussion be­
longs to the theories that would have to be elaborated for individual func­
tional systems. It must suffice to say that this distinction between system 
references arises from system differentiation itself and is hence imposed. 
Old European semantics also knew such arrangements—for example, the 
relation of the soul to God, to other people, and to itself. But only in mod­
ern, functionally differentiated society does the problem become relevant 
for the theory of society. Old European semantics had to content itself with 
simplifications of the “whole and part” schema, as will be shown in detail.315
If the operational closure and autopoietic reproduction of func­
tional systems is assured, further system differentiations can occur in the 
space thus marked. Although the outdifferentiation of further social sys­
tems within society is possible in widely varying, spontaneous, or orga­

 
  Differentiation
nized ways, there is much proliferation of all sorts—as in nature. But if the 
formation of a subsystem is to be recognizable as the differentiation of a 
functional system, operational closure must be presupposed.
Further differentiation repeats the system formation schema over and 
over; it repeats the deployment and reproduction of a difference between 
system and environment. In principle, all forms of system differentiation 
are again available: segmentation and center-periphery differentiation, hi­
erarchy formation, and further functional differentiation. Functional sys­
tems differ considerably; internal complexity enhancement follows no 
common pattern. In general, however, a sort of segmentary differentiation 
appears to predominate that accepts elements of a functional differentia­
tion. The global political system is differentiated segmentarily into terri­
torial states, while at the same time producing a sort of center-periphery 
differentiation. The world economic system can best be seen as a differen­
tiation of markets that serve as environments for organization formations 
(enterprises), which, with an eye to their market, see one another as com­
petitors. No strict similarity between segments develops, as is shown by the 
special status of the financial markets and the banks, or the widely vary­
ing sensitivity of labor, commodities, and product markets to externalities. 
The science system, too, is primarily divided segmentarily, into disciplines, 
which are also characterized not by the similarity but by the very dissimi­
larity of their subject matter, but which fulfill the same function in relation 
to differing subject matter. What we have seen to be the case for society as a 
whole therefore appears to apply within each functional system: unequivo­
cally opting for the primacy of a certain differentiation form is the excep­
tion rather than the rule, and, if this succeeds, it can expose the system 
to intense phases of evolutionary change, foreseeable, for example, where 
­center-periphery differentiation of the economic system is too extreme.
Combining the theory of autopoietic social systems with the concept 
of functional differentiation provides the point of departure for a theory of 
modern society. In short, by abandoning redundancy, namely, multifunc­
tionalities, considerable gains in complexity can be made—giving rise, how­
ever, to a multitude of problems. This description takes the theoretical place 
occupied in classical sociology by the theory of the division of labor.
By “abandoning redundancy” I mean abandoning multiple safe­
guards for functions, specifically for the most important societal functions. 
The problem is clear when we think back to the possibilities of growth and 

Differentiation    
shrinkage in segmentary societies described above or consider the family 
households (“economy”) of stratified society that released persons for pub­
lic (“political”) duties. The safeguards this had offered have disappeared. 
On the other hand, the menace of the external environment has also di­
minished, to be replaced by the much discussed ecological self-threat of 
modern society. All this is set off by the link between the abandonment of 
redundancy and growing complexity. The most important functions for so­
ciety can now be fulfilled at the required level of performance only in func­
tional systems dedicated to this end.316 For politics, the political system is 
responsible, but if this system needs money, it has to act monetarily, in other 
words, it has to condition economic payment transactions. It may labor 
under the specifically political illusion that it can itself “make” money. But 
then the economy refuses this money or accepts it only under conditions of 
devaluation, and the problem is passed back to politics stamped “inflation.” 
Conversely, there is no political action outside politics, as many a professor 
has had to learn when venturing onto this terrain. The same applies, mu­
tatis mutandis, to all functional systems. At the same time, however, these 
systems adjust mutually to a finely tuned level of performance; politics, for 
example, to the subtleties of constitutional law as developed by the compe­
tent court, and more or less all functional systems to the customary financ­
ing. This means that slight fluctuations in capability or motivation (e.g., in 
political willingness to enforce the law) can provoke disproportionate irri­
tations in other systems. If a mere 10 percent of university graduates fail to 
find suitable career opportunities in the economic system, this depresses an 
entire generation, channels education flows, changes personnel allocations 
and financial resources, and does the same in other systems, although not 
necessarily in proportion to what set off this development!
Each functional system can fulfill only its own function. In an emer­
gency, no system can step in for another even in a supportive or supple­
mentary capacity. In the event of a government crisis, science cannot help 
out with truths. Politics has no capacity of its own to devise the success of 
the economy, however much it might depend on this success politically 
and however much it acts as if it could. The economy can involve science 
in conditioning money payments, but however much money it deploys, it 
cannot produce truths. With financial prospects you can entice, you can 
irritate, but you can prove nothing. Science honors payments with “ac­
knowledgments,” not with cogent arguments.

 
  Differentiation
The resulting rise in the macrosocietal irritation coefficient mirrors 
the simultaneous increase in mutual dependencies and independencies. 
The consequent lack of clarity practically excludes any calculation of pos­
sible changes and their effects in relations between systems. Simplifications 
therefore establish themselves. Perhaps the most important consists in ap­
peals and in the apportioning of blame, which do not take account of the 
addressees’ self-description. Recourse is had to symbolically generalized 
media, above all to money and power, and certain decisions are demanded, 
for instance, more money for certain purposes or decisions that modify the 
legal situation with respect to certain interests, provoking complaints of 
not having been heard or of demands not being met. Such simplifications 
therefore have to be paid for with high rates of disappointment. A gener­
alized dissatisfaction may then well spread, precisely under conditions of 
high and growing prosperity, which fuels unrealistic views about modern 
society and leads to avid consumption of scandals.
However, this is countered by correspondingly increasing intrasys­
temic possibilities for compensation. Irritations and dissatisfaction age fast. 
They can also largely be compensated for by the flexibility of the functional 
systems themselves on the basis of their own specification and coding. It suf­
fices to cite the credit mechanism, the international surplus in money sup­
ply, and the borrowing capacity of the economy; freedom of contract and 
the legislative capacity of the legal system; or the freedom of topic choice 
within existing theoretical and methodological programs to which science 
owes its high level of responsiveness. Surprisingly, when one thinks of “sov­
ereignty” and classical theories of the state, one of the most inflexible sys­
tems appears to be the political system. This has to be clarified in detail.317 
At any rate, it can be assumed that the link between the abandonment of 
redundancy and gains in complexity favor some systems more than ­others 
and can in this sense lead to disequilibrium in the evolution of society.
From a formal point of view, complexity is gained by society expand­
ing internally through new system-environment distinctions differentiating 
out within society. As a result, more and more diverse communications be­
come possible within what contributes operationally to the autopoiesis of 
communication, both simultaneously and sequentially. All functional sys­
tems experience this. Whoever like the Vicar of Wakefield [in Oliver Gold­
smith’s novel of that title] chooses his spouse “as she did her wedding-gown, 
not for a fine glossy surface, but such qualities as would wear well,” needs to 

Differentiation    
communicate only about a few quality issues. Provided one first falls in love, 
love reflects the whole world as a topic of communication, romanticism 
teaches us. The market of present-day society can process far more informa­
tion than even the biggest agglomeration of public or private households. 
The democracy of a modern political system can politicize far more topics 
than a princely court of the traditional sort. Thus comprehensive society 
becomes more complex, not only through the addition of operations of in­
dividual functional systems but also as a space of observation and selection 
for each individual system.
These increases in structural complexity are accompanied by increases 
in semantic complexity. In the factual dimension, there are more topics 
and a greater depth of field in handling topics, texts, and contributions. In 
the time dimension, tolerance for differences between past and future in­
creases. This means that more can be changed and events speed up, so that 
synchronization becomes more difficult between systems and more and 
more events present themselves as chance, as accident, as opportunity for 
the systems affected. Structures (such as capital investments, the profiles 
of political parties, marriages, the conceptual languages of science) may, 
indeed must, ultimately be attributed to decisions. Future horizons that 
still appear amenable to planning move closer to the present. Pasts more 
rapidly cease to have consequences and arouse only nostalgia and histori­
cal interest.318 Moreover, spatially limited rather than temporally limited 
cultural complexes now provide orientation—complexes that are expected 
from the outset to vary, a characteristic that constitutes their attraction: 
fashions and styles, moods of the time, and the fortunes of generations.319
In the social dimension, complexity grows on the basis of the opera­
tional exclusion from society of people, who are then dignified with titles 
such as “individual” or “subject.”320 Individuals can no longer be placed 
socially in society because every functional system contemplates the inclu­
sion of all individuals, but inclusion now relates only to the operations of 
the system in question. Society oscillates between positive assessment (sub­
ject) and negative assessment of the individual’s prospects (homme-copie, 
Massenmensch). Counterposed desiderata like “self-realization” and “mutual 
understanding” are simultaneously idealized.321 The result is a sort of denat­
uralization of the social dimension that benefits the self-reflection of society 
as a communication system. Society accordingly realizes more expectations 
and more disappointments in communication and produces a self-illusory 

 
  Differentiation
symbolism for this very purpose, especially in the political system. If soci­
ety were not so indifferent to what actually happens in the consciousness of 
the individual, it would not be able to afford inconsistencies on this scale.
A consequence of functional differentiation that is just as impor­
tant is the far-reaching shift in observation to second-order observation, to 
the observation of observers. This had, of course, also existed in the old 
world—but only in the framework of cognitively or normatively narrowly 
limited programs—for example, with regard to errors committed by ­others 
or with respect to sin and guilt, which for their part could be described in 
the ­Aristotelian-Thomistic tradition as a variant of error. A common given 
world was presupposed in the form of nature or creation. Cosmologies 
were formulated as factual descriptions. With the attainment of functional 
differentiation, this “ontological” premise dissolves, and it can be replaced 
only by the actual observation of observers. The world then has to be re­
constituted in the medium of the unobservable at the level of second-order 
observation.
All functional systems are likely to observe their own operations at 
the level of second-order observation. In the economy, observers observe 
one another with the aid of the market and the prices that form there.322 
In politics, all activities are staged before the mirror of public opinion with 
an eye on the outcome of political elections.323 In science, too, researchers 
no longer observe one another directly at work, but with the aid of publi­
cations, which are reviewed, discussed, or ignored, so that one can orient 
oneself on how observers observe the relevant statements.324 This situation 
is similar in art, as soon as artists adjust to their works not being observed 
simply as objects but with regard to the means by which they achieve their 
effects.325 This means that functional systems have to install correspond­
ing forms and opportunities for self-observation and can construct reality 
only in this manner.
In the mode of second-order observation, the observed observer 
guarantees the reality of his observing (first or second order). For one can, 
indeed must, renounce accessing an underlying, unobserved reality that is 
the way it is.326 These systems are all the more dependent on accordingly 
enhancing their irritability, which means being able to register and process 
disturbances in the accustomed manner.
It is certainly not by chance that, since the eighteenth century, the 
parallel possibility developed of seeking social equilibrium in private inter­

Differentiation    
course in the observation of being observed and of choosing modes of self-
disciplining geared to this. This exploded the old unity of morality and 
manners and, indeed, the orientation on authoritative rules. Modern in­
dividuality, too, demands that the individual not only be what he is but 
also observe himself as observer. And the possibility also established itself 
at about the same time of observing others with regard to what they can­
not observe—whether in respect of unknown motives and interests, the 
ideologicality of their worldview, or of latent functions and structures in 
general. The remodeling of the construction of reality and its transfer to 
the level of second-order observation is thus not limited to the operations 
of the individual functional system but becomes the general mode of the 
demanding, societal ascertainment of reality. But it has to manage without 
any representative authority, hence without hierarchy, without the possibil­
ity of observing an authoritative apex or center of society. It has to integrate 
heterarchically and rely only provisionally on operational demonstrations.
The consequences of the mode of operation are apparent at the 
macro­societal level in the link between endogenous dynamics and the in­
terruption of interdependence. Left to their own devices, functional sys­
tems generate eigentimes and dissimilarities within themselves that can 
no longer be societally coordinated. Fixed forms, for example, capital in­
vestments or governments in office, are from the outset focused only on 
time. This makes them appear contingent. Society can also tolerate exter­
nal dissimilarities in individual functional systems insofar as their transfer 
from one system to others can be blocked. Even the very wealthy do not 
have political power or more discernment in art or more chance of being 
loved simply on account of their wealth. Function-specific conglomerates 
of advantages are also hardly transferable within families. Wealth, for ex­
ample, can only be used with economic success if the risk of loss is ac­
cepted; and organizational, artistic, and political careers also face typical 
risks. What can still be generalized in the way of universally accepted val­
ues—for example, freedom, equality, and human dignity—is based on this 
link between temporalization, system-specificity, and the interruption of 
interdependence. Values thus have their basis in reality, not in correspond­
ing states of society they describe or aspire to. In every functional system, 
they are therefore noted negatively in the sense of a lack or a need to justify 
limitations. They therefore gain societal adequacy, not through the value 
program coming closer to reality, but through the conditioning relations 

 
  Differentiation
between endogenous dynamics, deviation amplification, temporalization, 
and the interruption of interdependence. The specification of functions 
and their codes alone leads to other system orientations being rejected, 
thus constantly suggesting the presence of what has been excluded; and the 
purpose of value formulations is then to make it clear to each system in its 
own language what it is deviating from.
For the societal system, this order of relations between functional 
systems has far-reaching consequences. Under the conditions of stratifica­
tion and/or center-periphery differentiation, it could be assumed that the 
strongest system “ruled” and was provided with the appropriate resources 
(even though, from a realistic point of view, a regressive development to­
ward tribal conditions was quite possible, because archaic conditions still 
predominated in the countryside). In functionally differentiated societies, 
the reverse order applies: the system with the highest failure rate domi­
nates, because the failure of specific functional conditions can nowhere 
be compensated and imposes serious adjustments everywhere. The more 
improbable the performance, the more contingent the advances and the 
greater the macrosocietal risk of failure. If the law were no longer enforce­
able or money could no longer be accepted, other functional systems, too, 
would face almost insurmountable problems. The failure of scientific in­
novations or of religious explanations of the world might well be consid­
ered less important, but they give rise to similar problems; one need think 
only of the need for scientific inquiry engendered by increasing ecological 
interdependencies, of civilization-induced diseases, or of the political con­
sequences of religious disturbances of the peace. The extent of attention 
and concern can no longer be described by the metaphor of “force”; it re­
quires that of “crisis.”
These analyses can be summed up in the general insight that opera­
tional closure and autopoietic autonomy make a system highly compatible 
with disorder in the environment. To the extent that structural couplings 
can be controlled and irritations accepted and processed, the environment 
can for the rest remain opaque, overcomplex, and uncontrollable. Already 
operational at the outer boundaries of the societal system, this mecha­
nism by which communication distances itself from the rest of the world 
is transported by functional differentiation into its interior.327 The result 
is that society can increase its internal disorder and at the same time im­
munize itself against it. But this also increases its susceptibility to inter­

Differentiation    
ference and its reliance on the mode of second-order observation. Every 
functional system operates in an intrasocietal environment that it cannot 
control. That it can do so successfully makes the environments of other 
functional systems uncontrollable for them. In consequence, any ordering 
of the relationship between functional systems that is binding for society 
as a whole dissolves; and every functional system is all the more dependent 
on its own closure, on its own autopoiesis—however well or poorly it is 
equipped in this regard.
Functional differentiation thus does not guarantee equally good 
chances for all functional systems, for the economy and for religion, for law 
and for art. And it cannot be justified by gains in welfare in the sense of a 
division of labor. It is rather a form with which society can reproduce itself 
even under the conditions of high internal intransparency and unpredict­
ability. Operational closure brings disturbance, and disturbance brings op­
erational closure. And it is left to evolution to decide which focal points of 
development, which functional systems, which structures hold their own 
better than others under these conditions.
As complexity and uncertainty increase, the forms with which behav­
ioral expectations are bundled and ascribed to one another through iden­
tities also change. Whereas older societies had managed with a distinction 
between ethos and conduct, between normal-normative (naturally moral) 
rules and (conforming or deviating) conduct oriented on these rules, iden­
tification aspects now have to be more strongly distinguished if complexity 
is to be successfully converted into meaningful orientations and uncer­
tainty is to be structured in such a way that it can be “localized.” On the 
side of normative guidelines, a distinction must now be drawn between 
unconditionally applicable values and conditionally applicable programs, 
if only because the individual functional systems identify their invariant 
codings and their varying programs differently. At the level of conduct ori­
ented on rules, roles and persons have to be distinguished, if only because 
people are no longer identified by their social status and their invariant 
memberships, but choose professions, memberships, and preferred inter­
actions, and in so choosing have to remain identical.328
This differentiation has a considerable impact on what topics remain 
convincing in the context of societal self-descriptions. The domain of pro­
grams and roles can be “positivized,” that is to say, understood as depen­
dent on decisions, insofar as unconditional validity can be claimed only for 

 
  Differentiation
values and, feeding back, for the value of the individual person. We shall 
come back to this. What is relevant at this point is only that a structural 
differentiation is involved that is not limited to single subsystems (func­
tional systems, organizations, interactions) but imposes itself throughout 
society—with considerable consequences above all for possibilities of alien­
ation in families. For identities condense and confirm the social memory 
of the system. They regulate what can be forgotten and remembered, thus 
determining what of the past remains present; and they hence also regu­
late the oscillation scope of the future, that is the forms in which expecta­
tions (in this case behavioral expectations) are fulfilled or disappointed.329
In turn, these effects of functional differentiation affect the process 
of transforming stratified society into a functionally differentiated society. 
They are both the outcome of and factor in this transformation. On the 
one hand, individualistic orientation on the person is used to undermine 
old social divisions. And, on the other, the dependence of the program and 
of access to roles (careers) on decisions becomes so obvious that determi­
nation by origin has to be replaced by determination by decision, which 
produces attribution problems that focus attention on functional systems, 
organizations, and individuals (e.g., in matters of religious faith or in the 
case of “brilliant” discoveries or inventions).
Although the switch from stratification to functional differentiation 
changes the way society is differentiated, stratification is by no means elim­
inated. There continue to be enormous differences between rich and poor, 
and these continue to affect ways of life and access to social opportunities. 
What has changed, however, is that this is no longer a visible order of soci­
ety as such, no longer an order without which no order would be possible. 
Stratification therefore loses its alternativeless legitimation, to be con­
fronted from the eighteenth century onward by the postulate of the equal­
ity of all human beings, against which inequalities had to be measured and, 
where necessary, justified. Semantically, this switch was registered by the 
transition from the stratification concept of estate to the stratification con­
cept of social class, which more clearly marks the mere arbitrariness of the 
classification.330 However, this process continued even within stratification 
that was no longer based on estates, especially in the disappearance of the 
urban upper strata. Moreover, the influence of stratification on individual 
behavior appears to have relaxed in recent decades, so that sociologists now 
prefer to speak of social inequality rather than stratification.331 This may 

Differentiation    
well have something to do with developments in families, youth culture, 
and relations between the generations, but it also shows the decline of a 
standard typology of career, formerly still largely determined by origin.
Attempts have been made to demonstrate that the modern stratifi­
cation structure also fulfills a function by facilitating the selection of per­
sonnel and making it possible to mark career success (which can probably 
only mean renouncing appropriate remuneration for elites).332 However, 
such points of view could be of consequence at best in organizations. The 
theory of society is more interested in why extreme differences in life op­
portunities continue to be reproduced even though the society’s form of 
differentiation no longer depends on them. The answer is that this is clearly 
a by-product of the rational operation of individual functional systems, 
above all, the economic system and the education system.333 These systems 
use the smallest differences (capacity for work, creditworthiness, locational 
advantage, talent, discipline, etc.), developing them in the sense of devia­
tion amplification, so that even an almost level playing field is again tilted 
by social differentiations, even though this effect has no social function.334
Finally, an important difference between stratification and functional 
differentiation is that, under the strict conditions of stratification, there 
are hardly any communications that ignore this differentiation form. In 
functionally differentiated societies, by contrast, there is a great deal of 
communication that can refrain from attributing itself to the one func­
tional system or the other. This raises the question of how communications 
can recognize at all whether they are attributable to a functional system 
(and which one) or not. In stratified societies one could rely on persons 
and ways of life. In functionally differentiated societies, reference to the 
differing codings would appear to be the obvious solution, but this only 
shifts the problem of recognizing attributions. To a certain extent, a sort 
of topographical memory helps: one can distinguish between schools and 
courthouses, hospitals and factories or offices. But over and beyond this, 
a society that can no longer reliably find orientation in the person has to 
depend on the development of corresponding sensibilities. To take the ex­
ample of a malfunctioning marriage, one has to recognize when a problem 
becomes stylized as a legal issue; or at school when instruction lapses into 
political or religious propaganda; or in a hospital when one’s own body be­
comes subject matter for teaching or an object of research. In this question, 
one cannot expect consensus already traced out by the “subject matter.” It 

 
  Differentiation
is up to communication to decide through the concentration of references 
where it is headed.
We must make do with these general pointers. At this stage, they are 
intended only to explain and illustrate the implications of society switching 
to functional differentiation. It is by no means a subphenomenon, for in­
stance, in the sense of Jürgen Habermas’s distinction between system and life 
world, which only concedes that systems, whatever we think of them, also 
occur and are necessary.335 The primacy of functional differentiation natu­
rally does not lead to the replacement of segmentary differentiation or strata 
formation.336 On the contrary, the chances of segmentation (e.g., on the 
basis of organizations) and of self-reinforcing dissimilarities (e.g., between 
industrial countries and developing countries) grow with the complexity of 
the societal system; and they arise precisely from functional systems such 
as the economic system or the education system using and thus enhancing 
similarities and dissimilarities as factors in the rationality of their own op­
erations. The primacy of functional differentiation is the form of modern 
society. And form means nothing other than the difference with which it re­
produces its unity internally, with which it can observe its own unity as the 
unity of what is differentiated.
9. Autonomy and Structural Coupling
If we were to describe modern society as merely a multitude of au­
tonomous functional systems that do not need to take one another into 
consideration but only to obey the reproductive constraints of their own 
autopoiesis, the picture would be very one-sided. It would be difficult to 
understand why such a society is not on the verge of exploding or collaps­
ing. Somewhere and somehow, it would seem, “integration” must be en­
sured. The considerable ecological difficulties that this society now faces, 
which will produce serious crises in the foreseeable future, will at the latest 
have shown the plausibility of a need to plan (even if only in framework 
planning) or control (even if only in context steering).337 People had simi­
larly thought that things could not simply be left to evolution to decide 
during the worldwide surge of fascist movements.338 The present call for an 
ethic of responsibility is to be seen in this context.339 What is striking about 
all these rescue attempts is that newly introduced concepts ignore or accept 
considerable theoretical ballast in incorporating past experience, as if the 

Differentiation    
problem were so overwhelmingly urgent as to justify even desperate con­
cepts. Integration in the face of fundamental differences and the predomi­
nance of difference-theoretical approaches? Planning and control in the 
face of opaque complexity? Ethics in the face of the notorious difficulties 
that all ethics confront in justifying moral judgments? And, finally, hope 
placed in the communication potential of a civil society—not only with re­
gard to decaying communist regimes but also with respect to the problems 
produced by functional differentiation?340 Could it be that the search is too 
concerned with the past and that hope is once again feeding on concepts 
that history has already refuted, because hope is otherwise not to be had?
In what follows the intention is not to arrive at a more favorable 
picture of modern society by some other path; and we must a fortiori 
avoid replacing concepts such as planning, control, or ethics with simi­
larly practical proposals. We know too little to decide even on the form to 
guidelines for action. This can be done only within each functional sys­
tem for its own domain. This naturally does not mean demanding absti­
nence in practical matters, but it makes sense to observe observers with 
regard to these attempts to recognize what happens when someone claims 
planning or ethics for themselves in order to introduce new differences 
into society with their aid.
It is more urgent to correct the difficulties that face the theory of so­
ciety if only the autopoietic dynamics of functional systems is taken into 
account. In the classical sociological discussion from Durkheim to Parsons, 
this problem was handled with the differentiation-integration schema.341 
The task of sociology was to find forms of integration compatible with 
functional differentiation.342 We replace this schema by the distinction be­
tween autopoiesis and structural coupling.
In fact, all functional systems are interlinked and held in society by 
structural couplings. This concept, discussed in volume 1, chapter 1, can be 
applied not only to extrasocietal relations but also to intrasocietal relations. 
Even at the level of single-cell systems, autopoietic closure cannot develop 
without relations with the environment being transformed into structural 
couplings that enhance certain dependencies and effectively exclude ­others 
or reduce them to the possibility of destruction.343 This genetic and struc­
tural connection between operational closure and structural coupling con­
tinues at all levels in the formation of autopoietic systems dependent on 
life. We had dealt with this in discussing the outdifferentiation of the com­

 
  Differentiation
munication system society and must now attempt to clarify the same state 
of affairs in analyzing intrasocietal relations under the conditions of func­
tional differentiation.
The outdifferentiation of operationally closed functional systems re­
quires their intrasocietal environmental relations to be appropriately es­
tablished. The old ties between societal functions and family households 
and with the social stratification of the families had to be cut and replaced 
with new forms of structural coupling connecting up functional systems. 
Structural coupling in this context means transforming analog (simultane­
ous, continuous) relations into digital relations that can be handled in ac­
cordance with an either-or schema, and also intensifying certain mutual 
irritation channels with a high degree of indifference toward the environ­
ment. Without such forms of structural coupling, the outdifferentiation 
of functional systems would have come to a halt in the initial stages, for 
example, at the level of special corporations or organizations. Where the 
establishment of structural couplings succeeds, society as a whole influ­
ences structural development via these channels. Long-term tendencies to 
“structural drift” in functional systems can therefore only be explained if 
this is taken into account. Although there is no longer any possibility of 
intervening in structural developments from without, the irritations that a 
system has repeatedly to deal with—and what indifference it can afford—
play an important role.
In the field of structural coupling, there are further conditions for 
the autonomy of functional systems. On the one hand, the concept itself 
admits that couplings are conditioned by decouplings. This runs counter 
to a widespread view that (following Polanyi) sees an alternative in “dis­
embedding” and in “embedding.”344 Moreover, structural couplings can be 
stronger or weaker, and outdifferentiation can consequently be described 
as the “selection” of supportive systems [Anlehnungssysteme] that allow 
more freedom.345 However, the most important factor compelling opera­
tional autonomy and self-organization is likely to be the multitude of struc­
tural couplings with different segments of the environment, for this results 
in none of these external relations taking the lead and bottleneck problems 
being temporary in nature.346 Normally, this condition is guaranteed by 
the functional differentiation of modern society.
Since there are many functional systems and correspondingly nu­
merous relations between them, we cannot go into all structural couplings. 

Differentiation    
What is more, they vary greatly in importance. We shall therefore look at 
only a few examples.
(1) The coupling of politics and the economy is achieved primarily through 
taxes and charges. This does not alter the fact that all disposal over money 
as payment takes place in the economy. But disposal can be politically con­
ditioned and where this is the case it is not directed toward profit. What 
use the government budget is put to is then a political issue, and if a great 
deal of money or little money is available, this irritates politics. But the use 
of money itself is subject to the market laws of the economic system (noth­
ing is cheaper or more expensive because it is bought with tax money), and 
it has considerable consequences for the structural development of the eco­
nomic system if the “public sector share” of the money supply increases. 
Nor does the state necessarily have to limit itself to tax revenues. Since the 
eighteenth century, public debt has, together with interbank money, been 
one of the most important instruments for increasing the money supply, 
and this applies all the more where the state controls the central bank. Re­
lations between the political system and the central bank are therefore to 
be considered structural coupling, especially where the central bank is, on 
the one hand, independent—and can therefore, for example, make gov­
ernment loans more expensive on the money market—and, on the other 
hand, it can take certain political considerations into account.
Under the conditions of the twentieth century, these traditional cou­
plings are joined by others. The democratization of the political systems of 
individual states makes political success (electoral success) dependent on 
the economic situation, which is in turn embedded in longer-term struc­
tural shifts in the world economic system. However, the possibility of con­
trolling these conditions for success from the position of regional political 
systems is decreasing. The dependence of local production on exports and 
borrowing escapes control by government, which can at best intervene to 
correct or mitigate developments. What is more, the classical distinction 
between liberal and socialist economic policy is less important when only 
reactive measures can be taken to cope with the same, externally deter­
mined states of affairs. The political party schema going back to the nine­
teenth century has thus collapsed without it being clear what could replace 
it and how.347 But if the voter can be offered no alternative to which he 
can relate his everyday experience or only alternatives labeled “radical” on 
the political spectrum, an important basis for regenerating the willingness 

 
  Differentiation
to identify with electoral democracy is lacking. The political system will 
therefore have to reorganize itself in terms of thematic areas accessible for 
collectively binding decisions; at the moment, however, it is not clear how 
this could be done.
(2) The coupling between law and politics is regulated by the constitu­
tion.348 On the one hand, the constitution commits the political system 
to the law with the result (if it works!) that illegal action becomes political 
failure: on the other, the constitution makes it possible to inundate the 
legal system with innovations through politically inspired legislation,349 
which are in turn attributed to politics as success or failure.350 The posi­
tivization of law and the democratization of politics are thus closely inter­
related. This then leads to the administration directing politics with regard 
to what is legally and financially possible.351 The one determines the other. 
The law provides the scope for formative action, which then makes demo­
cratic decision-making possible politically. But the operations, each recur­
sively networked within the given system, remain separate. The political 
importance (questionability, contentiousness) of a law is something quite 
different from its legal validity.
The structural coupling of politics and law not only influences poli­
tics through the “judicial state.” It also deforms constitutional law itself 
when it is used for the judicial control of political welfare-state tenden­
cies.352 The purpose-driven state then has to be subject to justiciable rules. 
Notably in German constitutional law, basic rights are generalized into 
general value programs for action by the state, and, conversely, public ad­
ministration has no choice but to accept the decisions of the courts as gen­
eral guidelines for administrative practice.
(3) In relations between the law and the economy, structural coupling is 
achieved through property and contract.353 In their legal quality, these in­
stitutions offer extremely important grounds for rights and commitments 
(in the sense of obligations), so that during the period of upheaval in the 
eighteenth century, some even believed they were congruent with the foun­
dations of law and society per se.354 For the economic system, they form 
the systemic code have/have not and are the precondition for operations 
of the system, for payments in the context of transactions.355 Although 
contexts for use and thus the conditions for the recursive identification of 
single elements, for instance, the meaning of a payment or the legal validi­

Differentiation    
ty of a claim for breach of contract, differ considerably, structural coupling 
makes a high degree of mutual irritation between systems possible. Only 
the removal of legal controls on and the conditioning of property and con­
tract made the enormous expansion of the economy possible by involving 
completely unknown partners not belonging to the same sphere of life;356 
and, vice versa, the economic use of legal institutions announced the de­
velopment, based on Roman precedents, of the legal concepts of property 
and contract toward a definition of property as the right of disposal and 
toward the actionability of all contracts on the grounds of mere consensus 
between the contracting parties (nuda pactio). Structural coupling sets the 
direction of “structural drift” for both systems, although and because they 
have no common elements. And the result is an increase in the irritation 
of law by the economy, as the increase in civil litigation that accompanied 
economic growth shows.357
(4) The science system and the education system are coupled by the univer­
sity organization form. At the latest in the nineteenth century, universities 
escaped their medieval commitment to service functions in the religious 
system or in providing human resources for the early modern state;358 and 
they now constitute an organizational community of research and teach­
ing that also politically justifies the considerable financial cost to the state. 
The vehicle of research remains publication, the vehicle of teaching inter­
action in lecture halls and seminar rooms. “Academic didactics,” or mostly 
improvised functional equivalents, determine what scientific texts are suit­
able for instruction; and conversely, however highly qualified a teacher’s 
work may be, it bestows no reputation as a researcher. The systems remain 
separate but operate, as it were, in personal union; they have an effect on 
scientific publication that is difficult to determine and, perhaps even more 
strongly, bring a certain overemphasis on science and lack of practical rel­
evance to university education.
(5) To couple politics with science, recruiting political personnel from sci­
entifically trained circles had to suffice until well into the twentieth cen­
tury. However, as scientific research advanced faster than the knowledge 
of ex-academics in the public service and the knowledge requirements of 
the political system became more complex with the growing range of its 
societal engagement, new institutions of structural coupling developed. 
Their remit is increasingly the provision of expert advice. As we now see, 

 
  Differentiation
the activity of expert advisers can no longer be adequately understood 
as the application of existing knowledge. While in communication they 
have to withhold or at least water down uncertainties persisting in science, 
they have to avoid deciding political questions in advance as questions of 
knowledge. Their advice conveys not authority but uncertainty, with the 
consequence that experts appear to be scientifically untrustworthy while 
presenting politically inspired controversies as differences in the assess­
ment of scientific knowledge.359 As a result they are likely to be regarded 
neither as scientists nor as politicians but as a fast track for mutual irrita­
tions, as mechanisms of structural coupling.
(6) For relations between the education system and the economy (in this 
instance as employment system), the mechanism of structural coupling 
consists of references and certificates. This solution, too, inspired by criti­
cism of class-oriented recruitment, imposed itself only in the nineteenth 
century.360 For schools and universities it means a sometimes unwelcome 
alien element that, in the opinion of educationalists, makes the real task 
of education, of Bildung, more difficult. Nevertheless, the effects on the 
career structure of the system are enormous—when compared, for ex­
ample, with educational intentions and ideals. The economy suffers a 
great deal less from this incongruity because it depends more strongly on 
the situation on the labor market and on the motivation of young job­
seekers (self-­selection), and nowadays is increasingly engaging in system­
atic personnel development on its own. Its dependence is due more to a 
lack, namely, to the failure of the education system to provide adequate 
training for many occupations, for instance, in modern technologies and 
higher management.
These examples will suffice. Others could be mentioned, for exam­
ple, “sick leave” in relations between the medical system and the economy, 
or the art trade (galleries) in relations between the art system and the eco­
nomic system. A thoroughgoing analysis would also show that there are 
functional systems such as the religious system that have developed hardly 
any structural couplings and are therefore hardly affected in their “struc­
tural drift.” The evidence presented suffices to draw certain conclusions. 
Above all, it clearly shows that structural couplings function only as form, 
that is, only with an inclusion and exclusion effect. A constitution, for ex­
ample, may be adopted as a legal text, but it does not work if it cannot 

Differentiation    
prevent the unconstitutional impacts of political violence on the legal sys­
tem, for instance, in law enforcement or in the widespread form of corrup­
tion.361 Our examples also show that we are not dealing with institutions 
that exist, as it were, in suspension “between” systems, not belonging to 
any of them. They are rather institutions that can be used by every sys­
tem, but in a different sense by each; for how could irritations otherwise 
develop? Not least of all, the considerable societal prominence of some of 
these institutions is striking. Property, contract, constitution, transmission 
of knowledge (“technocracy”), and so forth have on occasion almost at­
tained the status of descriptions of society. To this extent, too, the theory 
of functional differentiation serves to relativize such claims and to draw at­
tention to the multiplicity of functionally equivalent forms.
Finally, a particularity should be noted that arises only in intrasys­
temic structural couplings. Whereas no operations are available for cou­
pling in external relations (there is, in other words, no coupling system that 
could realize an operation type of its own and thus its own autopoiesis), 
the situation is different for internal relations. In the case of the societal 
system, communication can be used to couple systems. Structural coupling 
is complemented by operational coupling. Thus a doctor can confirm an 
illness in writing and give the document to the patient for his employer. 
Above all, numerous “negotiating systems” have clustered around the po­
litical system, bringing together organizations representing interests from 
various functional systems in the form of regular interactions.362 Thus, as 
Michael Hutter has shown, “conversation circles” have formed around the 
pharmaceutical industry to discuss questions of patent law, research op­
tions, and economic interests.363 Operational couplings cannot replace 
structural couplings. They presuppose them. But they concentrate and up­
date mutual irritations, thus allowing information to be obtained more 
quickly and with better coordination in the participating systems.
10. Irritations and Values
The realization of functional differentiation as the primary form of 
societal differentiation fundamentally changes the environmental relations 
of systems, both of the overall system society and of its subsystems. Presup­
posing the concept of structural coupling, I use the concept of irritation to 
describe this change.364 The thesis is that transition to this differentiation 

 
  Differentiation
form increases the irritability of society, its capacity to react fast to changes 
in the environment; but this is at the cost of largely renouncing any co­
ordination of irritations. Society can react only with irritation to the un­
coordinated state of irritations and not, for instance, through a centrally 
supervised solution to the problem of overirritation. For if such central 
planning and control were possible, this would very soon reduce the irri­
tability of society to the format of the information-processing capacity of 
the relevant entity (and only an organization would really come into ques­
tion) and abandon the advantage gained from the increase in irritability. 
The tendency is for information processing to shift from anticipatory to 
reactive patterns (although both can increase with growing complexity).365
In the relevant functional context—the occurrence of something 
“new” as a deviation from expected continuity and repetition—the old 
European tradition used the term admiratio, meaning both admiration 
[Bewunderung] and surprise/astonishment [Verwunderung].366 Admiratio 
is thus conceived of as applying to the exception, as an undifferentiated 
state (passion), as undecided in relation to true/false, as not yet binarily 
coded. To generate admiratio, where it does not arise on its own and can 
then be occasion for religious experience, is a matter for art. In any case, 
there are opportunities or actions that according to this semantics can pro­
voke irritations. It is not yet—although the transition is not clear-cut—a 
question of the constant self-irritation of society.
The modern concept of irritation (or “perturbation”) covers a func­
tionally equivalent state of affairs, but reacts to a different form of societal 
differentiation. It is theoretically at home in the thesis of the link between 
the operational closure (autopoiesis) and the structural coupling of sys­
tem and environment. Environmental impacts on the system, which are of 
course innumerable at any moment in time, cannot determine the system, 
because every determination of the system can be generated only in the re­
cursive network of its own operations (thus here only through communica­
tion), and in this context remains tied to the system’s own structures, which 
make such recursions and corresponding operational sequences possible 
(structural determination). Irritation is accordingly a state of the system 
that stimulates the continuation of the system’s autopoietic operations, but 
which, as mere irritation, initially leaves it open whether structures have 
to be changed for this purpose; thus whether learning processes are initi­
ated through further irritations or whether the system relies on the irrita­

Differentiation    
tion disappearing by itself in the course of time because it is only a one-off 
event. Keeping both possibilities open is a guarantee for the autopoiesis of 
the system, as well as a guarantee of its amenability to evolution. But auto­
poiesis does not depend—it would be fatal—on the capacity of the system 
to learn. At the same time, this reflection shows (and this will hold true for 
organisms) that the increase in irritability relates to the increase in learning 
capacity, thus to the ability to multiply an initial irritation in the system 
and in coordination with existing structures to continue generating further 
irritations until the irritation is consumed by adapted structures.
In order to be open to irritation, meaning structures are built to form 
expectation horizons, which count on redundancies, hence with repetition 
of the same in other situations. Irritations are then registered in the form 
of disappointed expectations. Positive and negative, pleasant and unpleas­
ant surprises can be involved. In both cases it is a matter, on the one hand, 
of momentary inconsistencies, which can also be forgotten; one sees the 
consequences or represses them. On the other hand, irritation can also as­
sert its own repeatability and on this level runs counter to the expectation 
structures of the system. Widely varying expectation horizons are gener­
ated through system differentiation, as well as widely varying time spans 
within which things future deserve present attention, and finally widely 
varying rhythms and frequencies of possible repeatability. This is also the 
reason why functional differentiation vastly expands irritability in societal 
communication, while normally limiting learning demands to one of the 
functional systems and leaving it open whether this system will irritate 
other systems through changes in its structures and operations.
All this means that irritations can never be attributed to “the envi­
ronment” (as entity) but require the identification of specific sources, and 
cannot otherwise be perceived. The term therefore refers not to the general 
system-environment relationship but to system-system relations, and this 
is why irritations perceptible in a society change with the form of system 
differentiation.
Unlike older, model-theoretical or mathematical systems theories, 
this theoretical construct composed of autopoiesis, structural coupling, 
and irritation presupposes no state of equilibrium to which the system re­
turns after perturbation. It could at best be pointed out that the system has 
the double possibility of reacting through negative feedback (elimination 
of the difference produced by perturbation) or through positive feedback 

 
  Differentiation
(deviation amplification). We would then be approaching evolution-­
theoretical concepts and would presuppose the initial state in purely histor­
ical terms (and not structurally as equilibrium). The concept of irritation 
takes this theoretical development trend further. It corresponds to transi­
tion to a theory of nontrivial machines (Heinz von Foerster) and the tran­
sition from structural stability to dynamic stability.
Irritation is a state specific to a system without correspondence in 
the environment of the system. If we observe an irritation in a system, we 
cannot conclude that the environment is correspondingly irritated; not 
even that the environmental state that provoked the irritation is a prob­
lem for the environment (for whom else?). A “pollution” is a creation of 
human judgment.367 The hole in the ozone layer, the sunken nuclear sub­
marine, the “dying” forests are not irritated by themselves. The environ­
ment is the way it is. To be exact, one can talk about irritation only with a 
system index. This is also apparent from the fact that the concept already 
presupposes a difference that can exist only in a system, namely, the dif­
ference between a normal, structurally traced out sequence of operations 
and a state whose consequences are not clear, whose transition to follow-
up operations is undecided.368 The difference (and hence the “form” of ir­
ritation) appears in meaning systems as a semantic difference. It makes it 
possible to indicate the irritation, for example, as problem or possibly as 
ambivalence, as uncertainty that one can perhaps let rest. This difference is 
the form in which a meaning system reacts to environmental impacts, and 
thus to something that takes place on quite different levels of reality (e.g., 
chemically or in the mind) or also in other functional systems, which are 
inaccessible to the system because of its operational closure.
This conceptual revision reacts to a change in attitudes toward soci­
etal progress. It gives room for doubt about whether the model of the divi­
sion of labor that generates surplus investment income can be transferred 
to society. The assumption of this model was that differentiation in terms 
of functional specification was rational, because it made the more efficient 
production of goods possible and allowed cost savings as long as the tar­
geted market was big enough and could take the products. We should not 
think only of economic goods but also, for example, of health or scientific 
knowledge, or education. An increase in irritability is, however, something 
quite different from an increase in performance. We can be content to 
note that functional differentiation brings relief and, for example, in ac­

Differentiation    
cordance with the specific criteria of functional systems, can make possible 
better science (more knowledge), a better economy (more prosperity), bet­
ter politics (more democracy, better-coordinated opinions), better health, 
better education. There is no disputing this. But this primary focus on in­
trasocietal functions and performance hides the problem with which the 
concept of irritation is concerned, namely, the relationship between sys­
tem and environment, or to be more precise, the problem of the reentry 
of the difference between system and environment into the system. Hence 
the problem not of performance rationality but of system rationality.
Efforts directed primarily toward enhancing performance have the 
side effect of enhancing the environmental sensitivity of functional sys­
tems. Positive law can be adapted to new regulatory requirements, poli­
tics can continuously address new topics. The economy can divert money 
flows, and the education system can introduce new subjects of instruction 
and examination. Every day, the mass media need news; art and science 
understand themselves in terms of difference from what already exists. At 
least at the programmatic level, accelerated change is everywhere appar­
ent; and everywhere there are professions and organizations committed to 
initiating change, which would react with the greatest irritation and take 
action if things came to a standstill. This is a direct result of the distinc­
tion between coding and programming. In unreflected usage of the term, 
innovation is always taken to be good and deserving of support. Mean­
while, however, we also realize that this amounts in large measure to the 
self-­irritation of society, ultimately to irritation through irritation. A far 
from irrelevant indicator of this is when organization theoreticians observe 
(and the same applies to the theory of science) that problem solving seeks 
problems that it has solved in order to find its own meaning and possibly 
to arrive at other, functionally equivalent solutions.369 Or that through the 
problem/problem-solving schema, the self-irritation of the system distracts 
attention from the circumstance that in fact a conflictual, interested self-
description of systems is elaborated.370
The counter observation shows that the pressure of problems also in­
creases while the relationship of the societal system with its environment 
becomes more and more difficult. The irritation channels apparently ab­
sorb too many and not enough problems. If this were only a matter of rais­
ing the wrong problems, as many hope and warn, it could be corrected. 
But are we really sure? It could also be the case that the processual concept 

 
  Differentiation
of irritation hides a paradox, namely, the paradox of the unity of the dif­
ference between system and environment; and we would here be dealing 
with the unfolding of this (invisible) fundamental paradox, which in reso­
lution itself takes paradoxical forms, forms of hectic standstill, of planned 
change that triggers uncontrolled evolution, a flood of irritation that is 
not resolved, not processed, but which, as it were, de-irritates in irritating 
other systems.
Whatever one thinks of this theoretical construction, it is appar­
ent to the observer that the occasions for irritation from the environment 
of the societal system have been proliferating dramatically in recent de­
cades—not least, indeed, precisely, on society’s own monitors. This holds 
true in at least three regards:
(1) with regard to the ecological problems of the extrahuman world pro­
voked by technology and overpopulation;
(2) with regard to the increase in the population itself, hence the rapid 
multiplication of human bodies and uncontrollable migrations; and
(3) with regard to the increasingly individualized, increasingly “idiosyn­
cratic” expectations of individuals in the pursuit of happiness and self-
fulfillment.
All these insufficiencies are obviously a direct or indirect effect of 
modern societal evolution, hence of the transition to functional differen­
tiation. On the one hand, the irritation level of society has risen owing to 
functional systems being free to develop endogenous dynamics to a degree 
that escapes any coordination, and, through the mutual irritation of func­
tional systems, changes into societal self-irritation. On the other hand, this 
quite clearly reveals the also increasing discrepancies in relations between 
the societal system and its environment as problems in communication, 
without, however, offering adequate solutions. The continuous supply of 
information makes the discrepancy between irritation and remedy ever 
present. In its effects, functional differentiation intervenes more strongly in 
the environment, but it does not provide for the consequences to be dealt 
with centrally. It disperses the repercussions in society, distributes them as 
irritations among the individual functional systems because only there can 
effective remedies be expected.371 This makes it all the more urgent to give 
the problem of rationality the form of a reentry problem. This raises the 

Differentiation    
question: Can society adjust internally to its environment—even if only to 
changes in its environment that it produces itself? But precisely reentry is 
by its form also a paradox: copying a distinction as the same into another.
What one can observe at present cannot be understood as a pur­
posive solution to this problem, but only as the evolutionary change (in­
cluding the new formation) of structures that react to the given situation. 
Among these epigenetically evolving forms is above all the surprising emer­
gence of new hard distinctions and boundaries that contribute to identity 
formation and therefore cannot be crossed.372 We see this in the return of 
ethnic distinctions in regions supposedly pacified by the state and also in 
the revival of religious fundamentalism in a world society that has usually 
been described as “secularized.”373 In both cases, insulation processes de­
velop: minority inclusion-exclusion relationships that offer a locus for cer­
titude of identity, without calling on the services of functional systems and 
their organizations (that the pervasive media of the functional systems, 
for instance, money or organized official power can also play a role here is 
naturally not to be denied; but they are not used as offers of identity). Ra­
cial distinctions play a role, as does “gender trouble,” and not least of all 
strongly motivated xenophobia, which feeds on demographic movements 
that for their part occur as uncontrolled side effects of the success of func­
tional systems, which varies strongly from region to region.
And because it is a question of identity, it is also a question of vio­
lence. The hard boundaries of such separate areas are in no way coordi­
nated with the boundaries of functional systems. They are communicated 
expressively, and a propensity for violence is, as once in the world of the de­
clining nobility, perhaps the most expressive means by which one can show 
existential commitment. It is of course not a matter of psychological facts. 
What the individual thinks about things remains unknown. But violence, 
not least because it inspires fear, is a communicative event of the first order.
In all the cases mentioned, what is not least at stake is the demon­
stration of unirritability. Unirritability is also the solution for a quite dif­
ferent, comparatively harmless level of communication; the insistence on 
ethical principles or indispensable values.374 It is interesting that the aca­
demic discussions conducted under these headings, which had come to 
a dead end in both the ethics of moral justification and in the philoso­
phy of values, have not continued or have done so at best in popularized 
form.375 Attention appears to have turned to more urgent needs. Sociologi­

 
  Differentiation
cal ­analysis also reveals that all provision is lacking for the social realization 
of the unirritable postulates; indeed, that any understanding of this prob­
lem is lacking. With whatever justification, ethics turns to the individual 
decision-maker. But there are so many deciding at the same time (and still 
more if we multiply by time distances) that it is not quite clear how so­
cial coordination is to come about.376 If, for example, ethics demands re­
nunciation of the accustomed level of consumption in the interests of the 
environment or in the interests of more just global distribution, it is not 
apparent how this goal is to be attained through individual motivation. 
What remains is a certain maudlin contention that society does not live up 
to the ethical demands made of it,377 an assertion with which communica­
tion is understandably successful. If, however, we ask how this insistence 
on unirritability relates to the irritability of social systems, we find our­
selves back with the paradox of the unity of a distinction that can be used 
on only one or other of its two sides.
Since it is hardly possible to find a firm footing in ethics, one seeks 
to absorb uncertainty from uncoordinable, continual irritation at the level 
of “values.”378 Values compensate for the “loss of reality” that sets in in the 
transition to the mode of second-order observation. Instead, it formulates 
preferences and judges reality from this standpoint. But precisely because 
preferences are no more than preferences, they can become fixed points if 
communication can insist that this is not contradicted. One can make use 
of them in ongoing communication as an “inviolate level” (Douglas Hof­
stadter) and thus once again outbid a reality that has become contingent.
This is done with the aid of a certain communication technique. 
Values are presupposed in communication, and are also communicated 
in communication, but they are not exposed to communication. They are 
activated only as premises, not as assertions. Ongoing, value-focused com­
munication therefore sees no reason to react to a value assertion by accep­
tance or rejection or by a modifying “yes, but.” In themselves, values are in 
the first place preferences. Only through complex historical shifts in mean­
ing have social demands also been built into the value concept since the 
nineteenth century. If women demand equal opportunities, this also indi­
cates that others have to recognize this without the premise that equality 
is a value being subject to discussion. Hence, more than a mere preference 
is expressed, and this is a form that is not made the subject of communi­
cation at the typical pace of communication. The burden of complexity is 

Differentiation    
thus placed upon whoever objects, who may perhaps not even wish to deny 
the value of equality as such but to demand that other points of view also 
be taken into consideration. But this is too complicated and not worth­
while in the individual case. And so one lets the value pass.
Values contain no rules for dealing with conflict between values. 
There is no transitive or hierarchical order of values. Precisely because every 
order of values is full of “strange loops” and therefore continually collapses, 
it is suitable as an “inviolate level.”379 In this sense, there can be no absolute 
values that take precedence in every situation. The abstraction of numer­
ous values in the form of individual preferences can only mean that values 
have continuously to be compromised or put aside. The more values there 
are, the more difficult it is to see how to decide. However, an important 
advantage of the value semantics should not be overlooked. Since values 
flow into communication and are represented in the form of “entitled” in­
terests, they make their mark on the memory of the system. What was re­
jected or put aside is recalled and can be brought up in conversation again 
on the next occasion. The legitimacy of the interests, the value of the values 
are not denied nor the failure to take them into account simply forgotten. 
In other words, current values shift the normal balance between forgetting 
and exceptionally remembering in favor of remembering. And over time 
this compensates in some measure for values not being decision-making 
programs in themselves.
Given this state of affairs, absolute values assume a strange form; they 
are values with considered opposition. Since the proponents of such values 
already know who will oppose them, they see no reason to give way. They 
know only victories or defeats, especially since they can be sure that the 
value they uphold cannot be denied as a value.
This may be limited to marginal occurrences rubbing shoulders 
with the fanaticisms and fundamentalisms that a self-hyperirritating soci­
ety constantly produces. Ultimately, all value conflicts become irritations 
again and are transformed into decision-making burdens. Functional sys­
tems can in turn react with irritation to the severity of the distinction 
used to determine identities, to the proclamations of principles by ethics, 
and to the assumption of values. Xenophobia may become a political and 
legal problem, ethnic conflicts may diminish economic potential and in­
fluence financial flows. Women’s problems are converted into career prob­
lems, and religious radicalism is seen as a problem for the democratization 

 
  Differentiation
of politics. Reference to ethical principles or indispensable values may 
well increase in everyday speech and help in a wide range of situations, in 
formulating party platforms or court decisions, in announcing corporate 
principles or drafting laws. How the problems in hand are then resolved 
(as the system “assimilates,” as Piaget would put it, ethical irritation) is an­
other question. In short, oblique thematization develops in incongruent 
perspectives. Only if one takes sides with the functional systems, which 
suffer anyway from an overload of irritation, still seeing in them the only 
hope, can one judge their attempts to transform irritations into expecta­
tion structures as offering a perspective for solving the given environmen­
tal problems. Nowadays this takes a certain amount of optimism. At any 
rate, limits to the possibility of completely normalizing the evolutionary 
improbability of this form of function-oriented societal differentiation are 
now becoming clearly apparent.
11. Societal Consequences
The many problematic consequences of functional differentiation 
and the incorrigible operational autonomy of functional systems have 
often been described and blamed on modern society. The best known is 
certainly the failure of the world economic system to cope with the prob­
lem of the just distribution of wealth. Similar problems can be cited for 
other functional systems. By focusing on schools and universities, the ed­
ucation system leads young people to spend far too long hanging around 
in institutions of higher education to improve their career prospects, 
when they could long since have been married and in productive employ­
ment. Through the political parties, the political system attracts people 
into politics who then, merely because they have to keep busy, bestow 
unaffordable blessings on the nation. The expectations set in intimate re­
lationships (under the heading of marriage for love) are now so height­
ened—because motives are, after all, needed for getting involved—that 
the ensuing marriages keep the therapists and divorce courts busy, and 
new attempts are frequent.
These examples show that the functional systems of society burden 
themselves—and thus society—with problems produced by their own 
outdifferentiation, specialization, and focus on high performance. But 
they represent only a fraction of the societal consequences of functional 

Differentiation    
differentiation that have to be kept in mind. Another field is the environ­
mental relations of the societal system, in particular, the lack of a central 
authority responsible for such problems. Signals generated by the environ­
ment that society converts into information are taken up and processed 
only in the individual functional systems, because there is no other pos­
sibility. We need think only of protest movements—to which we shall be 
returning—but this does not change the fact that only a subsystem of so­
ciety feels itself to be affected and reacts on the basis of its own structures, 
on the basis of its own memory, and in the framework of its own opera­
tional possibilities. The societal system itself cannot act. It does not reoccur 
in society, and, once functional differentiation has succeeded, can also not 
be represented in society. In society there is no “good society,” no nobility, 
no distinguished form of an urban (civil) way of life to which one could 
turn. Solving environmental problems “ethically” thus becomes an all-too-
comfortable illusion, although formulating such problems in terms of ap­
peal can be useful in maintaining public awareness.
Every outdifferentiation of a system generates both system and en­
vironment, since systems can be produced only as forms that presuppose 
another side, an “unmarked space.” Meaning-oriented systems also operate 
always in connection with self-reference/other-reference. They cannot for­
get their environment. Through inclusion of what is excluded, it remains 
ever-present. This is true of ongoing communication, of the continuation 
of the autopoiesis of the system. But this does not mean that competence 
for dealing with environmental questions is differentiated out within the 
system. The relationship between energy procurement and power forma­
tion alone has been difficult in all societies, because the conversion of en­
vironmental problems into intrasystemic structures fails owing to their 
intrinsic logic.380 The form of functional differentiation shows all the more 
that there can be no control center and therefore no central agency for 
dealing with environmental issues. Such an institution would block the 
outdifferentiation of all functional systems affecting the environment. 
Functionally differentiated society operates without apex or center.
Naturally, this does not mean that the environment is not an issue. 
One communicates about it at the level of “problems,” because it would be 
too difficult and would breach communicative understanding if commu­
nication were to be shifted to the level of “interests.” However, if environ­
mental pollution is formulated as a problem, nobody will be found to have 

 
  Differentiation
overall responsibility for it. Processing, indeed, even the transformation of 
irritations into information, is the task of each functional system. Social 
movements can protest against the consequences; but they, too, are only 
subsystems of society that can exist only if they do not assume the function 
of the functional systems themselves.381
All information about the environment is therefore generated in the 
functional systems and in the supplementary protest movements. It re­
mains tied to the autopoiesis of these systems and to their system-specific 
memory. This constrains information processing, and its integration can 
consist only in a mutual limitation of the autopoietically possible degree 
of freedom.
But what is “the environment” and how do these limitations in deal­
ing with it affect society? This question brings us back to the problem of 
the societal consequences of functional differentiation.
If we understand society as the autopoiesis of communication, every­
thing that is excluded from it belongs to the environment. This includes 
not only the ecological conditions for the continued existence of societal 
communication, which is usually meant, but also the human individuals 
who contribute to communication through the particular efforts of their 
consciousness. We thus have to do with two sorts of environment, which 
differ depending on whether they contribute to the continuation of com­
munication and can hence be addressed as “persons” or not. The biomass 
of human bodies participates in both environments and, indeed, offers the 
perspective from which societal communication chiefly addresses environ­
mental problems and problems of the survival of mankind.
All this shows that there is no central competence in society for deal­
ing with ecological problems. Each functional system has to rely on it­
self.382 This does not mean that orientation on the corresponding problems 
cannot be intensified and also imposed on the economy, on science, and 
on politics. In this connection one thinks of the activities of ecological 
movements and above all of the mass media. But to begin with this in­
creases the discrepancy between problem formulation and problem solu­
tion (the discrepancy itself can naturally be a motive for doing more than 
would otherwise be expected). At any rate the topic is well established in 
public opinion as topic, schema, script, and if we bring it up, we are un­
likely to meet with astonishment (What on earth are you talking about?). 
But society suffers from this topic and from the corresponding future sce­

Differentiation    
narios, because solutions to the problems are not in sight (or at best to a 
minimal, gradual extent). Each functional system can react in its own way: 
politics rhetorically, the economy by raising prices, science with research 
projects, which with every advance in knowledge reveal still more igno­
rance. The factual consequences of excessive exploitation of the environ­
ment have hitherto been limited; but little imagination is needed to realize 
that things cannot continue as in the past.
That ecological competencies cannot be centralized may be seen as 
due to the structural weakness of modern society. The fact that responsibil­
ity for the individuality of individuals cannot be centralized may be con­
sidered a stroke of luck. A central agency concerned with the possibilities 
of being individual, and that also communicated this, would not only be 
an abomination but also quite clearly a paradox. The last attempts of this 
sort were notions concomitant with the decline of stratified society. At 
that time (ca. 1650–1750), it was claimed that individuals could be happy 
if they resigned themselves to the station in life to which they were born 
(and even then “happiness” meant reflected individuality). The society of 
today has instead only such topics as “identity,”“emancipation,” and “self-
realization” to offer, which demand the dismantling of societal barriers but 
provide no answers to how the individual, who uses the empty space soci­
ety leaves him, can find a meaningful relationship with himself that lives 
up to publicly proclaimed standards.
In our context, we need only note that problems with individuality, 
like ecological problems, are among the follow-up costs of modern, func­
tionally differentiated society. Although they concern the environment of 
the system, society cannot ignore them, because they are a subject of com­
munication. And with the increase in communication a certain sense of 
helplessness also appears to grow.
12. Globalization and Regionalization
Describing modern society in terms of the primacy of functional dif­
ferentiation meets with a great deal of protest, which, at first glance, seems 
empirically well justified. As soon as we look at individual regions, we no­
tice structures that do not fit in with the functional pattern of large-scale 
differentiated systems. Consider, for example, the importance of (wealthy) 
families and similarly structured social networks in the southern Chinese 

 
  Differentiation
economic area (including Hong Kong and Taiwan),383 as well as the link 
between politics and economics in certain Latin American countries. We 
could also question whether the typical Japanese matches the image of an 
individual who makes rational decisions on the basis of the linguistic yes/
no code, or whether the prime concern to which he is committed socially 
is not rather to avoid sharp distinctions. In many countries of the world 
system, the strict separation of legal issues and political issues is not usual, 
and it is not very useful to describe the problem-solving methods practiced 
there as “corrupt.”384 Strategies for sharing benefits, providing for the fu­
ture, and exercising influence are frequently pursued through networks of 
personal, direct or indirect “recommendations,” and this is often the case 
where agrarian clientèle relations have collapsed and recourse is had in­
stead to positions in organizations.385 The more one looks at the detail, the 
more striking are the deviations from what the theory of functional differ­
entiation leads us to expect. Where does a West African drummer belong 
who has mastered and can combine a wide range of rhythms in a highly 
original manner, but who owes his fame to the mass media and the interest 
exotic performers arouse among a Western public? In many trance-based 
cults, medical, mental therapeutic, and religious aspects can hardly be kept 
apart, and precisely this makes them attractive. How are we to explain the 
worldwide development of ghettoes in major cities (Rio de Janeiro, Chi­
cago, now Paris): is it due to economically enforced migration, class differ­
ences in the school system, different legal systems, the failure of political 
control? It seems that the impacts of various functional systems combine, 
reinforce, and inhibit one another due to conditions that occur only re­
gionally, and consequently generate widely differing patterns. Noone will 
deny these facts. The question is only what theory can do justice to them.
For a time, an attempt was made to tackle these problems under 
the tradition/modernity schema, and thus to acknowledge that there are 
modernization paths that are determined by tradition. Almost in parallel, 
however, considerable misgivings developed about such a dichotomy.386 
And indeed, it can hardly be overlooked that the hostility of European 
rationalism to tradition (and its espousal of innovation) is itself a tradi­
tion, whereas a nostalgic, even fanatical return to tradition since roman­
ticism, but also in the religious fundamentalisms of recent decades, must 
be recognized as a typical intellectual stance. This schema has therefore 
long been determined by reentry into itself and is hence applicable al­

Differentiation    
most at will. Hector had long ago already not cared whether the bird flew 
to the left or to the right or to West or East (Iliad 12.249–50). Moreover, 
citing different regional traditions hardly explains why tensions between 
global and regional orientations have clearly increased in the second half 
of this century.
The observation that global and regional optima diverge markedly 
is a better point of departure.387 This is likely to be because world soci­
ety does not control itself through goals or norms or directives whose re­
gional compliance can then be checked and if necessary corrected, but 
because the centers of world society (above all, of course, international 
financial markets) generate fluctuations that lead regionally to dissipa­
tive structures and to the need for self-organization. This can occur in the 
economic system through business enterprises but also investment funds, 
which in turn influence regional possibilities for production and work. Or 
in the religious system through fluctuations in fads attractive to individu­
als, to which religious fundamentalism then responds. Or in the political 
system through the decline in the predominant position of world powers, 
to which regional entities then react with ambitions to assert their posi­
tion. Above all, the continued existence of nation-states means that re­
gional interests are brought to bear and hence strengthened within world 
society and through the exploitation of its fluctuations. States compete, 
for example, on the international financial markets for capital for regional 
investment. This difference between global and regional is particularly ap­
parent when we look at the state, even if the political system of world soci­
ety is a system of states, and this no longer permits individual states to be 
considered as entities in isolation. 
The difference between global and regional understood in this sense 
also obliges the overall system to develop, not in pursuit of a goal, but in de­
pendence on history, and situations that have already occurred always have 
to be responded to retrospectively, which in turn excludes cognitive inte­
gration and favors regionally varying perceptions of situations. This does 
not contradict the underlying assumption, without which there would be 
no world society and no globalization, that the transition to functional dif­
ferentiation described earlier (in vol. 1, chap. 1.10) can culminate only in 
the establishment of a world societal system. For functional systems geared 
to universalism and specification, spatial boundaries make no sense—ex­
cept as segmentary differentiation (e.g., in political states) within func­

 
  Differentiation
tional systems. The reference to function demands constant crossing of 
territorial boundaries: to receive news of foreign provenance, to obtain in­
ternational loans, to take political and military precautions against events 
beyond the country’s borders, to copy the school and university systems 
of developed countries, and so forth. This attenuation of spatial barriers is 
intensified by the fact that worldwide communication now takes place by 
telecommunication in almost no time at all. Information no longer needs 
to be transported like things or people. The world system is in point of fact 
realizing the simultaneity of all operations and events, and it is therefore 
effective in an uncontrollable fashion, since what is simultaneous cannot 
be causally controlled.388 There is therefore no alternative to assuming the 
full realization of a world society, as noted earlier.389
The last major attempt within world society as it already exists to 
set up an “empire” on traditional lines failed with the Soviet system; and 
it foundered on the functional differentiation of world society.390 The 
­socialist-communist empire could not avoid economic, political, scientific, 
and mass-media interdependencies. It could neither close its borders nor 
prevent comparison between internal and external states of affairs. Above 
all, it could not effectively prevent the ensuing irritations from taking ef­
fect organizationally in information, and relaxation at this point led to 
the rapid collapse of the system. Apparently, if we can generalize from this 
case, regional entities cannot win a struggle against world society; they suf­
fer defeat in the attempt to hold their own against its influence.
Despite these rather clear indicators, this does not mean that regional 
differences no longer have any significance. On the contrary: the domi­
nant pattern of functional differentiation appears precisely to offer them 
a point of departure for effecting distinctions. To explain this, we can use 
the concept of conditioning. The starting point lies in the evolutionary 
improbability of functional differentiation. Regional specificities can then 
intervene both to foster and to inhibit developments. They can, for ex­
ample, promote a distinction between the economy and politics in the 
form of family or family-like loyalties, not least also in the form of cross-­
border economic relations, which politically can then only be hampered 
or destroyed. But they can also prevent the autopoietic autonomy of func­
tional systems, particularly typically, of the legal system.391 They can set 
conditions that make the self-corruption of the political system possible, 
for example in the form of vote buying in Thailand, which despite the of­

Differentiation    
ficially secret ballot works because of particular local conditions in rural 
areas and slums. They can render the organizational infrastructure of func­
tional systems (from universities and hospitals to public authorities) so 
dysfunctional that it becomes rational to rely instead on flexible networks 
of personal relations, which regenerate themselves through use, despite the 
constant change in persons.
These special local conditions may be structural couplings that pro­
mote a surge in modernization in the direction of functional differenti­
ation. More typically, however, the autopoietic autonomy of functional 
systems is blocked or limited to sectors of its operational possibilities. It 
would at any rate be quite unrealistic to see the primacy of functional 
differentiation as self-realization secured by the principle. Nor would in­
terpretation in terms of hierarchical dominance do justice to conditions, 
as if there were more and less successful forms of societal self-regulation. 
The assumption that the functional differentiation realized at the level of 
world society traces out the structures for regional conditionalities is more 
likely to hold true. In other words, it is a question of a complex and un­
stable conditioning of conditionality,392 of inhibition and disinhibition, of 
a combination of restrictions and opportunities dependent on innumer­
able other conditions. From this point of view, functional differentiation 
is not the condition of the possibility of system operations but rather the 
possibility of their conditioning. This also gives rise to a systemic dynam­
ics that leads to extremely dissimilar developments within world society. 
The regions therefore find themselves far from any macrosocietal equilib­
rium, and precisely in this context are presented with opportunities by a 
destiny of their own, which cannot be seen as a sort of micro-edition of the 
functional differentiation form principle. However, if the primacy of this 
principle did not hold at the world societal level, everything would be dif­
ferent, and no region can elude this law.
13. Interaction and Society
The concept of forms of societal system differentiation refers only to 
cases in which outdifferentiation takes place within society in relation 
to the societal system, in that society either finds expression in the form of 
relations between subsystems (similarity, ranking) or brings itself to bear in 
the individual functions that the outdifferentiation of functional systems 

 
  Differentiation
catalyzes. This far from exhausts what can be observed in society in the 
way of system differentiation. Autopoietic social systems can differentiate 
out within an already established society even without reference to the so­
cietal system or subsystems already in place—simply because double con­
tingency is experienced and sets autopoietic system formation in motion. 
Often quite ephemeral, trivial, short-term system/environment distinc­
tions thus develop without further form constraints and without it being 
possible or necessary to legitimate the difference by reference to society. 
The major forms of societal subsystems float on a sea of constantly form­
ing and dissolving minor systems.393 No societal subsystem formation, no 
form of societal system differentiation can so dominate the formation of 
social systems that it takes places only within the primary systems of the 
societal system. And precisely so-called “interface” relations between func­
tional systems use interactions or organizations that cannot be clearly at­
tributed to either side.394
This section deals with interaction systems as an example of such 
freely formed social systems, and the following section with organizational 
systems. This is followed by a section on protest movements, although the 
present status of research does not allow them be considered a separate 
mode of dealing with double contingency on a level with interactions and 
organizations.
Direct contacts between people in small, everyday encounters are 
often cited in societal critique. Society, it is claimed, determines our fate 
in a way that cannot be shaped or even modified through contacts be­
tween people. And even if critical tones are avoided, many studies begin 
by distinguishing between direct and indirect social relations.395 They do 
so without theoretically justifying the choice of this distinction, obviously 
confidant that the readers’ everyday experience will confirm it. This does 
not suffice. Our societal concept of the autopoiesis of communication sets 
a different point of departure. Insofar as communication takes place, even 
the smallest personal and impersonal encounters realize society. Modern 
society shows its modernity at this level, too, for instance, through libera­
tion from the communal terror of village life or through the elaboration 
of the eigenlogic of intimacy. We therefore need a concept that describes 
face-to-face contacts without calling into question that they involve com­
munication in the societal system. The concept of the interaction system 
is intended to do this.

Differentiation    
Interaction systems do not form outside society to then enter it as a 
finished structure. Since they use communication, they are always realiza­
tion of society in society. They nevertheless have their own form of opera­
tion, which cannot be realized without interaction. At the same time, they 
are equipped with special sensibilities that allow them to pay heed to what 
occurs as their environment in society. Constitutively, they are geared to 
autopoiesis in society.
Interaction systems form when the presence of people is used to re­
solve the problem of double contingency through communication. Presence 
brings perceiveability and, to this extent, structural coupling to communi­
catively uncontrollable processes of consciousness. Communication itself, 
however, is satisfied with the assumption that perceivable participants per­
ceive that they are perceived. Within the sphere of perceivable perceptions, 
assumptions can and have to be made; for example, the assumption that 
what is spoken aloud is heard. Doubt is possible but (as always with the 
boundary problems of autopoietic systems) can be settled in the context of 
these systems (i.e., among those present). Moreover, not every perceivable 
person present (e.g., slaves or servants, or, in restaurants, guests at other ta­
bles) has to be included in the interaction.396
At any rate, presence is a form, and thus in the meaning of our con­
cept a difference. It gains system-forming meaning only against the back­
ground of another side, in relation to what is absent. Since the people 
present are visibly and audibly present as persons, what else occupies them 
outside the interaction can be deduced. If it is not obvious, they point 
it out. The self-regulation of interaction systems therefore includes par­
ticipants taking each other into consideration, and mutual respect for 
each other’s roles can be expected. This is true not least for the timing 
of interaction. With the aid of this difference between present and ab­
sent, interaction establishes a self-referential difference between system 
and environment within which it can carry out its own autopoiesis, pro­
duce its own history, and determine itself structurally. Whoever is treated 
as present is accordingly included in communication. The complex mode 
of operation of communication, composed of information, utterance, and 
understanding, is thus a snare that no one present can elude. If one is 
not speaking, one is treated as a listener, at least as an understander, and 
therefore as someone whose active participation can be expected. Interac­
tion hence always creates its own redundancies, its own surplus informed­

 
  Differentiation
ness, from which (through turn-taking and the like) it can choose what is 
to happen. In this manner, interaction is firmly embedded in visible and 
­audible reality, and also gains a surplus of possibilities through outdiffer­
entiation; and precisely this imposes selection and hence autopoiesis—as 
long as only those present remain present. At the same time, it ensures the 
high selectivity and distinctive particularity of the system’s history; for very 
little of what is perceived can be fed into communication. The system, 
once under way, can thus easily distinguish itself from others—an indis­
pensable prerequisite for memory, in particular.
The difference between present and absent is therefore not an onto­
logically given, objective state of affairs. It is generated only through the 
operations of the system, and an observer can only recognize it if he or she 
observes the system that produces and reproduces it. For the operations 
of the system, it marks the difference between self-reference and other-­
reference. It is an artifact of the autopoiesis of the system, which cannot 
continue its autopoiesis without it. The same holds true for the beginning 
and end of the episode interaction, thus for the temporal boundaries of 
interactive co-presence. The interaction system itself, when in operation, 
has always begun and not yet ended. It determines beginning and end not 
as external observer, who can observe these breaks outside the time frame 
on the basis of his or her own autopoiesis. For the self-observation of the 
system, beginning and end are determinable only from the “meanwhile” 
position. The system cannot guarantee the ability to begin nor can the sys­
tem itself ensure that not all communication ceases with the end, but that 
society can form new interaction systems. But this is no argument against 
the thesis of the autopoiesis of interactive systems, because for such sys­
tems beginning and end remain elements of meaning that are constituted 
in their own operation and are decisive, for example, in deciding which 
narratives the system ties itself to and how much time it still has.
In the framework of a theory of the societal system, these consider­
ations can be mentioned only in passing. Any elaboration in parallel to the 
theory of the societal system would require a theory of interaction systems. 
In this context, we need only note that a differentiation of the societal 
system and interaction systems comes about, and how, and what conse­
quences it has for society.
Society/interaction differentiation can be understood only as the 
outdifferentiation of interaction systems on the reality continuum of soci­

Differentiation    
etal communication. Interaction does not hive off from society by forming 
a new system beyond the boundaries of society. It realizes society—but in 
such a way that boundaries arise within society between the given inter­
action system and its intrasocietal environment.
Since no interaction can realize all the societally possible communi­
cations within itself, because not all communication partners can ever be 
completely and permanently present, this difference between interaction 
systems and societal systems arises even in the simplest societies. With­
out interaction, there would be no society, and without society not even 
double contingency would be experienced. The beginning and end of in­
teraction presuppose society. Something else must have happened before, 
and something else will happen afterward; otherwise, one would not know 
how to begin, and in ending every possibility of further communication 
would be lost.397 Interaction is nevertheless autonomous in determining 
what beginning and end mean for it.
The difference between society and interaction is an original, ineluc­
table structure of society itself. This raises the question of how society—
apart from the fact that it carries out interactions itself—also comes to bear 
as societal environment in interaction. The outdifferentiation of interac­
tion systems and the formation of system boundaries give society double 
access to interaction, through execution and as the environment of this in­
teraction. This doubling is to be understood as the original condition of 
complexity to which society owes its own evolution.
The answers to this question vary—regardless of what societal forma­
tion one has in mind—depending on whether the problem arises in the 
factual, temporal, or social dimension. In the factual dimension, the differ­
ence enables the difference between present and absent to “reenter” what 
is present.398 In communication one can speak about what is present and 
what is absent and thus treat the distinction between present and absent as 
present (and, of course, make what is absent present, that is, fetch it into 
the present, something quite different). Generally speaking, this presup­
poses the development of speech, of the ability to deal with signs instead of 
with things. In the special case of the relationship between interaction and 
society, this means that society can represent itself selectively in interaction 
by taking or not taking itself into account as the environment of the inter­
action system, depending on how interaction develops. By differentiating 
out interaction systems within itself, society permits itself isolation and in­

 
  Differentiation
difference, which can then be selectively reversed. Only thus, only across 
boundaries, is the self-observation of society conceivable.
This corresponds in the time dimension to the possibility of epi­
sode formation. Unlike society itself, interaction systems have a begin­
ning and an end. Their beginning arises, their end is certain, even though 
the when and why are initially uncertain. Temporal limitation can take a 
wide range of forms up to and including long-term, planned sequences 
of meetings (e.g., for school instruction). Episode formation always pre­
supposes “non-episodable” [nichtepisodierbar] society, which ensures that 
communication has taken place before the beginning, so that conditions 
can be set for the beginning of interaction, and that when it comes to an 
end not all the possibilities of communication are over, that it continues 
elsewhere, with other participants, in other situations, for other purposes. 
Only under this condition can the opportunities offered by temporal limi­
tation be exploited. For no interaction promises enduring happiness and 
one can get involved in it only because one can break it off. And only in 
this sense, only to indicate the end of an episode, are empirical purposes 
and all the forms of rationality that depend on them possible. Society it­
self has no purpose.
Insofar as society realizes itself as interaction, it is seen from the per­
spective of the before and after of the current interaction and of the prob­
ability of further interactions after it is over, and thus as the condition for 
having the courage to call it a day. However, insofar as society is always 
the environment of the currently updated interaction system, it guaran­
tees the simultaneity of everything else that is happening. In this manner, 
diachronicity and synchronicity are always conveyed together, and always 
conveyed with a view to sequentiality. The present, in which everything 
that happens happens simultaneously, is the differential of past and future. 
Only thus can time become social reality to the full extent of the current 
sequence of past and future.
In the social dimension, finally, and under these conditions of a fac­
tual and temporal order (and initially hardly to be distinguished from 
them), account can come to be taken of what is expected of participants in 
various other interaction systems. Participants individualize themselves for 
the particular interaction through what they can mobilize in other inter­
actions in the way of resources, what duties they have to perform, and what 
time they have to spend. Decisive is also that restrictions do not merely 

Differentiation    
accumulate but that the difference between interaction systems generates 
both scope and restrictions, and does so precisely in the sense of integra­
tion. Whether such considerations arise and how far they go, and the extent 
to which they impose caution (e.g., in holding back information, in discre­
tion, in mistrust) has to be decided in the interaction itself. And in this re­
gard, too, society gains distance from itself through the outdifferentiation 
of interaction systems within itself.
At such a level of abstraction, statements about the relationship be­
tween interaction and society are formulated unhistorically. They take 
no account of differences in societal formations. However, it is self-­
evident that evolutionary change in societal structures influences the re­
lationship between interaction and society, and it is to be assumed that 
the development of interaction-free communication techniques (writ­
ing, printing) and changes in the differentiation forms of the societal 
system come into question as factors responsible for historical diversifi­
cation and turning points.
In searching for the onset point of these changes, it should be re­
membered that relations between system and environment are always syn­
chronous—the major constant in all evolution. This is so obvious that it 
was only the theory of relativity that made us aware that it poses a prob­
lem.399 No participant in communication can hasten into the future of his 
interlocutor or remain behind in his past. No participant can therefore in­
form others about their future because this future is for him already the 
present. To quote Alfred Schütz, we all grow old together.400 In precisely 
this sense, interaction and society are always given simultaneously in rela­
tions between system and environment. This means not least that some­
thing can occur in society outside the boundaries of the interaction system 
that, precisely because it is simultaneous, cannot yet be known and cannot 
yet be taken into account in the interaction system.
However paradoxical it may sound, desiderata and problems of syn­
chronization arise precisely from the simultaneity imposed by time as the 
basis.401 Such as it were timeless simultaneity does not ensure, indeed, ini­
tially excludes that a system can adapt to something that happens in the 
environment. In nature, synchronization can therefore take place only via 
relatively constant or regularly recurring features (sunrise/sunset) to which 
systems can adapt by “anticipatory reactions.”402 In the field of meaning­
ful information processing, a one-dimensional concept of time develops 

 
  Differentiation
for this purpose, that is to say, the distinction of present (which is synchro­
nized and therefore cannot be synchronized ) with the help of the distinc­
tion between past and future that relates to it.
Communication is originally only oral communication, that is to 
say, an operation tied to interaction and necessarily synchronous. Utterers 
and understanders have to be present at the same time. From a purely lin­
guistic point of view, it is always possible to communicate about what is 
past and what is future,403 but only in interaction. This changes only with 
the invention of writing and its spread; for the written word makes it pos­
sible to desynchronize communication itself.404 Communication thereby 
makes itself available as a synchronization tool (although it still holds true 
that everything that happens in fact happens at the same time).
Writing builds an almost arbitrary time distance (threatened only 
by loss of the vehicle) into the single event of elementary communica­
tion. Far more recipients can be reached than could ever be present at 
the same time. Temporal arrangements can be made without being agreed 
upon provided there are standardized time measurements (not needed in 
the absence of writing).405 The utterer can have been active in the past of 
the understander and nevertheless be understandable in his time for the 
understander. And this can be anticipated. Time expands, as it were, with 
communication, and agreement can develop to a previously impossible 
degree, to the effect that something will have happened at a given point 
in time that would only happen so that something else can happen at this 
later point in time. The holy time in which one had to know how and 
when to act was first supplemented then replaced by time as the synchroni­
zation frame in which one could agree on when synchronized action was to 
take place.406 In principle, this is naturally also possible by oral agreement, 
which is advisable when consensus is at stake. One arranges a sailing trip 
with friends that one could or would not undertake alone. But such cases 
are the exception. All major coordination operates on the basis of consen­
sus secured in advance with written plans.
The analysis also shows that writing is necessary only when the dif­
ferentiation form of society has generated considerable complexity—prob­
ably first of all for keeping records in large households. Until well into 
the modern age, writing was seen primarily as an aid to memory and as 
a means of conveyance, and there was consequently no concept of com­
munication that subsumed oral (speech) and written communication. 

Differentiation    
Depending on the differentiation form, there was little need for written 
coordination. Society was accordingly understood fully in terms of inter­
action. There were different, simple and complex societates. Kant still did 
not distinguish between sociality [Geselligkeit] and society [Gesellschaft]. 
Even the concept of the state was still defined in terms of interaction, wit­
ness Schiller’s Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von 
Briefen (A Series of Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Humanity). And 
the same was true of public opinion.407 It was presumably only the French 
Revolution with its societal impetus and its interactional aberrations (fes­
tivals, “revolutionary theater,” executions) that enforced the semantic sepa­
ration of interaction and society.408
The structural grounds for this separation lay in the transition from 
stratificatory to functional differentiation.409 The nobility had been and 
continued to be brought up to be competent in interaction, which could 
range from polite conversation and love affairs to the duel. New con­
tents were added within the educational form of eloquence,410 especially 
in England, but the oral form of expression continued to be expected. 
The spheres in which functional differentiation had already taken hold, 
however, no longer offered much opportunity for these forms and com­
petencies. A functionally differentiated society differentiates and specifies 
modes of interaction within functional systems and their organizations 
to a previously inconceivable degree. Actual interaction, conversation, 
initially still required stratum-dependent access restrictions, but already 
markedly differentiated from what functional systems demand in the way 
of specific forms. For example, Madeleine de Scudéry [1607–1701] asserts 
that it is not conversation “lorsque les Hommes ne parlent precisément 
que pour la necessité de leurs affaires [when men speak just of what their 
business requires].”411 Examples include court proceedings, commer­
cial transactions, military orders, and consultations in the privy council. 
Under the (provisional) protection of assignment to the upper class, rules 
of interaction can then be developed that relax the role prescriptions of 
stratified society. Women, for example, are granted greater freedom to 
draw conclusions themselves in interaction about their conduct in other 
situations.412 Under these special conditions, the privatization, psycholo­
gization, and finally the full social reflexivity of interaction-focused sys­
tems develop. Finely tuned analysis began in the seventeenth century. 
Motives were important, and therefore also suspicion of motives. Ingen­

 
  Differentiation
uousness, naturalness, and sincerity were called for—and thus became a 
problem.413 In the eighteenth century, the theory of social reflexivity was 
then available (with considerable psychological simplifications) and has 
hardly changed in the interim.
The individual interaction system could now become more indif­
ferent to its intrasocietal environment, whether under the functional sys­
tems’ contextual constraints or of its own accord. One often has no idea 
in what other interactions the participants with whom one has to do are 
involved.414 In older societies (and this still holds true of the upper strata 
of stratified societies), the link between interaction and the intrasocietal 
environment was close, so that one had always to reckon with needing or 
even being dependent on the person with whom one competed or was in 
conflict with in other contexts. In more complex societies, this network 
loosened. And only now could exchange and competition, cooperation 
and conflict, be separated on the basis of interaction and developed into 
socially relatively inconsiderate relationships. In functional systems, the 
role asymmetries specific to them could now be reinforced because they 
no longer had to take other roles into account as well. In return, extremely 
demanding forms of interaction developed for intimate relationships in 
which each participant was accountable for his entire internal and exter­
nal behavior.415
Given such discrepancies, society cannot understand itself in terms 
of interaction or even extrapolate what it is from interactional experi­
ence. What one knows about society, one knows from the mass media.416 
The excerpt of experience accessible in interactions now covers only a 
minimum of knowledge (available in written form and now on televi­
sion). Nevertheless, interactions are stylized into models (and in the liter­
ature into model constructions) of specifically social rationality, because 
only in interaction can social reflexivity with its immensely complex re­
flective conditions really be practiced. And the reciprocity rule applies 
here (but only here) once again. At the same time, however, it is clear that 
society itself cannot be understood in this manner. The more complex its 
system, the harder it is to influence the simultaneity and thus the inac­
cessibility of what actually happens at every moment. And it becomes all 
the more illusory, finally, to believe that this can be given rational form 
through interaction, dialogue, and attempts among accessible partners to 
reach understanding.

Differentiation    
14. Organization and Society
If this cannot be done through interaction, can it be achieved through 
organization?
At first glance, there is much to be said for modern society having 
switched from interaction to organization where longer-term synchroni­
zation was to be achieved under conditions of greater complexity. But we 
must first take a closer look at this type of social system.
Unlike interaction, organizations are not a universal phenomenon 
of every society but an evolutionary advance that presupposes a relatively 
high level of development. This becomes clear when we ask how society ar­
ranges access to the performance of work that the producer does not do in 
his own interest or because he enjoys the activity (or praxis) itself.
Whereas in the oldest societies, work was largely in the interest of in­
dividual survival and thus determined by extrasocietal conditions, the so­
cial, hence intrasocietal determination of work and the distribution of the 
proceeds increased as society evolved.417 The forms of societal differentiation 
made themselves felt. The differentiation of work roles in the household 
economy was complemented by mutual help, often also by group work 
undertaken by young men on particular occasions. With the advent of hi­
erarchical societies and/or societies organized on the pattern of center and 
periphery, politically and legally enforced labor was introduced, again in 
a supplementary role, whether in the form of occasional conscription for 
major projects, of slavery, of debt bondage, or by means of detailed and 
practically inescapable regulation by guilds. In all these cases, tailor-made 
role differentiations developed, but the institutional conditions limited their 
acceptability, and thus the complexity and flexibility that could be attained.
This could change only when social access to work was regulated 
on the basis of the individual and this became the norm (special cases of 
contract work had, of course, long been current). It should be noted that 
this did not alter the social determination of work, but it did limit it to 
organizations especially set up for the purpose and expanded in this man­
ner.418 Organizations replaced external social dependencies through self-
produced dependencies. They made themselves independent of accidental 
reciprocities in needs and cooperativeness and thus organized work as a 
regularly repeated activity that depended only on the fluctuation of the 
market or other sources of finance.

 
  Differentiation
This transition to work recruited on an individual basis not only 
presupposed the money economy, which made the acceptance of money 
attractive. It was also based on the legally safeguarded enforceability of 
contracts with the other party, on the fact that without a contract there 
was now hardly any access to work and thus to a livelihood.419 Moreover, 
the education system organized in the shape of schools and universities 
helped enable expert competence to be recruited individually without 
taking other social characteristics into account, and enabled appropriate 
training to be developed wherever there were prospects of employment.420
The functional systems for the economy, the law, and education thus 
provided important preconditions for the emergence and spread of the 
system form organization without this leading to organizations existing 
only in these systems. This example alone shows that organizations per­
mit the development of social interdependencies that are compatible with 
the auto­poiesis and operational closure of functional systems, indeed, that 
they are preconditional to the individualization of the recruitment process 
and the assignment of people to jobs.
Clarifying the preconditions for the evolution of organized work pro­
vides valuable insights into the particular properties of the system form. 
The organization, like society itself, as well as interaction, is a certain way 
of dealing with double contingency. Everyone can always act otherwise and 
may satisfy wishes and expectations or not—but not as a member of an orga­
nization. Upon entering an organization, one’s hands are tied, and one runs 
the risk of losing membership in it if one is persistently awkward. ­Albeit 
in many ways now almost unavoidable, membership in organizations is 
therefore not a societally necessary status. It is based on mobility, and mo­
bility has to be permitted by society. Membership is acquired by decision 
(typically, a combination of self-selection and other-selection) and can be 
lost by decision (either resignation or dismissal). And it does not, as in me­
dieval corporations (cities, monasteries, universities, and so on), affect the 
whole person, but only parts of his behavior, only one role among others. 
The solution to the problem of double contingency is that conditions can 
be set for membership; not only for the act of entering but also for main­
taining the status.421
Seen as a system form, membership marks the “inside” of the form, 
that is to say, what is of primary interest in the system and the conse­
quences of which have to be borne in mind. In the outside world, every­

Differentiation    
thing is in disarray; inside the form, coherence and integration are ensured. 
The difference between system and environment does not exclude the form 
“re­entering” the form. Within the system, one can be instructed under 
the rules of the system itself to pay due regard to the environment. But, 
since internal communication capacities are limited, this can be done only 
highly selectively. And even when communication is concerned with the 
environment, the membership role, affiliation to the system, is the symbol 
that marks such communication as an internal operation.
Since membership is established by decision, and the further behav­
ior of members in decisional situations depends on membership, organiza­
tions can also be described as autopoietic systems on the operational basis 
of the communication of decisions. They produce decisions from decisions, 
and in this sense are operationally closed systems. At the same time, an el­
ement of structural indeterminacy lies in the form of decision. And since 
every decision invites further decisions, this indeterminacy is reproduced 
with every decision. A decision-making system, one could say, lives on self-
generated indeterminacy with regard to further decisions, and this element 
feeds into the operational closure of the system. The production of deci­
sions from decisions absorbs uncertainty, but with respect to the further 
need to make decisions, it always reproduces the background uncertainty 
on which the system lives. It reproduces further demands for decisions, and 
only thus is the recursive operational closure of the system possible.
Organizations generate possibilities for decision-making that would 
not otherwise exist. They deploy decisions as contexts for decisions. In­
numerable other decisions can attach to decisions on membership. The 
duty to comply with instructions can be imposed, work programs can be 
drawn up, communication channels prescribed, personnel selection and 
staff changes can be regulated, and all of this in a general form that is then 
implemented by decisions to suit the situation. Membership is the premise 
for deciding on the premises for making decisions—all to a degree of spec­
ification limited by only one imperative: membership must remain suffi­
ciently attractive. That money is the normal reward reflects this situation.
As a result, an autopoietic system develops that is characterized by 
a special form of operations: it produces decisions through decisions. Be­
havior is communicated as decisions. What a decision is “per se,” we can 
leave open. For precisely this remains indeterminate (or only tautologically 
determinate) if it is described as a choice among alternatives. It is not an 

 
  Differentiation
­additional choice, and therefore not a component of the alternative also 
open to choice, but rather the middle excluded by construction of the al­
ternative: the observer! The decision can therefore not be determined by 
what is past. The past is uncoupled by the construction of alternatives. 
But to a certain degree, the past can bind the future, because it makes 
something possible (without being able to determine it) that would not 
be possible without the decision.422 For this very reason, decision-making 
requires communication. Normally this takes place by opting for one of 
a number of options. But—a typical nightmare of bureaucracies—it can 
also happen subsequently. One can decide without realizing one has done 
so; or decide between alternatives that one had not even seen. This leads to 
innumerable safeguarding strategies, which take account in the future per­
fect tense of what could happen if a current decision were to become the 
issue of a future decision.423
Decisions, like all communications, naturally have to rely on the per­
formance of consciousness. Classical theory stresses the rational cogitation 
of the decision-maker. However, its contribution remains unclear, because 
the presumed rationality is a “third” something in relation to the alterna­
tives to be decided between, namely, not itself an alternative. One cannot 
decide to fly, take the train, drive—or be rational. Alternativity excludes 
rationality as an option. We thus have a paradox! This suggests that the as­
sumption of rationality serves to unfold this paradox: its invisibilization 
through mystification and its resolution by stating criteria or rules that can 
be socially validated.
This way of looking at things did not yet emphasize an important 
aspect, namely, that the consciousness participates in decision-making, 
above all through perception. The consciousness has to hear what is said, 
read what is written. These institutional requirements are particularly rel­
evant for administrative work. Apart from this there are, however, many 
other forms of work in which the perception of nonlinguistic states of af­
fairs is required to filter out any need to make decisions. Consider eye-
hand coordination in industrial work, but above all what is demanded of 
“field workers”: of policemen and teachers, of supervisors and controllers 
of all sorts.424 When surprises or inattentiveness are to be expected in the 
perceptual domain, the organization normally concedes autonomy, that is 
to say, a relaxation of supervision to cushion the system against the endog­
enous dynamics of perception/nonperception.425 At this interface between 

Differentiation    
communication and consciousness, in any case, organizational systems 
have to rely less on reason than on consciously processed perceptions.
These intermediate considerations do not affect the thesis that an or­
ganization “consists” of nothing else than the communication of decisions. 
This operational basis makes the closure of a special autopoietic system pos­
sible. Autopoiesis means reproduction from own products. All origins—
from the founding of the organization to occupation of membership roles 
by persons—must therefore be treated recursively in the organization as 
its own decisions and can be reinterpreted in accordance with current 
­decision-making requirements. In the sequences of its own decisions, the 
organization defines the world with which it has to do. It continually re­
places uncertainties with self-produced certainties, to which it adheres as 
long as possible, even if reservations arise.426 The room for maneuver is de­
marcated by the problem/problem-solution schema, where problems serve 
to define the possibilities for solutions but also, conversely, the tested solu­
tions can serve to adjust problem definitions or to look for problems that 
make existing routines look like problem-solving.427 Finally, the primacy 
of autopoiesis also finds expression in the circumstance that all structures 
are subsequent to operations, so that they can be understood as the re­
sult of decisions. The organization knows structures only as premises for 
­decision-making on which it has itself decided. It guarantees this through 
the formal structural principle of the (permanent) “post,” which allows it to 
decide on establishing such positions in determining the budget and then 
to change holders, duties, and organizational assignment by decision.
Whereas interaction systems can take account of their environment 
only by activating present participants and only by internalizing the differ­
ence between present and absent, organizations have the additional pos­
sibility of communicating with systems in their environment. They are the 
only type of social system that has this possibility, and whoever wishes to 
achieve this has to organize.428 This outward communication presupposes 
autopoiesis on the basis of decisions. For communication can be produced in­
ternally only in the recursive network of the system’s own decision-making 
activity, hence only as decision; it would otherwise not be recognizable as 
communication of the system itself. Outward communication thus does 
not run contrary to the operational closure of the system: on the contrary, 
it presupposes it. This also explains why communication by organizations 
is often smoothed into vacuity or often displays surprising particularities 

 
  Differentiation
and is difficult to understand. Organizations prefer best to communicate 
with organizations, and they often treat private persons as if they were or­
ganizations or invalids in need of special aid and instruction.
That organizations can communicate outward is due above all to 
their hierarchical structure. We can speak of hierarchy in a double sense 
of the term. On the one hand, subsystems can in the case of organizations 
form only within subsystems—and not simply in free proliferation on the 
basis of the internal environment.429 Unlike the societal system, the orga­
nization prefers and realizes a nested hierarchy. At the same time, chains of 
command are formed—hierarchies in a quite different sense. Such chains 
of command guarantee the formal decidability of conflicts, while nested 
differentiation guarantees that the whole system can be reached. As we 
now know, this structure does not necessarily lead to power concentrating 
at the top, and modern theories of “leadership” in organizations describe 
how one has to behave to nevertheless achieve something. Regardless of 
this problem of power distribution, however, the hierarchy suffices to guar­
antee the capability of communicating outward—not least because the in­
ternal power game is difficult for outsiders to access, and they have to be 
content with what is said officially.
These are clearly highly modern states of affairs, not to be found in 
traditional societies. In historical retrospective, we recognize here, too (as 
in the case of society/interaction), that a clear distinction was not drawn in 
older societal formations between system types. Society itself was under­
stood as a member association, as a social “corpus” to which some people 
belonged and others did not. Then, however, flexibility in setting condi­
tions for membership has to be renounced. In segmentary societies, we 
find high mobility between settlements and tribes, as well as expulsions 
(e.g., for criminal offenses). But there is little self-regulation of the appli­
cable conditions. More extensive societies can cope better with mobility 
problems internally, although it is always a question of including or ex­
cluding the whole person, which crucially limits society’s regulatory capac­
ity. Only modern society has been able to waive this.
The organizations that formed in traditional societies also kept to 
the pattern of the corporation.430 This was true, for example, of mili­
tary units and of temples and monasteries. Membership meant full inclu­
sion—here and nowhere else, not even in other households. There could 
be strict rules (e.g., for monastic discipline), but they were not seen only as 

Differentiation    
premises for decision-making. And authority was certainly not grounded 
in decisions. Officers, bishops, abbots, and abbesses were of noble birth.
Even in the Middle Ages, however, one went beyond such an alterna­
tive of household or corporation. The highly developed legal culture made 
viable amalgamations with other households possible on the assumption 
that the household could “economically” secure a livelihood. This was true 
particularly of guilds but also of the corporative constitutions of the es­
tates. Precisely because of this economic self-sufficiency of members, the 
motives for organization formation lay in the political sphere, and above 
all in the privilege system. Organizations were not attractive as a context 
for earning a living; hence they did not need to compete for members in 
financial terms.
Modern society waives being an organization (corporation) itself. It 
is the closed and hence open system of all communications. And at the 
same time it establishes autopoietic systems within itself whose operation 
consists in self-producing decision-making, thus organizations in a sense 
that distinguishes them from both interaction and from society. Organiza­
tions can coordinate vast numbers of interactions. They perform the mir­
acle of synchronizing interactions in their pasts and futures even though 
they always and necessarily take place at the same time. And they manage this 
with the technique of deciding on the premises for decision-making on the 
basis of a willingness for acceptance in a “zone of indifference” secured by 
membership.431 However, organization costs money. And it requires mem­
bers to be completely independent of the binding instrument of the old 
world, their own other roles. Where such ties continue to exist, they now 
take on the guise of corruption.432
Autopoietic organizations can compensate for losses of authority that 
become inevitable when society shifts from stratification to functional dif­
ferentiation, when printing spreads and literacy makes progress among the 
population, and when the old “economic” order of households is trans­
formed into modern, intimately associated nuclear families. Organizations 
then develop their own procedures for absorbing uncertainty.433 During 
the processing of information, it is condensed at each stage and conclu­
sions are drawn that are no longer checked at the next stage—partly be­
cause the time and responsibility is lacking, partly because it is difficult to 
word good questions, and above all because there is no obligation to do so. 
Absorbing uncertainty also means accepting responsibility for the exclu­

 
  Differentiation
sion of possibilities; but in organizational practice, this does not necessar­
ily mean taking responsibility for mistakes.
This mode of implementing decisions in decisions is the autopoiesis 
of the system. It transforms world-determined uncertainties into intrasys­
temic certainties—not only but also in the form of records. For this very 
reason, organizations can grow accustomed to the risks they take and to 
conflicts with unchanging opponents, to competition.434 In the hitherto 
successful absorption of uncertainty, they find a confirmation difficult to 
replace. This explains the inertia often ascribed to organizations decried 
as “bureaucracies.” Precisely because uncertainty lies buried under all the 
certainty of decision premises, nothing must be touched. Precisely because 
the construction is self-produced, one keeps to it. This does not exclude 
irritability; but it has to attach to events that can be presented in system 
communication as new and unforeseen.
External sources of authority are not needed for this process of ab­
sorbing uncertainty. The organization can free itself from them. To a certain 
extent, recruitment processes have recourse through personnel selection 
to given societal distinctions—for example, to property relations for eco­
nomic enterprises, to political contacts, to the level of expertise guaranteed 
by training and education. But this does not mean that society submits or­
ganizations to the regime of given (e.g., estate-based) authority. Organiza­
tions use the mechanisms of personnel recruitment to procure resources; 
and internal authority can then well develop independently of the order of 
responsibilities and chains of command because exceptional and differen­
tial access to environmental resources can be obtained through persons. A 
sales representative who has good contacts with clients can obtain special 
conditions for customers in the firm. A brilliant and popular actress can 
exert influence on the director.
Max Weber’s classical descriptions do not capture such states of af­
fairs exactly enough, and above all not realistically enough. Anyone who 
has worked in organizations is aware of the strong personalization of ob­
servation, especially in connection with job evaluation and careers. The ir­
regular involvement, typical for interactions, of a person’s other roles also 
makes itself felt (e.g., it is understood that parents have to take their chil­
dren to kindergarten before they can go to work). More important is the 
other side of the relevant experience: that precisely a well-running orga­
nization that is fully developed in the fashionable directions of rational­

Differentiation    
ization and democratization generates strange irrationalities.435 With the 
increasing complexity of making decisions about decisions about decisions 
about decisions, autopoiesis develops appropriate structures and a growing 
tendency to decide not to decide. To deal with its own defects, it can only 
reuse the means that caused them, namely, decisions.436 Moreover, struc­
tural coupling with individual motivation atrophies under these condi­
tions. Since there are decisions to be taken over and again, there is a lack of 
motivation to stand up for the implementation of decisions against inter­
nal and external resistance. For this task, every organization emits “policy,” 
which, however, often fails to impose itself.437 It is therefore understand­
able that modern reflection uses a double concept to capture this state of 
affairs. It speaks of organization when it wishes to indicate the necessities 
and positive sides of the phenomenon and of bureaucracy when the neg­
ative aspects are meant. However, it lacks an expression for the unity of 
organized social systems and accordingly lacks a theory of organization ad­
equate for the purposes of societal theory.
Like interactions, organizations do not need to be geared to the unity 
of the societal system. They can form free of any societal “systemic con­
straints,” and there are innumerable organizations (often deceptively re­
ferred to as “voluntary” associations), that cannot be attributed to any 
societal functional system. However, all organizations benefit from the 
complexity of the societal system, the present-day extent of which has been 
made possible only by functional differentiation. With little exaggeration, 
one can therefore claim that only under the regime of functional differen­
tiation has the type of autopoietic system developed that can be described 
as an organized social system. Only now are there sufficiently numerous 
niches for such systems. Only now is there enough to be decided. Only 
now is it worthwhile to judge the environment to be so complex that no 
facts, signs, or representations, but only decisions can correspond to it.
But there is no disputing that, if not most, then at least the most im­
portant and largest organizations form within functional systems and there­
fore adopt the functional primacies of these systems. In this sense, we can 
distinguish between economic organizations, state organizations and other 
political organizations, school systems, science organizations, and organi­
zations of the legislature and administration of justice. The way in which 
organizational possibilities are realized quite clearly differs from one func­
tional system to another. We cannot go into detail at this point. It must 

 
  Differentiation
suffice to clarify the relations between functional systems and “their” orga­
nizations, and to do so under the premise that we are dealing in both cases 
with autopoietic systems, although there is no disputing that such organi­
zations form in functional systems to perform their operations and imple­
ment their functional primacy.
The starting point for what follows is the insight that no single func­
tional system can obtain its own unity as organization. In other words, no 
organization in the domain of a functional system can take on all the op­
erations of the functional system and carry them out as its own. There is 
always education even outside schools and universities. Medical treatment 
does not take place only in hospitals. The giant organization in the politi­
cal system that we call the “state” only ensures precisely that state-related 
political activities take place that do not function as state decisions. And 
the organizations of the legal system, above all, the courts, are naturally 
called upon only when communication about right and wrong that takes 
place outside organizations makes this opportune.
But organizations within functional systems must also be seen as op­
erationally closed social systems that operate autonomously on the basis of 
their decision-making. They assume functional primacy, albeit often with 
concessions to other functions (e.g., with an eye to profitability in budget 
allocations). They take over the binary code of the given functional system. 
Only under these two conditions can they attribute their own operations 
to the functional system concerned and be recognizable as, for example, 
courts, banks, or schools. In contrast, they gain and organize their own 
world through a further distinction, namely, that between programs and 
decisions. Programs are expectations that hold for more than one decision. 
At the same time, they compel behavior to take the form of a decision as 
to whether to apply the program or not.438 All programmed behavior is 
decision-making behavior, even when the program itself is the product 
(­itself programmed) of decision-making behavior. The link between pro­
gram and decision can thus be recursively closed, can be circular. In this 
sense, all organizations are structurally determined systems—without im­
porting structures from their environment (internal to the functional sys­
tem or internal to the societal system).
All this also holds true, indeed, particularly so, for very vaguely for­
mulated programs, such as the optimization of operating results, or the 
balancing of interests. It also applies when purposes alone serve as pro­

Differentiation    
grams without other conditions. This gives rise to problems in interpret­
ing or “factorizing” the program,439 but they can be resolved and must be 
resolved within the organization. Where else?
Contrary to the prevailing policy-focused view, organizations in func­
tional systems do not serve to carry out or “implement” decisions made at 
the center. Feasible decisions can be made only in the organizations them­
selves, and the central authorities are part of the network of organizations. 
To recognize the function of organizations in the structure of function­
ally differentiated society, it must be remembered that organizations are 
the only social systems that can communicate with the systems of their 
environment. The functional systems themselves cannot do this. Neither 
science nor the economy, nether politics nor the family can enter into out­
ward communication as entities. In order to equip functional systems with 
external communicative competence (which as communication is natu­
rally always autopoiesis by society), organizations have to form in the func­
tional systems—whether in assumed spokesman roles, such as employers’ 
and employees’ associations who allegedly represent “the economy,”440 or as 
organizational entities complexly interlocking with the major centers, gov­
ernments, international corporations, and military leadership. Recent re­
search on “neocorporatism” has thrown a great deal of light on this, albeit 
from perspectives lacking a more elaborated theoretical basis. The compli­
cated theory of societal control on which Helmut Willke is working also 
presupposes the communicative competence of societal subsystems (e.g., 
the capacity for self-commitment through communication in intersystem 
relations).441 The growing importance of organizations in functional sys­
tems is, however, accompanied, indeed, triggered, by the impossibility of 
organizing functional systems themselves. This also shows how very much 
organizations are formed to satisfy the continuous need for synchroniza­
tion, thus reacting to the artificiality of differentiating the societal system 
in terms of functions.
Functional systems treat inclusion, that is to say, access for all, as 
normal. The opposite applies to organizations: they exclude everyone 
except highly selectively chosen members. As such, this difference is 
functionally important. For only with the aid of internally formed or­
ganizations can functional systems regulate their own openness and treat 
persons differently even though all have the same access. The difference 
in modes of system formation thus makes it possible to practice both in­

 
  Differentiation
clusion and exclusion at the same time. And it also makes it possible to 
uphold this difference even when the system is more complex and, pre­
cisely with the help of complexity, to resolve the contradiction between 
inclusion and exclusion. Lawyers interpret the equality principle not as a 
prohibition of inequality but as a prohibition of arbitrariness. This points 
to organization as a tool for regulatory specification. In other words, the 
equality principle is not a conditional program442 but a limitative princi­
ple. It can be presupposed as a precondition when consistent practice in 
distinguishing is at issue.
This difference in the treatment of the inclusion/exclusion problem 
is beginning to take effect. On the one hand, access to organized work 
(and no longer “exploitation” in organized work) becomes the problem. 
On the other, resentment develops in many functional systems, especially 
in the political system, against what is expected of the individual as a re­
sult of organized decision-making processes. If there is now more talk 
about civil society, citizenship, and the like,443 this is neither in continu­
ation of the Aristotelian tradition nor political engagement against eco­
nomic interests; the impulse is broadly directed against organization. At 
issue is participation in the public sphere without membership of organi­
zations. And the problem no longer lies in the special governance form of 
“bureaucracy,” but rather in the unsatisfactory results of organized “un­
certainty absorption,” which considerably limits what is possible in func­
tional systems.
Perhaps even more important, organization serves to interrupt in­
terdependence in functional systems. The necessity of interrupting inter­
dependence had also been hidden by the theory of “state and society,” 
which so to speak conceded a single case of incongruity—only to place 
value, with respect to the state, on uniform policy and, with respect to 
the economy, on equilibrium. However, reality has long since worked 
differently, presumably for good reason. Political programs are drawn up 
by political parties, and thus by organizations with the systemic impera­
tive to distinguish themselves (which is not always easy given the subject-
matter logic of problems); and the decision to actualize politics is the job 
of another organization: the state, which, among other things, also orga­
nizes political elections. Without this differentiation at the organizational 
level and without the continuous observation of observations that it en­
ables, no democracy would be possible. The same applies to the economic 

Differentiation    
system. Here, too, the notion of completely balanced competition may 
well make mathematical formulations possible in the reflection theory of 
the system, but, as has long been evident,444 this does not correspond to 
reality. In the economy, specific interruptions of interdependence orga­
nize themselves to prevent every price from depending on all other prices, 
thus making it possible to achieve economic rationality; not in the state 
of the overall system but at the level of the corporate balance sheet. And 
here, too, this form of interdependence interruption enables and imposes 
the replacement of unattainable unitary rationality by the ongoing ob­
servation of observers. Although organizations cannot be observed with 
regard to their decision-making processes, they can be observed on the 
basis of their prices.
A hierarchical conception of the relationship between functional sys­
tem and organizations is therefore replaced by a sort of network concept.445 
Organizations develop eigendynamics that are absorbed in functional sys­
tems through the procedure of second-order observation, and this takes 
place under the conditions of continuous reactualization—for instance, in 
the form of the market, via public opinion, in successive scientific publica­
tions or legal texts. Statistical monitoring remains possible insofar as there 
are special organizations that assess data. But in the economic system, for 
example, it is clear that the decisions that determine the system lie with 
the firm population, and supervisory authorities like stock exchanges or 
central banks with their own recursivity influence events only as organiza­
tions. No organization represents the system in the system, and each is re­
sponsible only for itself. The feedback that develops cannot be understood 
in the form of equilibrium models. It has a tendency to suddenly aggregate 
effects, which in turn impacts organizations and can transmit the tremors 
provoked to other functional systems.
Of course, it is not easy to get used to this unusual theoretical per­
spective. Whether it is worthwhile depends on what it brings. At any rate, 
a theory so decisively geared to operational closure and autopoiesis shows 
that organizations can emerge only within societies, but also that they 
contribute in their own way to societal differentiation: first, to the differ­
entiation of the societal system and its functional systems against the auto­
poiesis of organizations, and, second, on the basis of this autopoiesis, to 
the differentiation of functional systems from one another and from their 
environment. In this way, a striking structural discrepancy comes to light, 

 
  Differentiation
namely, that modern society has to rely more than any of its predecessors 
on organization (being, indeed, the first to develop the concept);446 but 
also that it can be understood less than any preceding society as organiza­
tion in its unity or in its subsystems.
15. Protest Movements
There is a further phenomenon that the system typology developed 
so far (society, interaction, organization) fails to capture. A section dealing 
with social movements is thus necessary, regardless of aesthetic theorizing. 
It will not suffice to take over the concept of collective behavior developed 
by the Chicago School, which was directed against individualistic explana­
tory approaches, and was thus based on the distinction between individual 
and collective. But this is not where the problem lies. These movements, 
alone through their social openness to ever-new supporters, seek to mobi­
lize society against society. How can this be possible?
In the old world, the attempt to draw a boundary in order to ob­
serve God and his Creation from the other side was depicted as the fall of 
the angel Satan. The observer, because he sees what is observed and other 
things besides, must consider himself better, and hence mistakes God.447 
In today’s world, this is a matter for protest movements. But they do not 
fall, they rise. They do not mistake the nature of God (even theologians 
join in), so that the quality of sin, distance from God, does not apply. 
Sympathizers even claim that they enhance the production rate of good 
reasons.448 But they do copy the devil’s observation technique, drawing a 
boundary within a unity against this unity; with the same consequence of 
unreflectedly considering themselves better. They accordingly operate with 
the apportionment of blame. The fate of society lies not in the inscrutable 
will of God. The fate of society is Others.
The rise rather than fall of protest movements probably has to do 
with the switch of society to functional differentiation. This brings us to 
another paradox. Following Talcott Parsons, we can assume that there is 
a link between greater differentiation and greater generalization of the 
symbolic basis, especially “values,” on which society seeks to formulate its 
unity.449 But what happens if generalized values can no longer be accom­
modated in differentiated society? If, although formulated and recognized, 
they are inadequately realized? It seems that social movements are in search 

Differentiation    
of an answer to this problem, and that this answer takes the form of an­
other paradox, finding expression in protest by society (and not just by 
single actors or specific interests) against society. On that assumption, this 
chapter on differentiation will conclude by enquiring into the structural 
reasons for this clearly novel phenomenon.
There is probably no disputing that the protest movements of our 
times are not to be compared with the religious renewal movements or the 
economically motivated unrest and rebellions of the old world.450 There 
has clearly also been thematic diversification, especially in the second half 
of the twentieth century. The so-called “new social movements” no lon­
ger fit in with the protest pattern of socialism. They are not only con­
cerned with the consequences of industrialization, and their goals are no 
longer limited to the better distribution of wealth. Their causes and themes 
have become much more heterogeneous, ranging from Prohibition in the 
United States [1920–1933] to modern feminism and the ecological issues 
that have now come to the fore. This makes it all the more difficult to in­
terpret these new social movements in terms of their goals.451 This is par­
ticularly true with respect to contemporary xenophobia, which rejects any 
coalition with the now classical protest movements and gains public at­
tention almost entirely through spontaneous acts of violence, and thus 
in a criminal fashion. If asked about their motives, xenophobes point to 
their opponents, foreigners, and their protest serves almost only for “self-­
realization” in an underclass mode of behavior.452
Many describe the phenomenon in terms of the difference between 
rational and irrational (emotional) motives. Such a controversy must be 
considered unfruitful.453 It merely reflects the prevailing view on inclusion 
and exclusion (possibly self-exclusion), reformulating the perspectives of 
participants and sympathizers on the one hand and those of their oppo­
nents on the other. Our point of departure is rather the observation that 
protest movements are to be understood neither as organizational systems 
nor as interaction systems.
They are not organizations because they do not organize decisions 
but motives, commitments, ties. They seek to bring into the system what 
an organization presupposes and mostly has to pay for: membership mo­
tivation. Just as organizations secrete “politics” to deal with residual prob­
lems, protest movements only secrete “organization” for the same purpose. 
Without organizing a “representation” of the movement, it can only act, 

 
  Differentiation
only exist, but not engage in outward communication. In the case of rigor­
ously managed organizations (e.g., Greenpeace), this requires a latent but 
effectively supportive willingness to protest, which would, for example, 
react to appeals for a boycott (as long is does not get uncomfortable). Pro­
test movements cannot recruit adherents either through generalized sub­
jection to conditions of membership or through respecification of these 
conditions through decisions. Unlike organizations, they have an infinite 
need of personnel. If we were to understand protest movements as orga­
nizations (or as emerging organizations), they would display a long list of 
deficient characteristics: they are heterarchical not hierarchical, polycen­
tric, structured as networks, and, above all, they have no control over the 
process of their own change.
But they are also not interaction systems. As elsewhere, interaction 
is certainly indispensable in a protest movement. But it serves primarily to 
demonstrate the unity and size of the movement. This explains the inter­
est in and focus on “demonstrations” (the association of demonstration and 
democracy is a useful linguistic accident [in both German and English]). 
Interaction is proof of engagement; “Come on!” is the call. But the sense 
of being together goes beyond the mere fact of being together (as it also 
does in a different way in organizations). For participants, it is composed 
of highly individual problems involved in the “search for meaning” and 
“self-realization,” whose concentration and exploitation through the focus 
on social issues is also precarious.454
The socialist movement of the nineteenth century, given the class sit­
uation and factory organization, could proceed on the basis of a relatively 
responsive motivational situation, and one that could accordingly be ad­
dressed relatively uniformly. Or it had at least constructed its world on 
these lines. It was therefore also capable of organization, indeed of theory. 
For today’s “new” social movements, the situation is different. They have 
to do with more strongly individualized individuals, and, as has been said, 
with individuals who feel the impositions of their life situation to be para­
doxical,455 and who therefore require externalizations, “meaning,” differ­
ences to resolve the paradox. They stand for the demand (which each can 
interpret in his own way) not to allow their prospects for a self-determined 
way of life to be impaired, or to be curtailed only for cogent reasons. They 
argue as “affected parties” for “affected parties.” Above all, young people 
and university graduates appear to be self-referentially sensitive to paradox 

Differentiation    
in this way. But this also means the new social movements that respond 
find their motives for participation in a notoriously unstable public. Their 
potential for recruitment is based on the considerable weakening of the im­
portance of affiliation, perhaps also on the intricate invasiveness of the con­
stitutional state, which reaches deep into private life, making it unnecessary 
to worry about having to rely on others.456 They therefore depend more 
strongly, precisely in their outdifferentiation, on sociostructural conditions, 
for example, on residual confidence in the state, which could help if only it 
chose to do so, and on the social normalcy of sharp differences of opinion 
between generations (also and especially in families).457
It is all the more necessary to abstract the perspective suitable for 
catalyzing such movements, for focusing them, providing them with iden­
tity—and for invisibilizing their functions, which are also always psychic.
The unity of the system of a protest movement arises from its form, 
from protest.458 With the form of protest, it becomes apparent that, al­
though participants seek political influence, they do not do so in normal ways. 
This eschewal of the normal channels of influence is also intended to show 
that the matter at issue is urgent, profound, and general, so that it can­
not be processed in the usual fashion. Although protest communication 
takes place within society—otherwise it would not be communication—it 
proceeds as if it were from without. It considers itself to be (the good) soci­
ety,459 which does not, however, mean that it would protest against itself. 
It expresses itself from a sense of responsibility for society but against it. 
This does not, of course, hold true for all the concrete goals of these move­
ments; but through the form of protest and the willingness to deploy stron­
ger means if protest is not heeded, these movements differ from efforts at 
reform. Their energy and also their ability to change the subject, just as long 
as protest can be communicated, can be explained if we take into account 
that oscillation between inside and outside has here found a form.
Moreover, in this way a specific form of societal differentiation finds 
expression, namely, the differentiation between center and periphery. The 
periphery protests, but not against itself. The center is expected to listen and 
take the protest into account. But since there is no longer a macrosocietal 
center in modern society, protest movements are to be found only in func­
tional systems that have developed centers; above all, in the political sys­
tem and, to a lesser degree, in centrally organized religions of the religious 
system. If this center/periphery difference did not exist, protest would also 

 
  Differentiation
lose its sense as form, for then there would be no social (but only a substan­
tive or temporal) boundary between desideratum and fulfillment.
With the form of protest, a marked decision is taken against a cog­
nitive procedure and for a reactive procedure.460 Recognized, responsive 
“scripts” (e.g., peacekeeping) are used, but they focus on specific problems 
(in this case, against the arms race) that are no longer easily amenable to 
consensus. One makes do with a highly schematized account of the prob­
lem, often combined with a presentation of it as a “scandal,” portraying 
one’s own initiative as reaction to an unacceptable state of affairs. And the 
addressees, too, are called upon to react—rather than engage in further cog­
itation. For whereas efforts to obtain more information and well-founded 
future planning can get bogged down in never-ending procrastination, re­
active procedures promise fast results (a glance at economic planning, from 
central bank monetary policy to corporate production and organizational 
planning shows that this is not confined to protest movements. Here, too, 
the pressure of time appears to impose a transition from more cognitive to 
more reactive strategies).
The fact is conveyed in the form of protest that there are interested 
parties and affected parties from whom support can be expected. As has 
often been said, protest movements therefore also serve in mobilizing re­
sources and establishing new ties. Only when such goal-directed mobiliza­
tion develops461 can we speak of a self-reproducing, autopoietic system.462 
Many protest actions (e.g., by Greenpeace) do not lead to the formation of 
social movements but reproduce a protest climate.
The form “protest” does for protest movements what functional 
systems achieve through their code. This form, too, has two sides to it: 
the protesters on the one side and what (and whom) they are protesting 
against on the other. And this presents the form with an insuperable prob­
lem: the protest movement is only the one half—and the other consists of 
those who seemingly impassively or at best slightly irritatedly do what they 
wanted to anyway. Protest negates overall responsibility, even structurally. 
It must assume that there are others to carry out what is demanded. But 
why do the others know that they are on the other side of the protest form? 
How can they be induced to accept this definition of the situation instead 
of following their own constructions? Apparently only by drastic means, 
by alarming communication, and by the mass deployment of bodies that 
present themselves as protest,463 but above all through a covert alliance be­

Differentiation    
tween protest movements and the mass media. In other words, what is 
lacking is the reflection-in-itself typical of the codes of functional systems; 
and this has to do with protest movements’ unquenchable thirst for moti­
vation, which cannot tolerate reentry of the distinction into what is distin­
guished on either side of its lead distinction.
Also lacking is consideration of the self-descriptions of those against 
whom one is protesting. There is no attempt to understand. Views on the 
other side are taken into account at best as tactical elements of one’s own 
action. And the temptation is therefore strong to ride the other side’s moral 
high horse.464 No second-order reflection, no reflection on the reflection of 
functional systems can therefore be expected of protest movements. They 
keep instead to the form of protest.
The form of protest thus differs from the form of political opposi­
tion in a constitutionally organized democracy. The opposition is part of 
the political system from the outset. This is shown by the fact that it must 
be prepared to take over the government or collaborate in it. This has a 
disciplining effect. Criticism of the government may well be exaggerated 
rhetorically and for tactical electoral reasons, but ultimately the opposi­
tion has to be in a position to uphold its own views and implement them 
as government. Protesters invoke ethical principles; and when one has eth­
ics, it is of secondary importance whether one is in the majority or in the 
minority. Protest need not take into account any these considerations. It 
acts as if it has to represent society against its political system. It is there­
fore not wrong to see the origins of modern-style protest movements in 
the outdifferentiation and relative unresponsiveness of the political system. 
The constitution serves to limit the political system to itself.465 For protest 
movements, this constitutes a provocation to provoke.
Protest is not an end in itself—not for protest movements, either. 
They need a topic to which they commit themselves. They explain that this 
has to happen in the form of protest owing to the refractoriness of society. 
They therefore attribute what makes them into protest movements to ex­
ternal circumstances. This allows a certain innocence of operation “for the 
cause.” At least the gesture of social critique and the form of protest allows 
them to recognize like-minded spirits behind other topics and to develop 
corresponding sympathies. “As movements, the new social movements are 
capable of unity and action only in the unspecific protest milieu and only 
with reference to topics relevant to society as a whole.”466 What character­

 
  Differentiation
izes the form of protest can be hidden from the individual movement by 
its topic, thus remaining latent and being shifted to its external relations.
The topics that give rise to protest movements are heterogeneous 
and remain so when grouped under broad headings such as environment, 
war, women’s affairs, regional particularities, Third World, excessive im­
migration. The topics correspond to the form of protest as programs of a 
code. They make clear why one finds oneself as protester on the one side of 
the form. They serve for self-placement in the form. They must therefore 
be controversial; they must be topics that allow protesters to show suffi­
ciently drastically what should change and why. Moreover, they must in­
volve knowledge the individual can make his own, and this excludes any 
analytical depth of focus. Protest movements cannot be expected to under­
stand why something is the way it is; nor can they be expected to realize 
what the consequences will be if society gives in to the protest.
Specific forms are suitable for generating topics, and two of them, 
because very general, have gained particular prominence. The first is the 
probing of internal equality, which, introduced into society, shows up in­
equalities. The second is the probing of external equilibrium, which shows 
society as a whole to be in ecological disequilibrium. Both are utopian 
forms, for inequality and disequilibrium are precisely what characterizes 
a system. The two forms thus guarantee a reservoir for inventing topics 
that is in principle inexhaustible (just as in science there are always the­
ories and methods, in the economy, there are always balance sheets and 
budgets, and in politics, always conservative and progressive policies). The 
problem and innovative talent of protest movements lie in the specifica­
tion of their topic; that is, in the specification of what they protest against. 
But every topic has to raise its profile against the background of a society 
that protest expects to manifest the opposite of its structural characteris­
tics: equality internally and equilibrium in external relations. Protest thus 
ultimately always describes a society that apparently produces, covers, ap­
proves, and needs what is being protested against.
Functional systems have been able to take in and resorb a consider­
able range of protest topics. This is true of the capitalist economy, of the 
mass media, and also of a political system that orients itself on public opin­
ion. This has had a retroactive effect on protest movements—partly in the 
form of losing attractive topics, partly in the entrenchment of an inner 
core, who then have to insist all the more on what cannot be achieved, 

Differentiation    
while losing adherents in the process. Protest movements live from the 
tension between topic and protest—and perish from it. Success and failure 
are equally fatal.467 The successful implementation of the topic takes place 
outside the movement and can at best be attributed to it as a “historic ac­
complishment.” A lack of success discourages participants. This dilemma 
is perhaps one reason why new social movements seek contact and sympa­
thize with one another as long as the minimum conditions are met: an al­
ternative idea, protest, and nonidentification with “ruling circles.” In this 
manner, however, the most that can be achieved is that a culture of protest 
develops with the possibility of addressing ever-new topics.
As indicated, the form of protest is not the form of sin; and it is well 
worth asking why not. It seems that the rhetoric of warning, exhorting, 
and demanding has changed sides. It is no longer directed against sinners 
in the interest of order, but favors protest. Institutional criteria controls 
fall by the wayside or are relevant only for organizations. The poor preach 
the gospel themselves.468 Thus, the danger also lies on the other side, and 
with it everything that is to be done to regain control over the symbolism 
of threat and resistance.469 The order of sin had benefited from the pos­
sibility of representing society with binding force in society. The order 
of protest benefits from this no longer being possible. But whereas in the 
old order everyone was a sinner (albeit some less than others), the protest 
movements have to recruit supporters and impress opponents. It is easier 
for them than for sinners, but also more difficult, and the reason for this 
difference lies in the change in the form of societal differentiation.
This also gives us a key to understanding the distinction between 
foreground topic and societal background. Protest movements observe 
modern society on the basis of its consequences. The socialist movement, 
oriented on the consequences of industrialization, was only a first case. 
As long as it was the only case, it could even afford a theory of society 
that matched its protest and even helped explain it. For this reason, one is 
still interested in Karl Marx. Since innumerable other consequences of the 
structures of modern society have become apparent, this simplification is 
no longer tenable—either as a monopoly on protests or as theory. Society 
has become the background topic of topics, the medium of ever-new oc­
casions for protest. An appropriate theory of society would now have to 
describe society as a functionally differentiated system with innumerable 
(and then in detail no longer attractive) grounds for protest. It is worse 

 
  Differentiation
(and naturally also better) than a protest movement could ever imagine. 
Protest lives by choosing a topic. If it wished to reflect on the selectivity of 
its topic and thus on itself as selector, it would have to recognize the para­
dox of protest in unity against unity, and thus doubt the conditions of its 
own possibility.470
This becomes clear when we understand protest movements as auto­
poietic systems of a particular sort,471 and protest as their catalyzing ele­
ment. Protest focusing on a topic is their invention, their construction. 
That society has hitherto disregarded the topic or paid too little attention 
to it is the condition for the movement to develop. Society reacts with sur­
prise or incomprehension. In its organizations, the topic is unknown. It is 
the autopoiesis of the social movement that constructs the topic in the first 
place, finding the matching background so that the movement does not 
have to appear to have invented the problem, and thus creating a contro­
versy that, for the other side in its everyday routine, is initially not a con­
troversy at all. Unassuming beginnings suffice, and are only in retrospect 
singled out as such; the controversy is and remains the protest movement’s.
One cannot protest against complexity. In order to protest, things 
have to be flattened. This is done with the aid of the schemata and above 
all the scripts that can be asserted in public opinion with the help of mass 
media.472 Especially superficial causal attributions calling attention to spe­
cific effects have an alarm function, drawing attention to threatened val­
ues and interests. But schematizations point to problems that are handled 
with other schematisms. They generate “distilled ideologies.”473 Even if we 
look at the world from only one angle, complexity develops over time. It 
is then advisable to abandon the initial topic—all the more so because the 
multiplication of effects through the mass media constantly demands new 
topics. At this stage, the need for an ideology becomes stronger to articu­
late the consistencies in the inconsistencies of protest topics.
This has yet to happen, and it seems that the slot has meanwhile been 
otherwise occupied, namely, by the symbolism of the “alternative.” It was 
not invented, it turned up, but can be regarded as one of the most con­
vincing and effective form formulas of the twentieth century. The func­
tional systems, which construct their own alternatives, show conspicuous 
restraint.474 On the other hand, identification with alternativity enables 
recognition of like-minded parties with other thematic obsessions and the 
formation of a network for mutual support. It permits a change of topic, 

Differentiation    
while preserving the form of protest. One is and remains alternative. In 
this manner, many have relocated from Marxist protest to ecological pro­
test and are today recognizable as migrants only by their accents. Their bi­
ographical identity is preserved and can individualize even more strongly, 
since it is no longer committed to specific theoretical concepts. And, above 
all, the alternative is an offer to the other side. Protest lives from the bound­
ary it draws as a mode of observation. But the alternative can cross its 
boundary. As someone living the alternative, one is and is not on the other 
side too. One thinks in a precise sense in society for society against society.
If there is autopoiesis, there is also structural coupling. Such a re­
lationship has arisen above all between protest movements and the mass 
media, and has meanwhile led to clearly recognizable “structural drift.”475 
These relations are now so close that their continuous effects have changed 
ideas about “public opinion”; one no longer expects a sort of acid test se­
lection of the good and right; the final form of public opinion now ap­
pears to be the presentation of conflicts—of conflicts about ever-new 
topics. The planning of protests also takes this into account. Protest stages 
“pseudo-events” (as mass-media research puts it),476 in other words, events 
that are produced from the outset to be reported on and that would not 
take place at all if it were not for the mass media. Protest movements use 
the mass media to attract attention, but not (as recent research shows) 
to recruit supporters. Circular relationships become established. Even 
in planning their own activities, movements keep an eye on the willing­
ness of the mass media to report on them and on their telegenic quali­
ties. This complicated relationship with the mass media, for whom even 
Chernobyl is old hat, also requires independence from the trigger event, 
as well as a supply of new events in the context of generalizing protest. 
The pace of the protest movement is not that of the mass media but it is 
also fast. In the event of failure, the movement fizzles out until a more fa­
vorable hour strikes. In the event of success, the symbolic management 
of danger and remedy passes to the functional systems and their organi­
zations. As a result of the movement there are now special administrative 
authorities,477 and, in exceptional cases, even a flagship in the shape of a 
“green” or “alternative” party. They have their own experts, and to reassure 
the public and set rules for organizations, there are “limit values,” over­
shooting which is considered dangerous and undershooting harmless.478 
Organizations are identified as solvent “perpetrators” and the necessary 

 
  Differentiation
compromises are negotiated. But such arrangements give rise to quite new 
sorts of risk—for example, that smaller firms are put out of business as a 
result of regulation, that service stations have to close because of new safety 
rules, and that large firms switch to alternatives whose hazardous nature has 
yet to be discovered. For a while, the symbolic management of danger and 
disadvantagement appears to have returned to those responsible for them. 
But new protests can arise at any time.
Considering each case in turn, the results are meager, and there is no 
other way to solve the problems. But this should not blind one to the nov­
elty of the overall phenomenon. We are dealing with a sort of autopoietic 
system that operates neither on the principle of presence (interaction) nor 
on that of membership (organization). And the internal differentiation of 
protest movements can also not assume the undifferentiated nature or the 
simple role asymmetry of interaction systems, because such movements are 
too large; nor can they behave as position hierarchies like organizations, for 
the personnel situation is too unstable. Social movements tend to differen­
tiate internally into center and periphery—as if they wished to copy their 
external situation on the periphery of a societal center into themselves. 
There are, typically, a strongly committed core, followers to be mobilized 
for occasional actions, and, at least as the movement presumes, a wide cir­
cle of sympathizers, which permits it to assume that it represents general 
societal interests. Center-periphery differentiation can develop relatively 
without preconditions, is compatible with personnel fluctuation among 
sympathizers, followers, and core, and allows relatively blurred boundar­
ies that sharpen only in the process of self-activation of the movement and 
can change in the course of its developmental trajectory.
Despite this internal looseness, which is geared to fluctuations, which 
reacts to successes and failures, and which changes with the structural drift 
of the movement, we are naturally dealing with societal subsystems—and 
not, for example, with a possibility of communicating outside society. If 
we wished to state the function of protest movements, we could say that 
they implement the negation of society in society in operations. It is hence 
an exact correlate of the autonomy and operational closure of the societal 
system, what had once—when one could still formulate in paradoxes—
been called “utopia.”
Modern society seems to have found a form of autopoiesis for ob­
serving itself: within itself against itself. Resistance to something—that is 

Differentiation    
its way of constructing reality. As an operationally closed system, it cannot 
contact its environment, and can therefore not experience reality as resis­
tance of the environment, but only as the resistance of communication to 
communication. Whether the environment consists of individuals or of 
ecological conditions, there is nothing to suggest that protest movements 
know it better or can judge it more correctly than other systems of society. 
But the very illusion that they can do so provides protest movements with 
the blind spot that enables them to stage resistance of communication to 
communication and thus to provide society with a reality that it could not 
otherwise construct. What matters is not who is right; what matters is the 
form in which this sort of resistance of communication to communication 
introduces reality into communication and continues to take effect in it.
In this way, society can cope with ignorance about the environment 
(individuals or ecological conditions). Complemented by the innumerable 
reality constructions of the functional systems, for example, science or the 
economy, it can continue its own operations through continuous oscillation 
between other-reference (reference to the environment) and self-­reference 
(reference to communication). In this highly temporalized, rapid form, it 
reacts to its own intransparency, to the risks of its renunciation of redun­
dancy, to the forced dependence of all procedures on decision-making in 
the absence of any macrosocietal authority to determine what is right. And 
naturally it thus reacts above all to the many negative side effects of its 
own realization. The functional systems and their organizations begin irri­
tatedly (how otherwise?) to adjust themselves. They seek “understandings” 
in order to give provisionally tenable form to conflicts. However, what does 
not seem to succeed in this fashion is the production of appropriate texts, 
appropriate self-descriptions of modern society. But this brings us to the 
subject of the next chapter.


Self-Descriptions
1. The Accessibility of Society
The society of society is the subject of this concluding chapter, as it is 
of this book as a whole. Our point of departure is that no society can reach 
itself through its own operations.1 Society has no address. Nor is it an orga­
nization with which one could communicate. From an empirical point of 
view, there is no disputing this. And it is not difficult to explain. Recall that 
with every communicative use, the medium meaning reproduces new pos­
sibilities that alter what is to be presupposed as society. The mathematics 
of self-referential systems offers yet another approach. If the societal system 
not only generates the difference between system and environment but 
also orients itself on this difference, we have a case of a form “reentering” 
the form (of a distinction reentering the distinction), which puts the sys­
tem in a state of “unresolvable indeterminacy.”2 “Unresolvable” means that 
the normal mathematical operations of arithmetic and algebra no longer 
produce unambiguous results. The system requires imaginary numbers or 
imaginary spaces to move forward. This is certainly not an argument that 
proves anything for the theory of society, but the communicative inacces­
sibility of society, that is to say, the failure of the operations that reproduce 
the system is empirically established. Here too, we have instead imaginary 
constructions of the unity of the system that make it possible to commu­
nicate in society, if not with society, at least about society. I call such con­
structions “self-descriptions” of the societal system.
5

 
  Self-Descriptions
In the occidental tradition that we follow (in this book, too) initially 
without reflection, it seems obvious to understand self-description as cog­
nition. This presupposes that the knowing subject and the known object 
can be distinguished and separated from each other, that cognition is sub­
ject to special rules that prevent the peculiarities and prejudices of individ­
ual subjects from coming to bear, and that the object (in our case society) 
does not change as a result of being exposed to the process of being ob­
served. Cognition seeks intersubjective certainty on the part of the subject 
and presupposes stable objects.
We know that physics has exploded these assumptions for a num­
ber of reasons. For sociology, the question is whether the subject/object 
schema is not a product of the societal manipulation of meaning. If this is 
the case, we are dealing with a circle: the cognition schema is an aspect of 
the object that we are seeking to explain on the basis of this schema. This 
need not end in disaster. But for the theory of society in particular, it raises 
the question of whether and in what sense cognition can be understood as 
communication of a subject that knows an object. Treating imaginary con­
structions as self-description provides a position to which we can switch if 
we jettison the subject/object cognition schema.
However, caution is called for. The concept of the subject that has 
objects both within and outside itself was designed as a model for ongoing 
operation with the distinction between self-reference and other-reference, 
which comes very close to our problem of the cognitive status of self-­
descriptions.3 However, as we shall see, this solution was only a makeshift 
one for a time that was unable to mobilize adequate semantic resources for 
describing modern society. As modern society remedied this deficit and 
was increasingly able to draw on experience with itself, the subject became 
a less convincing concept, finally fading into an alternative expression for 
people, individuals, persons without weight of its own. But this does not 
mean that the historical semantics of subjectivity has nothing more to tell 
us. For in the subject it at least reflects the difference between subject and 
object. We therefore need to make a brief detour across this difficult ter­
rain (postponing a sociology of knowledge analysis until later)4 to examine 
whether and to what extent the theory of the subject had prepared the way 
for a theory of societal self-description.

Self-Descriptions    
2. Neither Subject nor Object
By “subject,” we mean not a substance that bears everything else 
through its mere existence: subject is self-reference itself as the basis for 
cognition and action. Experience with this figure of thought has, however, 
not encouraged simply transferring it to society—treating society as the 
real subject, calling it perhaps mind or intersubjectivity and then expect­
ing everything of it that had previously been expected of the individual 
consciousness. We need not ignore what subject philosophy has produced; 
but we can regard its results as shoals that the ship of societal theory should 
keep well clear of.
Some results remain important and can be adopted. For example, 
the insight that self-reference established at the operational level (in clas­
sical terms as thought) undermines all code guidelines, including that of 
true and false. It can therefore confirm itself even with false results. With 
the loss of code guidelines, the criteria needed for selecting one or other 
value of the code are also lost. Both coding and criterion formation are 
products of the self-referential mode of operation itself, and, as mathe­
maticians would put it, are eigenvalues of their recursive operation. In 
keeping with consciousness theory, we can therefore also speak of the cri­
terion-free self-identification of self-referential operation.5 Also worth not­
ing is the operational setting of the reflection concept, which implies that, 
in being carried out, a operation is neither able nor has to attribute itself to 
its topic, to reflect on itself. The classical philosophy of the subject tackled 
this problem under the subject/object schema; it relied on a sub-objective 
operation and failed in the process, as Jean Paul remarks ironically.6 Kant 
sought to solve the problem of the relationship between the external world 
and cognition in the subject with the aid of a “reentry” of the distinction 
into itself: into the subject.7 This was a striking shift of the problem from 
the factual dimension (congruence) to the time dimension. Kant stresses 
that, despite the radical difference between object and concept, “similar­
ity” is required in their relationship; and he had seen this similarity not in 
representation of the one in the other but in relation to time. He sees the 
diversity of objects as relating to inner meaning in terms of time, and for 
this very reason, the idea of an object must make use of a “schematism” 
that does not represent the object but provides a procedure for construct­

 
  Self-Descriptions
ing it (e.g., drawing a circle), and thus itself takes time. This is of inter­
est as a point of departure for further consideration, but Kant himself sees 
this solution fully in the domain of subjectivity, namely, in the relation of 
inner meaning to the representations of the intellect—and not in the rela­
tionship of the subject with the external world. Schleiermacher’s inference 
that an external (transcendental) explanation of the unity of this difference 
was necessary was accordingly an understandable consequence, whatever 
one might think of the religious setting of this solution. With all this in 
mind, the concept of subject with its pretensions to uniqueness provokes 
the question of what it distinguishes itself from: from the world, from ob­
jects, from other subjects? Or only from itself, from the non-I?
If we understand the (transcendental) subject to depend only on it­
self, we transform the problem of being-in-the-world into a problem of 
being-in-oneself. As a result, the subject becomes irreflexive in relation to 
the primary distinctions to which it owes the possibility of observing. To 
this extent, even if it wishes to, the subject can no longer reflect on its own 
embeddedness, either in the world or in society. It will have to distinguish 
the conditions of the possibility for observation from what others then at­
tribute to it as ideology, as historical conditionality, as “male bias,” and so 
forth. At this level, it cannot participate in the discussion, because it can­
not reflect fully on its own contingency. The only possibility left to it is to 
presuppose itself dogmatically.
Apart from these academic possibilities, the form of the subject also 
has a quite different side to it, in which it reflects on itself as a paradox. The 
subject aspires to “self-realization”—and achieves this by copying individu­
ality patterns that it finds in life and above all in literature.8 It operates con­
sciously, but in order to do this, it needs an unconscious basis that takes in 
everything that cannot become conscious. This two-sided form already re­
acts precisely to the problem that is addressed below under the heading of 
self-description. A self-description can do nothing but indicate something 
and leave other things unmarked. It legitimates and delegitimates itself in 
one fell swoop. This can indeed be noticed but not “sublated,” for noticing 
is only possible autologically; it carries out the difference it notices.
This is probably the hidden reason for the difficulty even permit­
ted subject distinctions face. When the cognitive operations of observing 
and describing are at issue, presumably the distinction between subject and 
object is traditionally invoked. The subject can be expected to reflect on 

Self-Descriptions    
this difference within itself and thus to emphasize it (and itself). The sub­
ject determines itself as subject as opposed to object, and this is precisely 
how it generates the distinction from the object. However, the status of 
world then remains undetermined, and above all the distinction between 
one subject and others is disregarded. Such a subject could neither occur in 
the world—for this would mean that the world reflected on itself 9—nor be 
an individual that distinguishes itself from other individuals. It could there­
fore not participate in communication.10 And no subject, if it is to be an 
individual, can “think the same” as another; for the individual can be indi­
vidual only on the basis of the operational closure and self-reproduction of 
its own experience. Nowadays, we even read that self-sameness [­Selbigkeit] 
is already an institution.11 But without individuality, the subject would be 
nothing more than the semantic figure—or “rule”—of self-reflection. It 
would accordingly be nothing more that the ability to distinguish, espe­
cially since this ability also implies self-reference.12 This initially circular 
implication relationship can be unfolded by attaching differing counter­
concepts to the two concepts and thus distinguishing them from each 
other. One speaks of self-reference as opposed to other-reference, of dis­
tinction as opposed to indication. This permits richer formulations, for in­
stance, with the question of what a self-referential system can distinguish 
and indicate (= observe) operationally and how it actualizes self- and other-
reference at the same time in observing, because only thus can observation, 
even if not directed at itself, take place as an operation of the system itself.
What “underlies” this is accordingly the use of a distinction to distin­
guish between simultaneously practiced self- and other-reference.13 Using 
a distinction to indicate one of its sides (and not the other) is, however, al­
ways a momentary operation that is over in a flash. It would thus seem ap­
propriate to continue the tendency already apparent in Kant’s schematism 
text and resolve in the time dimension the problem of cognition of a world 
that exists independently of cognition. The guarantee of reality can lie only 
in the way in which a system bridges the time differences of its own opera­
tions, and does so simultaneously with what it presupposes as environment. 
If, however, it is this that ensures the “similarity” [Gleichartigkeit] (Kant) of 
the cognitive process with the world of objects, what objection could there 
be to looking for other empirical systems with the faculty of self-reflection?
The societal system is such a case.14 Moreover, at least under present-
day conditions, it is a case without other subjects, in other words without 

 
  Self-Descriptions
other societies. There is insofar no subjectivity, and therefore no intersub­
jectivity, and no objectivity demonstrated by intersubjectivity. But there 
is the operational possibility of self-observation and self-description. In 
carrying out these operations, there are problems of autology. Commu­
nication about communication is itself communication; the concept of 
generalization itself generalizes. Every operation of this system, as we 
must admit for the subject, too, produces a difference between system 
and environment.
This resolves some problems of the philosophy of the subject, nota­
bly that of intersubjectivity.15 Otherwise than often assumed, the function­
ing of social relations, which for us means the autopoiesis of society, does 
not depend on “intersubjectivity,” let alone on “consensus.”16 Intersubjec­
tivity has neither always been given nor can it be produced (which would 
presuppose that one can establish whether it has been attained or not). 
What is decisive instead is that communication continues—­howsoever 
the consciousness required for the purpose is persuaded to join in. It can 
never be ascertained in communication whether consciousness systems 
are “authentically” involved or are only contributing what is necessary for 
continuation. Precisely this has been demonstrated by Harold Garfinkel’s 
well-known experiments.17 The premise of “intersubjectivity” or consensus 
can thus simply be abandoned.18 It cannot be attributed to a subject, to a 
social a priori, to a “life-world,” or to anything else in the sense of a reduc­
tion to something that always has to have been given as the precondition 
of all communication.
If this centerpiece is removed, other problems facing subject philoso­
phy become all the more problematic. As long as one could presuppose a 
plurality of subjects, it was not difficult to see the observer of the subject as 
external observer, that is, as another subject. The theory of society, by con­
trast, has to do without the possibility of adequate external observation.19 
Although it can formally admit that society is observed by the conscious­
ness systems of individual human beings or also by their bodies, their im­
mune systems, and so on, in view of the complexity that is society, such 
observations are hopelessly inadequate. We therefore have a case that sub­
ject philosophy had not needed to take into account: that all cognition 
is steered through self-observation and self-description.20 One has to do 
without competent (even if headstrong) external observation. The system 
itself has to undertake the observation of its observation, the description of 

Self-Descriptions    
its descriptions. It can therefore be understood as neither subject nor ob­
ject in the classical sense of this distinction.
By renouncing the subject/object distinction, we also avoid the ill-
considered equation of “subjective” with “arbitrary.” In reality, there is no 
arbitrariness that, as it were, attaches to the subject. The concept can be re­
tained, but only to indicate the limited competence of external observers. 
We can therefore avoid attributing the function of monitoring arbitrariness 
to supposed objectivity or, mutatis mutandis, to intersubjectivity. We man­
age with the description of system relations at the level of first- and second-
order observation, which makes “arbitrariness” a descriptive stopgap.
Instead of the classical problem of intersubjectivity, which is partly 
taken for granted and partly has to be addressed, we now have the fact that so­
cietal self-observations and self-descriptions, since they can take place only as 
communication, are themselves subject to observation and description. This 
leads to the continual redescription of already existing descriptions and thus 
to the continual generation of incongruent perspectives. Self-­description is 
therefore a problem and only a problem; but if it is thematized at all, it gen­
erates, almost necessarily, several solutions. The system has a tendency to­
ward “hypercomplexity,” to a multiplicity of views on its own complexity.21
Another problem has to do with the form that an observer uses to 
describe a system as a system, namely, the distinction between system and 
environment. An observer who splits the world into a given reference sys­
tem and its environment has to self-locate either in that system or in its en­
vironment. The observation itself thus enters into the form—on either its 
inner side or its outer side—that it takes as the basis for observation. The 
possibilities then still differ. A description of society would, for example, 
have to waive communication to be described as external, which is likely 
to be unappealing.
When descriptions of societal self-observations and self-description 
are at issue, this must be taken into account. The system describing itself is 
always on only one side of a difference it has itself produced. For it can ac­
tualize the distinction only by indicating the one (and not the other) side. 
It must therefore allow the difference to reenter what it has separated off 
on one of the sides. There has to be, as Spencer-Brown puts it, a reentry of 
the form into the form, of the distinction into what is distinguished by it, 
of the distinction between system and environment into the system.22 And 
this transforms the indeterminate initial state, Spencer-Brown’s “­unmarked 

 
  Self-Descriptions
state,” into the “imaginary space” of which one can say at least that it per­
mits self-observations and reentries to occur. To occur and thus become 
observable! However, whereas transcendental theory relies on “functional 
prerequisites” to explain the synthesis that underlies the cognitive faculty 
and capacity for action of the subject as conditions of its possibility, the 
mathematics of reentry leads to a self-generated indeterminacy, to an “un­
resolvable indeterminacy,”23 by which the system itself acknowledges the 
inadequacy of its own operations.
Humanists tend to be interested above all in where the subject has 
got to and to stress the importance of this figure of thought. But the object 
falls with the subject, and this has perhaps the more serious consequences. 
The object (in the modern sense of the term) had lived from the distinc­
tion between subject and object. Seen from the perspective of the subject 
(and one cannot speak of “seeing” from any other), it was the other side 
of the distinction and served as form for ascribing identity. Whatever in 
the numerous empirically diversified individuals is determined to be “the 
subject” (or rather their subjectivity) sets the track to corresponding iden­
tity correlates in the environment. The identity of an object lies in its ap­
pearing to be the same to all subjects who used their intellect correctly. If 
we replace subject by observer and define observers as systems that gener­
ate themselves through the sequential practice of their distinguishing, any 
guarantee of the form of objects is lost. Within all identification, what 
matters is to distinguish the distinctions that an observer uses. In other 
words, it is a matter of iterations, of a condensing and confirming that is 
always to be described in relation to the systems that carry them out opera­
tionally (which also holds for the describer of these descriptions and his or 
her “objects”). From this point of view, objects constitute themselves only 
in the context of second-order observation.24
It must be admitted that these considerations raise difficult logi­
cal and technical theoretical problems, especially when one has to realize 
that they cannot simply be solved by shifting analysis to a logical or lin­
guistic meta-level (Russell, Tarski). But problems of this sort are mean­
while the subject of such widespread discussion in the natural sciences 
and in machine theory25 that one should not be discouraged.26 Especially 
in sociology, there are very similar notions in a somewhat simpler version 
not formulated in epistemological terms. Anthony Giddens, for example, 
shows that all action is integrated reflexively in structures and contexts, 

Self-Descriptions    
including knowledge generated by action. One might also speak of a cir­
cular relationship between action and knowledge. “Sociolocal knowledge 
spirals in and out of the universe of social life, reconstructing both itself and 
that process as an integral part of that process.”27 And the result is, Giddens 
claims, that in the social sciences there is no accumulation of knowledge, 
and that more knowledge does not, as in classical epistemology, lead not 
to more certainty but to more uncertainty.28 The abstract questions of a 
suitable autological theory design cannot for the moment be satisfactorily 
answered. But we can contribute by clarifying how self-descriptions work 
in the case of the societal system. There is no doubt that they occur, that 
they are therefore possible. And we can always inquire into the conditions 
of this possibility.
3. Self-Observation and Self-Description
The societal system is already obliged to observe its communica­
tion, and in this sense to observe itself, at the operational level. It suffices 
initially to observe the utterance as action, as if it were a specific object 
(determined by itself).29 Then the distinction between self-reference and 
other-reference develops, with which the system reacts to generating its 
own form by operating, namely, the difference between system and en­
vironment. Ongoing observation on the basis of the distinction between 
self-reference and other-reference condenses the corresponding references 
and concentrates them into the distinction between system and environ­
ment. This permits a new style of self-observation, namely, the attribution 
of topics to the system itself as opposed to its environment. The system re­
flects on its own unity as point of reference for observation, and as order­
ing perspective for ongoing reference. It is then advisable to produce texts 
that coordinate a multitude of such always event-like and situation-bound 
self-observations. In the simplest form, the system gives itself a name, a 
rigid, invariant denotation, which because of this very rigidity can be re­
peated and used in predictably differing situations. Comparisons can then 
be based on such names, setting one’s own system against another in order 
to identify it by contrast—Greeks and barbarians, Christians and hea­
thens, or, in more modern style without proper names, civilized and sav­
age.30 As the examples show, this allows the contrast to be gradually filled 
in with structural descriptions; in the last mentioned case, for instance, the 

 
  Self-Descriptions
division of labor, and thus to enrich the texts by which the system indicates 
itself. We shall call such texts, including names, self-descriptions.
Since the end of the eighteenth century, the concept of culture has 
occupied the locus for reflection on self-descriptions. Culture in the mod­
ern sense of the term is always culture considered as culture, thus a descrip­
tion observed in the system. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
this harmonized with the switch in the concept of individuality from indi­
visibility to self-observation of one’s own peculiarity and with the demand 
that individuals have to “appropriate” culture in an individually suitable 
manner (education). Culture can indeed be understood to mean that self-
description does not exclude the description of the world in which it takes 
place but rather includes it through the distinction between self-reference 
and other-reference. Culture is then, as it were, the expressive form, an­
chored in society, of a description of the world that could assume other 
forms in other societies. Culture is, as we often read, learned behavior.31 
The concept of culture implies comparison between cultures and historical 
relativism, and self-location of one’s own culture in this context. It conveys 
a semblance of “objectivity,” that is to say, the assumption that all observ­
ers of cultures would come to similar results, particularly if the relativity 
of the object is acknowledged. At the time when the concept developed 
in the late eighteenth century, the Eurocentrism of comparison between 
cultures and the modernity-centric perspective of historical retrospection 
were taken for granted. They have since been abandoned without jetti­
soning the concept of culture. However, the concept has remained unde­
fined or controversially defined. The culture concept lives only from the 
circumstance that any proposal to do without it would have little chance 
of success until it can be replaced by another conceptuality. The specific 
problems of self-relations and reflective operations escape analysis owing 
to the ambivalence of the culture concept. They are not overt but covert;32 
and for this reason no theoretical progress appears to be made under the 
heading of “cultural studies” [Kulturwissenschaft]; there are only phases of 
stimulation, fatigue, and the renewed appeal to culture. Whether we can 
do without the culture concept can be decided only when an elaborated 
theory of societal self-description is available.
Self-descriptions, too, are and remain observations in the strictest 
sense. Recall that an observation indicates something by distinguishing it. 
With what it indicates, it also produces an unmarked space that is not in­

Self-Descriptions    
tentionally or thematically addressed (indicated), but presupposed as the 
rest of the world [Welt-im-übrigen]. And it separates the operation of ob­
servation (and hence the observer) off from what is observed. That all this 
also applies for self-description has considerable theoretical repercussions. 
First, in the description of society, the world is always involved—with both 
known forms (e.g., stones, plants, animals, gods) and with unknown prop­
erties and ordering postulates of the cosmos, creation type not amenable to 
further explanation. The other side of the society distinction makes other-
referential indications possible; but it can never be indicated as unity. It 
enables the boundary to be crossed, but only because another distinction 
is drawn on the other side—for instance, between heaven and earth. And 
there is a second blind spot, the observer himself. Description can op­
erate, but it cannot describe itself in taking place, for this would be an­
other operation, which would require another distinguishing indication. 
It can only be redescribed afterward. No thematization of society achieves 
a fully transparent world.33 And, if this theory holds true, this must be 
demonstrable for all societal self-descriptions—also and especially if they 
take sociological form. This is further discussed in section 21 below, on 
invisibilization.
Self-observations and self-descriptions of society are always commu­
nicative operations; they exist only in the nexus of the system. They must 
presuppose that the system already exists, and are therefore never consti­
tutive but always subsequent operations that have to do with an already 
highly selectively formed memory. This is also true for the production and 
use of texts. The system cannot escape its own historicality; it must always 
presuppose the state in which it has brought itself. Precisely because this 
is so and precisely because the temporal sequence of operations is irrevers­
ible, structures in general and texts in particular have the function of en­
suring repeatability and in this sense reversibility. One can have recourse 
to them; but this, too, happens only if it happens. Reflection, we can say 
in a double sense (structural and processual), is the “result of the result.”34
Societies without writing also produce self-descriptions. They pro­
duce narratives for repeated use and presuppose in narrating that the story 
is known and only the accessories, the trimmings, the skill of the narra­
tor will surprise. Thus myths about the human race, the tribe, forefathers, 
and so forth can also be laid down in which society is represented in soci­
ety. For everyday use, for speech, however, “indexical expressions” whose 

 
  Self-Descriptions
reference is obvious suffice. It is only writing that removes this immediacy 
of being able to say “we,” thus introducing a reference problem. For when 
the reader comes to read what is written, the writer has long since turned 
to other concerns or may even be dead. Only with the advent of writing 
does a need arise for conceptually elaborated self-descriptions that seek to 
fix what is being communicated about when communication takes place 
in society about society.
Like self-observations, self-descriptions (the production of texts) are 
also discrete operations of the system. Description and what is described 
are not two separate but only superficially connected matters;35 in self-­
description, description is always part of what it describes and changes 
what it describes simply by appearing and exposing itself to observation.36 
It was possible to avoid this insight as long as description of the world and 
society was understood as religious truth. In Durkheim’s sociology, this 
concept is repeated—and at the same time destroyed.37 Religion symbol­
izes society and concentrates the awareness of individuals on sacred ob­
jects, and for this very reason must remain silent on the fact that it is only 
a description of society.
In contrast to the usual epistemology, there is also no subsequent 
congruence between cognition and object—either in the form of observa­
tion or in the form of description. The system can do nothing but oper­
ate communicatively. What communication ultimately means and seeks 
to indicate never has any resemblance at all to communicative forms; and 
this holds true even when (as here) society is described as a communication 
system.38 This also applies for self-descriptions. To ask about the truth of the 
description is therefore inappropriate. Pharaonic Egypt described its own 
millennia of history as unchanging repetition, which naturally did not cor­
respond to the historical facts but nevertheless did not fail to have an ef­
fect.39 Here, too, we must be careful not to confound map with territory. 
Every individual operation is one among countless others, and this is true 
independently of its meaning, and thus quite independently of whether it 
seeks to describe the overall system as a unity or is concerned with some 
detail or other. In other words, at the operational level, the system can 
never be its own unity; it can only, however transiently, indicate it.
It follows that the system, which can process its own autopoiesis only 
in individual operations, is inaccessible to itself. It is opaque to itself; just as 
opaque as the environment.40 We can therefore also say that self-reference 

Self-Descriptions    
and other-reference point to essentially infinite horizons of ever-further 
possibilities, which cannot be exhausted because operations have insuffi­
cient operational capacity and take time. The theme of Tristram Shandy! 
Every self-description of the system is thus a construction. For the same 
reason, a system can surprise itself with itself and gain ever-new insights 
from itself. Through its own self-description, the system directs what it can 
notice in the way of inconsistency, limiting it and accordingly intensifying 
irritabilities against the background of everything that is thus suppressed 
and disregarded (by describing society as a class society, societal theory in 
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries obscured the serious consequences 
of functional differentiation and comforted itself all too long with the be­
lief that revolution or other forms of leveling out inequalities could help). 
Self-observations and self-descriptions have, in other words, information 
value, but only because the system is opaque to itself. And because this is 
so, the historical semantics of self-descriptions of society, the topic of this 
chapter, has an importance of its own.
Communications by which the system describes itself also remain 
communications, and hence distinct events, which can be observed as such. 
A great deal else happens at the same time in the same system and even 
more so in the world. Only observation “digitizes” what happens; only ob­
servation highlights the one as opposed to the other. Time itself remains a 
continuum of transformation; it modifies conditions in order to use a fa­
miliar distinction, not digitally but analogically,41 that is, in a continuum 
of continued simultaneity. This is no different when self-­descriptions are 
involved. Then, too, the system has to digitize the temporally analog re­
lationship with itself. And this requires a construction, a form, a turning 
point in reality, which could always take a different course, or not take 
place at all.
Neither consensus nor consensual capacity is implied by the concept 
of self-description. When demanding texts are produced, consensus will 
tend to be improbable in a society that imparts literacy only to a very lim­
ited degree and can transmit texts orally. This holds already for conditions 
under center/periphery differentiation and stratification.42 Regardless of 
such structural channeling of consensus, dissent, and ignorance, this ques­
tion must be treated as a variable. By self-observation, we should therefore 
understand only an operation in the system directed at the system, and by 
self-description, the production of a corresponding text.

 
  Self-Descriptions
The myriads of simultaneous operations with implicit or explicit self-
reference should not be seen as chaos. Even the transition from only occa­
sional self-observations to the recording of texts is a first corrective step, one 
taken already in the narrative traditions of oral cultures. Texts are created 
to be recognized and for repeated use, and coordinate the self-­observations 
that fit them. We call such meaning guidelines worth preserving as “se­
mantics.” The system thus facilitates self-reference in often very heteroge­
neous situations by providing a special semantics. This can, in generating 
a further distinction, be rightly or wrongly used. This bifurcation gives rise 
to a need for interpretation by experts who watch over the correct, “ortho­
dox” use of the text and derive their social prestige from the quality of the 
text. The right meaning of the text then easily takes on a normative quality. 
This means nothing other than that, where necessary, it is upheld against 
the facts. What is important will not lose this character because mistakes 
or ­errors or abuse occur. On the contrary: mistakes come to light pre­
cisely because one recognizes them as deviating from the right meaning. 
This trend toward normative fixing will frequently be found confirmed in 
what follows (e.g., in the old European concept of nature and the modern 
context of ideologies). It is necessary here only to recognize the function 
of textualization and normativization: on the operational level, they com­
pensate for the inevitable singularity and eventness of all self-observations.
Moreover, the factual-communicative performance of all self-­
observations and self-descriptions ensures that these operations can be ob­
served and described. The system cannot operate except in actuality. Every 
self-observation and every self-description therefore inevitably exposes it­
self to observation and description. Every communication can become the 
topic of a communication. But this means that it can be commented on 
positively or negatively, that it can be accepted or rejected. Relatively stable 
self-descriptions therefore develop, not simply in the form of convincing 
access to a given object, but as the result of recursive observation and de­
scription of such descriptions. In mathematical cybernetics, such a result is 
also called an “eigenvalue” of the system.43
The establishment and stabilization of a text has the advantage that 
the operation of producing the text can be forgotten, and with it, the au­
thor; and with him, his interests and perspectives. This, too, can serve to 
protect the text. The text becomes a holy scripture or one whose age and 
venerable tradition protect it against criticism. Its obviousness conceals 

Self-Descriptions    
the fact that there were other possibilities. Particularly in written cultures 
with a still primarily oral tradition, the written status of the text symbol­
izes its invariance. If the names of authors have been preserved, they take 
on a quasi-mythical quality, duplicating, as it were, the importance of the 
text. Only with the printing press, thus only since the fifteenth century, 
does authorship in the modern sense of the concept become established. In 
the Middle Ages, it was the text that communicated, then possibly also the 
printing press. And only with the clear differentiation between author and 
text was what was in principle an oral transmission of written texts suc­
ceeded by the sophisticated art of interpretation referring to contexts and 
intentions that we now call hermeneutics.
It should also be remembered that the problem of self-observation 
and self-description is always the same. The problem of identity is con­
tained in the identity of the problem. But any solution to the problem, 
every proposed identity has to be carried out by operations of the system 
and therefore exposes itself to observation in the system. The observation of self-
observation takes place from a different, “critical” perspective. Above all, it 
now also sees the locations, interests, semantic ties involved in the formula­
tion of primary self-observation. The nonidentity of self-observations and 
self-descriptions is therefore a result to be expected in the normal course of 
things—and with growing probability where primary observation can no 
longer operate on the basis of authority and tradition.
In addition, a peculiarity of all self-referential practices, especially of 
the self-description of societies needs to be pointed out. There are no ex­
ternal criteria for assessing them. The same can already be said in the Car­
tesian tradition of the consciousness of the subject. If the subject thinks 
that it thinks, it cannot be objected that this is not the case. If the subject 
maintains that it likes this or that, it cannot be argued that it is mistaken. 
However, this is not, as philosophers claim, a peculiarity of the subject 
and an indicator of its unique status in the world. It also applies to the 
social system society, all the more so because this system has no possibil­
ity of communication at all outside society, and thus no authority capa­
ble of correction. Society therefore has to rely on practicing criterion-free 
self-reference.
This by no means excludes criteria being developed for self-descrip­
tion. The reflection theories with which the functional systems of modern 
society describe themselves usually demand “scientificity,” whatever this 

 
  Self-Descriptions
might mean for the legal system, for the political system, for the educa­
tion system, or for the economic system. Religious criteria applied for the 
self-descriptions of premodern societies; in their central components, they 
had to be amenable to religion. However, such criteria are not established 
from the outset in all cases of societal self-description. It is rather that they 
form a component of the text. And if they are recorded separately (e.g., 
reference to God in the occidental Christian tradition), this happens in 
conformity with the text and not as reference to an independent testing 
authority. Self-descriptions can, in other words, only be explained circu­
larly, and if they seek to interrupt their explanatory circle through external­
ization, this takes place as a component of the text, as part of the execution 
of the self-description.
Under these structural and operational conditions, a special seman­
tics develops for societal self-descriptions that is subject to evolutionary 
change. The scope is limited, for self-descriptions have to be sufficiently 
plausible to be able to prove their worth and change in the process of 
observing and describing descriptions. At the same time, however, exist­
ing texts gain a weight of their own. Even in the case of radical structural 
changes, society cannot abruptly change what it knows and has said about 
itself to start again from scratch. It would have to perceive what is new in 
old contexts in order to specify it at all. For example, it can retain indi­
cations but covertly change the counterconcepts that function as distinc­
tion44—such as when nature is no longer distinguished from grace but 
from civilization; or when one switches from utilitas/honestas to useful/
useless or useful/harmful, thus finding a new basis for assessing the soci­
etal position of the nobility. Thus, especially in times of radical structural 
change, one must reckon with an overhang of tradition, which can only 
gradually be reduced as the difference between the past and present world 
becomes apparent. As we shall see in detail, even the modern world de­
scribes itself historically to begin with in order to free itself of its history. 
In so doing, it accepts blanket concepts for an open future, and new irrita­
tions, and with them new experiences, can only gradually be built in and 
the vestiges of old European semantics replaced.
The concept of self-description does not after all exclude there being 
many self-descriptions of one and the same system. Another question is 
whether the societal system itself offers a multiplicity of self-descriptions 
and also notices that this happens. As we shall see in greater detail, this 

Self-Descriptions    
is the case only under modern (nowadays one says “postmodern”) con­
ditions, and this apparently has to do with the transition to functional 
differentiation. In consequence, society would have to describe itself in 
metaconceptual terms as polycontextural or hypercomplex. Every single 
self-description as description then takes account of its own contingency. 
It takes into account (and indicates that it does so) that there can be other 
self-descriptions of the same system. Or if it refuses this insight and adopts 
a totalizing stance; it becomes susceptible to deviation and intolerant. And 
makes life politically difficult for itself.
Our considerations so far are formulated on the level of a theoretical 
description of self-descriptions, and this applies for everything that follows. 
On this level of the theoretical redescription of self-descriptions,45 the con­
cept becomes “autological,” and it also applies to itself. The redescription 
of self-descriptions of society is a self-description of society. Redescription 
can then no longer be seen as the generation of better knowledge, let alone 
as progress (this would now be easy to see through as a preconceived opin­
ion of a further level, of a self-description of the redescription that ignores 
its autological nature). It is rather a matter of the ongoing transforma­
tion of premises that had formerly been considered necessary and natural 
into contingent and artificially selected limitations to certain operations. 
For example, the redescription of tonal music through the introduction 
of atonal music, or the redescription of political economy through Marx’s 
analysis of “capitalism.” The access of such redescriptions to descriptions 
can then be justified only temporally as appropriate to the present-day sit­
uation, with the prospect of being treated tomorrow as a thing of the past.
It is easy to see that this growing sophistication of descriptions pro­
vokes counterdescriptions (e.g., “fundamentalist” movements today). 
But this, too, brings no progress, no improvement in the quality of self-­
descriptions but only, and in this case particularly strikingly, confirmation 
of the analysis just attempted above.
4. The Semantics of Old Europe, 1: Ontology
In the typology of their differentiation, premodern societies show 
marked structural similarities. But they had a written culture essentially 
transmitted by oral teaching,46 and, despite all trade relations and all mu­
tual acquaintance, they retained distinct semantic traditions. Each could 

 
  Self-Descriptions
regard itself as the center of the world and design its own cosmology. In 
this sense, they were world societies and could accommodate other societ­
ies in their own cosmologies.
What follows is limited to describing the self-description of society 
in the old European tradition, thus to Graeco-Roman-Christian thought, 
for only this tradition has accompanied the emergence of modern soci­
ety, and it alone has influenced the expectations addressed to it to this 
day.47 The old European tradition arose in a society that now no longer ex­
ists—with respect either to modes of communication or to differentiation 
forms. This tradition nevertheless remains an integral part of our historical 
tradition and is in this sense a cultural heritage that can provide orienta­
tion. It cannot perish—precisely because it clearly no longer fits, is contin­
ually negated, and has to be available for this reason.
Its closure together with the religious control of inconsistencies that 
menaced the system is still impressive today—precisely because this is 
now beyond our reach. The inner wealth of this tradition’s conceptual­
ity is based above all on the circumstance that it knew both stratificatory 
and center/periphery differentiation, that in the course of its history it 
had to interpret both city and empire building, that it knew nobility liv­
ing both in the city and, in the Middle Ages, in the country, and that it 
changed religion in the course of Christianization, with the result that the 
heritage had to be reinterpreted without fundamental changes to societal 
structures. The geographical diversity of Europe certainly played a role in 
the emergence of urban cultures in ancient Greece and in the formation 
of territorial states in the Europe of the late Middle Ages. Despite this di­
versity, however, a decisive characteristic of all premodern societies was not 
affected: the differentiation form ensured a competition-free position for the 
right description of the world and society, namely, the apex of the hierarchy: 
the hereditary nobility, and the center of society: the city. There were cultural 
elites that were relatively autonomous, because they operated on the basis 
of texts, but did not call the structural asymmetries of the societal system 
into question, merely reinterpreting them from time to time. In spite of 
all controversies between schools, the production of descriptions remained 
the concern of a small stratum, and this corresponded to the continued 
existence of the primarily oral mode (teaching) of transmitting even writ­
ten texts. In [ancient] Mesopotamia, there were schools of writing; in the 
Middle Ages, a theologically and legally trained clergy. Only in the course 

Self-Descriptions    
of the Middle Ages did the cultures of the nobility, the monasteries, and 
the cities begin to develop separately. This was translated for the last time 
into a self-description of society in the theory of the three estates. At the 
same time, in the transition to the modern age, printing, which operated 
commercially in Europe (unlike in China and Korea), revealed the already 
accumulated heterogeneity of thought with surprising suddenness. And 
in semantics this imposed reactions that in turn made use of the print­
ing press and generated a multitude of forms, from which the modern age 
could then choose what was suitable.
The prevailing view of the world in old Europe can be described as 
ontology. The premises of ontology are introduced as factors that follow 
physics (Naturlehre): as metaphysics. We do not need to investigate whether 
this held true for all cognitive efforts, including those in the domain of re­
ligious interpretations of the world. But the predominance of the ontologi­
cal mode of observation and description is demonstrated alone by the fact 
that paradox was invented to defend Eleatic ontology and thus treated from 
the outset as a disturbance if not error in reasoning to be avoided; and, 
moreover, that bivalent logic, which ontology had relied on to block reflec­
tion, was unquestioningly accepted until very recently.48
By ontology, I mean the result of a mode of observation that operates 
on the basis of a distinction between being and nonbeing and that subor­
dinates all other distinctions to this one. This distinction finds its inimi­
table plausibility in the assumption that only being is, and that nonbeing 
is not. This is then taken over in logic as the law of the excluded middle, 
by which being and thought certify their mutual conformity.49 Even if 
only being is and nonbeing is not, the distinction nevertheless has to be 
respected because confusion is possible at the level of beings/nonbeings 
[Seiendes/Nichtseiendes].
Confusion occurs above all when communication relies on the schema 
“something as something.” In this schema, deceptions can creep in by in­
dicating something as a something that it is not, or perhaps only possibly 
is not. This is illustrated by statements about women, about races, and also 
about workers or about religiously charged objects or symbols—to men­
tion only the most awkward cases with a structurally built-in tendency to 
deformation.
And to avert the dangers of the “as” schema—the risk of misattribu­
tion and the risk of discovering a misattribution—the primary ontological 

 
  Self-Descriptions
distinction includes a quasi-normative postulate, which is understood as 
a requirement for order. Any being [Seiendes] is not to be what it is not—­
except as a miracle that serves to prove the superordination of religion, the 
omnipotence of the Creator. Ontology therefore guarantees the unity of 
the world as the unity of being. Only Nothing [das Nichts] is excluded, but 
“nothing” is lost as a consequence.50 With the Stoics, one can, if being is 
understood as individuated existence, also form a superordinate concept of 
aliquid [something] being said to exist or not exist. However, precisely if 
one assumes the primacy of the distinction between being and nonbeing, 
with an aliquid one blocks the question of what it is to be distinguished 
from. Furthermore, one can outbid the unity of being with the unity of 
God, with the possibility of dissolving being in distinctions. Everything that 
is then distinguishes itself from other things and participates only thus in 
being. But ontology then imposes the question of the being of God—with 
the dangerous consequences of a negative theology that raises the question 
of the being or nonbeing of God, with the inevitable answer that He does 
not distinguish Himself at all, and therefore not thus. This is likely to have 
consequences in dogma and Church policy, leading ultimately to the differ­
entiation of religious dogma formation on a specifically ecclesiastical basis; 
but with Nicholas of Cusa it also reveals that distinguishing (also between 
being and nonbeing) is a specifically human mode of cognition, which lets 
the intractable issue of unity founder on paradox.51
That ontology with its bivalent logic limits the concept of world was 
pointed out in volume 1 of this book.52 World cannot be indicated as back­
ground indeterminacy (neither being nor nonbeing) but only at the level 
of designatable objects, as an aggregate of objects or the totality of objects. 
It is the way it is; one can only make mistakes in indication and then has 
to correct them.
The concept of “ontology” arose only in the seventeenth century,53 
apparently in connection with the crises of certainty experienced at that 
time. A term was needed for what had previously been presupposed. For 
present purposes, ontology is defined as an observation schema that ori­
ents itself on the distinction between being and nonbeing, and thus in­
dependently of the very different ways in which philosophy has treated 
the concept. This means above all that the distinction between being and 
nonbeing is and remains dependent on a prior operational separation, 
namely, of observation (or observer) from what is observed. In the domain 

Self-Descriptions    
of ontology, the tendency is to recoup this primary difference ontologi­
cally; which means to distinguish its two sides, observation and what is ob­
served, again in terms of being and nonbeing. The ontological world thus 
remains closed. Thought, speech, and Logos occur in it [the world] when 
it [Logos] is, but not when it is not. Thus the observer can, if he wishes to 
make statements about himself, only provide for himself on the one side 
of his schema, and not as something that “is not.”54 He must participate in 
being because he could otherwise not observe at all.
In such a minimal philosophical program, being dominates. It is the 
way it is. Since there is no nothing, the reality indicated as being [Sein] 
or as a being [Seiendes] is monovalent. It can be reduced to a basic ontic-­
ontological formula. The “non” [das Nicht] consumes itself, as it were. It 
can therefore be disregarded. As indication in the framework of the being/
nonbeing distinction, the “non” can only mean a call “back to being.” 
Crossing the boundary from being to nonbeing and back brings no gain, 
it is nothing other than deletion of the operation. Only because one needs 
a distinction to observe does one have to postulate nonbeing to observe the 
being of the world, reality as a whole. Nonbeing is a necessary implicature 
of the observation of being.
In the factual dimension this ontological distinction corresponds to 
the concept of thing (= res). Like the unity of the world, the independence 
(substantiality) of the thing is guaranteed by its being. Individual things, 
too, can exist in themselves because their being needs to be distinguished 
only from their nonbeing and their nonbeing can do them no harm. At 
the genus/species level, this principle is supplemented by the logical rule 
that an indication excludes its opposite. A horse can thus not be an ass, a 
Greek cannot be a barbarian, and a good person cannot be a bad person. 
There are no mixed forms, and if they are discovered or fabricated, analysis 
is called for; or they are monsters that simply prove that this is not possi­
ble. The thing (like the genus) is thus a concentrate of being, which, while 
excluding its own nonbeing, does not exclude other things. The world ac­
cordingly consists of visible and invisible things and of relations between 
them. This premise of ontological metaphysics is so powerful that even 
Kant still spoke of the “thing-in-itself” [Ding an sich]; and the result is 
that the problematization of the thing, especially in so-called epistemology 
since the mid-nineteenth century, notably in neo-Kantianism, is limited to 
methodological reflection.55

 
  Self-Descriptions
The distinction between thing and cognitive method conceals that a 
distinction has previously also been made predominantly between being 
and nonbeing. This founding asymmetry provides the basis for all other 
traditional asymmetrical oppositions, and also for normative and aesthetic 
assessment. It is always the positive side of the distinction that something 
can be done with, because it relates to being, or in a nineteenth-century 
variant, to validity. This is safe ground, a reassuring position. Thus the dis­
tinction between good and bad is itself good because it identifies the bad as 
bad. As Louis Dumont has shown, this asymmetry of opposition (this en­
globement du contraire) underlies the hierarchical architecture of the world 
and enables it to claim completeness.56 The hierarchy is the “fullness of 
being.”
Even the analysis of time is submitted to this ontological schema. 
From Aristotle to Hegel,57 one asked whether time was or whether it 
was not—and had then to accept that this question turned the ontology 
schema itself into a paradox. An understanding of time could then be 
gained only by resolving the paradox. This was done above all with the sec­
ondary distinction between immutable and mutable things. Projected into 
the ontology schema, the immutable had the quality of being (it makes 
no sense to speak of immutable or mutable nonbeing). That the immu­
table is is re­assuring for the observer, as it were. He does not have to be 
constantly on the lookout, for there is nothing to discover. He can presup­
pose immutable being as frame of the world and turn to what is happen­
ing in the world. This also facilitates the observation of time itself. One 
can assume a time (aeternitas) withdrawn from time (tempus) and accord­
ingly distinguish between (time-bound) fate and (timeless) order.58 Or one 
proceeds on the assumption of a (divisible) concept of movement, only to 
realize that time is not simply movement or process or dialectical process. 
What one can identify, namely, movement, apparently has another side 
to it that escapes indication. But the distinction between moved and un­
moved blocks out any questions about this other side. Only now is it be­
ginning to be asked what this thematization of time lacks.59
“Between” past and future, there is thus “nothing,” and the same ap­
plies to other “betweens,” to what separates parts of a whole from one an­
other and thus combines them into a whole.60 All boundaries, all breaks, 
all “betweens” fall in the domain of “nothing,” or to be more precise in the 
domain of the ontologically excluded middle (excluded through the ob­

Self-Descriptions    
servation form of “being”). In closer analysis, we are thus dealing with two 
different exclusions: with exclusion of nothing from being (plenitudo), and 
with what is excluded with this distinction between being and nonbeing. 
Philosophical ontology typically passes over this problem with the ques­
tion of what “the being” [das Seiende]—whether object or subject—is “in 
itself.”61 But this question really only has the (dubious) effect of metaphysi­
cally declassing relations.
(From the point of view of an operational systems theory such as 
that propounded here, it is striking that this concept of time suppresses 
what allows time to be observed in the first place, namely, the present; 
for only in the present can observational operations be actualized. When 
time is observed on the basis of the distinction between past and future, 
the present serves as a boundary, thus as the unobserved unity of the dif­
ference. Time is then experienced as the difference between the currently 
nonactual time horizons and hence detemporalized in the observation of 
time—as if time were always given as an ontological principle [Ontologi­
cum], unless as tempus it has a beginning and an end itself.)
After this repression of the time problem and of the factual prob­
lem of the thing boundary, “being,” if it has to distinguish itself only from 
“nonbeing,” remains an extremely general concept—a medium for all pos­
sible things or forms. To guarantee tangible reality for being, an additional 
concept such as “material” then has to be introduced. Being, one might 
therefore say, is, as being, indifferent to all forms that it can assume, and 
to this extent compatible with the concept of creation, which determines 
in the first place what comes about as world and what does not. And time, 
too, as tempus in distinction from aeternitas, is part of this creation. It owes 
its being to a beginning, an origin.
All this also holds true for observation and the observer himself, since 
we would not want to deny the practice of observing the attribute of being. 
After all, Descartes was to make its very indisputability the point of depar­
ture for his philosophy. This is all the more true of all further distinctions—
for instance, that between sign and signified in traditional semiotics or that 
between physis (natura) and technē (ars), which is concerned with whether 
something becomes the way it is of its own accord, in the unfolding of 
being, as it were, or whether, as something that has to be made, it can both 
be and not be. The (for us) first difference between observer and observed 
is to this way of thinking a second difference, which articulates being and 

 
  Self-Descriptions
renders it reflexive for thought. One could therefore assume that, in estab­
lishing being, thought had attained its natural end.
This appears initially to work comprehensively. For everyday life, 
too, does not expect gaps in being. What has disappeared must have ended 
up somewhere—be it only in rubble, dust, and ashes. Souls end up either 
in heaven or in hell. Everything that is distinguished is distinguished in 
terms of being. The irritating counterfigure of an abstract nothing can be 
left out of account. It may well give a profile to mythological tales, provid­
ing histories of origins with a “before,” but mentioning it serves only to in­
dicate, which is all that is important.
The decisive advantage of the primary distinction between being and 
nonbeing is that only being has to be taken into account (and, if neces­
sary, on the observer side, error as well). All other distinctions can then be 
treated as divisions of being. The form of distinguishing reenters itself and 
appears on the side of being as division. Since Aristotle, primary divisions 
have been termed categories, originally a term from judicial procedure (as 
if a “charge” [katēgoria] had been brought that being cannot appear as 
unity). Time, for example, is divided into concepts of line segments, past/
present/future, and not as always present, as a distinction between past and 
future practiced in the present. This strikingly plays down the paradox of 
distinguishing, resolving this paradox of the unity of difference in divisions 
that leave the impression of an ordered world—ordered in divisions that 
harmonize with the inclusion principles of society, which provide a specific 
place for every human being in societal differentiation.
The temporal succession of the distinctions practiced was allowed 
(one could say) by abiding by the unity of origin. In a way we now find dif­
ficult to understand, origins were seen as present past and thus as measure. 
However, the beginning, the ground, archē and origo, the principle of prin­
ciples was God. His glory lay ultimately in His creating the world of dis­
tinctions and, as far as humanity was concerned, allowing this world as 
freedom, without Himself being distinguishable. This correlated exactly with 
a world of nobility that had to unite origins and virtue, that had to treat vir­
tue as a sort of family heritage that it communicated to descendants, even if 
it made use of its freedom to fail. There were nobles only where there were 
divisions that did not exclude the other—there were also peasants, servants, 
and so on—but which excluded anything from being something else at the 
same time.

Self-Descriptions    
But, although the premise was not the observer but being, an irritat­
ing experience was to provoke the development of a “logic.” In society, pre­
cisely in seeking to formulate statements of fact and to relate what was said 
to what existed, propositions differed. Opinions about the same things 
should really match, especially if observation is seen as a mode of being, as 
the use of signs, or as being passively impressed by what presents itself. But 
society produces differing opinions. The mode of observation relating to 
the identity of being stresses this all the more. How is it, as Plato asks in the 
Theaetetus, that one person holds something to be true that another con­
siders to be false; that society thus communicates truth as falsehood? It was 
sought to limit the phenomenal domain through an appropriate distinc­
tion: that between strict knowledge (epistēmē) which, despite reflection, 
admits only unanimity (as mathematics shows), and mere opinions (doxa), 
mere “semblance of truth” [Wahr-Scheinbarkeit]; and then to introduce 
this distinction ontologically with the evident argument that that’s the way 
it is. But this did not fully solve the communication problem. A level of 
second-order observation was also needed and developed at which claims 
to truth could be assessed, that is to say, where one observes how some­
one observes who provides “assertions of fact” [Ist-Behauptungen] against 
an index of true or false. As terminological clues reveal, logic originated in 
social, communicative problems.62
Since differences of opinion cannot be denied (least of all in the highly 
developed debating culture of the Greek city), the thematization of observa­
tion (expression, indication) cannot be avoided. This happens on the basis 
of the self-inclusive distinction between being and thought, thus with the 
outdifferentiation of a logic, an ability to speak, collect, order. In both cases, 
we are dealing with two-sided forms. However, the being schema is asym­
metrical, while logic is symmetrical. The being schema has only one value 
with designation function. The other value (the outside of the form) indi­
cates nothing. In logic, by contrast, there is a relation of exchange between 
the two values true and false. It is symmetrical; one could say, ontologi­
cally symmetrical. This symmetrical bivalence is, however, fully in the ser­
vice of (the cognition) of ontological monovalence. It defines the freedom 
of observation as the possibility of correctable error (and not, for instance, 
transcendentally or dialectically or constructivistically). With Gotthard 
Günther we can say that the elementary contexture of world observation 
is both monovalent and bivalent, both symmetrical and asymmetrical; but 

 
  Self-Descriptions
this distinction is organized in the form of a hierarchical opposition. This 
means that asymmetry has precedence as ordering value—just as the nobil­
ity over the people or the city over the country.
We therefore have to distinguish between the use of two-sided forms 
in all observation (thus the simple fact that one can only indicate some­
thing if one can distinguish it), and of bivalent logic, which has a posi­
tive value and a negative value and can indicate an indication as being 
indicated to be true or false. This does not mean that classical logic ab­
stracts from ontological premises, that is, argues free of ontology. Indeed, 
its problem is precisely that its concept of being does not allow contradic­
tory predicates to be attributed to the same object. From the perspective 
of being, being is monovalent, even though the practice of observation re­
quires a distinction to be made in terms of being between what is indicated 
and other things (if only from nonbeing). Within being, a distinction is 
drawn between thought and being, and on the basis of this distinction, 
one arrives at the premises of classical logic: at the principle of identity, the 
prohibition of contradiction, and the insight that bivalent logic excludes 
all third values (whereas being excludes only nonbeing).
In other words, it is a very specific form for taking the observer into 
account and placing him in the world. It simplifies descriptions of the 
world and society, in keeping with the realities of premodern society One 
can assume that there is a reality continuum of world (and accordingly of 
society) in which everything that is takes the form of a being [Seiendes], or, 
to be more precise, the form of a (visible or invisible) thing (res). The dis­
tinctions between things can be seen and cosmologically classified as dif­
ferences of essence [Wesen]. This permits “classificatory” [»dihairetische«] 
processing of the world by attributing individuals to genera and species,63 
which can in turn be divided into those of being and those of thought 
( partitio/divisio).64 In processing domains of societal experience, whether 
Hellenistic science65 or Roman law, with its cautious, case- and tradition-
dependent abstractions, perspectives already developed that we would call 
second-order observation, or we find at least a reformulation of what is 
presupposed as knowledge. This technique of genos abstraction was then, 
following Plato, referred to as dialectics, and dominated European think­
ing on the subject of form. It underlay the medieval controversy between 
realism and nominalism, which became possible only because individu­
als and species/genera were distinguished on both sides. It also dominated 

Self-Descriptions    
the Ramist “dialectics” of early modernity, as well as the parallel revivals 
of ­Platonism. On the same premises, it was also interpreted as a sign of 
madness until well into early modern times if a person had the intention 
or illusion of being another—clearly an ontological confirmation of the 
hierarchical structure of society. Already in the mid-seventeenth century, 
however, a new concept of person (Thomas Hobbes, John Hall, Baltasar 
Gracián) broke with these presuppositions. For “person” was now a clev­
erly controlled appearance, no longer representation of being but presen­
tation of a self that established itself for the purposes of social intercourse. 
It was a being with memory.66
Paradoxical communication needed to be avoided all the more if pre­
sentation was what counted. Only rhetoric and, above all, poetry were still 
able to accept paradox; and they did so now with the ulterior motive of de­
ceiving with genus abstractions and of exposing the deception,67 thus calling 
the whole generalization technique of the theologians and philosophers into 
question.68 But this offside position of paradoxization can also be understood 
to mean that the matter is settled once the deception has been exposed. At 
any rate, the predominance of ontological division and generalizing is not 
shaken, and society (in the present-day sense of the term) is conceivable only 
on the basis of the human species. It was Kant who first announced that he 
no longer had “any marked pleasure” in this traditional thinking in terms 
of species and genera (while recognizing its historical value).69 And then the 
concept of dialectic was free for new, time-focused use.
The renunciation of intellectual self-sufficiency in the use of classi­
fications as a form of handling distinctions is more than a mere change in 
fashions; it announces that a different society demands a different way of 
dealing with distinctions. Distinctions now assume the function of limiting 
arbitrariness in the transition from one to the other; they transform them­
selves into regulating mechanisms for handling contingencies; they replace 
coexistence in a species-rich and therefore beautiful world with nonarbitrary 
sequence, the notion of an orderly succession that restricts both reversibil­
ity and correctability. The major classifications of biology and chemistry still 
served as divisions, but soon aroused interest in the origin of species. And 
this led to the new, time-related concept of process, which in around 1800 
was transferred from the fields of law and chemistry to world history.70
Not independent of thinking in species and genera and the corre­
sponding generalization style, ontologically constituted metaphysics allowed 

 
  Self-Descriptions
the use of analogies (analogia entis) with their typically conservative, world-
conserving and (in a religious sense) world-changing implications.71 The na­
ture concept covered everything that was not made: including human beings 
and the social order. It contained, as we shall see, natural things with an 
awareness of their own nature—human beings and other higher beings. At 
least in the Aristotelian tradition, all cognition had the natural aim (and 
end) of determining being. The same applied to both poetic and practical 
action. This, too, was convincing on the basis of a continuum of being and 
left logic only the function of correcting errors arising from someone hold­
ing something to be true that was false, or vice versa. The bad was reduced 
to the category of error, for human beings aspired to good by their nature. 
(Spinoza, thus already in modern times, reversed this, claiming that human 
beings consider that to be good to which they aspire with a clear and explicit 
idea; but the relation holds even when reversed.) Even the far-reaching dis­
solution of being into individual beings (e.g., in Leibniz’s monadology) still 
relied on ontological reinsurance in the form of the notorious prestabilized 
harmony; whereas in an evolutionary cosmology, compatibility no longer 
arose from being but, qua evolution and qua sorting out of what is unsuit­
able, only from history.72
At this level of elaboration, there were counterpositions. As we have 
seen, Aristotle himself excepted the future, about which no judgments 
were possible in the present as to whether statements are true or false 
(but without addressing freedom in this context, as we would reason­
ably wish). And at the other end of the time dimension, in the question 
of origin (origo), paradoxes arise, for the “being” of origin cannot be de­
termined without asking what came before. Furthermore, the tradition 
provided basically dualistic views of the world, which related the primary 
secondary division in terms of being and nonbeing to morality, thus cos­
mologically distinguishing powers of heaven and powers of hell, leaving 
philosophers to ponder on the relationship between these two distinc­
tions. Skepticism doubted quite generally (with growing success in early 
modern times) that there were indisputable criteria by which the values 
true and false, being and nonbeing could be predicated—a “performative 
self-contradiction” as we would now say, since skepticism addressed itself 
too. Protest against the expositions of ontology, and particularly against 
the notion of a stable ­cosmos of essences, still thought in terms of the pri­
macy of the being/nonbeing distinction.

Self-Descriptions    
Ontology, as its logical difficulties show, has always sought to secure 
the ultimate convergence of observations of the world, with the sole excep­
tion of errors. But how can unity be insisted upon if a distinction has inevita­
bly to be drawn between being and nonbeing? No one would any longer dare 
to assert that being is the “principle” or even the “soul” of the world.73 It was 
replaced by concepts such as the “immediacy” of relations with the world or 
“existence,” meaning experience of oneself that did not depend on the use of 
signs, and thus not on distinctions of the being/­nonbeing sort. Finally, still in 
the context of metaphysics, one could reject the premise of presence and the 
logocentrism of tradition (thus monovalence and bivalence) and develop a 
counterconceptuality, whose status would remain unclear, however, and that 
could really be understood only if one knew what it was intended to counter.
If, however, we radicalize the concept of distinction-dependent ob­
servation, we find ourselves in another world. In this world, distinguish­
ing and indicating have to be secured as elements of a unified operation. 
This is achieved by allowing discretion about what that which is indicated 
is distinguished from, and by treating the very switch between the distinc­
tions used as being what constitutes the world as the condition of this pos­
sibility. The continual “recutting of the world”74 then has to be allowed 
and has to be worked into the concept of world. The two-sided form of 
being would then be only the most general concept for this. We can then 
also ask how this switch can be socially controlled in such a way that the 
autopoiesis of society remains possible; and on the basis of this question 
we can correlate the switch of world concepts, time concepts, framework 
notions for things and for the social order with changes in societal struc­
ture—under the sole and indispensable condition that the autopoiesis of 
communication is preserved.
The distinction between being and nonbeing is now replaced as pri­
mary distinction, completely implausibly from an ontological point of 
view, by the distinction between inside and outside or that between self-
reference and other-reference. For, according to the new version, an ob­
server has first to be produced before he can apply the being/nonbeing 
distinction. But there are no metaphysical or logical rules for selecting an 
initial distinction;75 there are only plausibilities of societal history, includ­
ing, in modern times, an interest in deontologizing the world.
Given all the pearls of philosophy that one can admire in this field, 
the sociologist will ask himself what initial intruder produced them. In­

 
  Self-Descriptions
quiring in the manner of the older sociology of knowledge into “under­
lying interests” is unlikely to bring much success. This would amount 
empirically to the scarcely resolvable tautology that whoever asserts some­
thing has an interest in asserting it. We therefore have recourse to the dif­
ferentiation theoretical analyses of the preceding chapter, for which both 
center/periphery divisions and hierarchical orderings show positions in the 
center or at the apex from which the world and society can be observed 
without competition. The convincing concepts they offer are ontologically 
plausible concepts of being. They can claim authority in communication. 
The world and society are represented there with all their inscrutabilities, 
and from there one can authoritatively deal with truth and error. One 
need not go so far as to assert the general acceptance of the worldviews 
of urban or noble modes of communication. It may well be that south­
ern Chinese fishermen have never heard of Confucian ethics or fisherfolk 
in the Outer Hebrides of the world architecture of Thomas Aquinas. But 
ontology (compared to everything we now undertake in the way of phys­
ics and logic) is very close to everyday plausibilities—only more imposing, 
more solemn, more pensive. Through its bivalent logic, it allows, indeed, 
compels, one to cease questioning when being has been reached—whether 
in the obvious particularities of the noble or “civil” way of life or in the 
obvious differences between life in the country and life in the city. From 
a sociology of knowledge point of view, one can therefore continue to ex­
plore the hypothesis of such a link between semantics and social structure 
on the basis of certain initial plausibilities. But perhaps the most convinc­
ing argument is that the change in social structure toward functional dif­
ferentiation caused cracks in ontological metaphysics, then its complete 
collapse—even though there may well still be fishermen even among phi­
losophers who have never heard of this.
5. The Semantics of Old Europe, 2: The Whole and Its Parts
For every description of self-descriptions (as for every observation 
of observations), it is important to note what distinctions are being ap­
plied. Among the most important distinctions with which—following 
Aristotle (and a probably extensive discussion in his time)—old Euro­
pean society described itself was that between the whole and its parts. This 
schema could well have been motivated by many people’s experience of 

Self-Descriptions    
life in the city or by the craft production of complex objects (e.g., ships). 
At any rate, it provided a brilliant and highly successful resolution of the 
paradox of a unity that is both many and one (unitas multiplex). There 
are two levels to this paradox, which are kept apart without the unity of 
what is kept apart having to be thematized.76 The one level constitutes the 
whole, the other the parts. The meta-unity of these two levels, the unity 
of their difference, is not separately explicated. Rather, the problem of the 
unity of identity and difference is obscured by the proposition that “the 
whole is more than the sum of its parts.” The mysterious “more” indicates 
the need for explication, which can be used to justify the social order and 
its representatives. In the theory of transcendentals, unity—in things, in 
the world, as God—can then be positively assessed, brought into order 
in the sequence unum—verum—bonum—pulchrum and distinguished 
from the opposing case of mere multitudo. If God copies Himself into the 
world and the world into things, there is unity everywhere. But in order 
to say (distinguish, indicate) this, one needs a boundary with another 
side—mere multiplicity.
From the point of view of becoming [Werden], this schema offers two 
possibilities. If we start with the parts, we can attribute them a tendency 
to, a striving for unity. If we start with unity, the whole unfolds itself in 
parts; an emanation theory results. The topic remains controversial (e.g., 
on the lines of Aristotelianism/Platonism) because the initial schema offers 
both possibilities.77 The paradox unfolds in the distinction between a more 
mechanistic description of the world and a more animistic one.
The distinction between the whole and its parts draws attention to 
the internal relations of the whole, which resolve the paradox. The dis­
similarity of the parts can be accepted, indeed, celebrated, as harmony, 
because the parts are also similar—similar in that they belong to the same 
whole and “serve” it. External relations, by contrast, remain relatively un­
articulated. They can be described without further reflection by repeat­
ing the schema, by pointing to a comprehensive whole. Only persistent 
questioning raises the problem of an ultimate edge to the world sphere. 
But this question can then be abandoned to religion and treated further 
in terms of the immanence/transcendence schema. And there are no con­
cepts for indicating what lies beyond the boundary. Everything is seen 
from within, and not in the manner of an observer who sees every bound­
ary as a two-sided form.

 
  Self-Descriptions
The dominance of this schema of a whole consisting of parts is to be 
understood only if one takes into account the multiple role that the con­
cept of “nature” played. The parts were seen as nature, from which the 
whole grew together, especially individual human beings as cognizing bod­
ies living together in the city. But the divisions themselves were also seen as 
nature: the distinctions between man and woman, master and slave, citi­
zen and inhabitant, city and house, natural wealth and money, perfection 
and corruption. Nature was believed to distribute functions and places in 
society, and justice was to be measured by how well it complied with this.78 
The idea that such distinctions were given by nature not only removed any 
doubts about them but also excluded any questions about how society pro­
duced its own unity.79 Nature thus found its way into societal life.
Nature contained parts that could know (and mistake) their own na­
ture: human beings. Self-knowledge was required of them by their nature. 
But self-knowledge was concerned not with the facticity of individual sub­
jectness, which sufficed to itself, but—by analogia entis—with the essence of 
the individual’s own nature as a microcosm in the macrocosm, as imago Dei, 
as reflection of the world-soul in the individual soul, as symbol of the unity 
of God and creature in the creature.80 Ethics could therefore use the meta­
phor of the mirror—not to double up facticity but to confront the human 
being with what he really was according to his position in society, but could 
not see without a mirror.81 Reason, too, was seen as nature (the nature of the 
human being); as the form by which nature limited itself.
Society was therefore a special case of a nature that could produce 
a relationship of observation within itself (the explanation being that it 
consisted of human beings). For this purpose, there was the usual double 
form: action (will) or experience (reason), which provoked the decisive 
controversies. The self-relationship could be thought of as the production 
of society; theories were then developed on violence or on contract as the 
“origin” of society. The background was initially the political conditions 
prevailing in the city and the divisions usual there (but not in the coun­
try). However, this premise had already lost its basis in Roman times—
first, with the extension of Roman citizenship to all citizens of other cities, 
then with the history of territorial expansion, defense, and finally division 
of the Roman Empire (which was, however, still described as imperium = 
power to command). The urban reference of “political” was gradually for­
gotten and the human being came to be understood not as a political but as 

Self-Descriptions    
a social being in nature (because people continued a priori to be regarded as 
determined by their nature). In the schools, this led to a novel distinction 
between politics and ethics.
The situation could not be decided because the main conflict of the 
High Middle Ages, that between emperor and Church, could not be terri­
torialized. But it was this very conflict that stimulated the development of 
a special theory of collective bodies (universitates) that could be transferred 
to the idea of natural determinacy.82 Since John of Salisbury’s ­Policraticus 
[ca. 1159],83 there had been a version based on self-knowledge of one’s own 
nature, which took the form of an organism analogy and dealt with the 
origin issue as a matter of creation. This allowed the distinction between a 
natural (perfect) and a corrupt state of nature to be transferred to the body 
politic and to be used to confirm or criticize political authority. Artificial 
and natural were reciprocally nurtured by their difference. This blocked 
any description of society as an autopoietic system. Sufficient degrees of 
freedom were nevertheless built in for society. They lay, first, in the fact 
that nature—itself a concept of temporal becoming—did not also deter­
mine the point of time for human action; and, second, in the fact that 
nature did not impose itself without exception in the fashion of modern 
natural science laws but was itself subject to corruption. Both were nature, 
but whereas fire was always hot when it burned and combustible things 
always burned, the nobleman did not always attain the perfection com­
mensurate with his nature, even though nature always set out from the im­
perfect toward the perfect.84 What became through nature could therefore 
be used in the ethico-political context of society as a gift, and only in this 
respect, only under the conditions for attaining or failing to attain per­
sonal perfection, was the human being free and political society autarchic.
The nature concept obscured the fact that the problem of the unity 
of the many and diverse or the problem of the use of certain distinctions 
rather than others were not resolved or even addressed but accepted in the 
given form. In a parallel cosmology, the same problems could be solved 
differently, namely, in the form of a myth that could be told, in the form 
of an emanation mythology. Plotinus, for example, taught in the Enneads 
that unity, the summum ens, freed the difference between unity and multi­
plicity from itself. Emanation was understood not to be the generation of 
something new, and certainly not production, but the unfolding of origin, 
the becoming of something that already was. The natural philosophy of 

 
  Self-Descriptions
the late Renaissance posed this problem once again in strong terms, postu­
lating an efficacious principle, addressing precisely this issue, of the unity 
of the world according to the paradigm of the soul.85 At the same time, 
however, efforts were already being made toward understanding the unity 
of the world in terms of the dynamic processing of differences, for which 
laws had to be sought. This transferred the issue to the successful empirico-
mathematical natural sciences.
With the distinction between the whole and its parts, the unity of 
the object that was primarily concerned—whether the world or society—
was only duplicated, that is to say, described twice. On the one hand as the 
whole and on the other as the sum of the parts whose interplay produced 
the added value that made them into a whole. That this was a double de­
scription of the same phenomenon was at the same time obscured, and this 
had to remain invisible because the paradox would otherwise become ap­
parent. It was only the mythology of the “invisible hand” that named this 
problem directly, but as a metaphor that was itself paradoxical.
This metaphor, too, presupposed that the problem lay in breaking 
down the whole into parts. This raised the question of who did the break­
ing down and assumed responsibility for it. The whole/part schema pointed 
to a higher authority, to a comprehensive concept of nature or to the Cre­
ator. The schema thus remained tied to a religious view of the world. With 
concepts such as evolution, emergence, differentiation, self-organization, 
by contrast, a quite different mind-set comes to bear, which assumes that 
without a whole being provided for from on high, local, specially struc­
tured entities (atoms, suns, living beings, and so forth) could come about 
that set conditions for the adaptation of other entities of this sort.
Separating the two levels of description, whole and parts, made it 
necessary to concede that the whole could not reoccur at the level of its 
parts. Providing clear evidence for the creativity of paradox resolution, this 
raised the question of how the relationship between the whole and its parts 
was to be conceived. In accordance with the plausibilities of a stratified 
order of society and an organized urban community, Aristotle states in 
the Politics that “because in every composite thing, where a plurality of 
parts, whether continuous or discrete, is combined to make a single com­
mon whole (hen ti koinon), there is always found a ruling factor (to archon) 
and a subject factor (to archomenon).” Aristotle invokes nature, necessity, 
and utility, and the only argument for the justice of this inequality that 

Self-Descriptions    
he admits is that the better parts rule. Later, people spoke of maiores par­
tes, sanior pars, valentior pars, and so forth, and it was asserted that the 
­stratum-related qualifications of these elements were in harmony with mo­
rality. Even “communalistic” corporation theories oriented on medieval 
municipal constitutions presupposed oligarchical structures in their use 
of concepts such as populus or civis. The philosopher in Mario Salamonio’s 
dialogue De principatu [written ca. 1513] speaks not of “argumentatio de 
toto ad se ipsum” but of “argumentatio de parte ad partem.” The author­
ity of the civitas over itself can thus satisfactorily be explained in terms of 
the distinction between sanior and stultior pars.86 The “eminence” of the 
higher elements can be shown cosmologically to be characteristic of their 
nature,87 and the image of a pyramid also allowed the upper parts to be 
distinguished from the apex of the pyramid, which could be attributed to 
none of the sides and thus belonged in a certain sense to the whole without 
really being a part of the whole.
As we see, the whole/part distinction was supplemented and inter­
preted by the above/below distinction, hence by reference to hierarchy. 
The paradox was resolved by a multiplicity of succeeding distinctions, 
gaining both invisibility and plausibility at each stage. The abstraction of 
the additional distinction hid the fact that the above/below schema could 
be both an inclusion hierarchy (nobility and commons were parts of the 
whole), as well as a command hierarchy grounded in a structure of offices.
The transformation of the unity paradox into a theory of the hierar­
chy of parts corresponds to a further, rather odd, also Aristotelian theory, 
namely, that an order that consists of perfect and less perfect elements, 
for example, of men and women, is more perfect than an order that con­
sists of only perfect elements.88 In the Middle Ages, it was then said that a 
world that contained both angels and stones was more perfect than a world 
where only angels existed. Here, too, a semantic compensatory mechanism 
was built in: precisely the imperfection and natural weakness of women 
lent greater glory to their virtue, for they had to prove their worth under 
unfavorable natural conditions.89 There was even good sense in evil, if only 
per accidens.90 It also justified the misery of the miserable. It was the neces­
sary other side of the form.
A wealth of connecting distinctions is determined above all by the 
growing legal specification of the Roman and then medieval social orders. 
The Roman law figure of legally effective representation (repraesentatio) 

 
  Self-Descriptions
gave rise to a theory of the representation of social corporations, and, fi­
nally, provoked by the reform efforts of the Council of Basle, to a general 
concept of repraesentatio identitatis (as opposed to repraesentatio ­potestatis) 
with the concomitant justificatory controversy.91 No part could be the 
whole in the whole; but there were parts that were authorized and quali­
fied to represent the whole in the whole.
The concept of representation came up against various difficulties. It 
had nothing to say on what was to happen if the representative erred (and 
this was all the more important in the Middle Ages when one operated on 
the basis of an Aristotelian, strongly cognitive concept of action and consid­
ered goals something that could be recognized). Moreover, the exclusion of 
those represented from institutional action could not very well be justified 
on the grounds that they were represented; for if they managed to be pres­
ent, why could they not take part in decisions? These problems provoked 
juridical discussions, and in the course of the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries, the legal category of universitas thus shifted to occupy the place 
that since reception of the Aristotle’s Politics had been filled by the concept 
of civitas.92 Marsilius of Padua, for example, spoke of universitas civium.93 
This made it possible to distinguish the legal unity of universitas from the 
mere mass of individual citizens and, through legal regulation of election 
and nomination procedures, to eliminate the implications of the error and 
exclusion problems. Whether in clear cases a right of resistance was admit­
ted, and for whom, then became a legal issue. Finally, its legal form made it 
possible for the concept of representation to survive its societal context of 
origin and to continue to be used to this day in constitutional law.
Whereas representation, as the term indicates, could be a task for only 
individual parts of the whole, the concept of participation described the rela­
tionship of all parts to the whole. The one concept thought bottom-up, the 
other top-down. Participation brought moral desiderata into play: by vir­
tue of participation, every part had rights and duties to fulfill, had a right to 
protection and maintenance, and in return had to perform services for the 
whole. The tense relationship between the whole and its parts was redefined 
by the distinction between ruling and the subject elements, and the latter by 
the distinction between representation and participation. The distinction be­
tween rights and duties was applied to participation, whose unity was called 
ius and which in this form in turn served to differentiate society in terms of 
rank and position. Form generated form generated form generated form.

Self-Descriptions    
Apart from the demanding (ethico-political) forms of representation 
and participation, which sought to infer from part to whole and to deter­
mine the sense of the whole as such—still under the schema of the whole 
and its parts—there was the less demanding form of arguing by example, 
by instructive exempla. It was cultivated in legal argumentation, in rhetoric, 
and above all in pedagogy.94 In respectful manner, it left open the meaning 
of the whole, referring to it only by association with a religious definition of 
the world or through the criterion of justice in handling legal cases.
The model of the whole that consisted of parts could be applied to 
a wide range of entities: to households and cities, to corporations such as 
monasteries or universities, to empires, and to the emerging territorial au­
thorities that came to be called “states.” The Middle Ages developed no 
theory of society, no theory of the comprehensive social system. The no­
tion of an overall empire of Christendom (as corpus Christi in opposition 
to corpus diaboli) did not prevail. The lacking social synthesis was then 
compensated for by a religiously grounded cosmos of essences, which dis­
played the same structural characteristics: a whole that consisted of parts, 
each of which had its function to perform and was accordingly equipped; 
a whole whose perfection consisted in its diversity; a whole ordered hier­
archically in the manner of a series rerum, each part devoted both to self-
preservation and to the service of higher parts, and all together, by virtue 
of participation, to the service of God and to his enjoyment of the world 
he had created.95
There were, of course, opposing views in natural philosophy. Lucre­
tius, for example, was of the opinion that nature did not of itself unite into 
a whole but merely summed diversity. However, no account could be taken 
of this if the unity of nature was to be conceived of in terms of the unity of 
God. The ordering of the parts to the whole was in keeping with the pur­
poses of God. From every wholeness in which one was included, one could 
therefore relate to the religious sense of the overall enterprise of Creation. 
Creation “supported, enveloped” (in the sense of periechon) what it con­
tained. It was not an environment of systems (the word “environment” did 
not yet exist) but the meaning-imparting form of the world whose other 
side bore the name God. “Natura, id est deus”—Nature is God—and par­
ticipation in this ordinata concordia was natural insight, was reason.
In the context of a religious description of the world it became im­
portant for the whole/parts schema to be able to incorporate the distinc­

 
  Self-Descriptions
tion between visible and invisible parts—again without questioning the 
unity of the visible and the invisible. This could mean that the invisi­
ble parts could only be worshipped, not understood. The outdifferen­
tiation and legitimation needs of an upper stratum were likely to have 
benefited from the doctrine that one had to rely on the grace of God and 
could obtain salvation, not through good works alone, but only through 
faith. But in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, quite different con­
clusions were drawn from the intransparency of the self and the world 
(Montaigne, Donne, Gracián), especially with regard to problems of han­
dling this intransparency, to second-order observation (observation of self-­
observation), and to a theory of reflection that observed observations and 
descriptions as illusions, in this sense bringing enlightenment before the 
Enlightenment.96 The visible/invisible schema thus served as a framework 
concept for enhancing expectations of (technical) ability, until ultimately 
only the syllogism of the invisible hand guaranteed that the whole was 
designed as a unity.97 Furthermore, at this time the notion that political 
society consisted of human beings began to lose ground, above all with 
the emergence of the territorial state. With his concept of the ­consociatio 
symbiotica universalis of political society, [the Calvinist jurist Johannes] 
­Althusius had already constructed a universitas of a specific (and simulta­
neously universal) sort, which no longer contained the individual human 
being, nor families or collegia, as part of itself but included them only 
through the concept of living together (symbiosis). The territorial organi­
zation of the universitas now consisted only of homogeneous parts, only 
of territorial organizations.98 Thereupon, in the seventeenth century, re­
course was had to the figure of the contract, attributing not only the es­
tablishment of authority but also of society itself to a contract, to a pactum 
­unionis.99 Individuality now gained new sense as a counterweight to struc­
tural change in society,100 and if efforts were now made to conceive of the 
individual and the collectivity as a unity, the result was totalitarian logic 
and a “total state” that no longer respected any boundaries.
For a long time, religion guaranteed in its theology a uniform de­
scription of the world that coped very well with inconsistencies. ­Diversitas 
became virtually a synonym for perfection, because God had wanted 
the world to be so rich and variegated and diverse that this went beyond 
human understanding. Inconsistency will first have been experienced after 
the advent of writing, when texts could be placed side by side and com­

Self-Descriptions    
pared; and the variety of phenomena to be admired seems to have been the 
solution to this problem. Only when in the High Middle Ages theologi­
cal texts, too, become inconsistent, and only when the printing press had 
made this an integral part of a lay culture, too, did unity despite inconsis­
tency become a problem that finally, in the twentieth century, would affect 
even the relationship between ontology and logic.
But this was preceded by centuries of experimenting with (written, 
printed) self-descriptions. Once the world/God distinction no longer suf­
ficed semantically to explain the unity of the cosmology of the whole and 
its parts (or after the printing press had disseminated differing interpreta­
tions of texts and thus dissolved the religiously grounded unity of world­
view), the problem repeated itself with respect to human beings. From the 
eighteenth century onward, it was transposed into the human being, who 
was expected as a part of society to be both whole and part: on the one 
hand, as homme universel or as transcendental subject, to embody univer­
sal humanity, and, on the other, to be highly individual and thus unique. 
And this dual function was repeated from a temporal-processual perspec­
tive in education. On the one hand, the empirical human being had always 
been born and had to be educated, that is to say, induced to reflect on what 
there was in him or her that held true for every human being as a human 
being. On the other hand, we also find the Fichtean formulation by Nova­
lis: “How does the absolute I become an empirical I?”101 How does it find 
an individual form of life? Such a time schema is also to be found in the 
Kantian distinction between mature and immature [mündig/unmündig] 
and in notions about enlightenment or emancipation. The time difference 
clearly served to resolve a paradox: what one could not be simultaneously, 
one had to be successively. But the paradox was retained as an objective; it 
was merely transferred to an idea, to a future that could at best only be ap­
proximately attained, the yearning as an individual to be a human being. 
And not to have to give up anything! This was a major preoccupation in 
the aesthetics of German idealism.102 But the paradox concerned is still 
that of the whole consisting of parts.
Whereas the figure of the meaning-imparting Creator God and, in 
His succession, the apotheosis of the human being in the human being 
conclude this description of the world for those who use it, we, in describ­
ing this description, have to take it a step further and inquire into its logi­
cal and ontological foundations. Decisive for both the structure of this 

 
  Self-Descriptions
semantics and how it handled paradox was the unquestionable validity 
of a bivalent logic. This logic accepted a distinction, thus gaining its spe­
cific form, namely, the distinction between the logical values positive and 
negative. Important in assessing this advance was therefore that distinc­
tions could be drawn and forms marked before the operation of negating 
became available, because negation was due to form, not vice versa; it was 
possible only because of a distinction whose other side was the position.103 
By contrast, drastic restrictions were imposed by bivalence itself. Bivalent 
logic has only one value, the positive value, at its disposition for indicat­
ing being, and a second value for the self-correction of the observer, for 
controlling errors. If the distinction between thinking and being is taken 
as an additional basis, being can be considered a form whose other side is 
nonbeing. The observer can then indicate being and nonbeing correctly 
or incorrectly. This exhausts the possibilities of a bivalent logic. If addi­
tional modalities of time or possibility are taken into consideration, the 
limits of this observation schema are reached; and this is all the more true 
if second-order observation is to reflect on (first- and second-order) obser­
vation. Structurally more diverse matters cannot be described but have, 
as it were, to be ontologically condensed. Problems of reference can ac­
cordingly not be distinguished from problems of truth and falsehood. A 
proposition without reference is an untrue proposition, and uncertain­
ties of reference—for example, in the interplay between self-referential 
and other-referential components of observation—automatically become 
problems of truth. This has been the subject of futile discussion in the tra­
dition of “skepticism.”
The result of such a logical-bivalent description of the world ap­
pears as ontology and in explanatory ventures as ontological metaphysics. 
Being can then only be or not be; and thought can only indicate being or 
nonbeing correctly or incorrectly. Thought has to be understood as the 
“representation” of being and art as the “imitation” of being, for other­
wise they would have to be seen as mistakes. A plurality of observers is 
consequently instructed to concur in observation. Together they observe 
being, whether correctly or incorrectly. And since there can be only one 
correct representation of being in thought, there is authority. Whoever 
sees correctly can inform others. The observation of observing in this 
context has no other function than to filter out errors of cognition. And, 
when observed, other observers are objects. They have a factual quality 

Self-Descriptions    
[Sachqualität], like any other thing. Observers can therefore have opin­
ions about their being, correct or incorrect. Plato consequently asks in the 
Theaetetus how the observation of another observer can be described truly 
as false even if the other holds it to be true. Platonic philosophy sets out 
to find an answer to this question.
It is not our task to reconstruct the enormous efforts undertaken by 
philosophy and assess how fruitful they have been. In sociological analysis 
one is struck by the correlation between the logical, bivalent mode of obser­
vation and a social structure that provides for an undisputed position for de­
scribing the world and society—be it the apex of a hierarchy, a center from 
which the world is to be seen, or the expertise of author or cleric. The pre­
vailing oral tradition of transmission also supported this assertion that there 
can be exclusively correct descriptions. The authority to instruct the igno­
rant and erring is already built into the social structure in the differentiation 
form of society and in its role order. It has only to fill an existing position 
properly. And this it does by reflecting on its own situation by applying the 
schema to itself. Its wisdom is the knowledge of knowledge and ignorance.
And with Aristotle one could therefore afford an ethics that under­
stood action as aspiration for a good and presupposed that this good was 
cognizable.104 There was accordingly no goal that was not good and noth­
ing that was intentionally bad; at worst, error. So that here, too, authority 
had to be presupposed as an institution that—without restricting free­
dom!—enlightened the actor about his goals and if necessary corrected 
him. Not until the seventeenth century was it realized that purposes and 
motives could diverge, and that purposes, however motivated and in what­
ever interest, could in turn be selected.
Naturally, this did not work out completely. The paradoxes in the 
defense of Eleatic ontology and in the controversies with the sophists were 
discovered. Ambivalent concepts were formed, for instance, that of move­
ment, in order to describe time relations. On the basis of the perfection/
corruption schema, a normative component was built into the concept of 
nature.105 This made a teleological understanding of nature and a natural-
law understanding of the social order possible without openly contradict­
ing ontology. The most prominent victim of bivalent logic and also its 
ultimate compensatory mechanism was, however, God Himself.
For God could not err; he therefore needed no second value. But 
how then did He observe the world? He could copy it completely into 

 
  Self-Descriptions
Himself. He knew everything. But His knowledge then lacked any sort 
of independence, and how was He able to distinguish Himself from the 
world? A theologian such as Nicholas of Cusa might well answer that God 
had no need to distinguish in order to know. Nor did He need a distinc­
tion in relation to Himself. He existed beyond all distinctions, including 
that between being and nonbeing, indeed, even beyond the distinction 
between being distinguished and not being distinguished. However, such 
a theology could hardly claim the status of official Church theology. The 
Church had to be able to distinguish what was pleasing to God and what 
was not. It had to be able to observe God as observer (and that means as 
distinguisher). And all it could then do was praise and give thanks that 
God Himself knew how to cope with the paradoxes of bivalent logic. Per­
haps as the middle excluded in observation, as the observer per se. At any 
rate, so that meaning was guaranteed for the whole of His creation.
Even in the early nineteenth century, even after invention of the “en­
vironment,” it was extremely difficult to abandon the notion of the world 
as a whole [Weltganzes]. In discussions on magnetism, ether, mind, one 
repeatedly comes across the argument that there must be some elements 
or other identical in mind and nature (we would now say in system and 
environment), because a concept of world would otherwise be untenable. 
The world was therefore still conceived of as a whole that consisted of 
parts or of elements.106 That the formation of observing systems within 
the world should make the world itself invisible as a unity to these systems 
was almost inconceivable; and it therefore seemed obvious that society it­
self should be described—for example as a class society—in only ideologi­
cal self-description, no matter what the major world narratives of physics 
might have to say.
Only in the experience of world society and worldwide modern cul­
ture, thus at the earliest in the nineteenth and really only in the twenti­
eth century, was the cosmologically grounded schema of the whole and its 
parts definitively abandoned (which did not exclude certain semantic “sur­
vivals”).107 World society has too little visible harmony for it to be under­
stood as such. The traditional schema has therefore been replaced by the 
less demanding distinction between particular (regional, ethnic, cultural) 
and universal forms of meaning (that can be used everywhere). This makes 
it possible to elaborate particularity in explicit opposition to the universal 
structures of the modern world (e.g., as religious fundamentalism) and at 

Self-Descriptions    
the same time to participate in the technical conditions of modernity (e.g., 
mass media, travel, banking). World-societal universality can then even be­
come a condition for the comparative cultivation of local particularities.108 
But this constitutive playing one off against the other presupposes that so­
ciety has renounced “holistic” framework requirements or leaves them to 
contestable ideologies. Only such distinctions are then chosen that have 
particular validity, precisely because they differ from globally valid distinc­
tions (e.g., the codes of functional systems) and accordingly reject attribu­
tion to specific functional systems. Concrete idiosyncrasies arise, “identity 
discourses,” which assert their meaning against the unmarked space of all 
other possible meanings and at the same time throw acute light on certain 
oppositions in specifically rejecting global features of modern society. But 
these, too, are distinctions—of society.
6. The Semantics of Old Europe, 3: Politics and Ethics
The differentiation semantics of the whole that consists of parts re­
flects what had been said about society until well into modern times. Tra­
ditionally, every human society was regarded as a unity, a whole consisting 
of human beings. In Greek, it was called koinōnia; in the Latin transla­
tion, either societas or communitas, in the obvious legal sense. At an early 
date, experience gained in the formation of cities had suggested a first dis­
tinction, that between household (oikos) and city or urban society (polis, 
koinōnia politikē), later to be translated by the set phrase civitas sive societas 
civilis,109 which was maintained almost unchanged up to the civil society 
of the eighteenth century.110 The term oikos referred to the independent 
household as an economic undertaking and family, hence to the unity 
deriving from segmentary societies that continued in sophisticated urban 
society—in fact, in both cities and country—but that could no longer ar­
ticulate the differentiation principle of these advanced societies, and thus 
their “essence.” The household was now understood as merely providing 
for survival, whereas the real sense of human life was fulfilled only by the 
urban way of life, and thus by the “political” public sphere. The distinction 
between oikos and polis could therefore also express a distinction between 
mere life and the good, virtuous (nowadays one would say meaningful) 
life. This involved the broader and more intensive opportunities for com­
munication in the city, written culture, production based on the division 

 
  Self-Descriptions
of labor, secure internal peace (concord), and a corresponding structure of 
offices, which as was solemnly exhorted, ensured justice even for the poor 
against the rich.
But now an umbrella concept for the unity of household and politi­
cal society was lacking. Ethics, which could have assumed this function, 
only took over the distinction and culminated as virtue ethics in the re­
quirements of the polis. And the polis itself, although to be found on only 
one side of the distinction, also had to stand for the overall system, thus 
to represent the distinction itself. There have since been innumerable ef­
forts to resolve this paradox of the side that also stands for the distinction 
itself—from the hierarchical inclusion architectures of the Middle Ages to 
modern, sometimes only moral, sometimes only normative appeals to “sol­
idarity.”111 That there was no longer a logically clear-cut solution could be 
interpreted sociologically as an indication of the differentiation of societal 
structures and semantics.
As a concept of form, political society remained ambivalent, and that 
is perhaps why recourse was had to the double formula polis ē koinōnia 
politikē. On the one hand, the city was the unity, visible in space and dif­
ferentiated out as nomos that encompassed all urban households and distin­
guished itself from the country. On the other hand, it was public life, public 
affairs, the res publica—to use the Roman legal term. In this sense, it was 
distinct from the private life of citizens and from the many people for whom 
there was no question of a political life: slaves and dependents, women and 
unemancipated children, foreigners and other categories of mere inhabit­
ants, and thus the vast majority of the population.
The term “political society” therefore referred neither to an outdiffer­
entiated political system that in the modern sense could be called a “state” 
nor to something corresponding to our concept of the comprehensive sys­
tem of society. There was therefore no term for the reality of the social as 
such. One might well consider koinōnia and translate it as communitas or 
as “social system”; but a term for the totality of all koinōniai, for the com­
prehensive system of the social, was still wanting. And there was conse­
quently no distinction by which the social could be distinguished from the 
nonsocial and thus indicated.
This very place was occupied by the concept of human being, to 
which the epithet “political” or, since the Middle Ages, “social” could then 
be attached. The totality of the social was discerned in the human being as 

Self-Descriptions    
member of a particular species and was anchored in the specificity of the 
human way of life. The human being could be distinguished from other 
beings (gods, demons, animals, plants, inanimate beings, and so forth) 
and his position in the cosmos determined through these distinctions. The 
social order of his life was the manifestation of his nature. This nature 
was given him with general animal characteristics such as sensory percep­
tion, mobility, death, but also with the particularity that distinguished him 
from animals and that was traditionally called ratio in the sense of a part 
of the soul capable of self-reference that could use speech. Ratio and oratio 
[reason and speech] kept society together, were the vinculum [bond] im­
posed on it by its nature.112 This explains the normative expectations di­
rected at a way of life in keeping with ratio. Human beings, and with them 
the special qualities of their social way of life, were seen as determined by 
what distinguished them from animals (Aristotle’s zoology itself suffered 
from its preoccupation with this).113 In other words, the human/animal 
distinction occupied the place where we would now expect to find a the­
ory of society. In precisely this sense, the self-description of old European 
society was conceived in “humanistic” terms.114
The all-pervasive analogy with being still dominated the religious un­
derstanding of nature in the twelfth century. Just as God could see Himself 
in the mirror of the world, the human being could perceive the visibilia of 
nature with the invisibilia in mind, with God’s ideas of creation in mind, 
and could experience them as symbolizing the unity of this difference.115 
This difference, too, was increasingly emphasized in the naturalness com­
mon to human beings and the rest of nature. The theologians taught that 
it was God’s will for the rest of nature to be assigned and subordinated to 
humanity. They also found themselves having to explain why God became 
man (and thus nature); and found the task facilitated by enhancement of 
the status of human beings in nature—for example, as microcosm in the 
macrocosm.116 But even where no use was made of this legitimation for­
mula, the distinction could be semantically intensified. Sir Philip Sidney, 
for example (to bring in the poet), spoke of humans “for whom as the other 
things are, so, it seems in him her [= nature] uttermost cunning is em­
ployed.”117 Nature allowed itself the human being as its masterpiece—but 
clearly with certain risks.
The question of what distinction constitutes the nature concept re­
veals symptomatic ambivalences. First, there was the distinction between 

 
  Self-Descriptions
physis and nomos in the sense of necessary/arbitrary. Here the distinction 
reentered itself on the side of arbitrariness; for, in a world whose perfection 
consisted in its wealth of diversity, it was a necessity of nature that certain 
things had to be dealt with arbitrarily. Then there was the distinction be­
tween natural and corrupted. According to Aristotle, nature ought to be 
observed in its natural state, not in a corrupted state.118 Nature could thus 
be both natural and unnatural. Here, too, there was therefore a reentry—
this time on the side of nature. Nature was the better part of itself.
Theory escaped these conceptual ambiguities by interpreting its 
propositions normatively. What was naturally good remained good, even 
if there were corrupt aspects to the world. Nature strived unwaveringly for 
perfection,119 and perfection could therefore be perceived in nature. Ethics 
as an account of the natural constitution of the human being, the house, 
the city, transformed itself into a normative discipline in the conviction 
that norms could be recognized if a being was examined as to its nature. 
However, by recourse to the necessities of nature, ethics eluded the need 
for justification and thus avoided openly communicated consensus prob­
lems. That good reasons had to be found for good action was to become 
a problem only when ethics was recast in the eighteenth century—and it 
proved an insoluble problem. Until then, factual-modal theoretical for­
mulations such as “necessary” or “impossible” had diverted attention from 
the social dimension, namely, from the fact that consensus was expected.
In concluding a descriptive-normative account of the human (as op­
posed to animal) nature, the concept of political society had been given 
an ethical sense, indicating possibilities for enhancement in the direction 
of rationality and virtue (aretē, virtus, virtù) and in this form describing 
society. It was this concept of an ethical constitution (hexis, habitus) that 
described the good way of life for the human being, as well as what held 
society together as a whole and constituted its morality. In Aristotelian eth­
ics, society was then described as a good to which human beings aspired by 
their nature and political constitution; and in attaining this good, they at­
tained their own perfection. The highest of such goods, which included all 
others (also human perfection) was political society itself. In this context, 
its comprehensiveness—to which we still refer in our own concept of so­
ciety—had an ethical, not an empirical sense. As we saw in the preceding 
section, deviations were treated as errors. Unlike logic and cognition, mo­
rality was thus denied any dynamic of its own. It was good morality (as the 

Self-Descriptions    
emerging high religions were teaching at the same period), and Socrates 
died to show that the difference between right and wrong could not be 
questioned in the political life of the city.120
In this constellation, the concept of ethos (ethical) is thus among 
the traditional self-description concepts. It should not be understood 
in the modern sense of a theoretical explanation of moral judgments. It 
referred to the moral component of societal-political life and was based 
on assumptions about the nature of human beings. The schools of the 
Middle Ages, however, still fully committed to this view and with greater 
(religiously determined) emphasis on the individual, were to draw a dis­
tinction between ethics, economics, and politics depending on whether 
the right constitution of the individual life, the house, or political society 
was meant. When stratification differences stabilized in the later Middle 
Ages, differences in ways of life and manners became more apparent—and 
the insistence on the moral demands made of the nobility, which first ap­
peared in the Italian literature of the fifteenth century,121 can above all be 
assumed to be an exhortation to the noble to live like a noble.
As long as ethos was understood in this sense as a natural attitude, 
the concept had the latent function of defining limits to exemplariness, as 
well as limits to permissible emulation. In this fashion, the concept also 
regulated imitation conflicts in the sense of René Girard. This ensured its 
conformity with the differentiation form of stratified societies; and in this 
conformity lay the reason why the corresponding expectations could claim 
normative validity. With the internal boundaries that it provided for sub­
system formation, society supported the interdits [prohibitions] (Girard) 
that limited competition in imitation. And however much emulation of 
the models valid for one’s own status was recommended and the corre­
sponding “mirrors” held up, it made an inappropriate and ludicrous im­
pression if one sought to overstep the applicable limits.122
If, moreover, the movements of nature and action were understood 
in teleological terms, it made no difference for the state of rest or the per­
fection of the effect achieved that attaining the goal cost time, or how 
much. No consideration was given to the historicality of the process, 
its dependence on situations and opportunities, or its possible unique­
ness. And the cost in time became a subject of discussion only in early 
modern times, not least in connection with the time lags that the market 
brings and with the cost of borrowing. In the debate on the prohibition 

 
  Self-Descriptions
of ­interest and how to circumvent it, theologians repeatedly asserted that 
time was provided for in creation and that one could therefore neither buy 
nor sell it. It was only in early modernity that time itself also became a 
problem; and this no longer only as an aspect of the general inadequacy of 
the world after the Fall of Man, as it presented itself to humanity.
A special concept of the social (beside the koinōnia/communitas con­
cept, with the requirements it expressed) was not needed until well into 
the modern age because, by its form, its essence, its nature, the social was 
geared to perfection and was therefore moral. It was in itself (just as being 
is in itself what it is) directed toward the good. It was thus not only a 
special sort of material still to be shaped in accordance with the rules of 
morality. Only in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries did a semantic 
evolution begin that was finally to break the unity of the social and the 
moral. On the one hand, morality was now increasingly seen as an out­
come of the use of signs in communication, thus, together with the arts, 
as generated appearances [schöner Schein], without which one could not 
live in society. On the other, purposes and motives parted ways with re­
gard to what could and could not be shown in communication. Only the 
achievement of these high-resolution distinctions put an end to the unity 
of the social and the moral to then confront human behavior with moral 
demands that required justification (or today, discussion).
However, even in the old European tradition, morality was, through 
the distinction between virtue and vice, already a schematism binarily 
coded in terms of good and bad, and thus a distinction, a two-sided form. 
Observation of behavior imposed the alternative of acceptance or rejec­
tion, and it sanctioned this judgment by showing or withdrawing respect. 
From the ethics of Abelard, that is, since the twelfth century, the moral 
self-observation of the individual consciousness was also required. Each 
consciousness had to ask itself whether it could accept its own behavior or 
not, and the institutionalization of confession ensured that this happened 
on a regular basis. The early Italian Renaissance then also reactivated the 
civil republican tradition of antiquity and took rhetoric in the Ciceronian 
version back into service. Between the thirteenth and early sixteenth cen­
turies, rhetoric and policy advice merged in the so-called ars dictaminis [art 
of letter writing].123 As a mode of communication, this corresponded to the 
praise of virtue and the condemnation of vice.124 The names given to vir­
tues and vices are ambivalent enough. For one and the same behavior, we 

Self-Descriptions    
often find positive and negative descriptions (e.g., generosity and prodigal­
ity), so that communication had to be adapted to the situation and to the 
constellation of power and interests.
More clearly than ever before, this ethics of civiltà was understood as 
an ethics of the nobility. To mark this and give the nobility a form, a dis­
tinction was made at a later period (especially from the sixteenth century 
onward) between honestas and utilitas. Promoted by the courtly culture of 
Burgundy and Italy’s transition from republics to principalities, this ethics 
developed into a purely courtly ethics and began to react to its increasing 
isolation in society with cultivated refinement and stylistic exaggeration. 
The decisive role in this was played by Baldassare Castiglione [1478–1529; 
diplomat and author of The Book of the Courtier (Il libro del cortegiano)].125
That the nobility was distinguished not only by birth but also by 
(presumed hereditary) virtus was not disputed. The scions of a noble line 
were expected to distinguish themselves through their own accomplish­
ments before invoking those of their ancestors.126 This double criterion of 
birth and virtue enabled the prince to recognize special virtue (or what he 
considered as such) and to make up for lowbirth by ennoblement. On the 
other hand, a lack of virtue or even infamy was nevertheless no reason for 
entire families to suffer decline. Failure tended to be attributed to the indi­
vidual, and decline was checked politically and legally.
Theories treating the special position and moral quality of the nobility 
in society make a more and more artificial impression, as if the old catego­
ries of distinction were no longer convincing. Francesco de’ Vieri [1524–
1591], for example, believed that all human beings, since they were endowed 
with reason, were by nature noble, only some more than others; some opted 
for a noble way of life or were predisposed to it by birth; others did not.127 
What distinguished the nobility in essence (given aberrations) remained un­
disputed. Since the territorial state had become dominant and the political 
feuding between nobility and commons had come to an end, the Italian 
discussion tended to see special services rendered to the community as the 
distinguishing characteristic of the noble; however, the lack of such merits 
did not invalidate nobility, any more than one could consider limiting civil 
rights to nobles alone. Gentilhuomini and cittadini remained noncongruent 
concepts. In France the emphasis on military virtue, which circumstances 
had long since rendered obsolete, was retained (and consummated in the 
duel); perhaps because it seemed indispensable to justify tax exemption and 

 
  Self-Descriptions
the corresponding exclusion of the nobility from economic activities.128 At 
any rate, this excluded more precise analysis of moral demands, above all, 
those made of the nobility, thus opening the way to an observation of be­
havior that adopted a more psychologically analytical approach (science de 
mœurs). In the more legal context of the theory of three estates, Charles Loy­
seau helped out with a legal nicety. He distinguished between societal crite­
ria and societal division. According to him, only the clergy and the nobility 
had a specific dignité. The third estate (the concept appeared only in the 
fifteenth century)129 did not have a different sort of dignité but none at all, 
and in this sense was not an estate. But for the purpose of dividing up the 
population as a whole, it had nevertheless to be regarded as one: “Etant que 
l’Ordre est une espece de Dignité, le tiers Estat de France n’est pas proprem­
ent un Ordre. . . . Mais etant que l’Ordre signifie une condition ou vacation, 
ou bien une espece distincte de personnes, le tiers Estat est l’une des trois 
Ordres ou Estats de la France.”130 The third estate was both an estate and 
not an estate. It had to assume the paradox that resulted from unity having 
to be represented in unity. And the lawyer helped out—with a distinction!
In a situation that needed clarifying and was also structurally un­
certain, the concept of “honor” acted as a sort of lightning conductor, es­
pecially in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.131 The function of the 
honor/fortuna distinction as a defense against economic and political de­
pendence has already been discussed in chapter 4.132 This naturally affected 
the more strongly involved upper strata. Although lower strata also placed 
value on honor, witness the exclusion concept of “dishonorable” people 
and occupations,133 the nobility cultivated honor intensively as a mecha­
nism for marking themselves off from lesser mortals, and this manifested 
itself principally in the institution of the duel. Theological rejection and 
legal prohibition of dueling were ineffective, because the practice was the 
last refuge of the nobility’s will to self-assertion. It marked itself off, distin­
guished itself by “entitlement” to give satisfaction [Satisfaktionsfähigkeit], 
asserting a sort of original right as a natural right of the nobility, which no 
princely force, nor even the Church, could eliminate.134 Indispensable pre­
cautions were built in to protect structures: no son could challenge his fa­
ther, no subject his prince, no citizen an officeholder, whatever aristocratic 
relations might be involved in the particular case. Risking one’s life for a 
matter of honor also proved that the issue concerned was nonnegotiable, 
that it affected the person as a whole and his social status.

Self-Descriptions    
Of course, the honor of the hereditary nobility depended on recog­
nition (and was therefore sensitive to disrespect),135 but it did not have to 
rely on the dignatas attached to office and certainly not on the worthiness 
conferred by any university title of doctor or master. While this often led 
to the demonstrative rejection of university learning, there was no denying 
that certain knowledge (especially of the law) was indispensable for politi­
cal influence if one were to escape manipulation by those in the know or 
by unwelcome competitors for influence. The compromise appears to have 
been that many nobles studied, often in institutions or courses especially 
established for them,136 but did not assume any academic title.137 The no­
bility thus clearly distanced themselves from the requirements for success 
in functional systems (in this case, university education and teaching and 
state-organized politics), doing so on the basis of a semantics of honor that 
had once secured it leading positions in society. In any case, it could no 
longer rely on an ethical way of life alone to qualify for political action.
Already in the sixteenth century, models of conduct developed that 
explicitly rejected limitation to the hereditary nobility but maintained typ­
ically upper-class traits. There were the moral virtuoso (homme de bien) 
and the communication virtuoso (homme galant).138 The nobility now had 
to be measured against these models if they wished to keep up at court 
or in the salons. Solely on the basis of their doctoral titles, lawyers, too, 
sought recognition as nobility, albeit in vain; since expert knowledge not 
interactional skills were at issue here, the nobility had no difficulty keep­
ing their distance.
Despite the difficulty of morally justifying the claim of the nobility 
to moral superiority, there was until well into the seventeenth century no 
doubt that with morality the true nature of human beings was honored, ex­
acted, kept on the right path, and protected against corruption. In precisely 
this “essential” sense, the human being was seen as part of society. And it 
signaled the decline of the old world when, in the seventeenth century, mo­
rality began to be distinguished in its factuality as Sittenlehre (moral phi­
losophy, science des mœurs) from the experience of the individual, and the 
psychologically realizable possibilities of self-observation and sincere com­
munication were addressed. The normativity of morality, once understood 
as nature, came more and more to be defined as de facto normal behavior; 
normativity was replaced by normality, and uso, as one now put it, was seen 
as dependent on the times, as fashion. The individual was accordingly no 

 
  Self-Descriptions
longer thought of as destined by his nature for (moral) perfection, but as 
a being in control of himself who was well advised to behave with rational 
adaptability (Gracián). From the perspective of the individual, a distinction 
then had to be made between self-reference and other-reference. Religion 
was accordingly internalized. But, as Jansenists such as Pierre Nicole asked, 
could civilized (rationally appropriate) amour propre be distinguished for 
the individual from charité in himself and in others? Or had God relocated 
His criteria into the unknowable? The complexity this brought was then 
given form with the distinction between human virtues and true virtues,139 
a form that meant the end of the humanistic moral tradition. The subse­
quent liberal natural law of the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
with its twin emphases on reason and individuality, upheld the postulate 
of the moral integration of society, while withdrawing the moral legitima­
tion of the old order based on domestic duties and stratification, namely, 
the possibility of appealing to the nature of human beings.
The assumption that human behavior could be coordinated by mo­
rality and thus realized as a social body was obviously based on guaranteed 
positions in societal structure from which the only right descriptions could 
be communicated. The binary schematism of morality, which as form pro­
vided for the two possibilities of good and bad (evil) behavior appeared at 
first to contradict this. However, it served only to enable behavior to be 
described as freely chosen (the official description was determined by the 
notion of the nature of human beings and therefore ran conversely: only 
freely chosen behavior could be judged morally). Such a concession to free­
dom took account of the autopoiesis of psychic systems and the intrans­
parency of the motives for their behavior. But, precisely because morality 
fulfilled this function of generating freedom, it was considered to be good 
overall. The city and its politics were accordingly a good thing. The Chris­
tian God was therefore good. We therefore find an emanation mythology 
that tells how the difference between good and bad arose from good begin­
nings. It is the story of the fall of the angel (angels) and of Adam and Eve 
led astray. Only in the theological reconstruction of this narrative do we 
find reference to freedom as a condition whose use lies beyond the respon­
sibility of God (beyond the ordering possibilities of society)—as in Anselm 
of Canterbury’s tract De casu diaboli.140
Certainly, this ethico-political version of morality and theological re­
flection on it addressed only the upper stratum of estates-based society. 

Self-Descriptions    
The peasants, serfs, slaves had other worries, and only the figure of salva­
tion was gradually extended to the entire population with the aid of con­
fession as a tool of social control.141 For the rural population, that is for 
the vast majority of people, moralities of a type belonging in segmentary 
societies survived until well into the modern age—moralities of reciproc­
ity concentrated within narrow limits, of neighborhoods, and of free rein 
for behavior outside these bounds. Knowledge of Christian doctrine is 
likely to have been minimal, and only with the advent of printing and 
competition between denominations did a sort of popular religious ed­
ucation develop.142 At any rate, written culture and what was taught in 
schools was determined by ethics and by biblical teachings—so strongly 
that all variations of societal self-description that sought to take account 
of new structural developments in the transition to the modern age were 
seen as morally offensive. This explains the awareness of sin and fears of 
damnation that proliferated in the late Middle Ages.143 And it also ex­
plains that special semantics for individual functional systems had to win 
through against a morally charged conceptuality—thus the theory of the 
political requirements of the territorial state, the theory of purely individ­
ually grounded subjective rights free of obligations, the theory of passion­
ate love, of economic profit-seeking, of uninhibited scientific curiosity. All 
this was almost necessarily perceived as a breach of the morality laid down 
in religion, since no distinction was drawn between morality itself and 
its positive value of good. Thus a new thinking, whose structurally deter­
mined necessity could not yet be appreciated, had to win out against moral 
objections and also against the Church, although all that was really at issue 
was to escape from the form of morality, the two-sided code of assessment 
in terms of good or bad.
A last apotheosis of virtue morality (of ēthos in the old sense) took 
place in the eighteenth century. Morality was now clearly deployed as a 
concept for overcoming differences (and if there is anything to the socio­
logical theory that stronger differentiations require higher and more in­
determinate generalizations, this is where we would find it). What was 
at stake was above all freeing morality from dependence on the dogmatic 
quarrels of religion and grounding it in human sensibility. Soon thereafter, 
political differences among the territorial states in Europe made rethink­
ing imperative. Whereas ethics sought at the same time to reinvent itself 
(in decidedly academic form) as a theory explaining moral judgments,144 

 
  Self-Descriptions
morality set out once again to formulate a morally binding principle of 
solidarity. It held from Scotland to Poland, seizing minor princely capitals 
(in the ironical view of Jean Paul), nations, and cosmopolitan attitudes, 
and went by the name of “patriotism.”145 The antique reference to ances­
tors (as in patrios politeia or patrios nomos [the constitution/custom of the 
fathers]) was left out and replaced by an enlightening impulse. The con­
cept seems to have reacted to regional differences by an attempt to register 
distinctions and to overcome them in a general, cosmopolitan patriotism 
(this was at least the case in Germany). Differences between functional sys­
tems were ignored; and one would hardly have imagined that differences 
in economics, politics, science, religion, family, and so forth could be “pa­
triotically” integrated. To this extent, old differences were still involved: 
uneducated, uncouth people, and exclusively local patriots had to be en­
lightened about genuine patriotism. In the nineteenth century, the idea of 
community [­Gemeinschaft], by contrast, had quite different connotations. 
It reacted to modern living conditions by distinguishing itself from them.
The representation of society in society (or even of “high society” in 
society) was celebrated for a last time in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries in the form of the princely court. But nature was now replaced 
by artificial ceremonial, which did no more than symbolize supreme power 
and strictest distinction. Newly built palaces—from Versailles to the 
­Peterhof in Russia and La Granja de San Ildefonso in Spain—provided al­
most uniform settings, which outbid one another only in pomp and repe­
tition. And instead of an ethics of natural-perfect being, we find (covertly) 
strained efforts to produce vain appearances. A society game in society. In 
the early nineteenth century, Jean Paul could still say that “the great world 
is the spirit of society at its most potent.”146 But this specter vanishes when 
we have to distinguish between sociality and society.
7. The Semantics of Old Europe, 4: The School Tradition
Ontological metaphysics and its order derivates are not to be un­
derstood as a world of ideas that held its own thanks to self-assertion. The 
tradition had indeed always presupposed such self-certification of being. 
Or it had assumed that ideal forms existed because it was thus that angels 
could see the world. The latter explanation lay in the mystery of the Cre­
ation. A sociological theory that assumes meaning exists only in the op­

Self-Descriptions    
erations that produce and reproduce meaning must, however, tackle this 
question differently. Not least, it will have to ask how this semantic world-
edifice was passed on—above all at a time in which, although written texts 
existed, the transmission of knowledge relied primarily on oral communi­
cation, and hence on schools.
For transmitting knowledge, the Middle Ages had developed an im­
pressive organization of subject matter that prevailed in schools for centu­
ries. A distinction was made between the trivium and quadrivium [courses 
of study]. The trivium covered grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic [logic]; the 
quadrivium, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. A modern edu­
cational planner would be struck by the odd incompleteness of this cata­
log. A closer look, however, reveals an impressive, closed conception unlike 
anything we now have to offer. The trivium was concerned with commu­
nication, the quadrivium with the world. The theory of communication 
was organized in terms of linguistic, pragmatic, and truth-related (logical) 
aspects. The world was represented in terms of number, space, movement, 
and time. The schema was so strongly generalized that it took no account 
of specific professional training, for example, in theology, law, or medi­
cine. It also renounced copying distinctions of the visible, experienceable 
world directly into school instruction. It exploited the possibilities of the 
distance that the outdifferentiation of schools offered. It was conceived as 
a dialectical, not an educational schema. Schools were responsible only for 
instruction [Unterricht]; education [Erziehung] was the job of the family 
households. The schools were therefore concerned only to transmit knowl­
edge. The strict division into institutio and educatio also served to relieve 
instruction from tasks that could not be understood in material terms. It 
was not until around 1800 that the hybrid idea of “educational instruction” 
[erziehender Unterricht] developed, to become a task for the new school 
pedagogy.
Didactics relied on presenting topics of instruction in the form of ex­
amples. The subjects themselves decomposed communication and world 
into materials that could be taught separately but were nevertheless inter­
dependent. Within subjects, the exemplary was developed—whether in 
the form of learning plausible rules, proportions, or laws or that of anec­
dote, of examples from history. In parallel, profession-related instruction 
used biblical parables and proverbial maxims, which, especially in legal in­
struction, contributed to the systematization of case law.147

 
  Self-Descriptions
This dialectical technique made it possible to direct attention, to en­
rich the memory, and to covertly convey premises. Theology and philoso­
phy might then well seek to discover and iron out inconsistencies. But this 
remained more of an isolated endeavor well away from school instruction. 
“Philosophy” was not, as it is today, an academic discipline. One therefore 
did not need to work with open premises and could assume that there was 
a right description of the world. Only in the sixteenth century was an­
tique skepticism rediscovered, problematizing all cognitive certainty. The 
“dialectic” of a Petrus Ramus could only order; it could not explain where 
it obtained its binary distinctions. And even highly conclusive geometry, 
which in the seventeenth century was considered an exact science, was un­
able to define all its concepts.148 This had to be taken into account, but did 
not mean that knowledge could not be ordered.149 From then on, all the 
premises necessary for knowledge had a flank open to doubt; but as skep­
ticism this openness to doubt could not be substantively elaborated and 
therefore found no place in school instruction. It was only the increas­
ing pressure of new knowledge and new literature coming off the printing 
press that called old subjects and exempla into question.
In a rapid development from the sixteenth century, new institutions 
were established, indicating that the old schema was felt to be wanting. 
“Academies” were set up to meet the special needs of special groups—for 
instance, Ritterakademien [educational establishments for the nobility] and 
academies for painting and sculpture—thus in fields that had hitherto been 
the domain of domestic education or guilds. The aim was partly to inten­
sify communication within similar interests, partly to make contact with 
newly developing social formations. The old cosmology of knowledge was 
lost to view in the process—not necessarily in its subject matter but as a 
form for organizing the transmission of knowledge.
More serious, already in the late sixteenth century and ever since, was 
the impact on education and instruction of general uncertainty about the 
use of signs, about the social reference of signs, and about the authority to 
define their meaning. A self-reflexive element was increasingly a part of ed­
ucation, namely, teaching pupils to show “good breeding.” This was the case 
for both the upwardly mobile and for members of the old upper classes. 
From then on it was necessary to judge whether and to what extent one 
had to possess the insignia of knowledge and education and, with all due 
tact, could also show them off—or whether this would be interpreted as 

Self-Descriptions    
pedantry. Generally speaking, the pressure to obtain education increased, 
but the schools that continued to teach in the old style were clearly unable 
to satisfy these new demands. More reliance had to be placed on processes 
that we would now call socialization—as if good society could educate 
itself. Conversation with the ladies of society was considered to be par­
ticularly advantageous. And educational travel was recommended to put 
everyone in a position to converse authentically about what he had seen 
(like the Greek theōros [testifier]). It was only in about 1800 that the edu­
cational system was also converted to functional differentiation, bringing 
education and instruction together in one system. This task has since then 
been assumed by a pedagogy concerned specially with schools. And only 
now could one expect (however paradoxical this is in itself) to pass on the 
latest knowledge.
8. The Semantics of Old Europe, 5: 
From Barbarism to Critique
Not only hierarchical stratification but also center/periphery differen­
tiation left its mark on the semantics of old Europe. “Peripherizing” what 
was incompatible, treating it as marginal also fostered a closed description 
of the world.
In antiquity and in Europe later there had been a long tradition of at­
tempts to stabilize social unity through exclusory concepts such as “barbar­
ian,” “heathen,” or, to this day in southern Italy, saraceno.150 Unlike names or 
personal pronouns, such exclusory terms would not be understood equally 
on both sides of the distinction. Precisely because center/periphery differ­
entiation had been established, the center could assume that its own de­
scription of the difference was correct and the views of the periphery or the 
completely excluded parts of the world could be disregarded. Not without 
reason, the center repeated its own cultural superiority in its own descrip­
tion of the world. The established dissimilarity was taken into and given ex­
pression in its own description. How the matter was seen on the periphery 
could be ignored.
In keeping with the self-definition as center, the world was injured 
by a primary, two-sided distinction. The “Other” was excluded. It was not 
merely a question of producing a negative copy but of breaking up a total­
ity into a This and an Other, both for the object world and for the object 

 
  Self-Descriptions
society. With such a divisive semantics, the paradoxical goal could be at­
tained of designing a totality, while isolating oneself within it as something 
special. This allowed the inevitable disharmonies of a wide world to be ac­
commodated, to externalize the inconsistencies that could not be processed 
internally, and to take account politically of the factual (above all, spatial) 
barriers to communication and control. That such a design was the product 
of its constructor’s imagination (and that barbarians were therefore barbar­
ians only for the Greeks but not for themselves) could not be given expres­
sion in the construction itself. It therefore had to be offered as a religion or 
dreamed up geographically.151 Spatial divisions and time divisions (creation 
reports) typically cooperated in mutual plausibilization. If the distinction 
nevertheless came to be thought of as mere description—as in Montaigne’s 
famous essay on cannibals152—this had to result in a transformation of the 
semantics: it lost its geographical and demographic basis, now distinguish­
ing only between civilized peoples and savage peoples, and assumed that 
the distinction could be eliminated by missionary work or civilizing im­
pulses from the center. The final form was then the “patriotically” differ­
entiated cosmopolitanism of the eighteenth century, which used cultural 
comparison to focus world history on Europe.
For the historical semantics of the old world, these semantic asym­
metries must have been the form that made tenable the contextual ex­
tension that had occurred with the transition to advanced civilization 
[­Hochkultur], with the introduction of writing and the corresponding ex­
tensions of memory, and with dissimilarity as the form of societal differen­
tiation. In the religious, moral, and political self-descriptions of that time, 
this was seen as too much to handle and, consequently as idealizing com­
parison, virtue ethics, or, conversely, as awareness of sin and as a need for 
salvation. Virtue therefore had to be understood as the natural constitution 
(hexis) of the human being, just as sin had to be seen as habitus or, if as 
guilt, then as inevitable guilt. At the center of society, there was no escap­
ing the conditions of advanced civilization; but, in compensation, those 
excluded were treated with contempt or stamped with cosmic inferiority.
Whichever version was chosen, it applied to the self-describing center 
and not to the marginalized or excluded domains of the cosmography. The 
friction one had to face in societal communication could be reformulated 
in complex rituals for preserving the world or in a fundamental distinction 
between idea and reality, in a normative concept of nature, in the theory of 

Self-Descriptions    
the two civitates, and so on. But in whatever form, a difference remained. 
Its value for orientation must have been that only one difference for split­
ting the world was to be acknowledged, enabling one to operate with a 
clearly defined two-sided schema and not to get involved in a polycontex­
tural description of the world.
With this semantic design, too, society did not have to accept itself as 
it found itself. But criticism could not and did not need concern criteria; 
and if criteria did come to be doubted, it was in the sense of rerouting the 
problem to the philosophical and religious recognition of the inadequacy 
of human cognitive faculties. What remained possible in the way of cri­
tique was therefore morally schematized. The center was also, and in par­
ticular, to be understood as morally deficient; only thus was the primary 
difference to be kept more or less in harmony with reality. But the critique 
that has gone down in history under the name of “Enlightenment” under­
stood criticism as a means for realizing a fully adequate humanity. One no 
longer externalized; inadequacies and backwardness were brought into so­
ciety. The god was now self-critical reason, publicness was its medium and 
becoming literature its fate. That other peoples had to accept this was a 
matter of course,153 for precisely self-criticism could, after all, be universal­
ized. There could, however, be no doubt that this also implied a moral pos­
tulate that human beings should shake off the dependence for which they 
are themselves to blame. Moral generalization operated via self-reference, 
but it remained a moral demand made by human beings of human beings.
This appears to have changed definitively only in the post-revolution­
ary nineteenth century. Marxian societal critique managed without morally 
judging capitalists—thus landing itself with the problems of a polycontex­
tural description of society. Its characterization of other societal descrip­
tions as “ideologies” boomeranged. And this shows that the form of a 
center/periphery-based description on the lines of “we and the others” no 
longer worked. Residual problems could no longer be externalized. They 
had to be attributed to society itself.
This took place in the second half of the eighteenth century on the 
basis of a new concept: that of culture. Culture now no longer meant 
the cultivation of . . . but a special mode of observing with an eye to the 
possibilities of comparison. Now even barbarians, indeed, even the oldest or 
most remote forms of a societal way of life, had or were culture.154 In a pe­
culiar manner, culture benefited from possibilities of comparison; for what 

 
  Self-Descriptions
is comparable is striking precisely because what is compared differs and re­
mains different in all other regards. Against this background, what never­
theless appears to be similar is charged with meaning, thus demonstrating a 
sort of order that can no longer be reduced to its origins or to the essence of 
things. Comparison itself was included in culture, became a cultural prac­
tice. Every cultural item was thus exposed to self-reference and to other-
reference—became one sort of pottery among others, one religion among 
others. And the more differentiated the comparison was, the more obvious 
it became that one’s own culture could not be considered superior in all di­
mensions. Culture gave cause for critical self-reflection, nostalgic reminis­
cence, or the articulation of problems that would occupy the future.155
9. The Reflection Theories of Functional Systems
As the differentiation of functional systems gained in prominence, the 
onticity of objects, the exclusivity of their being and the correctness of at­
titudes toward them in cognition and action, changed. Its structural devel­
opment had obliged society to renounce setting fixed positions for correct 
observation. At the level of self-description, the reaction since the sixteenth 
century had been one of uncertainty: controversy arose about the right 
truth; there was a sense of order lost; semantic doublings were introduced, 
for example the distinction between true and false virtue; and attention fo­
cused on a world of appearances to which human beings had to adapt.156 
The consequences become clear only in the course of long semantic evolu­
tion in constant interaction with itself. It would be wrong to describe this 
development as a “loss of world,”157 for all this naturally took place in the 
world; but the idea of world had to adapt to this evolution at the structural 
and semantic levels, finally renouncing the observability of the world and 
thus any certainty based in the world.
Even in antiquity there had been attempts to set aside and replace 
the traditional semantics of nobility by knowledge relating more strongly 
to functional areas. A particularly impressive move in this direction was 
the differentiation of various discourses in line with different communica­
tion media in classical Greece.158 There were similar trends in late republi­
can Rome, partly in dependence on Greek imports, partly in confronting 
Roman tradition.159 However, neither the technical conditions for commu­
nication nor social structure were adequate for the purpose. Regressive de­

Self-Descriptions    
velopments delayed this switch for more than a thousand years. It was not 
until the High Middle Ages, and then mainly as a consequence of printing, 
that renewed efforts in this direction were made, initially in reviving Roman 
tradition relative to the distinction between religion, law, and politics.
In a protracted process that was to culminate only around 1800, the 
more indirect references in the semantics to a hierarchically ordered world 
were gradually deleted, calling the binding force of tradition into ques­
tion. As far as the form of transmission was concerned, the old European 
semantics lived from memory. It remembered things and places (topoi). 
The memory represented the world as it was because this way of looking 
at things had stood the test of time. It was not a question of marking ori­
gins or recalling when something had come to be known. “Since time im­
memorial” sufficed. In this sense, the concept of nature was appropriate. 
Reason unfolded as nature within nature. The world was seen as contin­
gent only with regard to the act of creation. What is more, experiencing 
and communicating took place in a tradition that was not reflected upon 
as such. It would have been inconceivable, as Descartes was to postulate, 
that everything was based on error and deception. Although the skeptics 
showed that there was no end to the question of causes, this also showed 
that one had no choice but to keep to what was given. And this held true 
not only for what was but also for what should be; for, apart from acci­
dents, both were given as nature. Nor was there any choice in following 
tradition—a problem that was to enmesh Edmund Burke in treating the 
French Revolution.160 Finally, it was unthinkable that the overall descrip­
tion of the world or society could be considered in terms of true or false.
This embeddedness in a tradition gradually dissolved in the course 
of early modern times. It began when the Renaissance drew a distinction 
relative to society between present and past. If the past as a tradition was a 
form in which the present established what was given for it and what was 
unavailable to it, the past could, in almost imperceptible transition (but 
completely by the eighteenth century) become dated history that was no 
longer actual but could at best be ideologically reactualized.161 To begin 
with, the printed word exposed the heterogeneity of the material handed 
down from the past and gave authors the idea that they were writing to 
instruct and convince their contemporaries. They were to learn that oth­
ers could not be convinced. From about 1600, specific reflection theories 
developed for particular domains, elaborating functional logics on such 

 
  Self-Descriptions
lines as raison d’État or the balance of trade. This could proceed in delib­
erate acceptance of tradition. Such was the case, for example, in the the­
ory of common law, directed against political intervention, which relied 
on the unity of reason and tradition—but already as an argument, indeed 
almost as ideology.162 And to the extent that one invoked either practical 
constraints or tradition, accepted innovations or regarded them as harm­
ful, one was already outside tradition, judging it as one observer does other 
observers. The concepts for economic or scientific rationality or for self-
critical reason explicitly reject being bound by tradition, without noticing, 
however, that in so doing they found a tradition themselves.
Nevertheless, the conceptual choices of old European semantics bound 
European thinking until well into modern times. Just how long depended 
on the scope of the concepts involved. The concept of politics was still used 
in around 1700 in the sense of public behavior as opposed to the private 
sphere of one’s own household.163 The term societas civilis was translated into 
modern languages and in the eighteenth century still dominated discussion 
as société civile or “civil society”—limited as before to independent persons. 
In the Anglo-Saxon, particularly North American, context, this concept—or 
to be more precise the distinction between civil society and government—
still determined the constitutional debate in the last third of the eighteenth 
century.164 In continental Europe, however—because independence was 
seen as secured by property, and property was understood in terms of the 
money economy—the concept of society came to have an exclusively eco­
nomic meaning in the last third of the eighteenth century,165 with the result 
that society in the sense of the economy could be set against the state.
The more subjacent components of old European semantics were 
much more enduring. The concept of environment (French environnement, 
German Umwelt), which had superseded the notion of periechon, was in­
vented only in the early nineteenth century, and the switch in systems the­
ory to the distinction between system and environment had yet to find 
general acceptance even at the end of the twentieth century (see vol. 1, chap. 
1.4). Bivalent logic and the constant recurrence of ontological descriptions 
of the world enjoyed even greater continuity for lack of alternatives. De­
spite all the clear signs of corrosion, no date can be put on the demise of the 
old European semantics—if we can indeed speak of demise—or the con­
comitant expectations targeting nature, reason, and ­ethics. Dating the shift 
in semantics from traditional to modern (with a great deal of plausibility 

Self-Descriptions    
in the details) to the few decades of the late eighteenth century is therefore 
questionable.166 This holds for the direct description of social conditions 
and for the understanding of history; but certainly not for everything in 
the way of more profound structures of thought that had benefited from 
the unambiguity of the uncontested position for observation in society. 
Modern society has to manage without representation of society within so­
ciety, and it has yet to find any semantic forms to match the peculiar clo­
sure and persuasive power of old European semantics.
If we are to detect the breaks in continuity that occur in the transi­
tion to modern society, we cannot rely only on the surface structures of 
etymology and conceptual history, even if the data they provide continue 
to feed our arguments. We have to take a more sociological approach, set­
ting out from the thesis of the switch in differentiation form dealt with in 
chapter 4. Modern society is characterized by the primacy of functional 
differentiation. This being the case, if the break with the old European tra­
dition cannot be attributed simply to the new technology of printing, it is 
likely to have occurred when the autonomy and the endogenous dynamics 
of increasingly outdifferentiated functional systems made themselves felt 
and demanded interpretation. And there is much evidence that this is so.
The most significant advances in modern communication arose and 
developed where functional systems differentiated out. The beginnings of 
a self-description of modernity took the form neither of reflection on the 
comprehensive unity of the societal system—such a procedure had been 
blocked by humanism—nor of an attempt to produce a successor seman­
tics to the old European description, which had not been evident as unity, 
and hence not distinguishable; as tradition it had simply been given. What 
is striking and calls for communicative treatment from both a practical 
and theoretical point of view is the problem of the autonomy of the new 
functional systems, which explodes both the cosmos of essences and the 
moral coding of the Middle Ages. Such autonomy issues began to mani­
fest themselves in the late sixteenth century with the problem of the sov­
ereignty of the political system and with the replacement of the manual of 
statecraft (Fürstenspiegel) by raison d’État theory. In the eighteenth century, 
perception of the question had spread to almost all functional systems, no­
tably, science, the economy, law, education, and the fine arts.
Considering the wealth of suggestions offered by the literature on this, 
and the unconnected coexistence of new formations, only brief discussion 

 
  Self-Descriptions
is possible here. The aim is to show the multiplicity and hetero­geneity of 
an overall uniform and almost simultaneous trend—the tendency within 
distinct functional systems to develop theories of reflection on themselves 
because of the transition of the societal system to primary differentiation 
in terms of function (rather than mutual influence in the domain of the 
history of ideas, although this naturally existed to a limited extent).
It is striking that these efforts at self-description took theoretical 
form, which means that they were problem-oriented and conceptually 
elaborated, and thus geared to comparison.167 But the radius of compari­
son was limited to the particular system. The order of the law was not 
to be compared but confronted with the order of love (one recalls the 
old, deeply rooted mistrust lawyers have of gifts). Old forms of analogy 
formation were jettisoned in favor of intrasystemic problems and distinc­
tions, such as how cognition comes by its object; or what constitutes unity 
in complementary role differences like ruler and subject (state), producer 
and consumer (market), teacher and pupil (educational instruction), or 
lover and beloved (passion). This very question of the sameness of differ­
ence [Selbigkeit des Verschiedenen] hides a paradox that is seldom elaborated 
(above all in characterizing passionate love), but is used as a covert source 
of theory formation. Use is made of existing, already formulated gener­
alizations (e.g., of jurisprudence, of historical examples of political suc­
cesses and failures, of action, or of love stories); but reflection theories are 
more than mere collections of experiences. They include future perspec­
tives, demand autonomy, explain problem-solving capacities, and individ­
ualize their system.
Above all, reflection theories are bound by a relationship of loyalty 
and affirmation to their object. They will not question in radically skepti­
cal or nihilistic terms whether it makes sense to form a system covering the 
function in question. This loyalty is the automatic result of limiting the 
comparative radius of the abstraction that can be used within the system 
itself. Often, however, it is also meaning invested by the relevant reflection 
elites no longer involved in the basic operations of systems—by education­
alists who no longer teach, by lawyers engaged in teaching, by theologians 
who do not preach, fast, or pray (or at best do so “privately”). A reflection 
theory can filter out such similarities; but, above all, it will be impressed 
by the diversity of forms in which the structural results of societal evolution 
are thus semantically honored and explicated.

Self-Descriptions    
In the political system, modern reflection began with the transition 
from the medieval to the modern concept of sovereignty, which sought no 
longer to cover only independence in relations between the Empire and 
the Church but also the unity of state authority within a territory. It ap­
pears that an element of (unlegislated) arbitrariness cannot be avoided in 
the practice of supreme state authority, which can be constrained by no 
other authority. To begin with, it was a concept directed against the nobil­
ity, who were accustomed to act at their own discretion in questions of law, 
honor, and morality.168 The French legists therefore defined legal norms as 
arbitrary, arguing that if there was to be arbitrariness, it should have only 
one locus, the apex of the state.
Initially, it was sought to organize the necessary confidential knowl­
edge under the heading of raison d’État.169 Knowledge of his own virtue 
no longer sufficed for the prince, and the newly defined concept of the 
state and a nascent theory of offices revamped a more or less administra­
tive knowledge. The “absolute state” became an administrative state. This 
left unresolved the problem of arbitrariness at the top. To begin with, it was 
dealt with only juridically as an eminent faculty, ius eminens. And since the 
final decades of the sixteenth century, one also spoke of loix ­fondamentales 
to justify the commitment of the prince in a self-reference argument: he was 
not permitted to act (for example, to alienate state property) in a manner 
that undermined his own position. However, this rule was legally useless, 
because it provided for no distinction from normal politics. For other func­
tional systems, especially the economy, based on property, a self-definition 
of the unity of politics as arbitrariness, originally directed against the no­
bility, necessarily became untenable with the discovery of its intrinsic logic.
Hobbes saw the problem of arbitrariness far more radically. As nat­
ural law, it was in the first place a problem of bodies that kill and can be 
killed. Arbitrariness was then duplicated and concentrated. By contract, a 
leviathan arose, an artificial man for whom arbitrariness was law.170 This 
installed a new distinction whose one side was the sovereign transforming 
arbitrariness into law and whose other side was the subjects, who were in­
vested with a second, no longer natural individuality, which guaranteed 
correspondence between rights and duties.
While the semantics of arbitrariness clearly described a process of 
decoupling and outdifferentiation, any solution to the problem it raised 
was initially far from apparent. For, from an empirical point of view, there 

 
  Self-Descriptions
was no such thing as arbitrariness but only politics that was successful or 
not, that was more or less amenable to consensus. An obvious reaction to 
this situation was the terminological switch from civitas to respublica and, 
in this context, from cives to subditos.171 This expressed specifically po­
litical, state-related role-complementarity, which—while not reminding 
the prince as civis or as noble of his corresponding duties—increasingly 
recognized that the status of subject was not identical with the status of 
human being, coming up against limits that were no longer set by social 
class but found expression in the recognition of human and civil rights. 
Whereas civis was intended to denote the perfection of being a human 
being in society, the subject was defined in terms of his role in distinction 
to the human being.
But this did not of itself offer a solution to the sovereignty paradox 
of the limitedness of arbitrariness. The answer lay in finally taking up the 
meanwhile established human rights semantics in the invention of “consti­
tutions” with their two components: human rights for external demarca­
tion and the principle of the separation of powers as a mechanism of legal 
self-regulation. At least according to the original intent of the authors of 
The Federalist Papers,172 constitutions were necessary because neither re­
ligion nor morality could sort interests and control passions, for reasons 
that had already been discussed by Hobbes. By pursuing this functional 
argument, the transition from absolute monarchy to constitutional theory 
could be achieved without difficulty. Political theory became the theory of 
the constitutional state. One operated with new distinctions, that between 
human rights and the separation of powers as the substance of constitu­
tional arrangements, or the distinction (unthinkable for the Middle Ages) 
between mutable and immutable positive (!) law. Once again, what consti­
tuted the unity of these distinctions was not reflected upon.
For the science system, the same problem of reflection on identity 
presented itself in quite different forms. According to the description of 
cognition that held sway in old Europe, knowledge was effected by what 
was known—on the principle of like effects, like causes. Therein lay the 
guarantee of its congruence with reality. At any rate, it was no act of will, 
for otherwise it would vary depending on the nature and orientation of 
the will. It is rather that the knower had to face up to what affected him as 
cognition; and he had only to protect himself against errors, corruption, 
and his own passions. Both cognition and what was known were nature.

Self-Descriptions    
The modern science movement, which wanted to investigate and dis­
cover new things, wished to do away with this version of the knowledge 
process. In fending off theological control ambitions, it was at first insisted 
that science was about the natural knowledge of natural phenomena, a 
doubled nature that violated no secrets and that could generate certain (not 
only hypothetical) knowledge, especially with the aid of mathematics.173 
To this was added a different understanding of “theory,” which was geared 
to (ideally mathematical) abstraction and no longer to seeing the whole in 
the parts. This new version paved the way for functional differentiation. 
Finally, as the science movement came to observe itself in epistemological 
terms—which began with Locke—an awareness of the participation of the 
observer in all knowledge acquisition developed. Gradually, the striving for 
absolutely certain knowledge and, with it, the distinction between strict 
knowledge and mere opinion (epistēmē/doxa) as the point of reference for 
reflection was replaced by the problem of the unity of the distinction be­
tween knowledge and object. As always, the unity of what was differenti­
ated could be comprehended only as paradox, with reflection taking on 
the task of resolving the paradox.174 To begin with, however, old ideas (e.g., 
image theory) were merely reformulated in the context of a founding para­
dox. Since the distinction between cognition and object could not be aban­
doned, one oscillated helplessly between empiricist and idealistic solutions, 
between object-focused and cognition-focused solutions. Innovation arose 
as a side effect, so to speak, of this oscillation—witness the pragmatic treat­
ment of the induction problem by Hume and the consciousness theoreti­
cal (transcendental philosophy) solution of Kant. The new version of the 
process concept in the last decade of the eighteenth century finally enabled 
a “dialectical” theory to be developed for the processing of distinctions. 
But these grand theories were really followed only by recapitulations or a 
“theory of science” drawing essentially on methodological reflection (à la 
Popper) or the history of theory (à la Kuhn). Since the distinction between 
knowledge and object had to be used in order to distinguish between self-
reference and other-reference, it was not possible to reflect on the unity of 
this distinction at the same time. The steeped-in-tradition solution to this 
problem, which had used the concept of “relation” to conceal the problem 
of the unity of the distinction and its formulation as ­adaequatio or as repre­
sentation, could be neither abandoned nor upheld. Science as an observer 
remained the middle excluded from itself.

 
  Self-Descriptions
With its question about the “conditions of possibility,” epistemologi­
cal reflection addressed what happened in the sciences themselves only to 
a limited degree. The focus of the natural sciences on “material,” of biol­
ogy on “population,” and of the humanities on the “subject” showed at 
least that their research programs were forward-looking—programs that, 
where possible, avoided or sought to eliminate any commitment to es­
sence [Wesen], indeed even to invariant laws that connected the past to the 
future.175 This corresponded to a society that could no longer determine 
its own “essence,” that treated its history as past, and that placed its hopes 
on a self-determined future. The epistemological consequences were first 
pragmatism then constructivism.
For economic theory, the point of departure for an independent re­
flection theory lay in the seventeenth century (probably going back to 
the considerations that had led to abolition of the ban on interest in the 
sixteenth century) in the attention paid to the transaction as such in ab­
straction from the sensibilities, welfare, intentions, and motives of those 
involved. It could be then left to the latter to regard themselves as “indi­
viduals” without this ruining the economy. Anthropology adapted itself 
accordingly with the theorem of “self-interest,” which renaturalized the 
subjective correlates of economic thinking.
This allowed traditional moral barriers addressing participants to be 
overcome. It became possible to establish uniform participant motives and 
relate them to calculated utility. At the same time, transactions showed that 
the behavior of participants consisted of decisions that could be criticized 
from the point of view of rationality (or initially simply from such points 
of view as the effective deployment of resources and time efficiency).176 
Not least, it was irrelevant from a purely economic perspective whether 
motives were sincere or mere pretense. What decided was profit and loss.
Since in transactions in which money flows only one of the partici­
pants gets what he wants directly while the other receives only money, the 
systemic aspect of a money economy gradually came to people’s attention 
over and above the(long-perceived) aspect of delayed payment, that is to 
say, credit. Moreover, production was more and more for the market, and 
this was true also in agriculture. This gradually dissolved the old distinc­
tion between the (in principle, self-sufficient) household and trade. For 
this reason, too, it became necessary to free the profit motive from its tra­
ditional moral constraints and to establish it in its own right;177 for how 

Self-Descriptions    
else could one calculate investment in market-oriented production other 
than in terms of profit?178 Similarly, the moral orientation on the distinc­
tion between egoism and altruism in dealing with scarce goods had to be 
abandoned.179 In morality, as in the economy, the individual was expected 
to observe and discipline himself as an observer of other observers. At least 
in the economy he could be guided by the prices at which others bought 
and sold on the market. This left unexplained how these prices were set, if 
not by the intellect or will of individuals.
From the seventeenth century onward, the scope for interpretation 
this gave was initially filled metaphorically by images such as balance, equi­
librium, and circulation,180 which also symbolized a strict internal order 
and closure. We can recognize in this one of the important no-longer/­
not-yet figures of modern times: no longer linear causality, but still with­
out analysis of the mathematical and logical problems of self-reference. 
Thus, even though banks were founded and government debt heatedly 
and worriedly discussed in England, no appropriate theory of money was 
developed, and the theory of the division of labor and the switch in value 
theory to value produced by labor left the question of (beneficent) unity, 
without offering an answer, to the “invisible hand.” Not least, the heading 
“political economy” betrays that, although one regarded the economy as a 
macrosocietal (and no longer domestic) phenomenon, hence abandoning 
old European economics, the unity of the distinctions used in the system 
was still not a subject of reflection. The substitute problem was scarcity, 
and the basis for plausibility was the enormous growth in agricultural and 
industrial productivity.
That this was a reflection theory of the economic system despite all 
the theoretical and “scientific” processing is apparent from the fact that the 
theory presupposed the rationally acting individual. This was a fundamental 
confirmation of the economy’s positive self-assessment. Rationality was an 
(1) innocent and (2) effective cause in building a social order—the economy, 
if not society itself. As far as classical and neoclassical theory is concerned, 
all further developments took place within this frame, in which neither the 
right to rationality nor the causal efficacy of rational dispositions could be 
discussed. Nothing changed with a switch from the natural endowment of 
individuals to a merely formal concept of rational choice. Nothing changed 
if one studied the discrepancy between practical value and exchange value, 
and had to admit that it could be resolved not through psychological the­

 
  Self-Descriptions
ory but only through mathematical theory. There were powerful counter­
currents that investigated whether the development of social order could 
be explained on the basis of these premises and whether rational economic 
activity was to be recommended for society without further restrictions. 
Marx, the institutionalism of the post–World War I period, and Keynes 
come to mind. But even then it was only a question of what additional ex­
planations (class conditions, mass psychology, habit formation, government 
intervention) had to be introduced to make the consequences of the causal 
assumptions acceptable to society.
There were comparable developments in the legal system of the sev­
enteenth and eighteenth centuries.181 It must be assumed that on the basis 
of civil and canon law, records of local customary law, town privileges, 
and an already considerable body of legislation, the law had already come 
to play a more important role in Europe than elsewhere in the world in 
regulating social conditions.182 Many of the “clerics” of the Middle Ages 
had not studied theology at all, but canon law. The law thus also served to 
consolidate the territorial state, to cut back manorial jurisdiction,183 safe­
guard religious tolerance, and, not least of all, to convert the property re­
gime from the manorial system to a money economy. This high degree of 
interdependence between the law and other social functions made it diffi­
cult, especially for lawyers themselves, to speak of the outdifferentiation of 
a legal system. There were, however, parallels.
From a more practice-oriented point of view, the new requirements 
exploded the old unity concept of the iurisdictio of the prince, leading in­
stead to problems of distributing the onus of decision-making between 
legislation and the courts.184 The difference between legislation and the 
judiciary has since dominated the discussion in legal theory and method­
ology. The paradox of the coding: whether the law was rightly or wrongly 
law was resolved by distributing the decision-making powers.
This shows that the idea of the positivity of law determined the reflec­
tion situation. But this did not mean that natural law was to be written off 
without further ado. Until well into the modern age, the old theory of dif­
ferent “sources of law” shaped understandings of the validity of law. Espe­
cially if a concept of the (religious, political, and so forth) autonomy of law 
was envisaged, natural law was indispensable on legitimatory grounds. But 
it had to adapt. The figure of reason as the nature of human beings trans­
formed natural law into a law of reason, granting it a license for specifi­

Self-Descriptions    
cally legal argumentation. In the discussion on property, the old division 
between politics and jurisprudence lost its force, even though, with a few 
exceptions (e.g., Grotius and Pufendorf), natural law still exercised little 
influence on practical jurisprudence. Then, in the eighteenth century, nat­
ural law was explicitly built into law courses, and, over and above the theo­
ries intended for practical jurisprudence, Christian Wolff pointed the way 
to a novel, philosophical legal theory that sought to provide philosophical 
or even mathematical, but at any rate reason-oriented foundations for legal 
knowledge. This domain of reflection was also concerned with the links be­
tween law and morality (Sittlichkeit [social morality], ethics), in which legal 
practice had to be left out of account. Toward the end of the eighteenth 
century the new concept of constitution gave the legal system a conclud­
ing formula, and natural law was thenceforth only a more or less superflu­
ous secondary justification for what the constitution lays down as law. The 
problem with law that has become autonomous is its positivity, that is to 
say, its self-justification. The relation between changing and not changing 
the law had to be negotiated within law. And if politics was conceded the 
power to change the law, it was in the form of legally recognized institu­
tional competence [Organkompetenz] and subject to judicial review. Free­
dom of contract was also granted as the counterpart to legislative freedom, 
so to speak, but at the same time, the nineteenth century developed the 
doctrine of the judicial interpretation of the will of the contracting parties.
In effect, this all meant that the relation between self-reference and 
other-reference in the legal system had to be reorganized. This occurred 
toward the end of the nineteenth century in the curious form of a contro­
versy that, in historical retrospect, was no controversy. The “jurisprudence 
of concepts” [Begriffsjurisprudenz] stood for self-reference. The “jurispru­
dence of interests” [Interessenjurisprudenz] stood for other-reference. And, 
naturally, the two orientations worked hand in hand if the legislator gave 
them the time. It was a question of the two sides of a form.
The reflection situation was quite different in the educational system. 
This system maintained close contact with contemporary humanism—not 
only in specifically German educational theory (Humboldt), but also in 
French national plans for a system of school education before and after the 
Revolution.185 The real innovation was due to a change in the conception 
of the object of education, a changed concept of the child.186 The child was 
no longer seen as an incomplete (imperfect) adult, but as a sensitive entity 

 
  Self-Descriptions
in a world of its own that could develop only in accordance with its own 
dynamics. Moreover, educationalists tended to divide humanity into ed­
ucators and children and to regard them as perfectible, as endowed with 
the “faculty to become ever more perfect.”187 This was their way of relat­
ing to society as a whole. Only a good hundred years ago did an extension 
occur with the introduction of “adult education,” which meant that the 
medium of education was no longer seen as the child but as the course of 
life [Lebenslauf ].
In their practical and methodological endeavors, the new pedagogy 
became entangled in the dilemma of freedom and causality: freedom that 
was to be premised, respected, and established; and causality without 
which the teacher would have to regard himself as superfluous. It was soon 
noted that Kantian philosophy, precisely because it addresses the antinomy 
between freedom and causality, could do little to resolve it. Instead, one re­
lied purely pragmatically on the institutionalization of the relationship be­
tween teacher and pupil, and, obviously, this relationship was united in the 
school.188 In a certain sense, the school was the unity of two functions that 
could no longer be integrated in pedagogical reflection, namely, the func­
tion of education and the function of social selection—whether for further 
education or economic employment. As an educator, the teacher consid­
ered himself responsible only for training and education; as a representative 
of the school, he practiced selection with the judgments that he commu­
nicated. With the concept of Bildung [education as self-­cultivation], the 
form of education was distinguished from selection, and for this very rea­
son, the other side of the form, the participation of educationalists in so­
cial selection has received too little attention. In the overall description of 
modern society, this deficit encouraged the view that selection was still a 
class phenomenon, and had to be corrected through economic and school 
policy in the light of the unequal distribution of goods.189
Art, or rather fine art, which differentiated out of the general domain 
of artes in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries and was left to govern 
itself, is the final example.190 Art, and above all literature, had to defend itself 
against philosophy, specifically now the new mathematical-experimental 
sciences, and history.191 Especially with the unity of the religious cosmol­
ogy disintegrating, however, and given that history could only report the 
facts of an imperfect world, this proved easier than in antiquity. The con­
ceptual program of imitation had not yet been fully jettisoned. Although, 

Self-Descriptions    
as Gracián put it, imitation was too simple to count as art,192 the majority 
of his contemporaries corrected only within the concept of imitation. The 
imitation of nature was still allowed, but no longer imitation of works of 
art. Above all, for the sake of the uniqueness and originality of the individ­
ual work, any work governed by rules was rejected, and with it any assess­
ment of works in accordance with rules. But how was one to know what was 
“beautiful” if there were no rules?
Beauty is what pleases was the view taken in about 1700, and the cri­
terion was taste, which one owed to one’s origins or to acquired culture, 
and that guided direct intuition in such a manner that reason could sub­
sequently confirm one’s evaluation. However, this criterion, as reference to 
the spontaneous judgment of intuition betrays, had marked links with so­
cietal stratification. Good taste was what people with good taste said it was. 
This irritating circularity was initially attenuated by reference to the special 
case of the “sublime” and the concomitant sensations,193 to be resolved in 
the course of the eighteenth century by Johann Jakob Bodmer, ­Alexander 
Baumgarten, and Kant, and, on the basis of the distinction between gen­
eral and specific, fed into a reflection theory, which in a new sense was now 
called “aesthetics.”194 The task of art was to give expression to the general 
in the particular. This placed aesthetics in the context of new demands 
on individuality, while also explaining why the work of art could not be 
explicated by reasoning, by conceptual analysis. Nevertheless, the work 
of art was understood through cognitive operations, its beauty was (for 
Baumgarten) the form of perfection of sensory cognition.195 The general 
could consequently be understood in very many ways—it could be roman­
tically moved into the domain of the incredible, it could lie in remoteness 
from what is usual in society, or in the symbolic, which postulates can­
cellation of the distinction between the content and form of the work of 
art. As always, art, too, has had its own concept of identity since the eigh­
teenth century with which it can justify its societal autonomy, whatever 
one might think of the “beauty” of the works it produces.
Reflection theories are far less apparent in religion and family, previ­
ously structural domains. One could almost suspect that functional out­
differentation had not been undertaken and not experienced as progress 
but merely suffered. The need for innovative semantics was thus not di­
rectly evident. Be that as it may, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centu­
ries, theology turned increasingly to “hermeneutic” problems—keeping 

 
  Self-Descriptions
to the positivity of its texts. And with the loss of the family’s political and 
productive functions and the increasing spread of schooling to the popu­
lation as a whole, which opened up careers to children independently of 
their origins, the question of internal cohesion presented itself. In about 
1800, the consequences were still felt by only a very small section of the 
population, but for them a substitute semantics was offered, which then 
gradually spread to larger sections of the population, namely, the notion of 
a personally, intimately grounded partnership based on a love match, and 
nevertheless enduring, in which the individual could find understanding 
and support for his specific individuality.
It is obvious that such heterogeneous functional system semantics 
could not be reduced without further ado to a common denominator that 
could then be presented as a theory of modern society. Descriptions based 
on functional systems managed at best such formulations as the world of 
modern states, capitalist society, or, with negative reference to religion, 
secularized society. Much of what has been produced in the way of specifi­
cally modern thought has sprung up in these fields. We must therefore go 
into some detail. At any rate, it should be clear that the overall result has 
not been a theory of society.
The reflection theories of functional systems in themselves and as a 
phenomenon typical of the time have a great deal in common. They en­
hance the observation of the system’s contingencies and give the impres­
sion that everything could be different; even and especially when, notably 
in epistemology and legal theory, they set out in quest of the necessary 
basis. This was because the acceptance of certain theoretical concepts was 
in turn observed, commented on, and criticized. Thus the (later so-called) 
early socialists complained that in London everyone thought along the 
lines of Adam Smith and David Ricardo. The introduction of a description 
into the system changes the system, and this called for a new description. 
Also typical is that reflection theories desist from invoking “beginnings.” A 
child’s origins are thus irrelevant for its education and the validity of law is 
not enhanced by its being long-established. The point at which phenom­
ena are treated as relevant in the system has to be decided within the sys­
tem itself in keeping with exclusively functional criteria.
“Theory”—this now meant new demands on intelligibility, and con­
trolled sensibility in relation to variants, the problematization of consistency, 
openness to controversy. The unclarified relationship of these endeav­

Self-Descriptions    
ors with strict science and with the aspirations of a Descartes, a Spinoza, a 
­Leibniz provided development aid, as it were. Simultaneously, it is obvious 
that what developed at the same time in the way of science was no longer 
really monitored by other functional systems. Furthermore, the reflection 
theories of functional systems could be made responsible for a new level of 
aspiration that no longer permitted orientation on the form world of the 
old rhetoric and on the prudentia of tradition. Many once usual distinctions 
went out of use. Others were continued on only one side with a new coun­
terconcept.196 Politics was thus defined no longer in opposition to household 
but to the economy (society), and the old double distinction public/secret 
on the one side and res publica/res privata on the other was generalized in the 
concept of public opinion to leave only the private sphere on the other side 
and no place for the old theory of arcana imperii, which one wanted to abol­
ish. Many a qualitative distinction, such as wisdom (sapientia) and prudence 
(prudentia), which had traditionally dominated and, like religion, had as­
signed themselves transcendental and immanent reference, were replaced by 
new concepts that tolerated only formal counterconcepts—for present pur­
poses, by the once estates-related concept of utility, with counterconcepts 
such as inutility (of monks, for example) or harmfulness. Or distinctions 
were virtually reversed. The “constitutions,” imperial decrees with quasi-­
legislative force that had been in distinction to the ancient, immutable leges 
(and that were still understood in this sense in the first half of the eighteenth 
century), now transmuted conversely into constitutional law that could not 
be amended, or could be amended only with great difficulty, whereupon the 
legislative machinery might itself be set in motion and the overall concept 
uncoupled from legitimation by age.
Many other examples could be presented, but attention has to be 
paid in each case to the forms, that is to say, to the distinctions and not to 
the meaning expressed in individual terms or concepts. We then see that 
and how ideas were set in motion by the outdifferentiation of functional 
system and their reflection theories. Another change in form is revealed 
if we analyze changes on the basis of a sociological hypothesis. It posits 
that stronger differentiation imposes stronger generalization of the sym­
bols by which the unity of what has been differentiated can be expressed.197 
From this point of view, the differentiation of functional systems—histori­
cally against the estates system and also against one another—triggered re­
markable generalizations that partly related to “human beings” and partly 

 
  Self-Descriptions
formulated principles to guide “the human being.” One example is the re­
shaping of morality on the basis of a theory of moral sensibilities, up to and 
including Adam Smith’s concept of sympathy. Another is the Enlighten­
ment movement on the basis of reason, which likewise addressed a general 
characteristic of all human beings. Or the French Revolution’s principles 
of liberty, equality, and fraternity. Or the singular version of concepts such 
as progress or history that established themselves in the eighteenth cen­
tury. And, last but not least, the transition of the fundamental business of 
thinking from the “philosophes” to “philosophy” and its establishment in 
academe. There is thus a great deal of evidence for the varied combination 
of differentiation and generalization. But this combination has not led to 
a theory of modern society, but only to a transitory semantics that was an 
uncovered check on the future, because it could not really observe and de­
scribe the societal order that was emerging.
This problem becomes even more acute if our analysis of functional 
differentiation and the formation of corresponding reflection theories is ac­
cepted. All functional systems assert claims to universality—but only for 
their respective domains. They no longer allow any inherent barriers to com­
munication, but it has to be produced in the system and reproduced from 
the products of the system. For a semantics addressing society as a whole, 
this means that the universalism of thematization potentials and the specifi­
cation of system references have to be combined. And these seem to be de­
mands that can hitherto be satisfied only through relativization, not through 
an adequate self-description of the overall system of society. At any rate, they 
sever the traditional links between ontology, bivalent logic, the conceptu­
ality of nature, and the technique of differentiation by ­species and genera.
10. Differences in Media Semantics
In many but not all respects, the functional differentiation of the so­
cietal system follows the schema set by the differentiation of different sym­
bolically generalized communication media. Many of the problems treated 
by the reflection theories of individual functional systems are therefore 
traced out by the media that have already differentiated out. This is true of 
the special problems that give rise to the formation of media and are at the 
same time functional problems of society, for example, the scarcity that in­
creases with economic development or the question of new knowledge and 

Self-Descriptions    
the growing dependence of society on ever more of it. Reflection theories 
similarly address problems posed by the most important codes—especially 
incongruence in relation to the morality code and the paradox-avoidance 
syndrome. But the differentiation of symbolically generalized communi­
cation media also engenders problems peculiar to modern society with­
out affecting the unity and autonomy of a subsystem. We shall be looking 
at two such problems, because they generate major structural impetus for 
­semantic particularities whose conflictuality preoccupies the description of 
modern society to its dissatisfaction. The “skewed growth” of society and 
the associated tendency toward structural self-criticism were addressed ear­
lier (vol. 1, chaps. 2–9).
Although the criticism of society in society tends to favor a single 
guiding formula, it involves various discrepancies. The first is the limits to 
technicization. The usual critique of technology avails itself of an aversion 
to mechanics, at times setting man against machine. But this is conceptu­
ally too nebulous for the purposes of societal theory. It is useful in simpli­
fying the self-description of society but gives no insight into what prompts 
it. We see the problem of technology in the isolation of its operations from 
an interfering charge of meaning, in, one could say, its unirritability.198 
Through this isolation, technology guarantees that operations can be re­
peated when appropriate. If a technologically planned operation cannot 
be repeated (does not “work”), something has to be repaired or replaced. 
In other words, technology is a mode of observation that operates with the 
distinction between whole and broken, and the same applies to cognitive 
or communicative operations that are so strongly technicized that errors 
(e.g., logical errors) can be discovered and eliminated. But why should one 
criticize this?199
This discussion clearly depends on simplification constraints that it 
generates itself, only to rebel against them. We have seen that there are 
­limits to the technicization of media codes and that owing to the nonlin­
earity of effects, the circulation of media symbols eludes all central control, 
especially in highly technicized codes. We now also know that no system of 
logic can be consistently closed; that systems with structured (organized) 
complexity, even on a small scale, have to be opaque to themselves and 
others; that the simulation of ecological conditions with even only a few 
variables produces unpredictable results, and so on. The difficulty there­
fore appears to lie more in the expectations made of technology that in its 

 
  Self-Descriptions
reality. However, differences in the growth rates of technicizable and non­
technicizable areas of operation also appear to give rise to criticism. The 
advent of calculating machines, one of the most impressive advances in 
technology, shows that problems that can be solved with the aid of such 
devices are tackled in preference to marginalized “ill-defined problems” 
that really no longer deserve to be called problems.
This question is illustrated by one of the most far-reaching undertak­
ings in the self-description of modern society: Marx’s critique of political 
economy. What was at issue was essentially a problem of technology (as we 
define the concept), namely, the simplification and isolation of “capitalist” 
calculation, which takes both material costs and labor costs into account 
in monetary terms, regardless of the fact that material and labor contribute 
to production in very different senses and with very different consequences 
for their exploitation. While this appears an intolerable injustice to the 
worker as a human being, it is difficult to see how a purely economic cal­
culation could be carried out differently, for example, to monitor the cost 
effectiveness of an investment or the mode of operation of an enterprise. If 
the critique of technology is accepted, it has to be—as the gigantic experi­
ment of socialism has clearly shown—at the cost of waiving information 
on economic efficiency.
Another example is Husserl’s critique of science.200 The “idealizations” 
of modern science, oriented on Galileo and Descartes, are accused of failing 
to do justice to the human need for meaning. In the atmosphere of crisis 
that prevailed in the 1930s with the worldwide spread of fascism and during 
reconstruction in the aftermath of World War II, this criticism may well 
have offered generalizable and politically exploitable perspectives.201 Mean­
while, however, both sides of the argument are disintegrating. The sciences 
have long since abandoned the linearities of the Cartesian model, and the 
idea that meaning is a human need can scarcely be verified on the street; it 
is more a gesture of embarrassment on the part of intellectuals who want 
to be good for something and help people suffering from loss of meaning.
This, it would seem, explains the schizophrenic attitude of modern 
society toward technology: technicization is rejected, with the full mean­
ing of human life in mind, while admitting that things are worse without 
technology. One is not satisfied with what can be achieved and therefore 
intensifies technological development, while criticizing the trend this sets 
off. Rightly so in both cases.

Self-Descriptions    
A second range of problems only becomes apparent if we accept cer­
tain conceptual dispositions. When presenting the different communica­
tion media, I stressed that there was a universalistic perspective in all cases; 
mostly on a specified basis, but sometimes attached to a special subject 
or special object. Typical cases use Parsons’s pattern variables universal­
ism and specificity, while the exceptions use the dichotomy of the pattern 
variable universalism/particularism. In such cases, the world relevance of 
orientation is based, not on certain aspects, whenever they occur, but on 
special subjects or objects, and then on all characteristics of these preferred 
elements. But this contradicts the universalistic and specific orientation 
usual in other domains.
All media differ in terms of reference problem and attribution constel­
lation. However, the distinction between specific-universalistic and particu­
lar justification for claims to validity adds a comparative dimension to this 
differentiation. Love and art regard themselves as counterstructural media. 
They offer protection and support, as it were, against the dominant char­
acteristics of modern society—against the economic necessity to work and 
exploit, against regulation by the state, against research that presses for tech­
nology. The threatened ego seeks refuge in love, revitalization in the fam­
ily, self-expression in art, or so at least it was hoped in the mid-­nineteenth 
century.202 The typical descriptions of this opposition approach it anthro­
pologically, contrasting intellect with feeling, and useful things with the free 
realization of individual human aspirations, for example. However, it soon 
became apparent—in criticism of romantic love, in reviving feminism, and 
above all in the growing self-doubts of art—that all was not well in this re­
spect. The passion of love became the pathology of family life, which could 
not be resolved in a chain of expected and presented proofs of love; and if 
art described the world of the citizen, it was in forms that ranged from mild 
irony to sarcastic parody. Anthropological interpretations of the problem 
disintegrated under these insights; they could at best relocate the conflict 
back into the human being. In this regard, too, the description of modern 
society culminates in a difference, indeed, an opposition, for which it can 
no longer offer an explanation.
This is the background against which religious revival movements 
can be understood, which can assume very heterogeneous forms: more 
Church organization and more symbolism among Catholics, greater dis­
tance from a purely cultural interpretation of religion among Protestants, 

 
  Self-Descriptions
receptivity to things Far Eastern, to mysticism and mediation, to the un­
conditional monotheism of Islam, to mention only a few. For this, too, 
there is no sociological explanation. But it is perhaps helpful to remember 
that the differentiation of symbolically generalized communication media 
had outflanked religion because neither the referential problems of indi­
vidual media nor the specification of the attribution constellation fitted 
in with it. Forms were obviously being experimented with without clearly 
innovative solutions being found. Here, too, the anthropological (or hu­
manistic) understanding of religion proves an obstacle. For unlike many 
other functional systems, religion now has to accept that one can live and 
die without religion. That religion is necessary can therefore be shown, if at 
all, only by analyzing societal communication. Otherwise, one can do no 
more than note that some believe and others do not, and that in the view 
of those who believe, believers are better off than unbelievers.
Religion, too, is a form. We can call this form “belief.” The other side 
is therefore “unbelief.” But unbelievers are unbelievers only for believers, 
not for themselves. This simple consideration also shows that, although re­
ligion can contribute to the self-description of society, it cannot impose its 
description as the only right one. One can observe and describe it at the 
level of second-order observation, but without using religious means of ex­
pression. Society itself is the only exception in this regard: it cannot be de­
scribed without using societal means of expression: that is to say, without 
communicating.
11. Nature and Semantics
The shift from what-questions to how-questions since the late Mid­
dle Ages is discussed in chapter 3 of volume 1 (“Evolution”) under the 
heading “Technology” (3.9). This switch in question form undermined all 
semantic specifications. It was the persistent cause of the erosion of the 
nature concept; and not only in what we would now call the natural sci­
ences. As soon as people began to admire the world without seeking re­
ligious constituents alone in it, wondering rather how the manifestations 
of the world came about and could if need be be produced, the context in 
which nature was referred to changed. In early modern times, reference to 
nature offered the assurance needed to go beyond what was familiar and 
beyond the achievements of antiquity. Francis Bacon provided the classi­

Self-Descriptions    
cal formulations. But the very success of the natural sciences now stimu­
lated cognitive efforts that, under the heading of “technology,” addressed 
how-questions themselves; going still further, they turned to the Kantian 
question of the conditions of possibility and the consequent distinction 
between empirical and transcendental questions. Thinking itself was then 
analyzed quasi-technically—for instance, [by Novalis] as “free successive 
isolating outside space.”203
Insofar as religious and political demands for conformity now led 
only to disputes,204 it seemed wise to keep the concept of nature out of 
these controversies and to reshape it as a semantic substrate of certainty 
now subject only to correction within science. It was now accepted that 
nature could be expressed in mathematical terms. It obeyed the logic of 
mathematical equations, which were reversible and made no causal judg­
ments. Equations are distinctions that make no difference. Passing from 
one side to the other must not be allowed to bring anything new but to 
serve only as a rule for the limits of variation. The theory of equilibrium, 
too, served in this sense to destroy information. Although deviation from 
equilibrium could occur empirically, it did nothing to change the equilib­
rium formula itself, merely pointing the way for a return to equilibrium. 
Thus equilibrium could now be considered a stable order, whereas in the 
Aristotelian tradition, it had been precisely the instability, the susceptibil­
ity to disturbance through minimal changes in weight on one side of the 
scales, that had attracted attention. The nascent calculus of probability also 
served to generate certainties independent of what occurred in the indi­
vidual case. All ignorance was externalized as an independent variable, as 
disturbance (not until Gödel was it realized that precisely consistency can 
be explained only by recourse to externalities). At the same time, the idea 
came to be accepted that everything that could be produced was in accor­
dance with nature, so that production could also be seen as a procedure of 
discovery and proof. Technology proved knowledge, whereas, conversely, 
doubt could be refuted by technology that worked.
It was inevitable that such formalization of nature semantics had an 
impact on the use of human nature as an argument. Already in the seven­
teenth century, we find the first moves toward switching the basis for de­
scribing society from nature to reflection, most impressively in Baltasar 
Gracián.205 Nature was disappointing. Contrary to what might have 
been expected if Providence were responsible, rather than chance, there 

 
  Self-Descriptions
was no pattern to the firmament.206 In order to fill the gap, the already 
well-­rehearsed understanding of art as the production of vain appearances 
[schöner Schein] was extended to everything that was produced. On the as­
sumption that truth could not hold its own in the world as it was, the prin­
ciple of deception was universalized—and turned against itself. The wise 
man had to escape deception by adapting to it. It was advisable to read 
every­thing that appeared in the mirror as the reverse of what was shown.207 
As to one’s own behavior, it was advisable to look, listen, and hold one’s 
peace; or, if this was not possible, to reflect on the deception in what one 
showed, and to overcome contingency through rhetorical means such as 
ambiguity, elegance, and paradoxization; or to hide by talking the way 
every­one does (without believing what one says). Only thus could one be 
a “person” in this world. But were there any such people? One would have 
to look for them with a lantern [as in Diogenes’ legendary search with a 
lantern in daylight for an honest man in ancient Athens]!208
This might well have been an extreme form, which had to be leveled 
down in the transition to moral sentimentalism and to the Enlightenment 
of the eighteenth century. But what it expressed, namely, the loss of trust 
in the determination of society by nature, remained a persistent motif in 
the search for substitute solutions. The impact on the description of soci­
ety can scarcely be exaggerated. In the mid-eighteenth century, the refer­
ential basis for self-descriptions of the societal system changed. The great 
natural-law syntheses had evoked nature in the sense of an invariant basis 
of being and of a basis of knowledge, which as self-knowing nature could 
guarantee orientation.209 But their function was also to separate natural 
history and rational construction and to deprive the still prevailing strat­
ificatory order of its legitimation as nature. In treating the natural equal­
ity of all human beings, Pufendorf, for example, stressed that individual 
human dignity was inherent in every human being, and that all differenti­
ation had to be attributed to civil law.210 This insistence on a nature-based 
self-interest of the individual, whatever his origins, was to be found above 
all in the British liberalism of a Locke, a Hume, a Lord Kames, to men­
tion only a few.211 But insofar as the theory of natural, innate, inalienable 
human rights gained ground, it also became clear that it was not suitable 
for interpreting existing law (which in the United States, for instance, still 
sanctioned slavery), but offered only an outlook on a future traced by con­
stitutional policy.212 This was why human rights could be proclaimed with­

Self-Descriptions    
out qualification. The theory of the state of nature and of its continued 
effects after the transition to a civil state remained a self-description that 
did not portray reality but sought to make criticism possible.213
The successor conceptuality appeared to lie in the notion of a criti­
cal age that was in a state of (historical) crisis and was therefore intent on 
critical self-assessment. In this conceptual turn, which could seek and find 
certainty only in self-observation, reference to nature was increasingly aban­
doned (which did not exclude its nostalgic reintroduction, for instance, in 
the form of admiration for the naturalness and authenticity of uncivilized 
peoples). It was eroded and replaced by a sense of culture and civilization 
geared to their symbolic, linguistic, and therefore mainly historical consti­
tution. Vico had shown the way, still on the basis of the rhetorical tradition. 
Rousseau’s Discours sur les sciences et les arts (1749) dismantled the tradi­
tional unity of morality and manners, thus decoupling the notions of civi­
lizational development and moral perfection.214 If morality could no longer 
be represented by the nobility or the “political” way of life in the city, it 
could also no longer be understood as human nature, let alone be expected 
as an outcome of history. By nature, the human being was no longer per­
fect (although corruptible). He was now only perfectible, and realizing his 
potential, as Rousseau’s Émile, ou De l’education(1762) was to show, called 
for extremely artificial measures, and was hence not to be expected to result 
from a natural history of society. Greater prospects of improvement also ad­
mitted greater skepticism. “Humanity therefore has the capacity for eternal 
improvement; but also hope?” Jean Paul asks.215 This signaled the dissolu­
tion of the old unity of sociality and morality, and it was to cost a great deal 
of effort to establish an ethics that decided the justification of moral judg­
ments. At about the same time in England, the controversy between the 
political groupings of the Whigs and the Tories demonstrated that a party 
needed “principles” if it was to hold its own against political opponents and 
distinguish itself from other parties; and this meant that principles had to 
face the question of who stood for them and in opposition to whom.216 
­Toward the end of the century, insights of this sort were presented in French 
linguistic usage as a research program under the heading “ideology.” In the 
meanwhile, the theory of innate (thus natural) ideas as the precondition for 
perception and cognition was replaced by language-based theories.
As far as language was concerned, Novalis had already reflected on the 
situation that had arisen, with its unperceived violence.217 Language played 

 
  Self-Descriptions
only with itself. Its purest form was chatter. If and only if one obeyed its 
inner potential was one capable of great thought. But this self-referential 
closure of language appeared to depend on participants not perceiving this 
and not only chatting but also wanting to say something specific. Talking 
and writing about society would then be no more than generating a lin­
guistic artifact, which was, however, possible only if it was not so meant.
The consequences of this switch from nature to signs and from an­
thropology to semiotics became clear only very gradually. They broke with 
an unmentioned precondition of the old semiotics and especially of rheto­
ric, which, although it had also distinguished between verba and res, had 
always assumed a natural continuum on which these two forms were given. 
Saussure was the first to recognize the difference between sign and signi­
fied as purely semiotic and to cut off all external reference. This meant not 
least that values, too, could be understood only as components of a distinc­
tion and not as valid in themselves; but also that all distinctions lost their 
unquestioned self-evidence and had to be seen as contingent conditions of 
observation and indication. And this meant that the self-description of so­
ciety had to switch from what-questions to how-questions. Its problem was 
then no longer what society was, but how it was described, by whom, and 
on the basis of what distinctions.
This very cursory sketch must suffice in examining the hypothesis 
that the prerequisites for the self-description of society and of individ­
ual functional systems were beginning to change without this necessarily 
showing in the terminology. This made it possible to continue talking in 
terms of societas civilis, civil society, economy, and the like while introduc­
ing the necessary modifications in a less radical manner. The concept of 
society now became receptive to primarily economic content, politics hav­
ing been attributed to the state. The economy was no longer understood 
in terms of household, but now in terms of trade, finally finding its focus 
in “economics” [Nationalökonomie]. The terminology of self-description 
did not have to take into account that, at much deeper levels of meaning, 
nature was at the same time dissolving into semantics, into language. One 
could still believe it possible to make correct statements, give accurate de­
scriptions, form substantive [sachhaltig] concepts. In his 1823 essay “Signa­
tur des Zeitalters” (Signature of the Age),Friedrich von Schlegel lamented 
the disintegration of all ties and certainties caused by the absolutization of 
party positions, the empty phrases of extremism [der Ultrageist], abstrac­

Self-Descriptions    
tion and thoughtlessness—only to place his hopes in religion, which for its 
part could not be allowed to become a party.218
There was thus little reason to assume that the switch from nature 
to self-reflecting semantics was set off only by the transition to the func­
tional differentiation of the societal system. For precisely the concepts that 
seek to absorb this transition vary in other contexts of meaning. It is more 
plausible to see the change as a consequence of printing—as the outcome 
of ever-broader interpretation of books by books accessible to all; the effect 
of a “self-reading of culture.”219 As we have seen, printing imposed a pref­
erence for novelty, even if only a new interpretation of old texts. Printed 
signs thus provided the point of departure for an expanding and diversi­
fying semantics, which ultimately led to the erosion of all necessary refer­
ences and could make do with self-reference. Society set itself up in the 
prison of its own language and from this perspective reflected on aprioris, 
on values, on axioms; which were, however, needed only to compensate 
for contingency, hence only to terminate its own interminability, only as 
hidden paradoxes.
12. Temporalizations
It has often been noted that the modern age has changed the con­
ceptuality of time with which it describes the world and society in the 
world.220 With regard to historical (societal) time, it was not until the Re­
naissance that a clear distinction was drawn between present and past. This 
allowed the past to be segmented into historical epochs and opened the 
present to what was different, divergent, new. There was then a great deal 
to observe and report. Traditional notions of time deformed under the 
pressure of having to take account of the flood of novelty and the grow­
ing need for decision-making; greater variety had to be accommodated in 
time. Nevertheless, neither the exact form nor the depth or reorientation 
or how it relates to sociostructural developments have been adequately ex­
plained. It is often assumed that the description of time switched from 
cyclical and linear notions to the concept of an open future. The basis 
for orientation was accordingly seen as a shift from experience to expec­
tation, and hence from past to future. In the transition to modern times, 
things thus lost their names and their memory, that is to say, the property 
of rendering their origins visible—be they in nature or creation. They no 

 
  Self-Descriptions
longer reminded human beings of beginnings that explained forms. The 
habit of solving present problems by critical examination of the past (in 
­England there was a special association of experts, the Elizabethan Society 
of Antiquaries) also lost ground; more attention was instead devoted to the 
(future) utility of pending decisions. Far from excluding greater complex­
ity, this tended to foster it in what could now be addressed as (nonbind­
ing) “history.” Eternity (to be interpreted by religion) now gave way to 
the infinite succession of the finite. Chronometry was reformed, backward 
calculation to a past without a fixed beginning (“before Christ”) was intro­
duced, world time [later universal time] was established in the nineteenth 
century. People spoke of acceleration and concentrated more on structural 
change. And the result, the telos, of movements, procedures, actions was 
then not determined simply by the perfection provided for by nature; it 
depended essentially on the historical situation in which the process took 
place, and on whether “Fortuna” intervened or not. All this is apparent 
from the careful analysis of sources, but still requires interpretation in the 
framework of a theory of society.
The alternatives of linear and cyclical as spatial metaphors conceal 
the decisive point. They suggest moving toward other places in space. 
However, the switch to primacy of the time dimension meant that society 
was moving toward a state of the world that did not yet exist. This direction 
was toward the unbounded, but the assumption that this movement nec­
essarily constituted progress (susceptible of intention) hid the unknown­
ness of the future.
If we proceed on the basis of the theory of self-referential, autopoi­
etic systems, the first question that arises is how such systems distinguish 
time in time. That they operate temporally does not, after all, mean that 
they observe time by means of distinctions and, if so, which distinctions. 
In the European society of the late Middle Ages, a concept of time estab­
lished itself that was to hold sway for centuries to come, partly following 
the Aristotelian concept (time as measure of a movement in relation to a 
before and an after) and partly determined by the introduction of mechan­
ical clocks.221 Distinguishing time in time was understood as an (iterative) 
calculation that could be carried out uniformly from all points in time: 
in Aristotelian terms as number, measure, chronology. This presupposed 
what was to be measured in the form of motion, flow, process. It was well 
adapted to the human faculty of perception, since human beings could 

Self-Descriptions    
perceive things as the same even when they passed from a state of rest to 
motion or from motion to a state of rest. And this time—as ­tempus—could 
be distinguished from the eternity of God, for which all points in time 
were always present. Residual problems such as the logical and ontologi­
cal status of the moment remained unsolved, but were unable to gener­
ate a competing description of time; and Augustinian reflection on time, 
which amounted to ignorance, was unable to solve the practical problems 
of temporally coordinating human activities, and was abandoned to theo­
logical contemplation. The double distinction between scale and motion 
on the one side and values on the other remained the predominant model, 
even though time itself, and with it St. Augustine’s question, disappeared 
in these distinctions as the middle they could not name.
The transition from the Middle Ages to modern times did not fun­
damentally change anything in how time was distinguished in time. In 
early modernity (one often speaks globally of “Renaissance”),222 the topic 
of time was doubtless dramatized. On the one hand, time (still in the sense 
of tempus) was the great opponent that, in the battle to attain one’s goals, 
focused attention on points in time, on the economic handling of time, 
on avoiding time loss, on acceleration. However, this very circumstance 
meant that people were so preoccupied with time in everyday awareness 
from politics to the world of business that time or its representative For­
tuna was the real mistress of events.223 Time appeared to be a power in the 
world, the antagonist of prudentia. But all this played out before the grad­
ually disintegrating counterconcept of eternity, duration, rest. Precisely 
this dramatization of time could not escape cosmographical distinctions 
such as rest/motion or continuity/change. Even Heidegger’s reflection on 
and Derrida’s critique of its metaphysical presuppositions have not pro­
duced a radically different concept of time.
There may well be deep-seated reasons to do with perception and 
communication or with the practical coordinative advantages of a sche­
matized notion of time. We are then all the more justified in asking what 
changed within this semantics when society switched from relatively re­
gional and hierarchical differentiation forms to functional differentiation. 
The disruptive factor now appeared to be the experience and increasing ap­
preciation of novelty. For novelty was easy to date, that is to say, to accom­
modate in time, but it could not be explained in terms of its own origins, 
in terms of “before.” It thus remained an irritating provocation that sub­

 
  Self-Descriptions
sequently transferred to an abundance of supplementary concepts such as 
genius, creativity, innovation, invention (instead of finding), and finally to 
a “progressist” understanding of society.
But why did novelty impose itself in the observation and description 
of the societal system?
At the beginning of the sixteenth century, it was still generally as­
sumed that the old was better than the new and that efforts had to con­
centrate on restoring the knowledge and skills of the ancients. This was 
the case with the Renaissance, with the Protestant Reform movement, and 
with the humanism of an Erasmus.224 It seems that far-reaching changes 
occurred only in the course of the sixteenth century, despite perpetuation 
of the notion that the present was an age of decline. One starting point 
could have been that the technology of the printing press made informa­
tion available on an unprecedented scale, relatively independently of the 
traditional controls exercised by the Church or the extensive regional con­
tact networks of nobility and trade. But information was information only 
if it was new. It could not be repeated. This was accompanied by rapid de­
velopment in the arts and sciences, and here, too, by the dissemination 
of information about them, which was in turn a condition for further in­
novation. Before all discussion about the primacy of the old or the new, 
which in the question of rank still obeyed the old structures,225 it was pos­
tulated that novelty appeals as novelty. But why? Probably because infor­
mation and therefore an incentive for communication could be expected 
only from novelty. God Himself, one hears, endowed nature with variety 
in order to make man’s exile after the expulsion from Paradise a pleasant 
one;226 there was then nothing to be said against human beings using their 
skills to provide novelty. The lamentation about unrest and instability still 
prevailing in the sixteenth century calmed down with consolidation of the 
territorial state.
The appreciation of novelty was limited. Both religion and politics 
saw themselves threatened by new developments and rejected them.227 In 
Gracián’s view, wisdom lay in finding novelty in the familiar rather than 
falling under the spell of the new and taking a disparaging view of the 
old.228 In the theory of art, too, the Platonic-Aristotelian principle of im­
itation still prevailed, however attenuated and distinguished from mere 
copying. As imitation, art continued to espouse a concept of nature that 
understood nature as imitating itself.229 But one could obtain information 

Self-Descriptions    
and participate in communication only by going beyond mere repetition 
of what already existed as art or nature.
That novelty was spoken of in connection with “pleasing” or “ap­
preciation” and the production of novelty was attributed to nature-given 
“genius” shows that conceptual clarification was lacking. One made do 
by simply building on to the given order. The switch from Latin origo to 
original also merely concealed a predicament by mystifying attribution. 
The old idea, important for theories of nobility, that origin was always 
and remained present, however the descendants of good families behaved, 
was abandoned with the new insistence on originality. Jurisprudence, for 
example, replaced invocation of a founding law of the legal order or, in 
England, of the legitimacy of the Norman Conquest by reference to the 
historical process itself. This meant not least that the process remained 
open to reform;230 but reform had now itself to be justified. But where did 
originality, inspiration, novelty come from? The answer would probably 
have to be: from the unmarked space, from the not observed and not indi­
cated world. Information would then be new precisely when it could not 
be attributed, not legitimated, not expected, and not justified—or, as we 
find in eighteenth-century theories of taste, only through dubious revamp­
ing by infertile “connoisseurs” and critics.231
New, of course, were the discovery of new parts of the world and the 
increasing influence of legislation on the law; new were improvements in 
agricultural techniques and in transport links in Europe; reforms, for ex­
ample, to the school system and (since the second half of the eighteenth 
century) to the prison system; and not least the Enlightenment, with a ra­
tionality that was no longer natural but expected of human beings. New 
was the extent of public debt as a form of discovering new financial instru­
ments; new was the extent of production oriented on the market and no 
longer on known customers. At the latest in the eighteenth century, peo­
ple could be said to have become accustomed to innovation; witness the 
spread of the idea that progress was to be expected as a normal trend in re­
cent history. That the appreciation of novelty culminated in an interest in 
information is shown not least by two centuries of struggle, from Milton 
to [Karl Theodor] Welcker [1790–1869], against censorship and for free­
dom of the press—borne from the start and down to the critical debate on 
“mass media” by a positive attitude toward “public opinion” and toward 
critically secured information. In other words, there was confidence that 

 
  Self-Descriptions
society could handle information about itself critically; the warnings of 
­Ecclesiastes were forgotten.232 This gave hope for the future.
The effect of this semantic career of the novelty concept lay not in its 
being understood, and how it was understood, but rather in how the no­
tion of the present changed, where alone novelty could be new. The pres­
ent was no longer the presence of eternity in time; and no longer merely 
the situation in which one could decide for or against sin to gain salva­
tion or suffer damnation. The present was nothing other than the difference 
­between past and future.
Observing time on the basis of this schema changed the meaning 
of both past and future. The Christian tradition had already seen the 
past from the vantage point of the present and had not resigned itself 
to accepting it the way it had happened. The doctrine of the forgive­
ness of sins institutionalized in confession clearly showed that it was not 
­remembering/forgetting that was at issue, but that something in the past 
was to be changed. This freedom toward the past changed when the ori­
entational focus of time disposition shifted more and more to the future. 
The question was, then, how the past could be understood in a way that 
left the present latitude for making decisions; the world was not simply 
the way it was on account of its past, but offered alternatives among which 
one could choose.
In almost imperceptible shifts, this gave rise to what we call tradi­
tion.233 The past was no longer obviously present. It was separately substan­
tiated, symbolized, recommended, and left to a communication that could 
be accepted or rejected. What had previously been self-evident was now 
specially presented. Handwoven cloth and handknitted pullovers were 
praised for their quality and offered for sale in special stores.
Furthermore, the past became history. With consideration for the 
then unknown future (which is now known), it was radically distinguished 
from the present. This destroyed any notion of linear continuum. Time 
was then no longer the content of a continuum of events that God alone 
could read simultaneously. For this reason, the future could no longer be 
understood as a part of time that was coming to us and whose actualization 
we had to wait for (with an eye on the clock or calendar). The future was 
the construction—generated in time, running and shifting with time—
of still unknown meanings, and was in this sense, not only different from 
what was past, but also new. Novelty (or information) was therefore the 

Self-Descriptions    
factor that made it possible to distinguish future from past and to observe 
time on the basis of this distinction.
But since novelty could not enter the present without losing its prop­
erty of newness, and, indeed, since novelty could not be remembered, but 
could at best reconstructed as a characteristic of a past future, time continu­
ally lost itself in itself. As difference it remained unstable and hence provoked 
acceleration.234 As past—because nothing could be changed there—redun­
dancy was introduced into time; as future, by contrast, variety. It was not 
the cosmos of essences or nature that determined the point of departure for 
the future but what as past had become present. Via future, however, un­
certainty was introduced into the same present; the system could oscillate 
between more positive and more negative assessments, between hopes and 
fears. In this sense, the French Revolution represents the present par excel­
lence, also and precisely because it became past itself and could be reactu­
alized only as controversy or as a further revolution. In practical terms, this 
means that only the new was essential, since only through unceasing nov­
elty could uncertainty for the present be eliminated and postponed until an 
ever-new future. And this, too, was paradigmatically demonstrated to the 
whole of society by its art system.
If the past was no longer the present, if the Fall of Man was no lon­
ger a sin, the future could also no longer be understood as redemption.235 
Time lost its meaning in salvation history [Heilsgeschichte]. It could no 
longer “presentiate” this meaning, but in every present had to be prepared 
for what was past or future for a given present to change. The novel of the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and forms of entertainment deriving 
from it chose the unknownness of the future as the principle of text or­
ganization—but with the prospect, if not of salvation, then of resolving 
suspense within the same text.236 It is certainly not by accident that this nar­
rative form now plays a role only in the entertainment sector.237 We are no 
longer confident that the past stored as text also contains a guarantee for 
the resolution of suspense.238 Each present always forms a new, again un­
known future. This makes it possible to deposit the problems of the pres­
ent in the future without meeting resistance. The future now guarantees 
that the world is and remains incomprehensible.
The present is thus the unity of the difference between past and fu­
ture, and for precisely this reason the unity of the difference between re­
dundancy and variety. But this is also the very condition for the possibility 

 
  Self-Descriptions
of observing novelty; for novelty always presupposes redundancies that 
make it recognizable as variation; even the newness of novelty is redun­
dant, since experience has always shown what it is about, and since the 
ever-same counterconcept “old” has been available to distinguish what is 
new. Precisely this explains the aura of enigma that surrounds the new and 
the innovator (the genius, the inventor, the creative entrepreneur). It in­
volves introducing information from the unmarked space, making the un­
repeatable present repeatable, information in the sense of the distinction 
that makes a difference, observing time from the perspective of the present, 
which is in itself, not time, but the blind spot that has to be presupposed 
if time is to be observed at all. In other words, it involves the resolution of 
the paradox of the unity of the different on the basis of the easy-to-handle 
distinction between old and new.239
Apart from the spread of new information and the need to main­
tain supplies—for new information is old as soon as it is known—it must 
be taken into account that printing allowed projections of the future to be 
communicated better than ever before. In itself, the consciousness knows 
nothing of the future. Instead it uses “anticipatory reactions.” Time mea­
surement makes empty expectations possible. Oral communication can 
warn or coordinate and go beyond self-evident repetition, but only within 
a very short time horizon, within sight, so to speak. Handwritten commu­
nication was also more suitable for keeping records than for projections. 
Only with the advent of printing did the transition to communication 
about an imaginary but substantive future seem to become possible; not 
immediately but with broader impact only in the eighteenth century, when 
the future was needed to compensate for the loss of the past. The tempor­
alization of utopias dates from the second half of the eighteenth century,240 
but the saying that the present was pregnant with the future permeated the 
century—so that the French Revolution could be understood as the real­
ization of a prediction.241
The present thus became an event, a deed, at any rate, a borderline 
between past and future. But as the source point of the new, it could be un­
derstood only on the basis of this difference. It was the unity of this differ­
ence, and thus a paradoxical point of reference that defeated all observation. 
For, on the one hand, it was the sole and always given temporal basis of op­
erations, and to this extent “eternal”; but it had this property only because 
it passed continuously and had to be autopoietically renewed, which took 

Self-Descriptions    
place with great reliability. This paradox corresponds to the experience that 
events (as opposed to structures) are the only forms that cannot change be­
cause they pass too quickly. It is this very paradox that is unfolded by the 
distinction between past and future. The semantics of time then teaches us 
that the present is nothing other than the distinction between past and fu­
ture. What was distinguished in the metaphysical-­religious thinking of old 
Europe, namely, the present as the presence of the world and the placeless 
moment, the atopon,242 now collapsed. Although entire epochs could still 
be described as “present” time, it did not prevent its disintegration into 
­micro-units and finally into a concept of mere transition from past to future.
But if this is so, what is left to the present but flight into inactuality? 
In any case, modern time semantics—distinctive in this alone—­resolves the 
time paradox by describing the present as changeable, volatile, insubstantial; 
and not, which would also be possible, as enduring actuality and as sole, con­
tinually renewed temporal locus for the operations of the consciousness and 
communication—from whence, in keeping with the requirements of con­
sistency, past and future are recursively constructed. The uncertainty thus 
generated is in the first place diverted to the figure of the subject. Strangely 
enough, birth and death were left out of account. Reflection on the subject 
was set to infinity, its use of signs became ironic, its relation to nature com­
pensatory, its authenticity therefore problematic. These, at any rate, were 
the forms with which romanticism confronted the situation, while dispens­
ing itself from formulating it as a theory of society in terms of the logically 
impossible concept of “intersubjectivity.”243
If the present was thus understood as difference, as the noncongru­
ence of past and future, it would seem obvious to mark it as a decision, re­
gardless of how and to whom this decision was then attributed. This could 
not mean that lost congruence could be regained in this way, but rather that 
a selectively recalled past was integrated into a selectively projected future. 
The decision then saw things as if the past presented it with alternatives to 
choose from, and as if the future was only unknown because what decisions 
would be made in the present and future presents was not yet determined. 
Each decision was then simultaneously the beginning of a new narrative 
and enabled forecasts, although it was not known how decisions were to 
be taken in future in the light of the consequences of the decision.244 If we 
were to elaborate a theory of time on this basis, we could probably manage 
completely without identifying time with the aid of the distinction between 

 
  Self-Descriptions
what is in flux and what is fixed. It would then be the semantic equivalent 
of the continual resolution and recombination of the unity of its own para­
dox, of the unity of the differentness [Verschiedenheit] of past and future.
If we understand time as the continuous reproduction of a difference 
between past and future, this gradually undermines the notion of a causal 
determination of future states by past states.245 The observation schema cau­
sality reacts in various ways. It retreats into the modeling of scientific “ex­
planations.” But explanatory models are never complete. The more variables 
they include, the more they have to operate with “estimates” of their em­
pirical manifestation. Ultimately, they offer nothing more than programs 
for future work on explanations. Moreover, it is now clear that causality 
demands decisions on attribution, since not all causes can ever be assigned 
to all effects (and vice versa).246 Selecting the causal factors to be taken into 
and left out of account is thus the task of the observers who use the causal 
schema. One must thus observe these observers if one wishes to establish 
what causes produce what effects, and no “nature” will now guarantee that 
everyone agrees. Causal judgments are “political” judgments.
These reflections on the theory of time go far beyond what is available 
on the subject and what has been possible in the way of self-­description 
of modern society. However, one noteworthy, obvious consequence is 
that modern society describes itself as modern; and this epithet expresses 
a value judgment. In the older linguistic usage of rhetoric, the concepts 
of antiqui/moderni referred to persons rather than to epochs, had applied 
only to people of the past or living contemporaries, and had waived any 
assessment of their deeds.247 This changed with the new understanding of 
history. Precisely because history was lost and the future uncertain, society 
saw itself called upon to evaluate itself with respect to its past and future; 
and this evaluation could be positive or negative, optimistic or pessimistic, 
or, as with Rousseau, both at the same time. Already in the seventeenth 
century, we find the insight that history determines the possibilities of ac­
tion, and that the ancients, if they could act today, would not be able to re­
peat themselves; they had had their possibilities and used them up.248 The 
modernity of the discussion of modernity culminates in the difficulty of 
finding out what this time dependence is all about.
Until well into the modern period, the semantics employed had 
been determined by basic ontological assumptions and bivalent logic. For 
humans, the ontological embeddedness of time conceptuality is (and re­

Self-Descriptions    
mains) plausible because, as we have seen, human beings (as opposed to 
some animals) assume that an object remains identical when it passes from 
a state of rest to motion, and when it again attains a state of rest. The idea 
of the (being) thing therefore cuts across the difference between motion 
and nonmotion, it outlasts crossing the boundary in this distinction and 
thus points to a ground of being that transcends this distinction. Perceived 
in motion, time can therefore be understood only as a subphenomenon of 
the world of being. This is not called into question even by the historiciza­
tion of notions of time. Hegel’s metaphysics of spirit, with its strong orien­
tation on time and history, still used a concept of motion or process, and 
came up with a concept of spirit [Geist] that was still unambiguous to the 
extent that, at the end of history, it takes all distinctions into itself and only 
excludes exclusions. For the rest, the limits of this semantics are marked as 
irrationalities. However, limits to including this description in description 
are also set that we would no longer necessarily accept.
If these limits are crossed in the stated manner, the correlations 
sought between semantic and sociostructural aspects of modernity can 
also be shown. Unlike the being schema of tradition, the time schema 
provides greater scope for combining redundancy and variety. It can react 
to the immense increase in the irritability of societal communication, a 
consequence of functional differentiation.249 It reveals the consequences 
of social positions no longer being grounded in origins but only in ca­
reers.250 There is then no more jockeying to defend one’s own position, 
but there are struggles to get ahead and avoid falling back. Guarantees of 
the status quo are demanded only in the welfare-state context and are con­
stantly undermined by innovation. Time clears all positions, so to speak, 
since as positions in present time, they pass away. The spatial metaphor of 
fixed positions that can be occupied and appropriated is replaced by a time 
metaphor in which the danger of displacement is succeeded by the risk of 
landing in unfavorable positions owing to decisions;251 and “history” con­
sequently no longer serves to legitimize occupied positions, but to best the 
claims of others in competition for future positions. The now somewhat 
derided generation of 1968 offers a good example; they can no longer hold 
their own as society but only in organizations.
As we have seen, these changes in time semantics have often been 
described as the linearization of time and compared with a circular sense 
of time. This needs to be explained, if not corrected. The mere compari­

 
  Self-Descriptions
son ­between line and circle does not suffice. If continuous innovation and 
sharp breaks between past and future have to be worked into time seman­
tics, time has to be developed into a schema compatible with inconsisten­
cies; or, more exactly, into a schema that renders inconsistencies compatible 
with one another as “history.”252 A brief, as it were, vivid, time memory 
(going back no more than two or three generations) then suffices, which 
merges into an undated, always present past, just as the creation of the 
world or the origins of the family mean nothing more than the presence 
of these beginnings. Instead, time has to be conceived of as measurable dis­
tance, as a dated line, as temporalized complexity in which many different 
things can be registered, as long as they occur in succession. With the result 
that the past becomes more distant and nonbinding as “time progresses.” In 
a certain sense, time itself then confirms what one learns anyway: that the 
origin and perpetual nature of things no longer give any hold.
These changes in time semantics will be irreversible for the foresee­
able future because the mass media as sui generis functional system have 
taken over the description of the world and society. The mass media sys­
tem operates in all program sectors (news/reporting, advertising, entertain­
ment) under the information/noninformation code. Every utterance that 
is selected as information automatically becomes noninformation, for in­
formation cannot be repeated. Although the negative value of the code also 
serves reflection in that it steers the selection of information, it also swallows 
all information, transforming it through the mere fact of its utterance into 
noninformation, thus obliging the system to offer novelty from moment to 
moment. This obviously applies for news and reporting relative to a hypo­
thetical state of knowledge. But advertising, too, can obtain brand loyalty 
only through constant novelty, that is to say, redundancy only through vari­
ety; and entertainment has to construct a space of self-generated uncertainty 
if it is to resolve this uncertainty through information.253 One might well 
complain about such “restless” time. But critical rejection of this experience 
of time has in turn to use the mass media if it is not to waive communica­
tion and remain unnoticed. The opposite does not need to be forbidden, it 
simply no longer occurs. The prevailing time schema no more requires the 
support of values or norms than the being schema of tradition did. But un­
like in the case of tradition, one hesitates to consider this reasonable.
If this is the form schema with which what we know is generated 
and reproduced, time is not only thematically but to a far greater degree 

Self-Descriptions    
also operationally involved in the self-description of society and its world. 
One can no longer really maintain that identities, whether objects or sub­
jects, are preset with respect to time. They are rather constructed and re­
produced in the midst of time and each at the present moment in order 
to generate temporal connections for a certain time, mediating between 
the extremely different time horizons of the past (memory) and the future 
(oscillation in all distinctions relevant to observation). Both philosophical 
and physical theories of time (Heidegger, Derrida, Einstein) propose a cor­
responding switch to the modern time orientation.
However, this would run contrary to the experience of time that 
guides human perception. It can well be described as an artifact or an il­
lusion; but one cannot expect human beings to distinguish between illu­
sion and reality in perception or attitude. And the mass media in particular 
have to take this into account.
If the centuries-long conversion of temporal structures in terms of 
the past/future difference schema has taken place as described, it would in 
effect anticipate an operational concept of system formation. The present 
of current operational events then has a double function: it is, first, the 
point at which the differences between past and future meet and through 
the reentry of time into time have to be brought into relation with each 
other (which involves interpretation with regard to things future); and, 
second, it is the point in time at which everything that happens happens 
simultaneously. Time is understood both as simultaneity and as succes­
sion, without society “having” time to seek a fundamental resolution of 
this paradox.
13. Flight into the Subject
Modern individualism, and above all the idea of the equality of in­
dividuals, is so familiar to us that we need to consider it from distance if 
we are to recognize the evolutionary improbability of this disposition. The 
prime meaning of “individual” is indivisible. In this sense, even a plate is 
an individual. The limitation of the concept to the human being that took 
place in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries meant initially that the 
individual brings in the same personal characteristics in different situations, 
and thus guarantees a certain social predictability. The individual does not 
become a quite different one with every change of scene.

 
  Self-Descriptions
Sociology can assume that the individuality of all, even unknown, 
human beings is a cultural artifact that can be explained neither biologi­
cally nor psychologically. The singularity of the body and consciousness of 
each human being and the operational closure of the corresponding auto­
poiesis is a self-evidence presupposed in all variations of societal history. 
The brain of each human being also differs from that of every other; there 
are no two people who have identical brains. But it was only in modern 
times that being an individual came to be institutionalized in a way that 
allowed, indeed, expected, individuals to behave accordingly. “This myth 
leads people to posture as individuals.”254 Only now did the meaning of 
“individual” shift from (the literal sense of) indivisibility to uniqueness.
That nature had endowed the individual with his own (and there­
fore differing) perceptions, opinions, and rights to act had already led to 
the radicalization of problem definitions in the seventeenth and early eigh­
teenth centuries, but the solutions initially remained those offered by tra­
dition. Hobbes pointed to the necessity for political authority, Berkeley to 
God as the guarantor for the relation of perception to reality. It was not 
until the last third of the eighteenth century that people began to base the 
autonomy of functional areas—and this meant, above all, their indepen­
dence of transcendental explanations—on the individuality of those acting 
within them: for the economy, witness Adam Smith, and for politics, the 
French Revolution’s concept of the volonté générale.
The astonishing thing is that the historical uniqueness, indeed, singu­
larity, of thus expecting unique and hence equal individuality had already 
been recognized in the eighteenth century, even before neo-­humanist sub­
jectivism came into its own—as when Herder remarked that, in his time, 
“everyone was a god unto himself in the world.”255 What is inevitably sur­
prising to the sociologist, however, is that this individualization comes 
to bear at the level of mutual perception and has to be upheld against 
all the evidence. Whoever behaves differently, or wishes to perceive dif­
ferently, must be able to activate resentment. Despite all the spectacu­
lar distinctions that present themselves—of age, gender, race, appearance, 
familiarity/unfamiliarity, facial expression, situational references (“atmo­
sphere”)—we perceive individual human beings first of all as individuals 
and thus as equal, and thus not presorted by some sort of classification. 
Even infants and beggars, even show business celebrities, even robbers, 
even drunks, even servants. If we assert against the evidence that all indi­

Self-Descriptions    
viduals are equal, we have to be able to say in what regard they are equal; 
and this, once again against all evidence, is covered by the concept of free­
dom. Individuals are equal and free at least by nature. All facts to the con­
trary find themselves on the critics’ hit list.
Against such background assumptions, the interaction context may 
then differentiate what interest focuses on and how specific relevance is set. 
However, in all older societal formations, this must have been different, and 
Tocqueville, for one, had registered the fact with appropriate astonishment. 
As Balzac (and after him Pierre Bourdieu) have shown, inequality now had 
to be developed by manipulating differentiation symbols, and therefore re­
quired continually reactivated attention. Many reasons can be found for 
this change—for instance, the extent to which each one of us has to do 
with strangers who are not of interest to us. What is decisive is to retain, in 
the face of the normality and currency of this assumption of equality and 
freedom, a sense of the evolutionary, counterintuitive improbability of this 
advance and for its far-reaching social-revolutionary consequences. Com­
pared with this fundamental state of affairs, all semantic, terminological is­
sues are certainly of secondary importance. But they supply the material 
with which modern society describes itself.
Among the hardly ever stressed but probably most important reasons 
why the modern age favors the individual is that individuals are conceived of 
as persons, and in this form they can symbolize the unknownness of the future. 
One can know persons—but cannot know how they will act. This peculiar 
integration of past and future is institutionalized in the semantic form of 
­individual/person and in the social concession of freedom. Obviously, this is 
at the cost of security in society.256 How people act will depend not least on 
how other people act. Social interdependencies multiply uncertainty about 
the future. Society thus confirms for itself the intensified disconnection be­
tween past and future, which it generates through system differentiation but 
then makes plausible in the form of persons. Whereas the ethically highly 
praised person is confirmed in his freedom of action, the latent function of 
modern individualization/personalization appears to lie rather in the plausi­
bilization of the time relations that societal evolution has produced and now 
has to put up with. This also explains the astounding expectation of origi­
nality, uniqueness, genuineness of self-interpretation [Selbstsinngebung] with 
which the modern individual finds himself confronted, and which he can 
hardly meet other than by copying individuality patterns.

 
  Self-Descriptions
The idea of then describing the (human) individual as “subject” 
(subiectum) did not arise suddenly, and it was not a mere construction of 
philosophical theory. The preparations can be traced back to antiquity—­
especially in the concept of the soul and its thinking part (which also 
thought about thinking). In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, tacti­
cal and inner individuality were split as a consequence of structural changes 
in society, of the need to renounce the natural security afforded by the fam­
ily, of complex patron-client relationships in the nobility and upper middle 
classes, of the expansion of trade, of money crises, of novel career oppor­
tunities at court or in territorial administrations. Orientation on the good 
(le bien), which others could also assess, was replaced by orientation on 
what pleased (plaisir), and this could be assessed only by each for himself. 
The use of signs lost the certainty of congruence with an existing reality 
and became a means of presentation.257 Interests therefore had to be known 
if simulation and dissimulation were to be seen through. A person owed 
what he was to control of his appearance. Self-reference and other-refer­
ence diverged because self-selection and other-selection had to converge, 
as discussed earlier.258 The inside/outside distinction accordingly shifted 
gradually to the place previously occupied by the above/below distinction.
Initially, it was therefore the problem of the uncertainty of social sign 
use and its shifting reference that drew attention to the subject. One had to 
rely on mere appearances, on following fashion, but this could not be for 
real! From the perspective of the societal context, a theory of the subject 
developed to refill meaning, and reflection (self-reference) was the figure 
expected to accomplish this.
From the seventeenth century on, there were various semantic tech­
niques that took their distance from traditional social distinctions. One 
technique (only prominent for a time) was argumentation more geometrico 
[in the geometrical manner] in ethics and social theory. In the eighteenth 
century, this was followed by the Enlightenment discourse. In both cases 
it was a question of the purity of communication undisturbed by anything 
concrete.259 Such procedures could manage without emphasizing the in­
dividuality of the individual. From the point of view of replacing ties to 
traditional divisions, they were functional equivalents. In the context of 
societal self-description, however, a more sustained impact with greater 
empathy was to be had by concentrating in ethics and social theory on 
the positive or negative self-reference of the individual, on self-love, self-­

Self-Descriptions    
interest, self-reflection. In art and literature the individual saw himself por­
trayed as observed observer—as observer who was obliged to observe how 
he was observed. The only guarantee left to him was the Cartesian self-
reassurance of the facticity of this situation: the Cartesian concept of the 
thinking ego, which could be certain of its thinking (at least this) regard­
less of whether what it was thinking was true or false.260 Some time later, 
the individual was to abandon the claim to right thinking, renounce all so­
cial rank and even moral justification, and want only to be different from 
the others. In Rousseau’s words: “Si je ne vaux pas mieux, au moins je suis 
autre.”261 But in this, fatally, all individuals were alike.
If the semantics of individuality was used to undermine old social 
distinctions, however, this had far-reaching consequences. If individuals 
were conceived of as centers of their world, as Leibnitzian monads or as 
subjects, this imposed a radically new understanding of the social. It could 
no longer be assumed that human qualities of being differed depending 
on whether people lived in the country or the city, and on the social stra­
tum into which they had been born. It now had to be explained how social 
order was possible despite the individual subjectivity of human beings—be 
it in terms of social contract, mutual reflection, or a “transcendental” re­
sidual substance common to all. But these assumptions no longer engen­
dered a theory of society.
Freedom and equality were in the first place “natural” attributes of 
human individuals. Since they were found not to have been realized in 
civil societies, they were upgraded to “human rights,” which could com­
mand respect—up to and including the human rights fundamentalism of 
our day. They were accepted as substitute symbols for the unity of society 
that had become inconceivable, and there was no longer a background 
semantics that could put them in their place. They reduced ties that had 
once been recognized as religion to something external, indifferent, that 
had to be accepted under duress or because it was opportune. Religious 
writers of the nineteenth century were to lament this loss and, in vain, to 
combat the collective ideology of individualism.262
It was then only a small step to recognizing the inaccessibility of the 
consciousness and above all the sentiments of others. But social theory 
then had also to take account of this radical alienness of the other. This 
is precisely what Adam Smith’s Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) sought 
to do.263 Smith waived any presupposition of natural (generic) similarities 

 
  Self-Descriptions
and explained the coming into being of sociality (which he called sympa­
thy) in terms of the observation of the situations in which the other be­
haves; and thus in terms of the observation of his observation.264 In other 
words, it was not a question of copying attitudes, which would be incom­
patible with individualism, but of copying differences.
A second, just as important (and just as often forgotten) consequence 
was the renunciation of absolute criteria. For every recourse to such criteria 
would lead to differences of opinion being seen as rationally solvable, and 
to the inevitable conclusion that some people know better and reason bet­
ter than others. This would, also inevitably, mean having recourse to in­
stitutionally guaranteed inequalities; the whole maneuver would therefore 
amount to recycling inequality.
Political liberalism of English provenance could not solve this prob­
lem. Although it proceeded on the assumption that common sense, taste, 
and historical worth could be abused, it was unable to name the criteria 
needed to decide between true and false. It denied “innate” ideas, socially 
differentiated by birth. Reason was accessible to all. But this new social 
universalism also meant that each person had to make an effort and that 
indolence and a lack of educational drive were legitimate reproaches. This 
legitimated a new, self-confident educated class [Bildungsbürgertum]. Po­
litically and economically, this liberalism that dismantled the old order 
employed the notion of individual, self-determined interest to uncouple 
the demands made of politics from the determinants of the estates-based 
order; but none of these paths led to criteria that made sense to anyone 
who consulted his reason.
This was, for a certain time, the aim of the theory of the (transcen­
dental) subject. Toward the end of the eighteenth century, the human 
being was conceived of as a subject in the strict and final sense, and thus 
excluded from nature. This could be seen from the point of view of the his­
tory of ideas as a consequence of the Kantian distinction between a realm 
of causality and a realm of freedom, and thus the distinction between em­
pirical and transcendental concepts. Or as a consequence of Fichte’s in­
sight that all science had to begin with the I, which had first to set itself up. 
In the transcendental sense, subjectness guaranteed unity; in the empirical 
sense, multiplicity and difference. The distinction between transcendental 
and empirical thus made possible the idea that the same thinking could 
prove different “only empirically.”

Self-Descriptions    
In this connection, too, it is worth asking about the other side of this 
form. What remained unindicated if the subject was indicated?265 What 
was not meant when one indicated a certain human being as subject? The 
other side of the subject was apparently the world, which with the set­
ting of the subject withdrew into the unindicatable realm of an unmarked 
space. The other side of the individual human being was, however, other 
human beings. We now see what happens if individuals are declared sub­
jects. The respective other sides, unmarked and marked spaces, merge, and 
this confusion occupies the place that should be occupied by a theory of 
society. This freed the society concept for provisional transfer to the “sys­
tem of needs,” to the economy.
We need not go into the strengths and weaknesses of such arguments 
at this point. The sociologist notes that they were found and began to 
prove convincing at a time when it was generally accepted that the mod­
ern society forming in Europe no longer had the form of the estates-based 
society presupposed in the old world; but that it was nevertheless not clear 
what it was being or had been replaced by. The peculiar figure of the sub­
ject appears to bridge this gap between “no longer” and “what now.” For a 
time at least, it assumed the function of a description of society, precisely 
because it was not in the least suited to the task. As Michel Serres would 
put it, it stood for the “problem of the third” that was to be presupposed in 
all descriptions of the world and society without being able to objectivize 
itself in them. The other subjects that turned up in such descriptions (and 
how could one ignore them?) were no longer objectivized.
Of the subject, we know to begin with only that it knows itself, and 
with this knowledge underlies everything that it knows. It therefore under­
lies the distinction between general and particular; it is the general particu­
lar. It discovers itself as a fact. It can generate itself in an act of self-setting. 
It remains accessible to itself in reflection, even though only after it has 
constituted itself. The world can now be spoken of only relative to the sub­
ject. The invention of the previously unnecessary concept of the “environ­
ment” (Umwelt, environnement) then followed naturally. The persuasive 
power of all this lies in the individually accessible, individually appropri­
able, self-referential structure of the consciousness. For this reason the sub­
ject immediately appears as individual. But since human beings do not 
differ in their property of being subjects or individuals (but significantly 
only in what they make of it), the subject can very well claim to speak for 

 
  Self-Descriptions
“the human being.” It is, so to speak, the prototype of all collective singu­
lars, the corpus mysticum of individuality.
This figure of the subject had the function of justifying the inclusion 
of all in society by appealing to the self-reference of each—thus neither on 
the basis of societal theory nor empirically. This figure gained further plau­
sibility by answering the question of what could be said about the human 
being in modern society. In a post-estates society, he could no longer be “in­
dividuated” by stratification, nor by membership of a religion, origin, fam­
ily, indeed by any fixed social point of reference. In view of the autonomy 
and endogenous dynamics of functional systems, society had to renounce 
inclusion rules set by the overall system. And it could no longer exclude 
persons. Regulating inclusion was left to functional systems. The general 
formula for this had to be correspondingly abstracted. The answer lay in the 
newly emphasized concept of the individual, limited since the eighteenth 
century to the human being. “The human being” was now individual and 
humanity at the same time—or this was at any rate demanded of him.266
The modern individual was expected to be an observer who observed 
his own observation: a second-order self-observer.267 Freedom was the order 
of the day—freedom for nations, for women, for negroes, and for love, as 
Jean Paul foresaw at the start of the nineteenth century.268 The concept of 
subject provided the underlying understanding. At any rate one could then 
explain what it was all about (or assume that one knew) when general ideas 
such as freedom or equality were postulated as rights, when general legal ca­
pacity and nationality were elevated to attributes of modern states, and civil 
rights were very gradually superseded by gender requirements, economic in­
dependence, and so forth. On the other hand, it was just as incomprehensi­
ble why someone who had property or money should be stopped from using 
it. He could be left to learn from self-interest. Formulas such as freedom and 
equality could, over and beyond civil rights, be postulated as human rights. 
They managed without models of order, which, as soon as they were com­
municated, could be observed and criticized, but allowed many conceiv­
able perspectives to converge in indeterminacy. The concept of freedom was 
historically directed against natural necessities and cultural self-evidences, 
and described a new form of contingency, namely, the possibility of chance 
determining one’s own choice of behavior. The concept of equality neu­
tralized origin-based inequalities to allow inequalities determined by func­
tional systems to develop (above all in property, and nowadays inequalities 

Self-Descriptions    
in positions in organizations). In both cases the point of reference was the 
individual subject. In brief, the subject offered a salvation formula for con­
version of the inclusion mode to modern conditions specific to functional 
systems. And this went very far.
It is easy to understand that modern society places greater value on 
the possibility of individuals being observed as individuals—either by 
themselves or by others. The subject concept sought to take this desidera­
tum into account. At the same time, it had the rhetorical function of pro­
tecting the individual against insight into his own insignificance as one 
among billions: he was after all a subject (and not merely an object) and 
had a right to be treated accordingly. It is no wonder that intellectuals, in 
particular, were loath to dispense with the word. But it is easy to overlook 
that all observation depends on distinctions. The subject concept is a vote 
for autonomy and against heteronomy, for emancipation and against ma­
nipulation. Even Habermas, under “post-metaphysical” conditions, still 
abides by this precept, although he abandons the concept. But autonomy 
can be observed only relative to heteronomy; the other side of the form is 
always appresented.269 If the antonym is forgotten or disparaged, the only 
possibility left is idealization, which then has little understanding of the 
little understanding the real world has of the ideal.
Society is thus understood as a society of subjects. This is obviously 
a paradoxical construction. A subject that underlies itself and the world, 
and that can recognize and acknowledge no givens [Vorgegebenheiten] apart 
from itself, also underlies all other “subjects.” Thus each underlies each? This 
can be asserted only if the subject concept is interpreted in transcendental 
theoretical terms; for if empirical individuals are involved, one would have 
to know their names and addresses to check whether this subject really un­
derlies everything else (and all others!). The transcendental theory turn al­
lowed the concept of the subject to be geared to philosophical explanatory 
desiderata regardless of what an empirical consciousness can really do. Only 
under transcendental theoretical premises can we assume that every subject 
can find necessities/impossibilities within itself (thus a substitute for the old 
“nature”) that it can presuppose in the same form for all others. The con­
struction error lies in equating subjectity [­Subjektität] with generality and 
in attributing this equation to the self-given consciousness. Individuality is 
conceived of, not individually, but as the most general per se by—in this re­
gard, too—letting subject and object coincide, namely, the concept of indi­

 
  Self-Descriptions
vidual (which is, of course, a general concept describing all —individuals) 
with the individuals themselves. But in principle this makes any commu­
nication superfluous. This problem found its most radical expression in the 
transcendental phenomenology of Husserl, precisely because this transcen­
dental theory was designed as phenomenology.270 The conceptual disaster 
was, however, still difficult to accept. Even if the subject had once again to 
lose its transcendental status, it was nevertheless difficult to abandon it as 
point of reference for the self-description of modern society and to trans­
form it back into a natural object. Certain normative expectations depend 
on it that have become attached to the concept of modern society, so that a 
society without subjects might be suspected of being a postmodern rather 
than a modern society. And this is what the dispute is about today.
Solutions have been sought, but the results have been indicative of 
embarrassment rather than success. For example, the Aristotelian distinc­
tion between (self-satisfying) practice and (work-producing) poiesis was 
adapted. It was linked to social theories via ethics and politics. Ethico-­
political action was considered self-sufficient. In the modern understand­
ing of governmental politics, this could no longer be said. On the other 
hand, the idea of being an end in itself was transferred to the human 
being as individual, as subject and, with Kant, interpreted as freedom. 
This sharpened the distinction between practice and technology, to cul­
minate with Habermas in the normative idea of practical rationality. The 
other side, whether it is called system or technology or strategic action or 
­monologic communication, was compensated by concessions. But would 
not both sides have to understand society as a unity?
Another solution proposed uses the concept of the “typical” to guar­
antee the comprehensibility of social action despite the inaccessibility of 
“other souls” [das Fremdseelische]. Here we think of Max Weber, as well 
as Husserl and, combining the two, Alfred Schütz.271 But the problem of 
(societal) order involves not only the conditions of possibility for under­
standing but also, if not primarily, the acceptance or rejection of what one 
understands. The typicality of communication topics offers no answer—at 
any rate, not for “hard cases,” as the lawyers would say.
It finally had to be realized that the persuasive power of subject se­
mantics was based precisely on the fact that it effectively excluded, or at 
least circumvented, the question of society as a social order. Epistemology 
could refer to “the subject” and thus avoid the ticklish problems of the so­

Self-Descriptions    
cial (communicative) construction of all cognition. But the social cannot 
be understood from the perspective of the subject; at any rate, not if one 
takes the concept seriously. In this sense, the concept had the function of 
helping out in a transitional phase in which an adequate description of so­
ciety was not possible anyway. The “social” remained somewhere between 
sympathy and police, remained a politico-ideological program or ruddily 
seething unrest on the margins of ordered conditions.
Since its beginnings, sociology has freed itself from this syndrome. 
Although it has retained the word “subject” as an alternative term for in­
dividual, human being, or person, and understands by it the human being 
as knowing, thinking, and acting individual,272 the proposal to withdraw 
or “deconstruct” the concept could in empirical sociology easily be under­
stood as a move to deny that there is such a thing at all. The persistence 
with which prevailing opinion in sociology has opted for “action theory” 
can be seen as a second line of defense that manages without the sub­
ject concept. From an intradisciplinary point of view, this “theory of ac­
tion” is nurtured by historical reminiscence273 and by the methodological 
directives of empirical social research. Alain Touraine has announced “le 
­retour de l’acteur.”274 The subject comes back on stage under a pseudonym. 
However, such discussions accomplish nothing more; they only block any 
query about the logic of a plurality of subjects.275 And there can be hardly 
any better evidence that the semantic rank of this figure and its signifi­
cance for societal theory have become historical.
Finally, the subject lives on as participant in communication. The 
transcendental theoretical claim has been withdrawn, at least by ­Habermas, 
and replaced by a normatively introduced concept of reason. The individ­
ual appears as subject insofar as he can claim to be guided in his own be­
havior (including his own recognition of the behavior of others) by reason. 
The transcendental/empirical distinction is replaced by the distinction be­
tween this claim to reason and societal conditions as they exist in reality.
This is certainly a borderline case, in which one can hardly still speak 
of subject. As in action theory, it is an attempt to survive with reduced 
conceptual demands. The right to reasonable self-determination is pre­
supposed and, so to speak, tested negatively against the difficulties of en­
forcement. With reference to Kant, the legal metaphor of “emancipation” 
then becomes a guiding concept for demands on the design of commu­
nication. But, how can the subject still be conceived of in strict terms if 

 
  Self-Descriptions
it is understood from the perspective of an ultimately paradoxical expec­
tation of being “emancipated” through participation in communication? 
The demands made of communication can, albeit with a marked utopian 
tendency, be expounded.276 But if the structure of the subject, which is de­
termined by itself and determines everything else, is abandoned, what then 
remains as a basis for the demands of others on “communicative action”? 
Only communication itself, it would seem; and this means: society.
And even though the figure of the subject is regarded with greater 
skepticism today in both its transcendental and its social-empirical (hu­
manistic, all-human) versions, one of its most important consequences 
continued to have an impact even at the end of the twentieth century, 
because it was used in both liberal and socialist ideologies, and was thus 
presupposed on both sides in the dominating politico-ideological contro­
versy of the past century and a half. The subjectness of the human being 
was understood as freedom, defined as the absence of constraint; and there 
were differences of opinion only about the sources of constraint: law set 
by the state or capitalist society. For just as long, at least since Freud, how­
ever, we have known that the distinction between freedom and (external) 
constraint is untenable. At all levels, psychic and social, this distinction is 
an artifact of self-description, especially of causal attribution. Freedom, as 
we now know, cannot be defined by a counterconcept, but only through 
the cognitive conditions of its possibility. What, it must be asked, are the 
conditions for reading alternatives and a decidable future into a deter­
mined world that is always the way it is? More precisely as far as freedom 
is concerned, when do the alternatives allow a decision to be attributed to 
a person (oneself or another)? Only then can the distribution of freedom 
in society be decided.
Another “survival” of the subject is the double formula of demystifi­
cation and internalization of the world. On the one hand, this double pack 
motivates talk about the end of history, the end of art, the end of philoso­
phy, and so forth, which cannot be meant in the sense that they no longer 
occur but only that they can no longer symbolize and realize the old unity. 
We now have to do only with difference phenomena and with the disap­
pointment of the subject that he can neither be the world nor make it his 
own through education. But this, too, is no judgment on the empirical dis­
position of real, living human beings, but only a self-description of mod­
ern society; and perhaps not the most apposite version of this problem.

Self-Descriptions    
The flight into the subject was based on humanistic premises; that is 
to say, on the assumption that natural or later transcendental premises guar­
anteed a minimum of social congruence in the individual human being. At 
the same time, this made it possible accordingly to treat violations (above 
all, going against judgments of reason) as violations of norms, and to con­
demn those failing to conform. Toward the end of the twentieth century, it 
became apparent that this was a construction whose socio­structural corre­
lates would have to be examined. Even if the semantics of the “subject” and 
the collective singular “human being” are no longer uncontested, reduc­
tionist concepts still dominate societal communication in the late twen­
tieth century that were invented and imposed in the seventeenth century 
as the semantic correlate of functional differentiation. This applies partic­
ularly to the economic concept of the benefit-calculating individual. The 
outdifferentiated money economy had led to the observation that only one 
participant in a transaction can directly fulfill his wishes. The other receives 
only money. It also had to be taken into account that participants in such 
transactions could choose what they wished to spend their money on or 
what they wished to receive money for—a freedom of choice that could not 
be explained in terms of concrete needs, class-based support, and the like; 
it reflected the new order to which it was owed. In order to construct the 
unity of the system at the level of individual motives, a uniformity of moti­
vation bridging these distinctions had to be assumed and, at the same time, 
since it was really a matter of representing the transactions themselves, so­
cial characteristics such as class, family, and fame had to be dispensed with. 
Moreover, motive ascription had to be anthropologically (humanistically) 
so generalized that one could explain that the human being was better 
served by an outdifferentiated money economy than by older forms of nat­
ural reciprocity. Politics was then committed to this “utilitarian” concept, 
insofar as it was given the task by both the liberal and socialist sides, if not 
to solve, then at least to defuse unresolved conflicts between economic in­
terests. Here, too, like motivational structures were assumed, namely, an 
interest in one’s own, self-determined interest.
However, motivation in this sense was only an assumption used in 
economic and political communication, and thus in the societal system, 
which the reflection theories of these systems follow to this day. What this 
did not cover in the way of individual motivation was transmitted in nar­
rative form, to begin with by the theater from the second half of the six­

 
  Self-Descriptions
teenth century on,277 then by the novel, and finally, in the culmination of 
these fictional forms, by Sigmund Freud’s all-embracing meta-narrative 
psychoanalysis. It would seem that modern society has, at least to date, 
managed with this division of the question about the motives to be pre­
sumed behind all purposes into a function-specific variant and a narrative 
and fictional one; the fictional variant having the advantage of present­
ing the biographical peculiarity of individual motives, leaving it up to the 
reader to relate them to her- or himself.
It must be asked whether this description of relations between the 
individual and society—which traces the societal need for communication 
and solves its problems by differentiating and fictionalizing the descrip­
tion of motives—still captures the critical symptoms in the relationship 
between psychic and social systems today. Topics such as the incommu­
nicability of the individual, the search for meaning and identity, indiffer­
ence toward any schema of conformity and deviance that society attempts 
to impose have long been under discussion. Particularly questionable is 
the attractiveness of fundamentalist identifications geared not to general 
congruence but to demarcation. We do not have to and cannot decide 
this question here. At any rate, the theory of operationally closed systems, 
which assumes the strict separation of psychic and social autopoieses, 
leaves other possibilities of description open.
Finally, it should be noted that, although the description of the human 
being as subject dominates the philosophical tradition of the modern age, it 
is by no means the sole semantic reaction to the structurally determined in­
dividualism of modernity. From the eighteenth century on, quite different 
interests in the scientific investigation of the human being also developed 
alongside subjectivism. There were statistical studies that took the individ­
ual as the observation unit. A new concept of population (which consisted 
of individuals) superseded the old thinking in terms of species and genera. 
This gave rise to demographic research, evolution-­theoretical concepts, and 
“eugenic” policy recommendations.278 An effort was nevertheless made to 
gain information about the human being precisely from spectacular vari­
ance, from the biographies of criminals, or Einstein’s chromosomes. The 
science of humanity replaced founding knowledge, which had previously 
been the concern of religion. To claim scientificity, research has to obey the 
sociostructural demand to proceed on the basis of the individual, while 
leaving his or her respective uniqueness out of account and addressing sta­

Self-Descriptions    
tistical frequencies, averages, or the range of extremes. In other words, the 
individual has to be presupposed—and at the same time neutralized; if not 
by transcendental theoretical reduction, then statistically.
14. The Universalization of Morality
The subjectivization of human being/individual/person semantics 
was accompanied in the eighteenth century by changes in morality and 
ethics that were also provoked by the transition to functional differentia­
tion and printing. Since the Middle Ages, moral expectations had been in­
creasingly internalized, insofar as expectations were now directed toward 
self-regulation, toward free disposition over one’s own freedom, and no 
longer permitted respect or disrespect to depend solely on behavior. The 
old version of ethics, which had operated with the distinction between 
good and bad behavior and between virtues and vices, and which had ac­
cepted the derailment of good intentions (as in the case of Oedipus) as fate, 
was supplemented by the comparison between intention and action. More 
could therefore be demanded of intentions, while offering more refined 
excuses. For a long time, this development could be absorbed in both the 
moral notions of religion and the ethics of the nobility—whether in the fig­
ure of a soul plagued by religious doubts, which now experienced the moral 
demands of society only as external, public normativization, or in the sense 
of a central ethical value of self-control that established appearances, the 
unity of morality and manners, and thus the unity of inside and outside. 
The revival of Stoic thought in the sixteenth century, in particular, allowed 
an ethics to develop that concentrated on facing the turbulence of the times 
with serenity and dignity.
There were increasing signs from the sixteenth century on of a new 
description of societal morality as a symbiosis of propriety and (gap-filling) 
hypocrisy (as a new concept). The moral science (Moralwissenschaft, science 
des mœurs) of the seventeenth century was Janus-faced. As the central fig­
ure of social life, morality could not be abandoned; but a discrepancy was 
seen between the communication of moral attitudes and what religion or a 
humanistic self-image demanded of the human being. One could now be 
a “person” only if one had mastered communication as a considered tech­
nique, but did not allow oneself to be duped by it. The direct relationship 
of the human being with God, but also his direct relationship with himself 

 
  Self-Descriptions
had to be separated from “the world” and stabilized by reflection on par­
ticipation in communication. This was what Blaise Pascal and Nicole said 
with respect to religion, and Baltasar Gracián with respect to human self-
control and a sort of ethos of endurance, of bearing with this world. It was 
a question of the possibility of moral (=social) existence and not yet, as in 
the later eighteenth century, of justifying specific moral judgments. The 
language of virtues and vices was still binding, and to this extent, this ver­
sion of the morality problem looked back to the ethics and rhetoric of tra­
dition; at the same time, however, the individual sought to be at one with 
himself, a position that was later to be expressed by the term “subject.” The 
moral catalogs of tradition were still in force; but the human being was al­
ready seen as homme universel,279 who had to discover the sense of his social 
behavior within himself.
However, all this does not yet give us the key to explaining changes 
that took place in the eighteenth century. The unity of morality and man­
ners broke down. Decked out with pseudonyms like “nature” and “rea­
son,” morality was now taken to be the “self-restraint of the social by the 
social.”280 New “ethical” demands of morality transcended the bounds of 
familiar, tribal, local entities, which knew only internal moral commit­
ments.281 Participants in communication, particularly readers or people 
taking part in many interactions when traveling, for example, found them­
selves obliged to adapt to strangers whose social ties they did not know and 
could not guess. Society reacted by generalizing and universalizing moral 
demands. Innumerable texts, associations, discussion rounds ensured this 
new, universal, “patriotic” morality. One was expected to identify actively 
with the good side of the moral schema and to show it. While universal­
istic morality destabilized the particular ties evident to the individual that 
set an inside world apart from an outside world of “Saracens” (saraceni) ir­
relevant to morality, respect or disrespect could always be manifested only 
in concrete cases. For this paradox there were now strange solutions: one 
espoused the cause of the hungry, the oppressed, the innocent victims of 
the abuse of human rights or other political persecution—situations in 
which one would never find oneself.282 Following Talcott Parsons, this can 
be described as specific universalism, which acquires persuasive force and 
attention through concrete action determined by the mass media, without 
becoming particular or excluding other moralization. The postulate of uni­
versalization is limited to the level of ethics.

Self-Descriptions    
Ethics, which had to take care of this sort of morality, sought to pro­
vide reasonable justification for moral judgments, and the philosophical 
faculties rather than the salons were now responsible for testing them. This 
also meant that a sense of ambiguities, of irony,283 of ridiculousness in social 
behavior was no longer learned, and the polished speech that permitted one 
to avoid the uncertain waters of morality was lost. Morality became the me­
dium for demands that religion had to make of itself—whether in the form 
of the theodicy problem or of cultural comparisons that showed all religions 
to be equal, provided they passed muster with morality. The necessity for 
justification shifted from religion to morality itself and the locus was (now 
academic) ethics. If religious justification requirements no longer applied, 
morality found itself thrown back on the circle of double contingency (tit 
for tat). It then had to externalize itself and construct its own absolutes.284 
This could hardly happen in the social dimension, since conscious or un­
conscious interests almost inevitably showed through. But the time dimen­
sion also failed. Building on tradition, if admitted, would not convince 
everyone and would in any case soon become outdated. And the future was 
too unknown to make peaceable assessment possible.285
If ethics now wished to take on the role of a universal theory of mo­
rality, it would also have to present itself as a moral enterprise; for precisely 
ethics would otherwise puncture the cosmos of morality, allowing moral 
pressures to escape into the vast realm of passions and interests. To stick 
to our metaphor: ethics had to keep morality under pressure and make it­
self available as the reason for doing so. Nevertheless, there was a quasi-
reflexive need for an Archimedean point, for a transcendence that resolved 
the incompleteness proven by Kurt Gödel [das Gödel-Problem]. Somehow 
(but theoretically there was no longer any agreement) it had to be shown 
that there were also good reasons for good behavior. In other words, the 
positive value of the code was doubled onto it and at the same time used 
to explain that it was good to distinguish between good and bad or be­
tween good and evil. The argument sounds very convincing: what would 
happen if the good/bad distinction could not longer be required morally 
or (as de Sade taught) was even to be forbidden as contrary to nature? But 
the contrary view also sounds plausible: it is highly immoral to use moral 
judgments,286 because this inevitably raises the question of the grounds, 
motives, and interests in doing so. The reasons for appealing to morality 
were no longer simply “good” reasons. Ethics itself had to listen to Gödel.

 
  Self-Descriptions
The persuasive power of this self-resolution of the paradox of (the 
unity of) binary codings must have been so strong that ethics then had 
only to concern itself with justificatory problems and with demonstrating 
the applicability of its theories. It “Gödelized” its theorems transcenden­
tally by recourse to facts (!) of consciousness that anyone could discover 
for himself through reflection; or it integrated self-reference with Jeremy 
Bentham’s thesis that all ethical theories must prove their worth through 
their own utility. The theoretical (“philosophical”) follow-up costs of these 
positions are easy to recognize nowadays, and the abundant experience of 
the philosophers with postmortems is needed to handle them.287 The so­
ciological question is rather why it should have come to such extravagant 
attempts at self-justification of ethically supervised morality at all.
Our hypothesis is that it has to do with the expansion of communi­
cation through printing, with the facilitation of interregional traffic, but 
above all with the transition from primarily stratificatory differentiation 
to primarily functional differentiation, and thus with changes in societal 
structures that escaped moral control, namely, through evolution.
All older forms of society had essentially been able to limit moral 
communication—inclusory and exclusory communication concerning re­
spect and disrespect—to subsystems. Even where communication was pos­
sible, the rule with regard to strangers was moral noncommitment (or, 
instead, interest, possibly also legal protection of the hospitality type or 
in the form of the Roman ius gentium). In clearly stratified societies, too, 
morality could be developed as internal regulation of subsystems, relying 
in so doing on their boundaries. For intercourse between Indian castes, 
there were ritual rules and taboos, but no generally applicable morality. 
Although, as has recently been noted, a “moral economy” was practiced 
in the manorial economies of old Europe, the household was the relevant 
unit, and for this very reason the “moral economy” failed with the out­
differentiation of a monetary economic system.288 In general intercourse 
(which was then termed “political”), it would have been difficult to imag­
ine nobles seeking the respect of a peasant or vice versa. Such behavior 
would have infringed the moral programs of one’s own group, one’s own 
subsystem. The reach of moralities was (even if it was always a matter of 
good/bad coding) preregulated by the schema of societal differentiation, 
which for its part found a hold in the convergence of internal boundaries 
with different moralities.

Self-Descriptions    
This order was once again to be emphatically stressed in the seven­
teenth century. Morality ignored the money troubles of the nobility. The 
tragedies of Racine permit neither comparisons with everyday behavior nor 
consideration of the relevance of political affairs in the form of the already 
outdifferentiated state. Certain moral problems were conceded that arose 
from the outdifferentiation of functional systems, an exceptional status—
above all under the heading of raison d’État. At the same time, functional 
systems already operated under their own binary codes, which could be co­
ordinated by neither politics nor religion. These functional system codings 
had to wait a long time for societal recognition, which explains the hyper­
trophied morality in the eighteenth century. But, finally, why should litera­
ture not be in a position to portray reprehensible behavior successfully by 
its own criteria (of beauty). Why should the nascent theories of the consti­
tutional state seek coincidence with morality with the result that officehold­
ers were treated as good and those subject to them as bad or vice versa? Why 
should the lover love above all the virtue of the loved one and have no un­
derstanding of his moral failings? Property was treated as the precondition 
of economic-rational dispositions, but should the proprietor be considered 
good and the nonproprietor bad in the sense of metaphysical convergence 
between the rational and the good? The law saw itself called upon to create 
freedom and to protect it; and this included freedom to engage in illegal but 
also immoral and irrational behavior, and if one was not able or willing to 
accept this, legal prohibitions had to step in. In all these points, the inter­
nalization of moral demands since the Middle Ages had paved the way for 
the stronger separation of codings in the manner of preadaptive advances.
In brief, the autonomy of functional systems secured by their own bi­
nary codings excluded metaregulation by a moral super-code, and moral­
ity itself accepted, indeed remoralized this condition. For now code sabotage 
becomes a moral problem—for instance, corruption in politics and law or 
doping in sport or venal love or cheating with the data of empirical research. 
The higher amorality of functional codes was recognized by morality itself; 
but this also meant renouncing the idea of the moral integration of society. 
Morality concentrated its attention on the pathologies that arise from and 
are continually reproduced by the behavioral improbability of society’s struc­
tural rules. In more abstract terms, morality adapted to the polycontextural 
form of the self-observation of society and itself offered its code as only one 
context among others. Society allowed, indeed needed, as Gotthard Günter 

 
  Self-Descriptions
put it,289 transjunctional operations, which were also able to decide whether 
a moral coding was appropriate for certain problem situations or not.
On the one hand, the universalization of morality led to the waiving 
of moralizations or to warnings against excessively pressing moral harass­
ment. On the other had, it exposed the medium of morality to inflationary 
or deflationary trends.290 The consequences of “disembedding” moral com­
munication were, first, that a great deal came to be said in a moralizing tone 
without engendering obligations that could be monitored; and, second, 
that morality could no longer be relied on where it was important—a sort 
of “stagflation” set in as inflation and deflation together debilitated morality.
Structural changes of this sort precede semantic adaptations, and the 
independent evolution of ideas can lead to considerable delays in adapta­
tion.291 This explains the exaltation of morality to be observed in the early 
eighteenth century. It explains a fundamental characteristic of its modern 
form, namely, its specific, code-based universality. And it explains the justi­
ficatory problems of a modern ethics that continues to consider its own ef­
forts at regulatory problem-solving to be good but tacitly waives setting the 
mechanism of principle justification and social discrimination in motion. 
For hardly anyone would take part in the discussions of ethics commis­
sions or other ethical discourses if there were a risk of attracting disrespect 
should views remain controversial. After all this, the name “ethics” has be­
come no more than an empty distancing mechanism conveying that a dia­
logue should not take place in contexts that are differently coded from the 
outset or already organized (the extent to which this is nevertheless the case 
naturally has to be ignored, for which academic naïveté can prove useful). 
Semantic reference to “ethics,” in other words, speculates with the modern 
separation of politics, law, and morality.292 But this also means that ethics 
has to reckon with disappointment if it wishes to assert itself. It would there­
fore have to learn to reflect on polycontexturality with all its consequences.
On the other hand, the driving force of individualistic ideology should 
not be underestimated. One might well doubt, for example, whether the 
transition to a market economy would have been possible other than as a 
side effect of individualistic ideologies; and it is also apparent that the nec­
essary corrections were introduced not under the heading of the individual 
but under that of the social.
This enlightening, universal morality was mainly at the cost of reli­
gion. It was deprived of the task of justifying morality. The enlighteners 

Self-Descriptions    
might well have been good Christians, but their ethics did not (and could 
not) reflect on what then became of God. Theology could only seek to give 
added meaning to an ethics that had gained its autonomy.293
15. The Differentiation of “Nations”
Among the striking phenomena accompanying the semantic reac­
tion to functional differentiation is the cushioning semantics of nations 
geared not to functional but to segmentary differentiation.294 The histori­
cal conditions of such self-description certainly lie in the regional, lin­
guistic, and cultural differentiation of Europe; in other words, in the 
prevention of politico-religious empire building.295 To be sure, the term 
natio had already been used in the Middle Ages to describe the origins of 
people who found themselves in foreign countries (e.g., students or coun­
cil participants), and this applied whenever several “nations” came together 
and it was not enough to speak simply, say, of “Lombards” (in London) 
or Genoese (in Portugal). From the sixteenth century, state centralization 
policy began to develop at the linguistic, cultural, and administrative levels 
in a few (but only few) territories—above all, in France and Spain (where, 
however, the attempt to include Portugal failed militarily). New ways of 
integrating the state, the law, culture, and language within regional bound­
aries were tried out—experiments that required regional (but not yet “na­
tional”) diversification in Europe. Early definitions of the state oscillated 
between denoting the ruling authority and the territory concerned. But in 
early modern times, from the fifteenth century to the seventeenth, areas 
like Italy, Flanders, and then the Netherlands with highly developed civili­
zations, craft industries, and commerce lacked an identity that could have 
been described as national. On the whole, polyethnic population struc­
tures prevailed in Europe, resulting from mainly rural-urban migration 
provoked by epidemics and famine, and from long-distance trade and dy­
nastic marriages among the nobility (that peasants in the Middle Ages 
were tied to the manorial soil shows how strong the migratory pressure 
must have been). Ghettoization, enclaves for merchants within narrow 
confines indicate that distinctions were not projected onto nation-build­
ing. Favored by the printing press and by the gradually emerging public 
law, a policy of centralization gradually consolidated in the territorial state 
only from the seventeenth century on, but in only few cases on a national 

 
  Self-Descriptions
basis. Neither Spanish policy toward the Basques in the sixteenth century 
nor French policy toward Alsace in the sixteenth century could be justified 
on the grounds that the region belonged to the nation. Notwithstanding 
that the French, German, Italian, and Spanish concepts of nobility had 
been compared in literature as early as 1600, neither Savoy’s ennoblement 
policy nor the tying of the Bohemian nobility to the Viennese court were 
indicative of national policy trends.
Things changed only in the mid-eighteenth century. Historical com­
parisons between cultures were increasingly joined by comparisons between 
regional cultures. The fact that nations had proper names proved a practi­
cal advantage for communication; it was not necessary to explain what one 
meant by Spain, Hungary, Poland, and so on. Even today this parlance is 
usual when discussing European integration. Use of the terms “nation” and 
“national” (also in compound forms such as circulation ­nationale, ­éducation 
nationale, etc.) increased in the course of the eighteenth century, appar­
ently satisfying a need for a generic concept when proper names such as 
France and England were not sufficient. But it was the French Revolution 
that made “nation” a necessary concept, signaling the abolition of tradi­
tional social distinctions.296 A successor had to be arranged for the body of 
the murdered monarch if the nation was to live on.297 By resolution, the 
États généraux transformed themselves into an Assemblée nationale, pro­
claiming with this distinction their sovereignty in relation to the distinc­
tions of tradition, and, above all, the establishment of the political system 
upon itself. But “nation” could then no longer be retained as, so to speak, 
the proper name of France. Copied elsewhere, the concept became an open 
one for cultural and political comparison. For as the revolution became 
historical, the universalism of its principles came to be perceived as particu­
larity, as a French particularity that other nations could but did not need to 
emulate. Cultivation of the national idea, namely, unity despite revolution, 
became the concern [in France] of historians such as Augustin ­Thierry, 
Edgar Quinet, and Jules Michelet.
The transitional situation made the concept ambivalent: regional 
society was a nation, and was to become a nation politically as well.298 To 
begin with, the nation was an imaginary entity that had to be filled with 
reality, for example, a common language, a common religion, a single cur­
rency, and a single legal system independent of local habits and customs. 
The nation defined itself in terms of its history, but this history had first 

Self-Descriptions    
to be written (and it was a moot question whether it was then also the 
history of the villages or factories, the peasants and workers).299 The new 
concept could now be filled with content, the choice of political struc­
tures discussed and adapted to the history and character of a specific na­
tion, generating a point of reference for the collective consciousness to 
which one could appeal top down and bottom up. The breadth of the na­
tion concept allowed conflicts of interest within nations to be admitted 
and their solution to be considered possible. Excluded were only conflicts 
that aimed to destroy the opponent. New forms of solidarity were now 
fostered, up to and included the sacrifice of one’s life in war for people 
one did not even know. The notion of a state-organized nation thus be­
came the standard model of territorial segmentation, and states that did 
not conform to it have ever since been considered anomalies.300 In the 
nineteenth century, this led to efforts to unify Italy and Germany; to find 
a solution to the Norway problem and the Finland problem through in­
dependent constitutions; to the secession of Belgium from the Nether­
lands, producing a new multinational problem; finally, to the dissolution 
of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires. But why did this turn to 
national awareness with partly fictitious normality, partly normative de­
mands date so exactly from the mid-eighteenth century?
It might also be argued that the internally peaceful territorial state 
was now fully established and had to legitimate itself in relation to the 
population. One could point to progress in combating epidemics and 
in agricultural techniques, and to the adoption of American crop plants, 
which eliminated many of the causes of vast demographic shifts within 
Europe and enabled people to believe in a relatively stable national pop­
ulation (growing only internally). Although the population was increas­
ing throughout the world (even on American slave plantations), surplus 
progeny could emigrate overseas without affecting the national integrity. 
Given all this, it would not have been by chance that the idea of the na­
tion asserted itself historically as the norm and as a normative demand at 
precisely the time when the transition to functional differentiation became 
irreversible and made itself felt in many domains.
The link between the increase in national rhetoric and the shift from 
stratificatory to functional differentiation calls for some comment. In the 
late eighteenth century, orientation on national differences clearly com­
peted with a sense of living in an extraordinary period of history and of 

 
  Self-Descriptions
pursuing a special “zeitgeist”; and since this temporal discontinuity made 
itself felt in all nations, comparison between nations took second place to 
historical comparison. The French Revolution was therefore not only a 
French revolution. Nor can the monetization and industrialization of Eu­
rope be understood in terms of national particularity. “In the face of this 
European similarity, all national differences in effect vanish,” Friedrich von 
Schlegel noted in 1802.301
But this was not necessarily at the cost of national identities. The 
nation was built into the broadening perspectives like an unfolded para­
dox: conceived of externally as particularistic and internally as universal­
istic.302 It could thus withstand the development of world society—until 
in the course of decolonization it became all too clear that not all the ter­
ritories of world society could amalgamate tribal and ethnic differences 
into nations (especially not if statehood and hence centralization was ex­
pected of them).
In the late eighteenth century and the nineteenth century, nation 
building in Europe benefited from the now undoubted reorganization of 
society that was proceeding in any case. It was the new differentiations 
and the disappearance of old social divisions that strengthened the need 
for national affinities. With the concepts of nation and of the human 
being as individual and subject, the self-description of the societal system 
provided a highly plausible way out, activating identity resources that the 
inclusion forms of functional systems could not offer. The nation con­
cept removed the plebeian odor adhering to the concept of people (Volk, 
peuple), explained the de-aristocratization of the political system, and, at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century, enabled the “people” concept to 
be reintroduced as a specifically political notion.303 Not only did it switch 
from a concept of origins to one of a future combined personal and ethnic 
[völkisch] identity, but it offered a very clear and easy to handle difference 
schema: a nation distinguished itself from other nations (and not, for ex­
ample, from the aristocracy or from rural life, or from the economy or sci­
ence). It allowed particularisms of regional communities to be presented 
as superior to the universalisms of functional orientation, and thus to bal­
ance out the tension of “pattern variables” in Talcott Parsons’s sense.304 
And it appeared to make it possible, on the basis of identity, to overcome 
breaches that had developed with the unleashing of market economy pro­
cesses (in so-called class structures), and as a consequence differences in 

Self-Descriptions    
religion and weltanschauung. In brief, the concept of nation offered an 
inclusion concept that did not depend on the special conditions of indi­
vidual functional systems and even obliged politics to respect all members 
of the nation as equal.305
The social division of the old world, the distinctions between nobil­
ity and commons and between rank groups within these strata, between 
city and country, or between military force and money earned in trade had 
been too strong and too obvious, too plausible to allow national trans­
mutation. A religious cosmology sufficed (for those who had heard of it). 
Before the introduction of printing and national languages, the linguistic 
bounds of communication had been very narrow. There was, of course, 
Latin. In the transition to functional differentiation, the nature and visibil­
ity of the distinctions that now structured society changed. New role com­
plementarities such as government/subject, producer/consumer, teacher/
pupil, doctor/patient, artist/art lover, and even priest/layman identified 
people no longer as concrete individuals but only in terms of their belong­
ing to a functional system. They no longer defined the meaning of a way 
of life but only tasks and rules; and at both the private and public levels, 
both the individual and the social levels, they engendered a need for new, 
summary identification. This need was met by singular concepts such as 
(individual) subject or nation.
The nation concept had therefore lost the original meaning of the 
word natio. It was no longer a matter of sorting by identities of origin. It was 
no longer assumed that unity already existed and had only to be recognized 
and named. On the contrary, the nation concept now guided the demand 
for the establishment of unity in a state, and to this extent the distinction 
between cultural nation [Kulturstaat] and state-nation [Staatsnation] was of 
secondary importance. Whatever the cultural and linguistic roots might be, 
unification and harmonization were necessary to achieve unity.
This semantics of the national was favored by the reception of an­
cient texts that presupposed civil society, had thrown no light on demo­
graphic and economic circumstances, and had thus been able to reconcile 
societal and political unity in one concept. However, this tradition had 
been based on the city as political unit and had only hesitantly territori­
alized the political in the course of Roman empire building. The city had 
offered considerable advantages for a sense of political affiliation, for ex­
ample, a topographical memory with whose help everyone could find their 

 
  Self-Descriptions
way round, and a personally known upper stratum. The replacement of the 
city by the nation not only extinguished the sense for the political culture 
of the city and the related position of the citizen [Stadtbürger]. It also had 
to replace topographical memory with a printed memory and the person­
ally known upper stratum with the princely court, and finally with an elite 
known only from the mass media.
On the other hand, it is likely that the concept of nation charged 
the old civil society with a new sense of reality, especially after the distinc­
tion between, indeed separation of state and society had proved inevitable. 
Moreover, it had been assumed, quite rightly at the time, that nation-states 
could wage wars and could win or lose them. The concept of nation al­
lowed compulsory military service to be justified with the implication of 
dying for the fatherland, without having to reward this at the state consti­
tutional level with universal suffrage. Wars were often final decision-mak­
ing procedures and not yet, as today, ecological disasters without winners 
and losers. All this was covered by the concept of nation.
With the delegitimation of stratification in the eighteenth century, 
the possibility had also been abandoned of explaining different destinies 
in terms of birth, thus in terms of stratification, and of combating dissatis­
faction, protest, and unrest on the grounds that they menaced the order of 
things. The liberalism of the eighteenth century, and above all nationalism 
and, in the course of the nineteenth century, socialism, developed elabo­
rated forms for society to express dissatisfaction with itself and demand 
improvement.306 The assumption was, however, that there were prospects 
for putting the ideas advanced into effect. A new situation developed when 
doubts arose about this outlook; and the hopes placed in the national self-
determination of peoples foundered together with this very idea.
Ironically, the end of World War I ushered in the demise of this idea 
precisely with the declaration of the right of nations to self-­determination. 
The attempts to realize it bear witness to its failure. From then on it de­
constructed itself, so to speak, in being obliged to take decisions whose 
consequences were not justified by the idea. A spectacular instance were 
Hitler’s plans for a Greater Germany, which ended in “ethnic cleansing” 
that found worldwide acceptance.307 Toward the end of the twentieth cen­
tury, the support conditions not integrated in the concept of nation—
and therefore invisible—changed decisively. In only few territories (Japan 
would be the most striking case) did world society offer opportunities for 

Self-Descriptions    
the formation of sufficiently large nation-states. Experience in ethnically 
or religiously unhomogeneous state structures (South Africa, Lebanon, 
Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, India, Ireland, to mention only a few) have 
shown that purely quantitative representation on the basis of the fran­
chise does not suffice to bridge existing differences in a territorial state of 
the national type. Especially under the conditions of democracy, national 
unity then proves unattainable. The desideratum of ethnically homoge­
neous state-building, where spatial separation is possible at all, leads to 
economically unviable or extremely vulnerable micro-entities. Individu­
alism has developed to such an extent that it can no longer be captured 
nationally (which does not exclude ethnic or religious fundamentalism 
from driving individuals onto the barricades). Given modern technologi­
cal developments, war is no longer possible without ecological disaster. 
This means that there are no longer any prospects of attaining limited ob­
jectives. Vast migration flows set in motion by economic imbalances are 
under way or imminent. All this undermines the plausibility of any con­
cept of a nation with which an individual can identify. The idea of nation 
obviously belongs to the set of short-lived semantics that can exercise a 
fascination for a transitional period without betraying what societal sys­
tem they refer to. It can therefore be assumed that this idea is now on 
the wane, a phase in which it does more harm than good and from a so­
ciological point of view constitutes one of those obstacles épistémologiques 
[hypothesized by Gaston Bachelard] that for reason of past plausibilities 
block urgently needed insights.
16. Class Society
One of the most successful descriptions of modern society, and until 
recently the predominant one, has been the assumption that it consists of 
social classes and is therefore characterized by inequality in relations be­
tween classes. This success of this description was due to its not break­
ing fully with the notion of a society ordered vertically in terms of rank, 
but dismantling it so strongly that important elements of modern society 
could be accommodated. The “class society” thesis is one of the most im­
pressive achievements of a transitional semantics, which, Janus-faced, does 
not lose sight of the old society while offering points of departure for reg­
istering radical change.

 
  Self-Descriptions
Innovations in comparison to the “estates” (status, états, Stände) ter­
minology can be summarized as follows:308
(1) By old tradition, “class” was a classificatory concept. It thus had to do 
with widely varying divisions, which could relate to all sorts of things, for 
example, fleets, armies, school classes, tax systems. The concept was used 
realistically, but in the knowledge that many divisions were possible; nota­
bly, in the eighteenth century, to classify living beings (Linnaeus).
(2) No longer families but individuals were categorized. Social classes 
were not birth classes. That the family into which one was born and in 
which one grew up influenced class membership was not and could not 
be denied; but membership of a social class was not a heritable trait. 
Above all, however, descent, the origins of the family, ancestral memories 
did not normatively determine a person’s way of life and behavior. Behav­
ior was free to enable people to adapt to the opportunities that present 
themselves.
(3) This made it possible to determine class membership primarily, if not 
exclusively, in economic terms. This still involved the distinction between 
rich and poor, but now also people’s functions in the economic process, 
above all, the distinction between owners and workers modeled on fac­
tory organization, to be macroeconomically and then politically general­
ized to the distinction between capital and labor. This generalization also 
appeared to ensure that class conditions reproduced themselves (despite 
changes in personnel), as long as no catastrophe in the form of revolution 
occurred as Marx predicted.
(4) The class schema was eminently suitable—and twentieth-century so­
ciology has made abundant use of it—as theoretical background for the 
statistical interpretation of empirical data. Although the importance of 
the factory paradigm had long since waned, empirical data on inequal­
ity could easily be obtained with the aid of all sorts of indicators and 
methods. Even if there had long been talk among economists and orga­
nizational sociologists of the revolution of managers, of absentee owner­
ship, the paradigm of factory organization could easily be replaced by 
ever-new data to demonstrate far-reaching inequalities in private wealth, 
in access to schools and universities, in access to the courts, in health and 
medical care, and in many other regards. And inequality meant injustice, 

Self-Descriptions    
proving the merely ideological nature of the formal bourgeois values of 
liberty and equality.
As the differentiation of estates of birth lost its inner legitimation as 
the natural and necessary order of things, compensatory notions had to 
develop to ensure equilibrium within the description of society. In the late 
seventeenth century, and until well into the eighteenth century, it was re­
peatedly asserted that every human being, regardless of his position in so­
ciety, could be happy if only he was satisfied with his status.309 Happiness 
was not an attitude of the individual toward himself, and attaining hap­
piness depended not on endowment with “external” goods and honors. 
This was demonstrated and lent narrative plausibility by examples from 
the topmost and bottommost strata of society.
Under the impression of the French Revolution and rapid industrial 
development, the nineteenth century replaced this natural entitlement to 
happiness by the moral demand for solidarity.310 This gave compensation 
for class differences a stronger moral, as well as militant direction. The de­
mand for social justice became a principle for uniting the disadvantaged, 
and at the same time a perspective for appealing to those who benefited 
from unequal distribution. “Social” also expressed an attitude and a value. 
As socialist parties formed and proved their capacity for governing in po­
litical competition, the harmonization of the living conditions of all so­
cial strata became a political postulate to be met through welfare-state 
facilities, by development policy, and above all by increasing distributable 
wealth and opting for a slightly inflationary economic policy.311
At the end of the twentieth century, this overall concept seemed to 
collapse. That inequalities exist is evident and more so than before. But, as 
the discussion about “new” inequalities shows, they can no longer be re­
duced to class structures. There are too many, as one now puts it, milieu-
specific influences. Natural factors such as gender and age differences also 
have a stronger impact than had previously been assumed. Not least of 
all, the schematizations of class society have broken down as communica­
tion has opened up to highly individual expectations, demands, identity 
projections.312 At the same time, it can now hardly be denied that society 
has neither made people happy nor ensured solidarity, nor has it achieved 
the harmonization of living conditions. Instead, fashionable successor con­
cepts such as “civil society” have increasingly revealed the utopian nature of 
such harmonization notions.

 
  Self-Descriptions
Since dissolution of the order of society based on birth estates, the 
concept of class society had offered a replacement. However, as was to be­
come increasingly clear in the course of two centuries, it remained depen­
dent on normative supplements. The unity of society could no longer be 
seen in the difference between classes. The result was a lack of legitima­
tion that was met in two ways: by aspiring to level out differences through 
the disempowerment and expropriation of the upper stratum, and by in­
troducing counterfactual opposites designed to transform the relation be­
tween difference and unity into that between facts and norms. However, 
the arguments in support of this self-description syndrome have become 
less and less convincing, without an alternative to this figure presenting it­
self. This would certainly not be the concept of an “event society” that toys 
with so-called postmodernism without offering any proposal for unfolding 
the paradox of the unity of the different on a new basis.
It could be considered a momentous historical accident: at any rate, 
the intention of revolutionizing class society hardened in the twentieth 
century into a regional conflict between a “socialist” (communist) and 
“liberal” (capitalist) societal order. This brought political, military, and 
organizational efforts into play. This confrontation preoccupied public 
attention to such an extent that no theory of society independent of it 
could develop. Even the “Third World” of underdeveloped countries was 
judged by this schema. Given such strong real and ideological discrepan­
cies, the thesis of a coherent world society had hardly any chance of find­
ing proponents.
In retrospect, the common ground is more impressive than the dif­
ferences. Both camps took a global view of an uncertain future that had 
to be mastered. Both camps renounced determination by the past, so 
that unity was no longer regarded as something given by nature or cre­
ation but as something to be achieved or produced. Both camps relied, 
albeit in quite different ways, on collaboration between the economy 
and politics to the neglect or instrumentalization of other functional sys­
tems. In both camps fixation on the other side and the struggle for world 
dominance gradually became all-pervasive. Only in the Eastern Bloc did 
the overestimation of organization and the underestimation of world­
wide functional differentiation lead to collapse; but this naturally does 
not mean that the surviving system can claim confirmation of its own 
description of society.

Self-Descriptions    
17. The Paradox of Identity and Its Unfolding 
Through Differentiation
Functional differentiation takes the outdifferentiation of individual 
societal subsystems to an extreme of full, independent, autopoietic au­
tonomy. This, we can predict, means that generalization of the semantics 
that can still symbolize the unity of the whole also has to be taken to an 
extreme. Any sort of generic summary, indeed even any ontological de­
scription will then have to be waived. The only remaining possibilities are 
paradoxical or tautological identification. The observer is not condemned 
to hold his peace, as some poets feel—and say. But he will have to admit 
that an observer (including a self-observer) cannot see what he cannot see, 
and above all not himself. In self-observation, the unity of society becomes 
the paradox of the observer.
As far as the object itself, society, is concerned, the loss of unity can 
now only be regretted as a loss of order. Friedrich von Schlegel, among 
many others, noted that external order had been restored after the Napo­
leonic Wars, but only with persistent and growing inner uncertainty—on 
the part of the observer!313 Ideas now raised suspicions precisely because, as 
could be observed, they were advanced with a claim to absoluteness; they 
were, so to speak, “ultrafied.”314 They became party catchphrases.
The French Revolution had still sought to realize the goals of human­
ity directly—through revolution, hence purely by freeing it from the old 
world. The Assemblée nationale imagined it was the volonté générale. This 
having failed, romanticism pondered on the situation. “Romanticizing,” 
Novalis wrote, “is nothing but qualitative potentiation. . . . By giving the 
common a higher sense, the ordinary, a mysterious appearance, the known, 
the dignity of the unknown, the finite, the guise of the infinite, I roman­
ticize it.”315 Hegel’s criticism of romantic “subjectivity” misses the essential 
point. The question is why such a refined paradox was offered.
Leaving aside the usual rhetorical games, explicit paradoxization was 
found above all in the context of breaking away from morality316—be it 
directly or in the context of individual functional systems that had to or­
ganize themselves on the level of higher amorality. Mandeville’s famous 
bee fable317 (and the economic literature decades before) showed that, on 
the whole, selfish, and therefore morally reprehensible, motives had ben­
eficial consequences. The French Revolution taught the opposite: that the 

 
  Self-Descriptions
best political intentions led to murder and terror. The entire machinery of 
civil rights and liberties and their constitutional guarantees still proceeded 
on the assumption that the individual had vast scope for action beneficial 
to himself and with neutral consequences for others (thus Pareto opti­
mal), or, where needful, could achieve contractual consensus. At the same 
time, moral reflection taught, on the basis of the utilitarian distinction 
between motives and consequences, that inverse relations and thus para­
doxes of the stated type could occur. And it was already known, or at least 
could have been known, that majority votes could produce no transitive 
order, so that in the course of time, contradictions developed that could 
not be morally coded.318
The result was a well-balanced solution that went by the name of 
“liberalism.” A solution without a theory of society. Paradox problems 
were distributed between the political system and the economic system. 
The constitution of the state was responsible for controlling the good in­
tentions of politicians. Its paradox was that it prescribed unrest.319 The 
“invisible hand” of the market economy took care of transforming self-
interest into wealth. And since there were only these two paradoxes, re­
flection limited itself to the relationship between the “state” and “society” 
(= the economy). Morality was left to “ethics,” which had meanwhile es­
tablished itself as an academic discipline and had specialized in examining 
the justification of moral judgments.
In this description, explicitly offered as modern, there was no par­
adox to be seen—but also no unity of society. One operated in the field 
of gravity of a problem that had been successfully (and with major con­
sequences) rendered invisible. It was no wonder that “invisibility” also 
turned up in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as a metaphor for 
order. The “sign from God” was replaced by the “invisible hand.”320 The 
paradox was not recognized—but indicated.321 The pragmatic solution lay 
in the offer of a multiplicity of distinctions that allowed phenomena to be 
ordered but did not permit the question of the unity of the distinction it­
self to be put. And if it was put, as it was by Hegel, the result was immedi­
ately decomposed into new distinctions—spirit and material, theory and 
practice, and so on.
The available material can be roughly sifted and ordered by sorting 
it in terms of meaning dimensions, factual, time, and social. With factual 
distinctions, one captures given facts that one wishes to single out. The dis­

Self-Descriptions    
tinction between “state and society” on which constitutions are premised, 
familiar since Hegel, has already been mentioned.322 The older distinction 
between imperium and dominium had not yet divided in terms of poli­
tics and economy.323 It was only when mercantilist economic policy col­
lapsed that people reacted with system distinctions; in France, for example, 
with the force/propriété distinction.324 At the same time, the property issue 
gained in importance in the constitutional policy debate.325 But the dis­
tinction between state and society was to become current as a description 
of reality only in the mid-nineteenth century; and this took place indepen­
dently of its peculiar position in Hegelian theory. For people now wished 
to discuss whether and to what extent the state had a special function to 
perform vis-à-vis society and its distribution problems, and for this pur­
pose the distinction had to be removed from the Hegelian context. What 
was retained, however, was the peculiar way in which the distinction itself 
saw the state: although the state was no longer the outcome of the dialec­
tics of history that “cancelled out” everything, it was the side of the distinc­
tion that had itself to make, respect, and carry out the distinction; from 
a formal point of view, a “reentry” of the form into the form in George 
Spencer-Brown’s sense.
Whereas from the perspective of our concept of society, the distinc­
tion between state and society is drawn within society, the distinction 
between individual and society—since the mid-nineteenth century also 
individual and collectivity326—is external to society. This latter distinction 
suggests, without admitting it and adopting the insight theoretically, that 
modern society does not consist of individuals and can no longer be de­
scribed as such, but that individuals as bodily-mental entities have to be 
assigned an external position. This, too, was a necessary consequence of 
functional differentiation; for this differentiation form excludes distribut­
ing individuals concretely among functional systems—for instance, fami­
lies, households, villages, cities, or social classes. Each individual now had 
to be able to participate in all functional systems; and social inclusion 
therefore had to be rethought and regulated anew in accordance with new 
value concepts such as liberty and equality.327 What becomes of the indi­
viduals themselves in the process is a topic that has to be renegotiated on 
the basis of the new distinction between individual and society.
This distinction registered a new type of maximum value for the in­
dividual (who, as we have seen,328 was also called a “subject”), which was 

 
  Self-Descriptions
attained around 1800. As we have seen, this fixed position—transcending 
the evaluations circulating in society—was determined by the switch in 
the forms of societal differentiation that revolutionized traditional inclu­
sion semantics and required the individual to be treated as external to so­
ciety. As external factor, the individual could to a certain extent displace 
religion (with its similar argumentation) or at least deprive it of its privi­
lege of determining maximum values.329 Reference to the individual thus 
developed, which then needed a counterconcept and—once the term “in­
dividualism” had been coined in the 1820s—could also be communicated 
as the onesidedness of any intrasocietal option. With the aid of the Freud­
ian theory of the unconscious, the individual found this counterconcept in 
himself, and it was only this development that completed the semantics of 
individuality. The individual could be understood as in distinction to him­
self—and could leave the concept of society to ideologization.
The concept of population—already current in the first half of the 
nineteenth century and popular since Darwin—provided a certain bridge 
for biological and demographic purposes. It replaced essentialistic notions 
about human nature (or the nature of other living beings) by an externally 
delimitable stock, which at the same time allowed considerable internal dif­
ferences, ultimately the full individuality of each specimen. On the other 
hand, this concept naturally did not satisfy the claims to self-­realization 
that subject theory could formulate for the individual. Variants of one and 
the same interest developed in the natural sciences and the humanities, 
namely, the question of the difference between individual and society.
The distinction between natural and artificial should also be men­
tioned. It reacted to the experience that unities (e.g., the unity of a nation) 
were less and less a matter of course: they had first to be produced. Or one 
left them to evolution, without knowing whether this was a natural or arti­
ficial procedure, at any rate, one that was not based on origin. As in ancient 
Greece, there were religious and moral reservations about the artificial, but 
the question of what constituted the unity of this distinction and why it 
was relevant was not raised. People were content to regard the one side 
with skepticism or to reject it.
Finally, the distinction between community and society [Gemeinschaft 
and Gesellschaft] proposed by Ferdinand Tönnies should be mentioned.330 
“Community” evoked a social system revolving around people, cozy home 
life, and rusticity; “society” conveyed that although these circumstances 

Self-Descriptions    
were fighting a losing battle in modernity, they were nevertheless to be 
taken into account in a formal sociology. The distinction also reacted to the 
loss of the confidence in progress in the manner of earlier sociology, namely, 
by invoking structure, and in this case through a distinction between types. 
Implicitly, however, the distinction meant a historical difference, namely, 
that between traditional and modern societal structure, whose present mix 
was the subject of investigation.
Compiling these three distinctions that contribute to the “factual” 
description of modern society reveals a great deal. In each case, a use­
ful (sufficiently concretizable) concept seemed to be lacking to describe 
the commonalities in what was distinguished, or to describe what distin­
guished the distinction itself from other distinctions (as consulting Hegel 
would have shown). Instead, what was at issue—modern society—was 
placed on one side of the distinction and put in a different light by what 
was set in opposition to it. Thus most concepts of society depended on 
what society was distinguished from. This allowed the complexity of the 
new situation to be registered without a coherent concept to indicate it di­
rectly. The theory of society managed without a concept of the compre­
hensive system of society.
The unity issue was probably neglected because, even in the nine­
teenth century, order was still conceived of only hierarchically, even 
though this could no longer be convincingly described. Unity was guar­
anteed from above—whether by the invisible hand or by the state. The 
only counterconcept that could then develop was the unacceptable “anar­
chism.”331 It was thus not by chance that this idea came to be regarded as 
not completely absurd only in the nineteenth century, when—Proudhon 
leading the way—one could even describe oneself as an “anarchist.” What 
was meant was that hierarchy as a form of modern society was superfluous; 
but no one could yet propose an alternative.
In the time dimension, too, striking changes in the description of 
the world and society developed even in early modern times (discussed 
in section 12 above). In the old world, time had been characterized by the 
observation of movement on the basis of the distinction between moved 
and unmoved, and consequently on the basis of the distinction between 
time (tempus) and eternity (aeternitas)—and thus set in relation to reli­
gion. In the transition to modernity, the problem of temporality became 
more important; but even temporal linearization was still seen in terms of 

 
  Self-Descriptions
the time/eternity schema. Before a person died, the Jesuits taught, he had 
time to earn salvation. Death (as event!) then marked the difference. After 
death, eternity began, and all that then remained was eternal remorse.332 
At the same time, the discovery of fashion (“la mode” as opposed to “le 
mode” assumed a temporally limited meaning) began to undermine the 
enduring validity of forms and hence the susceptibility of humankind to 
hierarchization. Skill in handling prevailing circumstances became more 
important than position.333 Although the form discussion was still domi­
nated by the distinction between spiritual and secular, each side of this dis­
tinction could encompass the other: devotion itself became a fashion, and 
fashion as such became a sin, because it distracted attention from what re­
ally counted in life: salvation.
The eighteenth century introduced changes that were fundamental in 
many regards. The new society now saw itself as independent of its begin­
nings, as gradually becoming more and more civilized (e.g., by transform­
ing violence into law and taking better account of women). And instead 
of the stories that had been told as examples for good and bad ways of life, 
“history” was invented to divide off the present from the past.
This had directly to do with the change in the societal description 
of time discussed. If, in the present, event-like actuality and thus the gen­
eration of a difference between past and present was emphasized, society 
needed a different sort of memory than before. In other words, what was 
already known, what one had previously relied on, had to be converted 
into the difference between past and future. The familiarity of the fac­
tual world [Sachwelt] in which the memory operated inconspicuously and 
hence uncritically (just as we all know that flowers belong in a vase, al­
though unable to say when and how we learned this) had to be temporal­
ized so that one could check whether reactualization was necessary or not. 
History thus developed in the sense of actuality that was no longer secured, 
and could then be investigated academically, cultivated with nostalgia, or 
interpreted in the light of national policy, or could provoke a desperate 
search for lost time.
This makes a new sense of the “revolution” concept understandable 
that only arose during the French Revolution in, so to speak, self-reference 
to events.334 The term “revolution” had long been current—partly to de­
scribe a (deliberate) return to the good old order, partly to describe violent 
upheaval. Revolution now came to designate a break dividing the old so­

Self-Descriptions    
cietal order from the new; thus a form of distinction that made the self-
description of modern society possible without having to define factual 
meaning boundaries (for instance, system/environment relations). Since 
this juncture was clearly marked historically and irrevocably charged with 
concrete experience, the processing of its consequences could in turn be 
left to history.
What was apparently at stake was to gain the past as point of reference 
for externalization. One defined oneself in terms of “no longer like. . . .” But 
for this very reason the past had to remain presentable and had to be re­
worked as never before. Such presence of the absent could be produced by 
writing and established as universal presence through printing. If, however, 
one could externalize into history and treat the present as a turning point 
under the paradigm (or exemplum) of “revolution,” the uncertainty of the 
future could be borne—at least for a while. It did not at the same time in­
dicate the indeterminacy of the world, but only the openness of the states 
of affairs that had arisen in course of the actual progress of humankind.
History contained its own description, which in turn corresponded 
to the “zeitgeist” and varied with the course of history—probably the first 
case of a description of self-descriptions that included itself in what it de­
scribed.335 One could then speak of a “history of society.”336 This history 
was understood only as the history of structural changes.337 It was “filled” 
with reference to tendencies (progress)338 and with all sorts of epochal divi­
sions, with the latest epoch being described as modern society in contrast 
to those preceding it. Historians consequently consolidated their disci­
pline at the level of second-order observation, inquiring more into the 
“how” of historiography, that is to say, into methods, than into the “what,” 
the factual concept of history.339 Finally, sociology solved the increasing 
difficulties of attribution and proof by extreme reduction to the differ­
ence between traditional and modern societies—only to founder on this 
distinction.340 Rejection of determination by origin (which accompanied 
rejection of the estates-based order) also led to a growing need for moder­
nity to interpret itself,341 and consequently to the impossibility of reaching 
agreement on the issue, to ideological controversy.
These changes in the concept of history went back to changes in 
how time itself was understood, at least in the literature. They were of 
much more crucial importance. Time was now increasingly described 
only in terms of the difference between past and future. This meant that 

 
  Self-Descriptions
society had to choose between a past that was no longer valid, no longer 
binding and a future that was still to be determined—like a young per­
son whose family could no longer provide him with the security and stan­
dards that his professional life could not yet provide. One could accept a 
blank check on the future only as long as modern society could not yet 
be fully known. This seems to be changing at present. Future prospects 
are becoming gloomier, which increases the pressure to make decisions in 
the present; for only in the present, only in the context of a simultane­
ously given world is one capable of making decisions and taking action. 
Time accordingly seems to pass more rapidly. The extent to which deci­
sion-making organizations, above all, in the political system, can absorb 
this pressure and thus the growing mistrust, is one of the most important 
problems of the present.
In comparison with the old European time semantics, the basic dis­
tinction has changed that determined the time dimension, and that there­
fore determined how the paradox of time would manifest itself and could 
be resolved. Where the distinction between time and eternity is concerned, 
the paradox (if we leave aside Zenon’s movement paradoxes) lies on the one 
side of the distinction: in eternity, which is time and not time. Here it can 
be absorbed by the concept of God. The distinction between past and fu­
ture becomes paradoxical if one considers that past and present are always 
simultaneously given, namely, as horizons of the present. The present is the 
unity of the difference between past and future. As the time of the observer 
of time itself, it catapults itself out of time. It is the time in which one has 
no time, because everything one can capture with time is already past or 
still future. This timeless “total temporality” of the present replaces eternity 
in modern thinking.342 And it is deparadoxized by distinguishing between 
the present past and future and the past and future presents, thus doubly 
modalizing the conceptuality of time. At more concrete levels of research, it 
is precisely this that the historicization of historical awareness brings about.
Finally, in the social dimension, the question is how society can be 
described as unity with regard to the distinction between ego and alter. 
The first-order observer sees the differences between human beings and 
their fates and asks about justice. At the second-order level one can ob­
serve and describe that and how society regulates itself, what positions it 
assigns to people, and how it justifies this. In this respect, we speak of in­
clusion principles.343

Self-Descriptions    
The old society had regulated inclusion by assigning fixed places to 
families or corporations (and thus indirectly to persons). This simple solu­
tion had to be abandoned with the transition to functional differentiation, 
for persons cannot be distributed among functional systems. Instead, new 
inclusion principles were sought and found, which were given the names 
“liberty” and “equality” and assumed the form of civil rights, even human 
rights. Liberty or freedom meant that the attribution of persons (no lon­
ger families) to society was no longer determined by societal structures but 
was based on a combination of self-selection and other-selection. Equal­
ity meant that no other inclusion principles were recognized than those 
the functional system itself laid down. In other words, only functional 
systems had the right to produce inequalities on intrasystemic (and there­
fore for them rational) grounds. All requirements had to be submitted to 
the system from the perspective of equality, thus without structure; for ex­
ample, the equality of all before the law with the exception of differences 
grounded in the legal system itself. The latent function of these human 
rights therefore lay not in honoring and ratifying specifications given by 
“human nature.” It lay rather in the fact that in modern society, it was in 
principle not possible to predict the social contexts in which someone had 
something to say or otherwise to contribute. It lay in keeping the future 
open against all advance arrangements that could arise from a categori­
zation or classification of human beings (e.g., in higher and lower), and 
above all from political sorting.
It is striking that the inclusion principles liberty and equality do not 
betray their own form. Although one can quickly choose between freedom 
and unfreedom and just as rapidly between equality and inequality, even at 
this level of abstraction society always realizes both sides of the distinction 
simultaneously. Concrete clarification is then only needed about the sort of 
unfreedom against which freedom can be asserted and about the sort of in­
equality against which equality can be demanded. The inclusion principles 
are, mainly owing to the French Revolution, proclaimed as a sort of blank 
check on the future. As such they have naturally not been realized. A prob­
lem that could not be solved in this form has simply been shifted from the 
present to the future. Concretization would have to follow through ideas 
that for this function have been given the name “ideology.” But since the 
principles cannot determine concretization, there is more than one possi­
bility of ideologization.

 
  Self-Descriptions
Besides temporalization, Reinhart Koselleck notes the susceptibility 
of many expressions to the “ideologization” characteristic of the semantic 
turn in which modern society discovered itself.344 This also addresses the 
social dimension, for it is always others who think ideologically. The pre­
conditions lie in the renunciation of natural principles mentioned above 
and in their replacement by a semantics capable of self-reference. The facts 
were familiar long before the invention of the ideology concept. In 1748, 
Hume wrote: “As no party, in the present age, can well support itself with­
out a philosophical or speculative system of principles, annexed to its po­
litical or practical one; we accordingly find, that each of the factions, into 
which this nation is divided, has reared up a fabric of the former kind, in 
order to protect and cover that scheme of actions, which it pursues.”345 
Principles and ideas differ depending on differences in social practices; and 
the concept of ideology in the Marxian sense merely adds the insight that 
these differences, too, can be explained in terms of the social order.
In a very undemanding sense, we can use the distinction between 
various ideologies to show that the French Revolution had opened up an 
option: for or against. In the first centuries of the nineteenth century, there 
were consequently constitutional and restoration movements. They were 
joined, with the spread of industrialization, by the controversy about lib­
eralism and socialism. The ideology concept offered a form for such dis­
tinctions. Participants, that is to say the observers of conditions, could 
thus react controversially to the structural problems of modern society. 
The observer of these observers saw that differing strategies were realized 
for resolving the unity that could now be comprehended only as paradox. 
Society could be paradoxically defined: it was (not yet) what it was. But it 
was already what it not yet was. It was on the road to progress, which had 
to be fostered through liberalism; or it was already gathering strength for 
a revolution by plunging ever deeper into the necessary crisis. The present 
of the future served as still indeterminate locus for meeting the promise of 
rationality.346 One then sought to realize ideas and behaved progressively. 
Both planning and utopia provided counterdeterminations, which made 
flight into a still indeterminate future possible; and “democratization” 
promised that, when the time was ripe, it would prove possible to reach 
agreement. Or one resolved the paradox in the opposite direction, defining 
it first as tautology (that is to say, in terms of a distinction that claims not 
to be one) and then concluding that society is what it is. There is nothing 

Self-Descriptions    
to be done, but disasters can be prevented and aberrations forestalled. One 
thus becomes conservative.
The program problems of the conservatives clearly demonstrated 
that while the historicization of societal time had made their position pos­
sible, it nevertheless put it at a disadvantage. The future as element of a 
distinction made sense only if it was different from the past. But conserva­
tives could not want this. They preferred everything to remain the way it 
had become and not to have to demand this. Progressives could more eas­
ily consider themselves favored by time. On the other hand, only conser­
vatives had the opportunity for a higher culture of reflection, because they 
alone faced the problem of the extent to which society remained the same 
in the face of change. They oscillated between concrete polemics and re­
flection.347 An idea sufficed for progressives; and they emitted theory only 
to explain why the idea had not yet come to bear.
Their positions had varying affinities with other idea complexes. Only 
the conservative could, for example, think “organically” or allow himself 
skepticism about humanity. Above all, however, this style of opposition was 
appropriate for seeing time differently. Either the future derived from the 
present and the contrast between past and future had to be reduced (with­
out the past assuming a self-value or having simply to continue), or one 
had to intensify the contrast and ensure that the future eliminated what ex­
tended into the present in the way of defects of an obsolete history, above 
all, inequalities.
The covert paradox and overt reference to history gave this form of 
ideology formation the success that enabled it to spare itself questions about 
the unity of the controversial issue. This is precisely where views differed, 
depending on standpoint and political commitment. The depiction of the 
given forms only strengthened the impression that it was a question of non­
negotiable “worldviews.” At the same time, the value concept, which only 
confirms this, began its career. It issued no instructions, but it takes account 
of the need to know there is a level of inviolate validity above all contingen­
cies of opinion. Once again, a distinction was available whose unity could 
not be addressed: the distinction between “being” and “validity.”
How then were decisions made in the social dimension of the de­
scription of society? Just as the distinction between past and future in the 
time dimension was intensified, so the distinction that defined the social 
dimension was also sharpened, namely, the distinction between ego and 

 
  Self-Descriptions
alter. The ideology concept itself provided somewhat clearer indications. 
The concept of ideology which initially denoted only the science of con­
trolling empirical behavior through ideas (thus more or less what we call 
“semantics”),348 took on a new meaning with Marx. Any explanation that 
takes account only of the polemical and pejorative components falls short. 
It is not only and not primarily a matter of abuse, even if Marx himself 
often uses the wrong tone. The decisive factor was the shift of the prob­
lem of societal orientation to a second-order level and renunciation of an 
agreed reality. An observer observed another observer with respect to what 
the latter could not see. In other words, ideologies are texts that contain 
something that they do not contain, namely, information about their au­
thors and users, and in the usual interpretation, this means information 
about their interests.349 It is, in other words, a question of a blind spot, 
the problem of latency. According to Marx, capitalists work on their own 
downfall because they cannot know or correct precisely this.350
From the nineteenth century on, observing the inability to observe 
concentrated increasing interest. This radical new approach to the social 
had predecessors in the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century novel, as well 
as in the literature described as “Counter-Enlightenment.”351 Many new 
versions of it appeared after Marx—for example, in Freud’s psychoanalysis 
and in the sociology of latent structures and functions. As long as one un­
derstood by “observers” only psychic systems, this could remain a nugatory 
or at best therapeutic, private hobby. But what happens when communica­
tion takes place in this way?
All these complex forms of transitional semantics can be summed up 
in one question: Who is the observer? This question cannot be answered 
and therefore cannot be put. The usual characterization of the observer as 
“subject” allows us at best to describe the problem of the social dimension 
as a problem of “intersubjectivity.” At least, one then has a strictly para­
doxical concept in hand, but nothing more; for, if the subject is a subject, 
“inter” can neither underlie it nor not underlie it. The novel, the love story, 
but also Hegel’s novel about the love between world history and philoso­
phy, localizes the observer—who can also see what he had hitherto not 
been able to see—at the end of the story. This makes it necessary to keep 
the narrator, who always knows everything already, and thus Hegel him­
self, out of the story.352 But this does not suffice to answer the question 
about the observer. Particularly unavailing are currently fashionable ap­

Self-Descriptions    
proaches such as Wittgenstein’s language-game pluralism, the thesis of a 
cultural relativism, and the discourse plurality of so-called postmodernism. 
Nor does it make much sense to concern oneself with the controversies be­
tween these various positions, for this leads only to the mutual reconstruc­
tion of their respective shortcomings.
Our analysis suggests that with this technique of observing the in­
ability to observe, modern society comprehends the paradox of the ob­
server as the included excluded third. But this then obliges the observation 
of observation to infer autologically to itself and to the paradox as conclu­
sion: the observer is the unobservable. This does not, however, lead to de­
spair. In the autopoietic system, there is no conclusion, neither beginning 
nor end. Every end is a beginning. The paradox thus resolves itself in time. 
The system puts what as object cannot be observed into operation. And if 
this happens and if such operations of observation are repeatedly applied 
to their own results, this could lead finally to stable “eigenvalues,” that is to 
say, to a semantics that can bear this and is therefore favored.
18. Modernization
Among the peculiarities of the self-description of modern society is 
that this society, too, needs “modernization.” Just as one suggests that in­
dividuals are not only real but also need self-realization, societal theory in 
modernity appears to assume that modern society is not yet modern and 
has, so to speak, to emulate itself in order to become modern at last. This 
conundrum is easy to solve by distinguishing between the various concepts 
of modernity. But the question remains of why this strange figure of mod­
ernization is claimed to be desirable precisely for modern society (noone 
would think of expecting “modernization” of the ancient Roman Empire 
or of lamenting its failure).
There is curious reserve in the lexical treatment of the subject: the 
Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie [Historical Dictionary of Philos­
ophy] speaks of “modern, die Moderne” and of “Modernismus” (vol. 6, 
1984), and the lexicon Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe [Basic Historical Con­
cepts; cited n. 344] speaks of “Modern: Modernität, Moderne” (vol. 4, 
1978). There is no article on “Modernisierung” [modernization]. On the 
other hand, evolutionary perspectives and result orientation have been 
running in parallel since the mid-nineteenth century. Entities come into 

 
  Self-Descriptions
being through evolution, but they also have to be made. There is therefore 
sufficient reason to dissolve the concept of modernity into the definition 
of something not yet achieved.
The French Revolution marked the end of aristocratic society, revoked 
the corresponding legal structures, and swept away the self-­conception of 
a hierarchical societal order long since crumbling. But it provided no al­
ternative concept of modern society. Its constitutional ideas were limited 
to the political system, and apart from that, individuals were set free to 
lead self-determined lives—an idea that soon came to be understood in 
the sense of “enrichessez vous” [enrich yourselves].The semantic vacuum 
could be interpreted historically as pointing to the future. Modern soci­
ety was “not yet” really modern. For concrete orientation, one relied on 
the distinction between developed and underdeveloped areas of the globe. 
This could be filled in with empty words and phrases such as “liberty,” 
“equality,” “solidarity,” “abolition of class distinctions,” “the rule of pub­
lic opinion,” and so on, without having to go the long way round via 
a theoretically and empirically well-founded model of society. A parallel 
philosophical construction, for which one can cite such names as Husserl 
and Habermas, assumed that still undiscovered, unsuspected potential for 
rationality lay in the principle of the self-critical reason of individuals, a 
potential that could far outstrip the advances of technical-scientific civili­
zation and its economic (“capitalist”) achievements.
Such “not yet” formulations, however, tend to hide a sociological 
problem: how already modern society can be modernized at all. In this re­
gard, we look back from the end of the twentieth century on two series of 
experiments whose premises have both become questionable: the socialist 
experiment of the Soviet Union and the experiment of modernization in 
developing countries. As long as the “Cold War” continued, each of these 
ventures could explain the setbacks of the other, and it was not necessary 
to confront the question of modernization in modern society. At the end 
of the twentieth century, we find ourselves in a different situation.
In both series of experiments, a regionally limited concept came to 
bear that ignored or at least underestimated the fact that modern society 
is established as world society.353 The one concept was semantically closely 
associated with the concept of revolution. Political events such as those in 
Paris in 1789 and Saint Petersburg in 1917 were described as revolutions 
and thus assigned to a modernization program. The direction of general­

Self-Descriptions    
ization ran from the event of a violent upheaval, of the sort that had always 
occurred, to a program to be continued with worldwide aspirations and re­
gional obstacles. Marxism, in particular, although it envisaged a world rev­
olution, could stage revolution only as a specific political undertaking, and 
thus only in regional states. Moreover, concepts such as classless society, 
social distributional equality, or emancipation were and remained histori­
cal concepts subject to a sort of parousia [messianic or apocalyptic] delay, 
and accordingly lost credibility. One could only try to realize these objec­
tives through a central organization with increasing discrepancies between 
idea and reality. Finally, there was and remained world society, in which all 
this was expected to take place within territorial boundaries, a function­
ally differentiated system that owed its own effectiveness to the autonomy 
of functional systems and was not to be combined with any sort of central 
control. This applied above all to the credit system of international finance, 
which could guarantee a certain flexibility in the timing of investment and 
consumption, which was crucial for growing regional development. Natu­
rally, it also applied to international affairs, to scientific research, and not 
least to everything that interested intellectuals. Any insistence on organi­
zationally controlled, regional autonomies is quite simply not compatible 
with this. The attempt to introduce this sort of modernization in mod­
ern society had to be at the cost of stagnation, a drain on last power re­
sources, diminishing acceptance, and finally the collapse of the “system.”354 
If Western circles renounced revolution and retreated into “dialogue” in 
quest of agreement, this cannot be regarded as a sociopolitical alternative 
from a sociological point of view.
Also outside Marxist doctrine, which had expected class conflicts to 
intensify, if society is described at all as a stratified system, and hence as 
a system of unequal distribution, modernization can be understood only 
as the reduction of these inequalities; for they have no function in mod­
ern society and are only a nuisance. Modernizing modernity now means 
reducing class differences, above all through growing wealth and by gen­
erating surpluses that can be used for the benefit of the disadvantaged. 
The predominance of functional differentiation remains outside the field 
of vision.
The modernization concept in development policy differs; at least 
implicitly it follows the models of individual functional systems and no 
longer the abstract ideals of the French Revolution. The point of departure 

 
  Self-Descriptions
lay not in ideas but in the circumstances, namely, in the widely differing 
levels of development in the various regions of world society. The situation 
was described as backwardness or backlog demands, and was easy to make 
plausible. Already developed countries, above all, industrialized ones, were 
seen as models to be emulated by the less developed.355 The comparison 
inspired a nationalistic policy even without any ethnic or a cultural basis. 
The point of departure here, too, was at least implicitly world society, for 
how would the differences otherwise have been registered and become a 
problem? On the other hand, the modernization concept related not to 
world society itself but to backward regions, practically speaking to the de­
veloping countries, whose “states” were both to implement development 
policy and themselves be modernized in the direction of democracy and 
the rule of law (on the assumption that both were possible at the same 
time). The question of how modernization in modern society was to be en­
visaged and carried out was handed on to regional entities, and reduced to 
a format offering a chance of practical solution with this breakdown into 
smaller, limited entities, ultimately into only local projects (e.g., irrigation 
systems for the hitherto unusual cultivation of rice).
Apart from this regional to local breakdown of the problem, how­
ever, the different structures marking the individual functional systems 
worldwide as modern were also abandoned. This was the case, for ex­
ample, with the so-called market economy, which trusts decisions about 
the rationality of economic investments (including borrowing) to the in­
dividual firm. It was the case for the idea that a modern political system 
had to consist of “democratic” states that could organize a change of gov­
ernment through “free” elections (without vote-buying, etc.). The (active 
and passive) freedom of opinion, freedom of the press, and so on were 
to be taken as legal conditions for the political, religious, and other au­
tonomies of the mass media system. The precondition for all this was a 
legalistically operating, constitution-based legal system insusceptible to 
“corruption.” Education in the modern style is school education under 
the system of age-group classes that regulates access to universities and 
thus to the distribution of positions evaluated in society. Scientific re­
search is supposed to be free, not subject to religious or political control, 
but guided solely by self-formulated theories and methods. Not least, the 
individual must decide whether to adopt a religion, and if so which one; 
then only so does it seem possible to ensure that religion is a matter of 

Self-Descriptions    
personal conviction and not an expression of adaptation to custom or to 
politically enforced conformity.
It was tacitly assumed that the sectoral thrust of modernization in 
each of the functional systems would be mutually presupposed and sup­
portive across systems. There was discussion of whether this amounted to 
“convergence” among modernizations or whether traditional regional dif­
ferences would persist, for example, in Japan or the Soviet Union. But 
the debate concerned only regions with differing traditions and differing 
demo­graphic and ecological conditions for modernization. The most se­
rious problem, however, is whether the autonomy of functional systems 
would not lead to mutual strain, even testing the limits to functional sys­
tems’ structural adaptability to their differentiation itself. What would the 
consequences be for the political system, for example, if science offered 
the possibility of producing energy from nuclear fission, whether for mili­
tary or civilian purposes? Or what differences would party platforms and 
electoral campaigns to be based on if the dynamics of the international fi­
nancial system rendered the distinction between liberal and socialist policy 
meaningless, and it was clear from the outset that economic promises could 
neither differ nor be met? Is it possible to control development toward the 
welfare state with the classical tools of legal dogma, and if not, how could 
the constitutional court be prevented from constantly intervening in ways 
not democratically legitimated? How could the economy or public admin­
istrative authorities financed by the economy ensure that jobs are available 
at the level of education provided by the educational system? And what are 
the political consequences if members of a growing ­university-educated 
middle class are no longer willing to come to terms with their qualifications 
bringing neither power or income? Imbalances of this sort make themselves 
felt in very different ways from country to country. They are to be found 
not only in developing countries but also and especially in countries that 
can look back on a wealth of experience in modernization. This could be 
demonstrated only by regional studies. At any rate, they call into question 
the present, as it were linear, concept of modernization.
Should we consequently abandon the curious concept of the mod­
ernization of modern society? If we did so, it would at any rate not mean 
apathetic acceptance of things as they are. But it would mean taking the 
already apparent problems of modern society, especially the emerging dis­
crepancies between functional systems, more seriously than in the past.

 
  Self-Descriptions
19. Information and Risk as Descriptive Formulas
For understandable reasons, descriptions of modern society have pre­
ferred spectacular characteristics that can be used simplistically, but which 
for this very reason can address only isolated phenomena. Access to the 
complexity of the overall system can be regained only through targeted 
reductions in the system. Until recently, the usual way out was to con­
centrate on the characteristics of one functional system—notably of capi­
talism (the money economy), industry (market-oriented production), and 
science-based technology—and present it as decisive, as dominant, as for­
mative. Recurrent efforts to focus on politics in the form of the nation-
state are in keeping with this pattern.356 Recently, however, descriptions 
have been added that no longer limit themselves to single functional sys­
tems but instead address aspects of communication, exploiting them for 
the analysis of historical differences. Catchphrases like “information soci­
ety”357 and “risk society”358 come to mind.
These formulas can be attractive, too, because of the need both to re­
duce complexity and to emphasize what is historically new, to treat spectac­
ular isolated phenomena as representative. In the case of the “information 
society,” new dissemination media and computerized data processing have 
generated a flood of information. That our society is an information soci­
ety is typically explained purely economically in terms of the production/
consumption schema. More and more working time is spent producing in­
formation and more and more working and leisure time is spent consum­
ing information.359 The questionable premise, accepted without hesitation, 
is that information is an economic good that can be produced, transmit­
ted, and consumed. However, the presupposed stability can hardly be 
justified on the basis of the information concept. Information is a decay 
product. It vanishes when actualized. An information society would ac­
cordingly be one that for initially incomprehensible reasons considered it 
necessary constantly to surprise itself.360 Although the spectacular increase 
in information generation is impressive, the degree of exploitation remains 
low. Most information is therefore not information, or at best potential 
information, and any increase in productivity through more and more in­
formation cannot be proved at the macro-economic level. On the contrary, 
the cost of improving production technology has been heavy.361 It seems 
to be a matter of rationally unjustified euphoria. The opposite is the case 

Self-Descriptions    
with the catchphrase “risk society.” The focus here is on new, technology-
related risks and the concomitant fears. However, the buzzwords “infor­
mation” and “risk” tell us more than this. They can no longer refer to single 
functional systems (despite all the stress on technological developments), 
but are compatible with a description of society that focuses on functional 
differentiation as form without committing itself to it.
The description of society as an information or risk society can be 
expanded with regard to the factors that gave rise to such descriptions. In 
the case of the information society, it is not only the impact of comput­
ers but more generally the question whether the information component 
of communication has gained ground over the utterance component. That 
would then mean two things: that the persuasive component of the utter­
ance and with it the dependence on social status and stratification take sec­
ond place; and that the newness, the actuality, the “just-in-time” quality of 
the information communicated become more important, and guarantees 
of duration less important. This would have a considerable effect on the so­
cial dimension and the time dimension of meaning, in which all commu­
nication is continuously followed and reactualized. Risk society is not only 
about the dependence of modern society on technology, but more gener­
ally about the assumption that the future depends essentially on decisions 
to be made in the present, so that future presents are always decided now, 
even though the future cannot be known.362 This is likely, for example, to 
intensify the trend toward politicizing all risk issues, toward a sort of pro­
tection policy (instead of mere distribution policy).
However, such extensions do not settle the scope of such descriptions 
at all. Both formulas use certain ambiguities in the concepts employed, 
above all a lack of clear distinctions. For instance, the information con­
cept is used in the double sense of a surprising selection and a transferable, 
transportable, and negotiable particle (although the one meaning excludes 
the other).363 The gain in determinacy that can be achieved through in­
formation is always associated with surprises, and presents determinacy as 
contingent, as possible in other ways. Furthermore, information can be a 
surprise only once. Once it is known, it retains its meaning but loses its 
quality of information. If information is to be communicated at all, it must 
therefore be continuously recommunicated; and if we know this, we also 
know that we cannot know the future. Information is a profoundly ambiv­
alent matter. It contains, so to speak, its own counterconcept. It reproduces 

 
  Self-Descriptions
­knowledge and ignorance ever anew from moment to moment. As infor­
mation, it provides connectivity options, but in so doing—on the other 
side, the “unmarked space” of its form—it always renews the background 
knowledge that there are other possibilities too. The concept of information 
thus excludes nothing and can therefore claim universal relevance. It directs 
the search for connections in a space of basically contingent selections—
without the religious safety net that older societies had spread.364
Risk is also, so to speak, everything that can go wrong. A possible 
counterconcept would be “safety,” but it must be admitted that safety in a 
strict, risk-free sense does not exist. Thus the concept of risk as usually un­
derstood is also a universal concept that excludes nothing but only marks 
itself in the context of its own form. These concepts cannot really capture 
what is historically new. In any case, it is not to be found in the advances 
usually cited: the mass media, computers, industrial technology. What is 
new is only that they are used as formally ambivalent concepts to describe 
modern society. It is also worth noting that the characterizations “infor­
mation society” and “risk society” are autological. They at least allow it to 
be asked whether the catchphrase “information society” does not itself give 
information about this society, and whether one does not run the risk of 
engendering risk aversion by speaking of a “risk society.”
If we look at the form of these concepts, including what they carry 
along on their “other side” without indicating it, both the profundity and 
the limitedness of these self-description formulas become clear. Informa­
tion then becomes a system-specific differentiation event that cannot be 
observed from outside. Information society is characterized by its struc­
tural and chronic uninformedness. Each system muddles along on the basis 
of its own information generation, continues its own autopoiesis on the 
basis of structural couplings, irritations, the related reactions and restruc­
turing without being accessible as unity from within or without—unless 
in the specific mode of observation that depends on specific distinctions, 
which in turn produce information, but only for the system that uses them 
operationally. And “risk” would be a catchword for the self-description of 
a system that limits the range of variation for the future through its deci­
sions but cannot determine its own future. Every future present is the re­
sult of evolution; or, to put it paradoxically: the future is decided not by 
decision but by evolution. However, if we wish to project this onto the de­
cisional situation that has arisen after the loss of confidence in feasibility 

Self-Descriptions    
and the loss of confidence in the knowability of errors, then risk is the suit­
able description.
At any rate, these catchphrases suggest a transition from the specific 
to the general, and thus a transition from descriptions that stir up public 
opinion for a while before fizzling out to theory-lead analyses that have to 
prove their worth only within science. This shifts the standpoint of the ob­
server to the level of second-order observation, if not a third-order one. A 
“that’s the way it is” attitude is replaced by a word game that seeks a hold in 
itself. Decisions about a more precise definition of the concepts “informa­
tion” and “risk,” and, above all, decisions about the other side of their form, 
that is to say, about what they exclude, and therefore include, are of consid­
erable relevance for the self-description of society.365 Self-­description itself 
becomes the subject of self-description, and society could describe itself as 
a self-describing system, while conceding that there can be more than one 
equally plausible self-description. The logic of observation and description 
then has to be converted from monotextural to polycontextural structures. 
It can no longer use only a single distinction for highlighting one thing 
against another. Nor can it make do any longer with monotextural, closed 
controversies, such as that between capitalism and socialism. The excluded 
third used in every decision (the world, the unity of society, the observer 
himself) becomes the potential subject of another distinction that exposes 
its own generalized tertium non datur to access by further observers. None 
of the selected sections can claim final validity or the function of judg­
ing all others. For itself, each operates blindly. At the same time, however, 
there is nothing that in principle escapes distinction and indication, noth­
ing that would have to remain covert because of its “nature.” Everything 
becomes history—never mind posthistoire. And everything that can be said 
about it can be said only on condition that it applies to itself.
In this situation without beginning and end, the possible candidates 
for the meaning forms of self-description can no longer be listed, no longer 
limited in advance, for this would again be only one self-­description among 
others. The task remains of explicating the theoretical means as clearly as 
possible, and thus exposing them to observation. Theoretical means are 
above all concepts. Concepts are distinctions. Distinctions are instructions 
to cross the boundary. As forms they are both closed and themselves dis­
tinguishable. As Spencer-Brown puts it succinctly: “distinction is perfect 
continence.”366 But precisely this continence offers the possibility of deal­

 
  Self-Descriptions
ing with it. With its forms, its distinctions, theory exposes its blind spot, 
that is to say, what is invisible to it, to which it owes what it can see and 
show. The point in exposing this is not to introduce a return to ultimately 
indisputable reasons. It is only a matter of showing what one can construct 
with certain means and the extent to which sensibilities can be unfolded 
(explicated) if one proceeds in this manner (and not otherwise). The sense 
of such a demanding enterprise is to both facilitate criticism and make it 
more difficult. What is demanded is to do it differently but at least as well.
The more clearly the contours of such a venture appear, which de­
scribes society as a self-describing society and thus enters its object, the 
more urgent the question of the real conditions of possibility becomes, at 
least for sociologists. Or to take up the question at the end of the preceding 
section: How do “eigenvalues” develop in such observation of observers 
and description of descriptions in the sense of stable attractors that stimu­
late further descriptions and can then no longer be passed over? And what 
operational contexts can keep pace if this is the problem?
20. The Mass Media and Their Selection of Self-Descriptions
At the end of the twentieth century there is no telling whether any 
eigenvalues of this sort will develop. In its very conception, the notion ad­
mits of no prediction. There is a growing discrepancy between the seman­
tics and reality. On the one hand, we have the intellectual scrap trade busy 
recycling ideas, which now offers its wares only in the “neo-” and “post-
”varieties.367 On the other hand, we find an intensive, quickly reactive sen­
sitivity in societal communication to new problems such as the impact of 
technology, ecology, decision-making risks, the internationalization of fi­
nancial markets, and the state’s political preponderance, which although 
in many ways obsolete, and can lead to war, is nevertheless democratically 
indispensable; also the problems that arise from the growing discrepan­
cies between industrial countries and developing countries, from the new 
intransigence in the individual’s entitlement mentality, and much more. 
Given the many and very specifically defined difficulties, it is difficult to 
see whether and how a theory of society could supply an appropriate de­
scription, let alone propose “solutions to problems.”
In assessing modern society’s capacity for describing itself, we must 
above all remember that such self-description is no longer transmitted 

Self-Descriptions    
orally as wisdom, and no longer articulates high conclusions as philosophy, 
but obeys the inherent laws of the mass media. Every morning and every 
evening, an inexorable web of news settles over the earth and sets out what 
has happened and what one has to be ready for. Some events take place of 
their own accord, and society is so turbulent that something is always hap­
pening. Others are produced for the mass media. Above all, expressions of 
opinion can be treated as events, so that the media can allow their material 
to reenter itself reflexively. In all of this, the print media interact with tele­
vision. The outdifferentiation of the mass media alone generates a surplus 
of communication options. This in turn leads to very stringent selection of 
what can be uttered, and to a selection of what can be “well” uttered (from 
a journalistic or telegenic point of view). Inevitably, every description of 
our society also has to include these means (and hence its own means) and 
how they relate to itself. In sociological descriptions, which have differenti­
ated out the “mass media” as an area of research in its own right, this has so 
far seldom happened.368 The “cultural hegemony” of the mass media, be­
fore which even protest movements have to bow if they do not wish to re­
nounce success from the outset, is indeed perceived,369 but described only 
as a phenomenon, because the societal theory context needed to capture 
and limit it is lacking.
The term “mass media” embraces perspectives that have to be care­
fully kept apart. One should use the term “medium” only to describe a 
quantity of only loosely coupled elements available for form formation. 
“Public opinion” is a medium in this sense—regardless of whether the to­
tality of elements is understood psychically as diffuse attention potential or 
socially as contribution to topics of communication, the form of which lies 
in familiarity (or in the implication of familiarity). This has to be distin­
guished from the question of which social system produces and reproduces 
the medium—society itself or a functional system differentiated out espe­
cially for this purpose. Only such a functional system should be termed 
“mass media.”
Since the eighteenth century, “public opinion” has been spoken of in 
a sense going beyond tradition.370 Contrary to the expectations of the eigh­
teenth and nineteenth centuries, however, the peculiar modernity of the 
public opinion that developed was that, like the market, it constituted no 
unity. It did not select what reason demanded. It contributed to the auto­
poiesis of society, for it involved communication; but it formulated no con­

 
  Self-Descriptions
sensus about what society was or should be. Its function lay not in societal 
integration but in making the observation of observers possible. Every mo­
mentary state was presented as the starting point for differences, if not as 
a difference in itself. This is apparent when one moves from description to 
analysis of the factors regulating how what appears as public opinion is gen­
erated and what it is. This is done by very specific selection, the results of 
which can accordingly not exclude contingency nor, above all, the possibil­
ity of reaching other conclusions.
The selectivity of what is given consideration as “public opinion” 
owing to the effectiveness of these mass media can be summarily described 
in the three dimensions of meaning. In the factual dimension quantita­
tive data gain outstanding importance with no possibility of taking the 
methods for arriving at these data into account. Disasters attract atten­
tion particularly when unusual numbers are involved (massive highway 
pileups, thousands of dead seals, losses running into the millions, etc.). A 
rise in GNP is welcomed, a fall deplored; politics and the stock exchange 
react to publication of the numbers without considering that the gross na­
tional product can also rise because previously unpaid work is paid for or 
because accidents and disasters increase and losses have to be compensated 
for through payments.371 
As a result, society plunges into a sort of statistical normal depression. 
Seen in reverse, every “more” is also “less” of what had been. If growth is 
reported, people are no longer satisfied with the conditions and yields that 
had been quite normal a few years ago. And even if growth slows down, this 
is bad news. Owing to this more= less paradox, a return to the levels that 
had been fully satisfactory a few years back is experienced as retrogression.372
As if to balance out the abstraction of quantities, information is ex­
pected to have and is given local (or functionally equivalent personal) ref­
erence. Paradoxes of becoming of the type more=less or higher=lower can 
thus be resolved in an identity thesis that they do not call into question. 
This leads to ethnocentric perspectives and to overestimation of how im­
portant individual persons are in the unfolding of events—thus, all in 
all, to peculiarities of reality construction that can hardly be corrected 
sociologically.
From a temporal point of view, what is worth reporting has to be 
new, it has to be an event with a certain surprise value (informational 
value), and the temporal depth of the report (prehistory and suspected 

Self-Descriptions    
consequences) is organized with this in mind. The social dimension is 
presented as conflict with the permanent background expectation that 
agreement ought really to be reached. Accounts of conflict are mostly ac­
companied by moral judgments, renewing the illusion from case to case 
that there are rules for deciding conflicts—in the form of points of view 
that call on everyone to join in judging. Taken together, these filters am­
plify the stir. This naturally does not mean that agitation really arises and 
persists within psychic systems. But at the level of what is communicated 
and what is communicatively connective, society appears to be agitated 
about itself and alarmed by itself. It therefore reproduces within itself the 
schizophrenia of the double wish: to take part in changes and to be pro­
tected against their consequences. And for this schizophrenia it creates the 
position of the uninvolved-involved spectator.
This is particularly well illustrated by a special paradigmatic case, 
namely, the way in which ecological topics have emerged and come to 
prominence. The speed with which this complex of topics has been in­
troduced and spread is certainly due partly to protest movements oper­
ating in close collaboration with the media,373 but above all to the mass 
media themselves. Many selection criteria come together in this context: 
high figures, a steady supply of disasters, events triggered by technology 
and therefore contingent, ideological and political conflicts about the ap­
propriate attitude to adopt. Then there are the local and at the same time 
supralocal relevance and the largely invisible form of threat (radioactivity, 
inaccessible factories, invisible chemical substances). On the other hand, 
precisely these favorable conditions also determine what is not reported, 
what remains invisible. This applies with regard to the question decisive 
for self-­descriptions of society: the societal embedding of the preexisting 
tendency to “disastrous developments,”374 which makes itself felt before 
disaster strikes. The way in which these topics are treated is alarming; it 
confirms expectations of further disaster and nurtures a sense of helpless­
ness in the individual recipient of news (thus, not least, generating recruit­
ment potential for protest movements, which, however, can only demand 
that others should do things differently).
The daily publication and production tempo of the mass media alone 
excludes consulting existing opinion in advance. Mass-media organizations 
have to rely on assumptions and, as a result, on self-fulfilling prophecies. 
They are largely self-inspired in their work: inspired by reading their own 

 
  Self-Descriptions
products, by watching their own broadcasts. They have to assume sufficient 
moral uniformity if they are to report every day on the violation of norms, 
on scandals, and on other aberrations. Shifts can be taken into account—
buzzword “value change”—but their own share in it cannot be separated 
out. We can thus speak of eigenvalue production: of relatively stable atti­
tudes that arise when an operation is applied to its own results.
What arises as the result of the long-term effects of the mass media, 
“public opinion,” is sufficient unto itself. It therefore makes little sense to 
ask whether and how the mass media distort reality; they generate a descrip­
tion of reality, a world construction, and this is the reality on which society 
orients itself.375 Information is disseminated in large quantities and day by 
day. This produces immense redundancy, which obviates having to investi­
gate what individuals really know and think. There is no alternative to as­
suming that people are informed. Public opinion therefore acts as a mirror 
that is backed by another mirror. The information provider sees itself and 
other transmitters in the medium of current information. The recipient of 
information sees himself and other recipients, and gradually learns what 
he has to take highly selective note of if he is to participate in the given 
social context (be it politics, school, circles of friends, social movements). 
The mirror itself is opaque.
There is much to suggest that a special functional system has devel­
oped, still without a clear concept (but, after all, tradition did not even have 
a word for what we now call family) and no recognized function assigned to 
it. What speaks against an independent functional system is that the mass 
media are closely interlinked with the communication of their societal envi­
ronment; and, what is more, that this is precisely where their societal func­
tion lies. Following publication, they count on communication about a 
topic continuing even outside the media; indeed, on this possibility more 
or less imposing participation in media communication—thus exposing so­
ciety to self-observation through the media. On the input side, too, cross-
linking is dense and indispensable; for how should the media establish the 
credibility and authenticity of their reports if they did not draw information 
from societal communication—whether the latter be researched facts, indis­
cretions, official press releases, or whatever.
Nevertheless, the operational closure of this system is not to be de­
nied. The system selects its own operations in accordance with the binary 
code information/noninformation. It thus reacts constantly to its own out­

Self-Descriptions    
put, to what it has itself generated, namely, knowledge of topics, which ex­
cludes the same thing being reported twice. Since the system itself produces 
knowledge, and thus destroys information, it has constantly to produce new 
information, new surprise values, itself. And it marks itself off from the dif­
fuse communication flow of society alone by the dissemination techniques 
employed. These techniques asymmetrize the system in relation to the soci­
etal environment: they normally exclude the disseminated communications 
from being immediately answered.
Apart from this particularity of greater closure and openness, of self-
isolation and interconnection, we find many characteristics of outdifferen­
tiated functional systems in the mass media too. Historically, their function 
is to replace what in the old society had been regulated by (competition-
free) representation, thus in the absorption of uncertainty in the produc­
tion and reformulation of world and societal descriptions. The binding 
force, which had been structurally possible only because of unrivalled rep­
resentation, was replaced by instability. Instead of monuments, one now 
has only the moments in which a certain level of knowledge can be as­
sumed; instead of opinions, one now has information that does not state 
how one could act correctly and consensually but fully suffices to repro­
duce itself. The code of the system consequently consists in the given mo­
mentary difference between information and noninformation, which in 
being temporally processed makes everything already known into nonin­
formation but has to be remembered to the extent required to understand 
new information. The programs of the system that control the selection of 
information are to be found in the thematic preferences and, on a higher 
level of aggregation, in the topic types that, as newspaper pages or broad­
cast slots, facilitate access to information. The autopoiesis of the system 
appears to lie in the recursive interconnection of the relevant information, 
which can be reproduced only in this manner. A high measure of reflex­
ivity—reports in the media report on reports in the media—is an every­
day affair. Information can be understood only on the basis of the level of 
informedness and, as preliminary information, is an indispensable condi­
tion for further participation. Current public opinion, the given thematic 
determination of the forms of the medium is, as the outcome of informa­
tion to date, a condition for future communication. The eventness of the 
system’s elements, whose meaning lies in their disappearance, in their ex­
penditure, in their contribution to the reproduction of further elements of 

 
  Self-Descriptions
the system—and only therein—is therefore quite typical. And, finally, this 
system, like all functional systems, cannot be reduced to the unity of an 
organizational system, even though here, as everywhere, organization plays 
an indispensable role.
Insofar as the thesis often advanced in systems theory holds true that 
highly mobile systems with rapidly varying structures are particularly suited 
to controlling less active systems, the mass media are well placed. There is 
no denying that the refinement in determining reality shown by the mass 
media and probably also their effectiveness have considerably increased in 
recent decades, especially in the advertising sector. Advertising might well 
be motivated by the hope of good sales. But its latent function lies in gen­
erating and consolidating criteria of good taste for people who lack them; 
thus in supplying sure judgment as to the symbolic qualities of objects and 
modes of conduct.376 Today the demand is also above all to be found in the 
upper strata of society, who because of rapid rises in social status and un­
regulated marriage practices no longer know how to provide a model. This 
latent function of advertising can then be used strategically to promote 
sales;377 but it naturally also has an impact on people who do not buy at all.
Nevertheless, one cannot yet infer from this that public opinion is 
“manipulated”—if only because of the thematic tangle and the multitude 
of selection criteria for news. Considered as a system, that is, with re­
gard to their endogenous dynamics, the mass media can hardly be pinned 
down to responsibility, whatever a far-reaching debate on journalistic eth­
ics might produce. It is just as difficult to define what is meant by “con­
trol” in this context. We can only note that descriptions of the world and 
society with all its functional systems are mobilized by the functional sys­
tem of the mass media, so that time differences become outstandingly 
important and all determinacy has to be situated in time. The excess of 
memory that the written and printed word and more modern, electronic 
storage techniques provide is in a certain sense neutralized. Access remains 
possible, but orientations are set only for the moment.
What in societal communication can be treated as “knowledge” crys­
tallizes in the day-by-day and deed-by-deed utterances of the mass media. 
In other words, the daily absorption of uncertainty by the mass media gen­
erates facts that can then be treated as such in ongoing communication. 
This leaves enough space for controversies; but even controversies are de­
termined by both sides being able to answer for knowledge, even if this 

Self-Descriptions    
knowledge differs. In fact, however, owing above all to scientific research 
and generally to the growing complexity of knowledge, ignorance is in­
creasing disproportionately. To point this out is the task of a second-order 
observer, who, however, also has to communicate through the mass media 
and therefore has to defend his ignorance as “critical” knowledge. We shall 
be coming back to this and to the role of sociology in this context.
Almost unnoticed, at any rate inevitably, structures that serve to 
couple psychic and social systems structurally condense in this process of 
ongoing information communication. We spoke earlier of schemata or 
of scripts, where actions are involved.378 This includes both the indica­
tion of “something as something” and strongly foreshortened causal at­
tributions, as well as pointed ascription to intentions that help describe 
behavior as action and possibly to evaluate it politically or morally. Such 
schemata leave the view one takes of information, what one recalls or for­
gets, and whether one considers reactions appropriate or not, more or 
less open; and in this case “one” means individuals and social systems of 
all sorts. Public opinion is therefore not about the shaping of typical atti­
tudes, and not only a matter of constantly renewed and forgotten masses 
of information. The structural component consists rather of schemata 
whose familiarity and use can be presupposed when it comes to setting 
communication in motion and continuing it. In keeping with a sociolog­
ical tradition reaching from Max Weber to Alfred Schütz, we could say 
that it involves the reproduction of types (stereotyped expectation pat­
terns) that are essential for understanding actions and communications, 
and that are not ensured simply by the correct use of words or grammati­
cal rules, and therefore not by language alone.
The mass media therefore guarantee that such schemata are acces­
sible and are so to an extent and in a variety that meets the requirements 
of societal communication as a whole and can easily be varied and recom­
bined if the need arises. It is about the operational conditions for continu­
ing communication under highly complex, fast-changing conditions. It is 
not about establishing a minimum consensus on describing reality. And 
precisely this combination of necessity and noncommitment means that 
this sort of eigenvalue production can hardly be carried out in any other 
way. At any rate, not by science, whose methodology is designed to neu­
tralize the observer and to produce a description of society and its world 
(however, it can then be criticized and verified).

 
  Self-Descriptions
Public opinion is accordingly neither mere fashionable opinion, as 
the seventeenth century saw it, nor the medium of rational enlightenment 
or puissance invisible expected to bring emancipation from traditions in 
the eighteenth century.379 It is the medium of self- and world description 
of the modern world. It is the “Holy Spirit” of the system,380 the commu­
nicative availability of the results of communication. Therefore, contrary 
to eighteenth-century expectations, it is also no longer concerned with the 
representative (or at least rational or powerful) expression of unity in unity. 
It is about the ongoing processing of structural differences and seman­
tic distinctions. What is achieved is high irritability in the operationally 
closed system of society and high endogenous complexity of the relevant 
structures accompanied by the absorption of uncertainty.381
With this position of the mass media and public opinion, it becomes 
a problem for sociology whether and how it can participate in societal 
self-description. It will be able at best to incubate new self-­descriptions of 
society but not to hatch them out. That it can produce theories for its own 
use, destroy them, and develop new ones is self-evident. But this is only a 
contribution to its own autopoiesis, only the operation of the subsystem 
sociology of the subsystem science of the societal system. “Intellectuals” 
are often expected to go beyond these limits.382 In practice, however, such 
a program is tackled rather by sociological writers.383
The experiments undertaken in this direction also show that this 
does not work. If sociology offers a theory of society, it can do so only in 
reflecting on its own situation, thus only as disciplinary endogenous per­
formance, which has to meet the criteria of its own, operationally closed 
system. As self-reflection in sociology, in particular, shows, it is and re­
mains societal observation and description; for it makes use of commu­
nication. It is self-description of society as it is, but a self-description 
that is protected by special system boundaries, and that therefore uses 
special forms, special distinctions, and, unlike public opinion, also re­
flects on this.
The possibilities thus available are misunderstood; they are, at any 
rate, too narrowly interpreted if sociology is understood as an opposition 
science and thus takes sides in the dispute between progressive and con­
servative ideologies. This can only lead once again to a failure to reflect 
on the unity of difference. If sociology sees itself as a “critical” science, 
the same weakness can be meant. But, more in keeping with the original 

Self-Descriptions    
meaning of the word, “critical” can also mean that sociology has to be in a 
position to distinguish, and to reflect on the use of distinctions. And this 
brings us back to the concept of the observer.
21. Invisibilization: The Unmarked State of the Observer 
and How It Shifts
The preceding sections have treated the self-descriptions of society as 
historical semantics and followed them up to the present. This semantics 
was naturally not seen as “semantics.” It had been believed possible to de­
scribe things as they were or at least as they ought to have been. Realiza­
tion from time to time that such descriptions (e.g., the distinction between 
Hellenes and barbarians in the Hellenistic era) were no longer appropriate 
merely shifted the blind spot in which the observer kept himself hidden. 
To this day, mass media reports purport to pass on facts, and the descrip­
tion of society that can be pieced together is consequently seen as a mosaic 
of facts. If selectivity is thought about, it is in sense of knowledge that dif­
ferent facts could also have been reported.
But all this does not hold true; at least not as it is meant. At the be­
ginning of this chapter we had pointed out that descriptions are observa­
tions that have to be actualized as distinguishing indications. But this has 
the double effect of constituting the world as unmarked space and render­
ing unobservable the operation of observation (and with it the observer 
himself in carrying out his operation). In all societal self-­descriptions, 
there are therefore two corresponding blindnesses: the unity of the world 
transcending all distinctions and the operating observer. If we speak of 
historical semantics, this is presupposed. We can therefore ask (and go 
through our material again with the question) how semantics safeguard 
their immanence and conceal their transcendence. Or what mystifications 
are built in to prevent one from seeing that one does not see what one sees.
This is not the place to tackle this secondary analysis. As far as world 
is concerned, it is clear that it would lead us to a religious basis and, as far 
as the observer is concerned, to the axioms of bivalent logic, whose evi­
dence hides their positing as an instrument of observation and thus also 
hides the observer. This would clearly provoke critique of the ontological 
metaphysics so decisive for tradition (and so decisive even for its critique) 
with respect to its “omissions”—a task now assumed above all by Jacques 

 
  Self-Descriptions
­Derrida.384 For the description of society by the mass media, it could also be 
said that the known and visible selection of facts and opinions hides the fact 
that the world is not merely an “and-so-on” of still more facts and still more 
opinions, but, as theologians would say of God, something quite different.
Ecological problems serve to elucidate this point, because they pro­
vide an increasingly observed background to the self-description of mod­
ern society, which, it is generally assumed, has caused more irreversible 
changes in the environment than any of its predecessors. This is attributed 
above all to modern technology, but also to industrial production oriented 
on the market and only on the market, and, not least, to demographic 
changes: to greater life expectancies for more and more people. This is a 
(naturally highly selective) description of society in the ecological con­
text—above all in its dependence on humanity.
Two aspects of this description are worth noting in the present con­
text. Knowledge about ecological matters is growing rapidly, thanks to 
growing knowledge in the natural sciences. We have a greater awareness of 
complexity than any previous society. There are also more promising pos­
sibilities for research than ever before. At the same time, however, igno­
rance is also growing—disproportionately. Mathematics and simulation 
techniques are adapting—only to confirm unpredictabilities. As knowl­
edge increases (and not although but because knowledge increases) society 
can no longer inform itself about the links between societal changes and 
environmental changes. Neither the old laws of nature nor experience with 
technology help. It is a question not of strictly but of loosely coupled mat­
ters, which can suddenly change. What used to seem a well-ordered cos­
mos is now described as the domain of potential disaster—in both cases, a 
form for boldly and simply concealing unmarked space.
In arguing this case, the observer sees herself as a Cassandra, with­
out being able to reflect on this role.385 A bivalent logic applies: society 
will destroy itself if it does not radically change. Either/or. Potential ca­
tastrophes are already developing into ongoing disasters.386 The schemata 
suggest scripts, the scripts suggest value judgments. Distress justifies exag­
geration, moralization, accusations, semantic shifts from the possible to 
the already real.387 Motivation requires renunciation of reflection. Hard­
ship becomes an appeal to the virtue of others.
Ecological changes affect human beings. People die more quickly 
than they should or in strikingly large numbers when disasters occur. 

Self-Descriptions    
Or they become chronically ill. They suffer and die less from infectious 
diseases than from so-called lifestyle diseases. Such states of affairs catch 
the attention and lead to no clear distinction being drawn between the 
human species and society. Discussing society from the point of view of 
self-­induced ecological problems thus hides a difference that would other­
wise impose itself, namely, that between communication system, on the 
one hand, and organic and psychic systems, on the other. The problem is 
no longer one of further development and further growth alone. The eco­
logical description of society is also marked by sorrow.
Precisely this highly modern mixture of knowledge and agitation sup­
ports our thesis of double invisibilization. In the unmarked space of what can 
be described only with fictitious “scenarios” and in terms of ­interest-driven 
assumptions about probabilities and improbabilities, a description of soci­
ety establishes itself that reacts with self-invisibilization. The bivalence of its 
coding, be it logical or moral, be it bifurcative in prediction, hides the unity 
of its own position. And this is neither a reproach nor a statement about the 
matter in hand itself. It is simply asserted that anything else is impossible. 
For observation is distinguishing indication.
Luckily, this inevitable invisibility of the world and the given op­
erating observer is not an ontological fact. It is not a property of certain 
things or totalities of things. The problem lies behind one’s back, and it 
can be shifted if observers are found to observe other observers. The shift 
can take place in the time dimension and in the social dimension. What 
had been disregarded in earlier observations can be seen later or by others. 
And what applies to every observation also applies to second-order obser­
vation. But for this very reason new shifts, displacements, différances can 
occur.388 The problem accordingly lies rather in the societal institutional­
ization of ­second-order observation. There is abundant evidence, especially 
for a wide range of functional systems, that this has become usual in mod­
ern society. That an alternative to metaphysical ultimate justifications is al­
ready established now just has to be acknowledged.
Among the peculiarities of modern descriptions of the world is to ask 
how the world can observe itself. In the Christian description of the world, 
such a question had been blocked by the assumption the God observes the 
world. What then counted was, in all modesty (and without devilish crav­
ings) to observe how God observed the world in order to draw conclu­
sions for one’s own conduct. Growing complexity was absorbed through 

 
  Self-Descriptions
semantic variety, by distinguishing between beings, through upward and 
downward differentiation, and through notions of a natural order that 
did not exclude something happening in violation of the order or outside 
the order. But violations could then always be read as confirming the ac­
cepted distinctions. This was the case until well into early modern times.389 
­Reflection on contingency remained the domain of theology, through 
which it assumed a form harmless to society. Potential second-­order obser­
vation over and above normal acquaintance with people was the preserve 
of observers of God.
With the retreat of religious positing of the world, it could now be 
asked how the world could be observed in the world, hence, how the world 
observed itself. This task devolved on human beings, who thereupon called 
themselves “subjects” to guarantee ultimate certainty and unity for their 
observation of the world in the face of all empirical variety among human 
beings. Almost inevitably, this figure of thought tended to claim a “tran­
scendental” if not “extramundane” standpoint for the subject. However, 
this was unsatisfactory. We must therefore return to the more radical (be­
cause paradox-prone) question of how the world can observe itself. And 
from the sociological perspective, it is clear that this question schema can 
also provide the model for asking how society can observe itself.
In the cogitations of the Romantics inspired by Fichte, the subject 
had already been joined by other candidates. One possibility besides lan­
guage was poetry. Seen from this angle, the alternatives did not look good. 
August Wilhelm von Schlegel, for example, had this to say: “But if one 
conceives all of nature as a self-aware being, what is one to think of pre­
tensions to study oneself by way of experimental physics?”390 In the twen­
tieth century, by contrast, physics is more or less the prime example of our 
problem. For the physics of this century it is clear that the self-observation 
of the world depends on physical instruments, including living physicists, 
that make the operation of self-observation possible in the first place, and 
also stimulate it. This experience—as we can call it—confirms and sur­
passes everything that the philosophy of the subject and the philosophy of 
language had addressed. As form of self-description it requires mathemat­
ics, which has to adapt to this task. As form of reflection, it requires the 
observation of observing, second-order observation.
If one does not turn a blind eye, this also has consequences for a so­
ciology that aspires to being a theory of society, thus to a theory of the 

Self-Descriptions    
world-describing societal system. And it has to ponder on what it does 
when it observes and describes how in society society itself, and with it 
the world of society, is observed and described. And this goes beyond the 
tradition of what had been advanced as sociological “critique” of society.
Critical sociology had assumed a know-it-all attitude. It projected an 
image of competing describer with impeccable moral motives and a bet­
ter grasp of things. However carefully it formulated and however much 
it sought to satisfy the demands of scientificity, its perspective remained 
that of a first-order observer. It offered a competing description of society 
and hence faced the task of explaining why others did not share its views 
but, blinded by their interests, described society differently, for example, 
as commercial society. Its explanatory concepts were not free of defama­
tory intent.391 However, this put it in an ambivalent position that could 
not be maintained in the long run. Describing who thinks in conformity 
with society, conservatively, affirmatively, and so forth, and explaining why 
he does so, indeed has to do so, compensates in certain measure for stag­
nating theory development. The critique of ideology became the focus of 
attention, and to a certain extent, the description of society shifted to ef­
forts to explain the societal conditions that did not allow others to describe 
society (including themselves) as the critics considered to be right. And as 
conservative attitudes (that is to say, attitudes opposed to the ideas of the 
French Revolution) lost their persuasive power, and the conceptual world 
of liberalism gained dynamic stability by transferal to economic matters, 
this fascination of the critics with their opponents grew. Finally, they had 
to invent the “neoconservative” label to give shape to their opponents and 
to enable them to carry on their business of criticizing. The permanent 
production of dissent with respect to reasonable understanding—and it 
is hard not think of intellectual fate of Jürgen Habermas in this connec­
tion—is the logical end position of this great bourgeois tradition of crisis 
and critique.
Criticism (in the usual sense of the word) presupposes a diagnosis of 
society to the effect that it is in crisis. Crises are transitory states. One need 
not abandon hope. The critical states of affairs of the present are attributed 
to abortive developments, especially in industrial capitalism, which could 
be corrected. Behind society, there has to be a good society, so to speak, 
to which one can redirect structures and effects to attain a better future. 
In the 1970s, one could still read that the ecological problems of mod­

 
  Self-Descriptions
ern ­society were a phenomenon of capitalist societies and would not have 
arisen under socialist conditions. However, as modern society has learned 
to take realistic account of experience with itself, this doubling of attribu­
tion levels has disappeared and with it the crisis. Despite all the difficulties 
and despite all the possibilities of correction, which are far from exhausted, 
we have to manage with a society that has developed through evolution. 
And even the need for utopia has to be attributed to this society.
Observation of such states of affairs requires a third-order perspec­
tive, which, however, does not differ in principle (but only in its reflect­
edness) from the position of second-order observation. It is not only a 
chain phenomenon; it is not only a matter of A observing how B observes 
C, or how Habermas describes how Hegel describes Kant. It is also about 
reflection on the conditions of the possibility of second-order observa­
tion and its consequences for what can then still be a common world or 
a society that makes description possible. In this situation, it would seem 
obvious—as further development of critical sociology, as it were—to re­
place the “critique” distinction by the distinction of observers. This, in 
turn, would presuppose that all observing and describing (including sec­
ond- and third-order) involves context-dependent real operations.392 The 
­second-order observer, too, is always a first-order observer in the sense that 
he has to choose another observer as object in order to see the world (how­
ever critically) through him. This imposes the autological conclusion of 
applying the concept of observation to oneself as observer. For the observer 
is no longer a subject with transcendentally justified special rights in his 
safe; he is at the mercy of the world that he perceives. He is permitted no 
self-­exemption. He has to place himself on the inner side or the outer side 
of the form that he uses. He is, says Spencer-Brown, a “mark.”393
For every observation of the world takes place in the world, every 
observation of society, if carried out as communication, takes place in so­
ciety. Social critique is part of the system criticized; it can be inspired and 
subsidized, it can be observed and described. And under present-day con­
ditions, it can be quite simply embarrassing if it claims to have the better 
morality and better insight.
Another consequence is the tool-dependence of every observation—
up to and including observations in quantum physics. This also means 
that selection is unavoidable and exhaustiveness excluded. Neither other-
observation nor self-observation can capture the entire reality of an auto­

Self-Descriptions    
poietic system. On the other hand, an observer (again of both types) can 
note regularities that are not among the conditions for the autopoiesis of 
the system. One needs no knowledge of grammar to speak; but an ob­
server can recognize the relevant rules. The same holds true of regularities 
in the external relations of the system, of its external appearance, of inputs 
and outputs. In all these regards, sociology, as a form of self-observation of 
society, is superior to the object of its observation as far as the latter’s au­
topoiesis is concerned—but it is autopoietically redundant. Although its 
knowledge is and remains societal knowledge, sociology knows more than 
a society without sociology would know. To describe this, Paul Lazarsfeld 
introduced the concept of latent structure analysis, which he relates to the 
methodology of empirical social research.
Latency in this sense is the observation domain of a first-order ob­
server who wishes to know more than before about the object of his obser­
vation. This was criticized as inadequate in the so-called positivism dispute 
[Positivismusstreit].394 Whatever one might think of this, there is at any rate 
also the possibility of second-order observation, observation of society as 
an observing system. And the second-order observer can also see less and 
sees differently than the observed observer. For him the concept of latency 
therefore has a different meaning, namely, in relation to the blind spot of 
the observed observer, in relation to what the latter cannot see. And what is 
considered natural and necessary in society is from this perspective some­
thing artificial and contingent. But this does not mean that one could also 
say how things could be done differently.
If sociology understands itself as “critical” in this sense, it does not 
necessarily follow the directives of the “Frankfurt School.” It can avoid 
mere confrontation, the rejection of “capitalism,” “system,” and “class 
rule,” which mired down in a negation without alternative concept. Even 
if we include the latencies, ideologies, superficialities, and inaccessibilities 
of societal self-observation, and if we see that the structures of the societal 
system lead to scarcely tolerable consequences,395 such a description pro­
vides no recipe for producing another society as object, but only shifts at­
tention and sensibilities within society. If “critical” is understood in this 
sense, it means first of all that sociology assumes the position of a second-
order observer. It is concerned with the observation of observers. As we 
have seen, this includes an “autological” theoretical component. For the 
object of this observation is observation, and only in second place can one 

 
  Self-Descriptions
ask whether observation by oneself or another is concerned. Moreover, this 
program inevitably leads to a “constructivist” understanding of science.396 
A science that understands itself as second-order observation avoids state­
ments about an outside world independent of observation, and it finds the 
ultimate guarantee of the relation of its cognition to reality solely in the 
facticity of its own operating and in the insight that this is quite impos­
sible without highly complex prerequisites (we have spoken of structural 
couplings). It would therefore be wrong to smell any danger of “solip­
sism.” The corrective lies in second-order observation itself, namely, in the 
“­autological” component of knowledge and in the insight that all knowing 
involves the use of distinctions, and to this extent—and only to this ex­
tent—is always an internal performance of the system. Not even the prob­
lem under discussion could be formulated were it not for the distinction 
between self-reference and other-reference; and this distinction can, as the 
formulation shows, be made only within the system itself and only with­
out any correlate in the environment.
The first-order observer, thus normal societal communication, ob­
serves the world in, as Humberto Maturana puts it, a “niche.”397 For him, 
the world is therefore ontically given. His philosophy would be an ontology. 
The second-order observer, by contrast, can recognize a system/­environment 
relationship that could also be differently organized in the world given for 
him (in his niche). What the first-order observer sees and what he does not 
see depends for the second-order observer on what distinctions observation 
is based on; and these distinctions can vary.
This holds true for all observation, also for second-order observation. 
Every observation uses a distinction in order to indicate something (but not 
the distinction itself). In other words, each observation uses the operational 
distinction as a blind spot; otherwise it would be unable to select anything 
to indicate. This, too, applies to second-order observation, which selects an 
observer (and nothing else) for observation. To the extent that theories are 
subjected to radically constructivist revision in this sense, the condition of 
structural latency has to be replaced by the condition of operational latency. 
For second-order observation, this means that necessary latency becomes 
contingent,398 namely, selectable and always possible in different ways—­
depending on which distinction is taken as the basis for observation.
As regards self-descriptions of the societal system, that is to say, of 
the system that permits first- and second-order observation within itself, 

Self-Descriptions    
the transition from the first to the second level leads to reality being de­
scribed as contingent, as always differently possible.399 For the first-order 
observer, self-description ends with particulars on invariant fundamentals, 
on nature and on necessities. Today the concept of value, which symbolizes 
the “super-unquestionable” [Superunbezweifelbares], occupies this place. 
For the second-order observer, by contrast, the world appears to be a con­
struction produced via various distinctions. Its description is consequently 
not necessary but contingent, and in relation to nature not right but arti­
ficial. It is itself an autopoietic product. The differences between necessary 
and contingent and between natural and artificial are once again reflected 
upon (and in this lies the autological component) and traced back to the 
distinction between first- and second-order observation. Ambitions for a 
common basis, a fundamental symbol, a concluding thought have to be 
abandoned—or left to the philosophers. Sociology does not, at any rate 
in this trajectory, find the way to what Hegel had called “spirit” [Geist]. It 
does not belong to the humanities [Geisteswissenschaften].
In the present-day context, the distinctions indicated have mainly 
been discussed in connection with the concept of value. It is obvious that 
no science, including sociology, wishes to produce valueless communica­
tion; and at least in this sense, there is no “value-free” science. But what 
else is meant by this formulation? This question, too, is clarified if we dis­
tinguish between first- and second-order observation. The first-order ob­
server observes on the basis of values. His values give him the distinction 
that guides his knowing and acting.400 The second-order observer relates 
the semantics of values to their use in communication. He can, for in­
stance, recognize that reference to values can neither allow decisions to 
be inferred nor conflicts to be avoided. But, above all, he sees how the in­
disputability of values is produced in communication, namely, by com­
municating not directly but indirectly, not about but with them. After 
all, one does not announce that one is in favor of justice, peace, health, 
conservation of the environment, and the like to provide opportunity for 
reacting by accepting or rejecting this utterance; one says merely what 
one considers to be just and unjust. The validity of the value is taken 
for granted and enjoys its indisputability, renewed daily, in this mode of 
communication alone.401
From the perspective of the second-order observer, argumentation is 
therefore not “value-free.” The value distinction, which operates blindly in 

 
  Self-Descriptions
relation to itself, is merely replaced by the distinction between value valid­
ity and communication. And this distinction works blindly, as the auto­
logical inference teaches us; and it may not stand the test of research, and 
thus have to be replaced by another distinction. In the context of the com­
munication of societal self-descriptions, distance is thus generated to direct 
value commitment in society, which allows sociology to be guided within 
its operationally closed system by the network of its own communication.
What sociology can also do is to reflect on the structural conditions 
for its position as second-order observer. They lie, quite clearly, in the func­
tional differentiation of the societal system. Functional differentiation of 
the societal system allows every functional system to establish its own auto­
poiesis. At the same time, the position that had been able to speak for all as 
the “ruling” position is eliminated. This gives rise to the logical structural 
diversity that, if measured against traditional expectations, is described as 
relativism or as pluralism. Above all, a functional system thus gains and 
reproduces boundaries of its own, which enable it to reconstruct society 
through the distinction between self-reference and other-reference in rela­
tion to itself. Science and especially sociology operate under these frame­
work conditions. In its description of society, sociology can include that 
for its part it is made possible in society through society.
This takes us back to the question of how stability can be established in 
a communication context at the level of second-order observation. Whereas 
the first-order observer assumes that there is an ordered world that has un­
ambiguous characteristics, which one can describe correctly or wrongly, 
the second-order observer has to do without these logico-­ontological as­
sumptions. He has to assume that the world tolerates diverse observation, 
so that what it shows on the basis of different distinctions cannot always be 
eliminated as an error of observation. If we set out from the general theory 
of recursive operations, we can formulate this problem as addressing the 
“­eigenvalues” of the system.402 The relatively invariant world of objects and 
the regularities (expectabilities) of its variation now become observable as 
“eigenvalues” of the system that it constructs. The problem becomes more 
acute if we include observations of latency. We can then know that agree­
ment about phenomena is no longer attainable, and that forms of language 
have to be developed to enable communication to continue nevertheless. 
A starting point could be the transition from concepts of substance to con­
cepts of function.403

Self-Descriptions    
We could say that the function of function is function—to make it 
clear that we are dealing with a form that can be practiced universally and 
thus also self-referentially. From then on, the only questions that can arise 
are questions of productivity, of opportunity, and so on, but not questions 
about the conditions of possibility. It is a comparative procedure limited 
to a given problem, which is suitable for both practical and theoretical 
purposes. In the form of a question about latent functions, it is particu­
larly suitable for observing what others cannot observe. It can also leave 
open whether the functional approach is meant “critically,” which in this 
context means urging rejection or not.404 This assessment is up to the ob­
server, insofar as he himself wishes to observe on the basis of the critical/­
affirmative distinction.
This reference to the function of function being an eigenvalue in an 
autopoietic communication context in second-order observation is to be 
understood as paradigmatic. Paradigmatic and also historical. This is how 
things have come about. One cannot infer from the mere occurrence of re­
cursive operations at this level of self-description that and what eigenvalues 
are to be found. It is also difficult to discover them when first-order obser­
vation capturing the world as a world of things is always concurrent. And 
there can well be other eigenvalues,405 especially because self-referential in­
dispensabilities can be shown elsewhere, as well, for instance, in the con­
cept of utility in the question of the utility of rejecting reflection on utility, 
and, above all, in the conversion of the concept of reason from a natural 
phenomenon distinguishing human beings from animals into a transcen­
dental, self-explanatory one. All this is orderly heedlessness that makes it 
possible to continue communication about society in society, even if one 
has to renounce a unanimous understanding of the subject matter and 
consequently has to reflect on this very renunciation. But if it is true that 
the eigenvalues of modern society lie ultimately in statements of func­
tion, and that self-descriptions are consequently guided by the function of 
self-description, a sidelong glance at other possibilities is always built in. 
Not least, this also means that new demands on the precision of descrip­
tion concepts arise that make it nevertheless possible to reach agreement 
on problems and functional equivalences, and that contain differences of 
opinion without opening the door to arbitrariness.
Finally, we could draw on considerations that have been advanced 
in semiotics and text theory.406 Linguistic, constructivist, and deconstruc­

 
  Self-Descriptions
tivist techniques of text analysis have meanwhile made such progress that 
they could prove dangerous for a sociology that bases its concept of reality 
on metaphysical premises. The starting point for this criticism was prob­
lematization of the possibility of a relationship between signs and the ex­
ternal world. This led to reformulation of the reality concept. If reality is 
still to be understood as resistance against arbitrary thematization—and 
what other concept of reality could we have?—it must involve the resis­
tance of sign against sign, of language against language, of communication 
against communication.407 This means it must involve recursively formed 
complexity. Thus seen, the system tests in ongoing operation what it can 
treat from moment to moment as eigenvalue in the way of self-generated 
uncertainty and self-generated resistance. If one wishes to take this into ac­
count within sociological theory construction, the theory of society must 
also switch to self-reference concepts.
Like Aristotle’s god, modern society is preoccupied with itself. Like 
the God of the Christians, it does everything that it does for its own 
sake. But in contrast to old European semantics, which relocated such 
figures of closed self-reference into transcendence and ascribed to them 
the quality of unconditional goodness to lend profile to the occasional 
corruption or even fundamental depravity of nature (and within nature, 
society), the self-referentially closed society of modernity considers it­
self deficient, in need of criticism, capable of improvement, and, again, 
suffering from enlightenment. And whereas the old world believed that 
it could observe itself through the eyes of the primary observer God or, 
if His criteria were not clear enough (did He distinguish at all?), that it 
could scrutinize itself in mirrors for what was better, modern society is 
preoccupied above all with its own misery. It can only help itself. But, in 
observing its observation, it always gets only to the point where some­
thing is to be criticized—even if it is the central point where good and 
bad merge: that one can observe that the observer cannot observe how 
he observes. The peculiar exceptionlessness of this structure presents it­
self no longer at a distance, no longer in the form of an unconditionally 
existing being. For us it lies in the operation of observation itself, in the 
dependence on meaning as a medium, which can be used only selectively, 
only to form forms, only with reference to something else. And there is 
no longer good reason to complain. For this would also hold true of the 
complaining itself.

Self-Descriptions    
22. Reflecting on Autology: The Sociological Description 
of Society in Society
In conclusion, let us reformulate the concept of a theory of society 
presented in this book as a description of society in society. Structural and 
semantic issues are to be distinguished, but in both regards, we can pro­
ceed on the assumption that a description of the societal system can take 
place only within the system, using only the means of the system, and al­
ways only with a fraction of its operations. From a structural point of view, 
this means that sociology as a subsystem of the subsystem science has to 
expect competition. This holds true particularly for the factors that deter­
mine what is taken to be public opinion—the mass media, and with vary­
ing impact, protest movements. In this respect sociology is under pressure 
to comment immediately on what moves public opinion (Chernobyl, the 
reunification of Germany, the collapse of the Soviet Empire, the Gulf War) 
as if it had to become an event itself to attain its aim of universal explana­
tion. It seems one must first of all have an experience in order to engage in 
sociology. That sociology cannot accept this condition, which it does not 
set itself, is clear, and it must therefore consider that with its unwieldy the­
oretical forms and the methodological safeguards of its own semantics it 
cannot compete in the field of public opinion.
In this situation, wordings, up to and including literary form, are just 
as important. Sociology certainly lacks the rich possibilities of literary for­
mulation available to philosophy.408 It has to keep an eye on “scientificity,” 
which is not least of all a question of style. Today we can perhaps assume 
that the dry verification/falsification style of logical positivism, which dis­
misses all other modes of expression as poetry or metaphysics, is not suit­
able. Apart from the fact that it is no longer covered philosophically and 
epistemologically,409 this approach sees its subject matter before it, and that 
means outside itself. But one can still choose forms of description that give 
expression to involvement and sympathy, which is hardly possible without 
oneself taking sides on the issue, or opt for (romantic) irony as a form of 
reflection, which even so expresses involvement as distance. Even in such 
opposites as Karl Marx and Max Weber, sociology finds both possibilities 
with varying degrees of brusqueness and refinement. If the requirements 
of science are also taken into consideration, the reticence of the abstraction 
imposed by theory can affect expression so strongly that textual difficulties 

 
  Self-Descriptions
paradoxically absolve the reader from having to grasp the argument, leav­
ing him merely to trace the flow of sentences.410
For understandable reasons, and owing not least to the conditions 
for success in the public opinion medium, descriptions of modern society 
have preferred morally acceptable characteristics likely to find consensus 
in society. In this and elsewhere, the embedding of thinking and formula­
tion in the fashions of the time appears to be a precondition for remem­
bering (and not forgetting).411 Naturally this does not mean that society 
has been treated only as good, thus requiring participants to give their as­
sent. For morality also has a bad side to it, but, as morality, it requires one 
to turn against the bad, and accordingly to champion changes in society, 
if not a quite different society. American sociology, in particular, has gone 
astoundingly far in championing the good, accepting the bad as at best 
“­deviant,” and setting social reform as its goal.412 It keeps to the storyline of 
a typical American movie: the good guy has a bad time and almost comes 
to grief due to all sorts of nasty experiences; but in the end he drives up in 
the latest model car for a well-deserved kiss. It apparently never occurred 
to Talcott Parsons himself that the L-function heading the cybernetic hier­
archy could be possessed by the devil; and if Marxists allege this to be the 
case, they see it as their duty to be against it.
At the observation and description level of morality, there is natu­
rally nothing to be said against this. The question is only whether socio­
logical theory has to accept this level only because is has to communicate 
in society; or whether morality cannot just as well be understood as a code 
among others that one can reject for oneself while allowing others to use 
it. If there is then any obligation to support the good and reject the bad, it 
is due not to the truth program of theory but to the selection mode of the 
mass media, particularly television, where anyone who visibly and audibly 
rejects morality counts as a “cynic.”
First, but far too weak versions are to be found where value change is 
discussed. Historical relativity is conceded, but the facts and circumstances 
themselves are not examined. The involvement demanded is limited to 
current values. They are the only ones to count in public opinion. Howling 
with the wolves! This possibility is offered by the concept. One can serve as 
avant-garde or just manage to tag along. But what is not understood is that 
values are always two-part observation schemata, and that a good value is 
always accompanied by a bad one. The motivation for a change in values 

Self-Descriptions    
can indeed be stronger on one side than on the other. But even this can 
now hardly be communicated. And public opinion will respond all the less 
if it is claimed that the choice between war and peace or between life and 
death for future generations, however relevant the value standpoints may 
be, has little relevance as distinction.
Similarly, perhaps even more strongly, the mass media impose a pref­
erence for bold and simple characteristics that allow everyone immediately 
to activate their own ideas and introduce them into communication, but 
that for precisely this reason can stress only isolated phenomena. They gen­
erate knowledge that can be assumed in everyday communication. This 
holds true of catchwords such as “capitalism,” “industry,” “science-based 
(inscrutable) technology,” “information,” and “risk,” which every observer 
can associate with his own experience; including some (such as informa­
tion and risk) that more or less impose an autological conclusion.
At any rate, these catchwords suggest a transition from the specific to 
the general, and thus a transition from descriptions that create a stir for a 
while in public opinion to theory-led analysis that has to prove its worth 
only within science. At the same time, this shifts the standpoint of the ob­
server to the level of second- if not third-order observation. The “that’s the 
way it is” attitude is replaced by a word game that finds hold in itself. Self-
description becomes the topic of self-description.413 The logic of observation 
and description has to be converted from monotextural to polycontextural 
structures. This means (following Gotthard Günther), that the homogene­
ity or substitutability of the logical loci from which descriptions are made 
have to be renounced. The description of society can no longer use only a 
single distinction for highlighting one thing against another. The excluded 
third used in every distinction (the world, the unity of society, the observer 
himself) becomes the potential object of another distinction that exposes its 
own tertium non datur to access by further observers. None of the selected 
sections can claim final validity or the function of judging all others. For it­
self, each operates blindly. At the same time, however, there is nothing that 
in principle escapes indication and would have to remain covert because of 
its “nature.” Everything that can be said about it can be said only on con­
dition that it also applies to the act of saying itself. As for morality, self-­
exemption is forbidden to sociology. And only this applies unconditionally.
The sociology of the twentieth century has not been able to meet 
these requirements. Insofar as it has established itself as a “science of ­crisis,” 

 
  Self-Descriptions
it has become mired down in its own theoretical crises. Insofar as it has 
engaged in “empirical” research to maintain its scientific status, it has not 
succeeded in producing a theory of society, for to do so it would have 
had to gear its logic, its concept of cause, its methodology to autology, and 
thus to self-implication. Although it has been able to address many topics 
and present successful research results, the elaboration of a theory of so­
ciety adequate to the object would have required it to bring itself into its 
object. But this would have required abandoning all fixed points, includ­
ing history and values.
In this situation without beginning or end, the task is to explicate 
the theoretical means as clearly as possible and subject them to observa­
tion. Theoretical means are above all concepts. Concepts are distinctions. 
Distinctions are instructions to cross boundaries. As forms they are both 
closed and themselves distinguishable. “Distinction is perfect continence,” 
according to Spencer-Brown,414 but precisely this continence offers the 
possibility of dealing with it. With its forms, its distinctions, theory ex­
poses its blind spot, that is to say, what is invisible to it, to which it owes 
what it can see and show. The point in exposing this is not to introduce 
a return to ultimately indisputable reasons. It is only a matter of showing 
what one can construct and the extent to which sensitivities can be un­
folded if one proceeds in this manner and not otherwise. The sense lies in 
facilitating critique and in making it more difficult. The demand is to do 
it differently but at least as well.
A sociology that thinks of itself as a contribution to the self-­description 
of society will have to develop the appropriate epistemological and meth­
odological ideas. Its task can no longer be to describe a given object either 
statically or dynamically. It will be to generate theories that accept distance 
from the self-evidences of everyday life, indeed deliberately generate such 
distance in order to attain a level of consistency that is more abstractly 
safeguarded. Resuscitation of classical rhetoric’s paradoxization technique 
could be considered, which pursued the same aim of formulating problems 
differently and with an eye to new sorts of solution.415 And one does indeed 
in more recent literature critical of science find formulations that sound al­
most as if one were aware of this tradition.416
Nevertheless, decisive changes have taken place since the sixteenth 
century. Above all, we lack the trust that then prevailed in the power of 
words, which derived from an oral tradition. Paradox cannot simply be 

Self-Descriptions    
generated by linguistic texts, witty sayings, or ambiguities. But this is also 
no longer necessary. For all observing (knowing and acting) is grounded in 
paradox, since it is dependent on distinctions, which it uses in its opera­
tions but cannot reflect on as unity.417 If such reflection is attempted, it is 
punished by paradox: what is distinguished is the same. And, let me repeat, 
this applies to knowing acting, and both first- and second-order observing.
The European tradition of (rational) knowledge and action sought 
ultimate causes, principles, indisputable maxims. To continue this tradi­
tion, we would have to deliver a self-description of society confirmed to 
be the right one. One would have to assert with authority, even if it were 
only an assumption, that one could provide further reasons and go on ar­
guing until everyone was convinced. But if such a claim is observed (and 
this always means observed in society), it is already no longer what it set 
out to be. In the domain of its observation it had distinguished and indi­
cated; but it is now itself distinguished and indicated. The world, society as 
condition for the possibility of distinguishing, is the same for observers—
and not the same insofar as it is divided in different ways depending on 
the distinction chosen, and therefore becomes a paradox in a different way. 
If the self-description of society is understood as an operation that can be 
observed and described in society, all observing and describing must nec­
essarily be understood as concealing and unfolding the unity paradox; and 
this can clearly occur in various ways.
In the topography of science today, it seems obvious to formulate 
this paradoxical starting position as the unity of constructivism and decon­
structivism. This includes the constructions of sociology having to reflect 
on their own deconstructability. However this is understood—whether 
in the psychiatric sense, as tension between the reporting and instructing 
components of communication,418 or in the sense of semiotic text theory, 
as tension between constative and performative text components—soci­
ology will in all the texts it produces have to keep an eye not only on the 
falsifiability but also on the deconstructability of all identities and dis­
tinctions. The fact that sociology expresses itself at all tells us something 
about how it understands its visibilization—as instruction or critique, as 
disposition over truths that are to be accepted by others, or an interpre­
tative authority. In the circumstance that it communicates at all and, un­
like the author of a story, cannot hide itself as author,419 lies the paradox 
of deconstructing assertions through the mere operation of uttering them. 

 
  Self-Descriptions
One possibility for reacting appropriately to this challenge is that already 
mentioned, namely, to describe theoretical structures as clearly as possible, 
so that ongoing communication can at least determine what has been pre­
sented for observation and for acceptance or rejection.
This settles something about the form of self-description accessible to 
self-description, but not about particular distinctions, and thus not about 
particular theories. Every step that goes beyond this can be taken only as 
a contingent (which does not mean arbitrary) choice of a form, a distinc­
tion, a contexture. That all communication has to operate in the medium 
of meaning is assumed.420 In very concise terms, every operation when ob­
served appears as a selection from a multitude of possibilities, and the cir­
cularity of the meaning contexts taking recourse to themselves has to be 
interrupted to make the asymmetry of a sequence of communications pos­
sible.421 This takes place in three dimensions of meaning, which are consti­
tuted in each case through a distinction specific to the dimension. In the 
factual dimension (traditionally represented in category theory), there is the 
“inside” as opposed to the “outside” of the form. The systems-theoretical 
versions speaks of system and environment. In the time dimension (tradi­
tionally represented by the concept of movement), the distinction con­
cerned is that between before and after; today, the distinction between past 
and future. Finally, in the social dimension (traditionally represented by the 
theory of the animal sociale), the distinction concerned is that between ego 
and alter, where by “ego” we refer to the person who understands a com­
munication and by “alter” the person to whom the utterance is attributed.
With these versions, the meaning dimensions are asymmetrized from 
the start. What is distinguished cannot be exchanged. Inside is never out­
side, before is never after, ego is never alter, although the next observation 
to come (but only through the expenditure of time) can shift the distinc­
tion so that what had earlier been inside is now outside, and so on.
A system of society that produces forms in the medium of meaning 
through its autopoiesis has to operate in these three dimensions. This nat­
urally does not mean that these dimensions have to become the topic of 
communication, because otherwise communication would not take place 
and could not be continued. The stock of structures necessary for orien­
tation and continuation lies only in the forms that are produced in this 
fashion. It is not the meaning dimensions themselves that make society a 
structurally determined system; this happens only historically through the 

Self-Descriptions    
continuation of the autopoiesis of communication in recursion to and an­
ticipation of its own results. But if we wish to describe society as a unity, 
pointers are needed in the meaning dimensions for the topics that are to be 
taken into account in description. In other words, in the self-description of 
the societal system, the medium of meaning itself becomes a form, mean­
ing itself becomes reflexive. And for this very reason we have to distinguish 
meaning dimensions as distinctions.
And if we accept this, there are still various possibilities for interpret­
ing the meaning dimensions of autopoiesis. Every self-description requires 
historical plausibility in the situation in which it is observed as description. 
We know anyway that the position of second-order observer can generate 
only contingent phenomena. With this proviso in mind, it is possible to 
describe how we have filled the meaning dimensions: the social dimen­
sion by the concept of communication and its media; the time dimension 
by the concept of evolution; and the factual dimension by the concept of 
system differentiations, that is to say, by outdifferentiation and iteration 
of outdifferentiations in systems that have already been differentiated out. 
The results can be summarized in the following sketch:
Autopoiesis of society
Communication  Evolution  Differentiation
social      temporal    factual
Self-description of society
Just as the meaning dimensions presuppose one another and each 
can be the starting point for observing the others, communication theory, 
evolution theory, and differentiation theory are points of departure for the 
description of the overall theory. Social systems arise through the initia­
tion of communication, and develop autopoietically from within them­
selves. Evolution comes about by bridging the difference between system 

 
  Self-Descriptions
and environment through structural coupling. None of these theories can 
renounce the involvement of the others. The sequence of presentation in 
this book is arbitrary. And the theory of society cannot be understood as 
the logical outcome of systems-theoretical premises—for example, in the 
sense of the now somewhat stale idea of a hypothetico-deductive system of 
knowledge. Nor is it the strict consequence of a certain constructive prin­
ciple, for instance, a dialectical procedure or a cross-tabulation technique 
(Parsons). It is the result of an attempt to coordinate a plurality of different 
theoretical decisions. And only this relatively loose form of theory design 
that shows as well as possible what decisions are made, and what conse­
quences it would have if other decisions were to be made at these junc­
tures, seems to me suitable as a self-description of modern society.
Sociological analysis shows that a sufficiently complex self-description 
of society has to articulate itself in the factual, temporal, and social dimen­
sions. But at the same time it observes what restrictive requirements have to 
be taken into account if the dimensions are condensed into self-description 
forms; and to this extent sociological theory behaves “critically” if it gears 
its own analytics to this condensation. It will note that and how the indi­
vidual meaning dimensions are already occupied and will therefore have to 
undertake a “redescription” of the self-description of the societal system.422
In the factual dimension, in differentiation theory, it discovers the 
problem of the selection of system references. It not only accepts that there 
are many different systems simultaneously but finds itself as second-order 
observer obliged to decide on the system from which it sees other things as 
environment. In the time dimension, it observes that the self-descriptions 
of society understand time as a historical process, even when one speaks of 
evolution.423 But the process concept stresses continuity, not discontinuity, 
because otherwise the identity and distinguishability of a specific process 
could not be established. Events then take second place as breaks, as inter­
ruptions, as innovations, or also as necessary, trend-setting stimuli. If, by 
contrast, one proceeds on the theoretical basis of the autopoiesis of events 
or operations, the underlying assumption is discontinuity and the normal 
state of affairs is continual disintegration, against which processes can then 
constitute themselves if the given event offers enough surplus possibili­
ties (= meaning) to allow what is appropriate for process formation to be 
selected.424 Finally, in the social dimension, every self-description empha­
sizes the binding agents (whether morality, reason, values, understanding, 

Self-Descriptions    
or desirable consensus), whereas sociological analytics assumes that every 
communication opens the yes/no bifurcation, because autopoiesis could 
not continue without it, and only from this position can preferences be 
clarified to enhance the probability of acceptance.
Such a redescription of description leads neither to a positive nor to 
a negative characterization of society. It does not formulate the identity 
of the system as a value, and certainly not as a norm by which one could 
judge society or the behavior within it. It does not allow a choice between 
progressive and conservation attitudes. All this would presuppose an ex­
ternal, guiding observer or an internal position for the only right observa­
tion, which would only have to tell the others what is to be seen from its 
standpoint. Let us replace such assumptions by the thesis that society con­
stitutes meaning per se by producing and reproducing itself as form in the 
medium of meaning. And all criteria for good or bad, true or false, ratio­
nal or irrational, functional or dysfunctional have to be generated in soci­
ety per communication, and this means in a way that can be observed and 
that offers possibilities for acceptance or rejection.
This also means that the form of self-description has to change. This 
change is as radical as the transition to functional differentiation, which 
implies the similarity of dissimilar systems and vastly reduces societal pre­
cepts of order; and it is also as radical as the evolutionary collapse of the 
differentiation of stabilization and variation, with the result that a non­
stationary system of society comes into being. In the context of the self-
description of the societal system, a similarly radical change appears to be 
beginning. It lies in the transition from first-order observation to second-
order observation.
As in the past, if we are to speak of self-description at all, the “self” 
of self-description has to be identifiable; and this always means that it has 
to remain distinguishable. Even if there are a multitude of self-­descriptions 
of society in society, there are not several societies (as if each observer were 
observing a different object—the one the angels, the other the devils). 
In polycontextural descriptions, unity can for this reason find expression 
only in the form of second-order observation—precisely through each ob­
server including in his description that other describers describe differ­
ently. In advanced attempts, this might lead to elements being included in 
descriptions that transcend these descriptions, or, in other words, that their 
meaningfulness is also communicated as selectivity. And, since all this is 

 
  Self-Descriptions
registered as taking place in society, it leads to society being understood as a 
unity capable of self-modification.425
It is a moot point whether the “project of modernity” is over or not, 
or whether it will turn out well or not. It is already obvious that this dis­
pute confuses positions. It is based on an obsolete conceptuality, which in 
turn discusses only topics of self-description (such as freedom, emancipa­
tion, equality, rationality, etc.). What seems to be changing, while under­
mining and carrying all this, is the form of self-description. The stationary 
societies of the old world had described themselves as objects, using such 
concepts as being, essence, nature, and genre. Within this structural and 
semantic framework, the possibilities of evolution were not excluded; but 
their observation and description could remain on the surface and work 
with the graphic concept of motion, which as counterconcept presupposes 
something fixed, like the banks of a river. Modern society observes itself 
as observer, describes itself as describer; and in a logically strict sense this 
alone is self-observation and self-description. Only now is the “self” of ob­
servation the observer, the “self” of description the describer himself.
If we wish to continue speaking of a “project of modernity,” it must 
be as an uncompleted project, indeed, as one that is not even adequately 
designed. It cannot be carried out on the basis of the subject concept if this 
concept continues to denote only the individual consciousness. Hegel—
who offers the only fully elaborated attempt to date—comes to mind. But 
we are then unlikely to set a term like “spirit” at the end of history, nor to 
see in it a closing thought, a predominant figure; and (against Hegel and 
with Darwin), we would have to avoid terms like “lower” or “higher.” The 
observer of the observer is not a “better” observer, simply a different one. 
He may appreciate value freedom or espouse the prejudice of freedom 
from prejudice; but, as these formulations indicate, he should at least no­
tice that he is operating autologically.
Radical structural changes on the scale we have seen in the past have 
never been observed and described as they happened; unless on the basis of 
completely inadequate concepts and looking back on a decaying tradition. 
Semantic changes follow structural changes with considerable delay. The 
condensation of meaning through repetition and forgetting under new 
conditions takes time. It seems to me that, in this regard, modern society is 
still on square one. The manifest dissatisfaction with everything currently 
on offer could be a fruitful beginning.

Self-Descriptions    
23. So-Called Postmodernity
Our investigations have provided no evidence to justify claims that 
at some time in this twentieth century, presumably in the second half, 
an ­epochal break took place that brought a transition from modern soci­
ety to a postmodern society. There have been many noteworthy structural 
changes within individual functional systems, due above all to globaliza­
tion and mutual strains on functional systems. But all the advances of mo­
dernity remain (one-age classes in the school system, party democracy as 
form of government, unregulated marriage practices, positive law, econ­
omies oriented on capital and credit, to mention only a few); we find 
only that their consequences are more pronounced. Even in the art system 
(perhaps with the exception of architecture), there are no distinct epochal 
boundaries between modern and postmodern.426 “Postmodernity” can be 
spoken of at most with reference to the self-description of the societal sys­
tem.427 We must therefore ask whether and, if so, how a specifically “post­
modern” (as opposed to modern) description is to be recognized.
Talk about “postmodernity” has perhaps arisen because the dynam­
ics of modern society have been underestimated and its descriptions have 
proved all too static. This holds true for the prominence of the Cartesian 
subject, for the idea of human rights, and also for Habermas’s assumption 
that modernity is an uncompleted project. If the signature of modernity is 
thus established, it seems reasonable to react with a theory of postmoder­
nity. In fact, however, the breaks that this postulates are not apparent, and 
it would therefore be better to dynamize the understanding of modern so­
ciety together with its self-description.
There is much that is controversial about the concept of postmoder­
nity. However, a more or less uncontested point of departure (albeit one 
that is in need of interpretation) would be the thesis of the end of grand 
narratives.428 It must immediately be conceded that this is itself a narrative, 
a métarécit. If this thesis is used autologically, thus including itself, it con­
tradicts itself: if true, then false. We must therefore reformulate it and say 
that the unity of society or, from its perspective, the world, can no longer 
be asserted as principle but only as paradox. Ultimate foundation in a par­
adox is considered one of the central characteristics of postmodern think­
ing. Paradox is the orthodoxy of our times.429 This means above all that 
distinctions and indications can now only be “founded” as resolution of a 

 
  Self-Descriptions
paradox. With respect to the problem of self-description, be it of the world 
in the world, be it of society in society, this is relatively easy. A plurality 
of self-descriptions needs only to be admitted, a plurality of possibilities 
in the “discourse” of self-description that are neither tolerant nor intoler­
ant of one another, but that can no longer take note of one another. We 
have anticipated this with the thesis that universalistic (self-inclusive) self-
descriptions do not have to be the only right, exclusive self-description. 
With an eye to the function of self-descriptions, one must add: cannot be 
exclusive, for the function of function is to admit functional equivalents.
More difficult is a second proposal, namely, to understand postmod­
ern thinking as dedifferentiation.430 But dedifferentiation cannot mean that 
one can forget differentiations, for the “de” prefix would then be meaning­
less. If dedifferentiation presupposes memory, this proposal amounts to 
preserving differences (e.g., preserving differences in style in postmodern 
works of art). Here, too, interpretation of the proposal would be helpful. 
It cannot be a matter of crossing from one side to the other within dis­
tinctions, for example from production orientation to consumption ori­
entation,431 or from orientation on the past to orientation on the future, 
and thus from boundedness to unboundedness. The question can only be 
whether attitudes have changed toward distinctions or, if one thinks in 
terms of objects, toward differences.
It will be recalled that the reversion in modern thought from given 
differences in essence to differentiation was a semantic innovation that met 
with growing response in the mid-nineteenth century.432 It may well be 
that, at this level of the forms of observing and describing, a further change 
has taken place; to put it in postmodern terms, a change toward a proviso 
that all distinctions can be deconstructed. In other words, one can always 
ask who is affected by the distinction (who is the observer) and why the 
observer marks the one side and not the other. But the answer to this ques­
tion depends in turn on who poses it, and thus on who the observer of it is.
If we understand postmodern description as operating in domains of 
self-generated indeterminacy, we immediately see parallels with other trends 
in science, which—in mathematics, cybernetics, and systems ­theory—are 
concerned with the peculiarities of self-referential, recursively operating ma­
chines.433 Such enterprises include chaos theory and fractal geometry. Com­
plexity develops here, not through attempts to describe the world more or 
less properly, but through iterative operations that set out from a self-gen­

Self-Descriptions    
erated initial state, updating it with every operation as point of departure 
for further operations. Time, which makes such shifts possible in the same 
­system, becomes the decisive variable, and unpredictability is, so to speak, 
the timely consequence of a sequence of such recursions.
Analyzing the temporal distinction between past and future is there­
fore likely to prove most fruitful, not least because the concept of postmo­
dernity is itself based on this distinction. Derrida’s critique of ontological 
metaphysics can be read as objection to overestimation of the present as 
the locus of the presence of being, proposing instead a more strongly time-­
related analysis. What occurs operationally is the notching of a difference in 
a world that tolerates this and makes “recutting” possible. This takes place 
through “writing” [Schrift]. But since it is a difference, it cannot last but 
has to be shifted from moment to moment. Différence is différance. This in 
turn implies that the relationship between past and future constantly shifts 
without it being possible to understand this shift as spatio-temporal move­
ment in an existing world of being. Understood as communication, the 
operation dismantles its own preconditions, deconstructs the distinction it 
uses in the sense of a performative contradiction between report (informa­
tion) and command (utterance that assumes its acceptance).
In quite different ways, the rapidly increasing computerization of 
everyday life presents us with the same question; regardless of literary ef­
forts to criticize the metaphysics of being, it is thus a topical issue. For 
computers veil invisible machines that render their states of circuitry vis­
ible only if one enters suitable commands. It makes little sense to describe 
these invisible machines as “present.” At any rate, they are induced only 
by requests situated in time and space to render information visible, which 
then generates its own difference between past and future in the context 
of the request. The dividing line between the invisible and inconceivable 
calculations of the machine and the occasional, interest-driven elicitation 
of its states could be well on the way to dislodging the old distinctions be­
tween aeternitas and tempus and between presence and absence from the 
first place in world construction. There is already talk of “virtual reality,”434 
and this suggests establishing a link with the discussion about postmod­
ern modernity.
An equally radical, postontological thematization of time appears to 
underlie George Spencer-Brown’s calculus of forms. He understands form 
as the marking of a distinction, thus as a unity with two sides to it, of which 

 
  Self-Descriptions
only one is indicated and the other has to remain unmarked. Crossing to 
the other side requires a further operation, and it therefore requires time. 
This becomes apparent at the latest when the calculus seeks to catch up with 
its own preconditions and begins to oscillate between the marked space and 
the unmarked space.435 Whereas classical form theory had understood form 
as static, a form to be judged successful or unsuccessful, it is now under­
stood as a dispositif for an observer and a regulation mechanism for decid­
ing to remain where one is (to repeat oneself) or cross to the other side. The 
primacy of form over the authorities that tradition had called reason and 
will (freedom) appears to demand the temporalization of forms. As regards 
reason, even Habermas is now willing to . . . wait.
The question of what is to happen with historically tried and tested 
but now obsolete forms takes us back to the current discussion about post­
modernity. Such forms are used as material. We could also say they are 
used as a medium for producing new forms through recombination. This 
has been discussed for the world of forms in art, but also holds true for 
the conceptual world of the sciences or other intellectual discourses. With 
postmodern forms, recognition is made possible—and forbidden. The 
pleasure of recognition—talk about “subject” or “democracy,” for exam­
ple—should not suffice. The recycled arsenal of forms is used with differ­
ent intent. Despite their apparent stability of being, the forms that have 
been passed down are now only one medium of self-understanding among 
other societal conditions. This can find expression in irony, but this would 
be merely an expressive escape and no directions for construction. This ap­
pears to mean that constructivist theoretical efforts do not continue post­
modernity but bring it to an end, even though they accept distance from 
history and its redescription as medium.
It remains to be seen whether the expression “postmodern” is felici­
tous. At any rate, descriptions are not postmodern merely because one now 
seeks to render the consequences of the Fall of Man bearable through en­
joyment rather than through work. What has just been said about unity 
and difference points to a need for theoretical reflection that is stringent 
as to form. There are more proposals in this direction than those currently 
bearing the postmodernity label. It is striking that the preliminary work 
on the issue does not include a theory of modern society. This might be 
because the modern/postmodern distinction discourages ventures of this 
sort. But if the particularity of postmodern descriptions lies in the prob­

Self-Descriptions    
lematization of distinctions and the temporalization of the forms that 
mark them, it could be assumed that the task of a “postmodern” theory of 
society consists in redescribing modern society on the basis of the experi­
ence available to us today. At any rate, an adequate theory of society (just 
like the theory of postmodern art) demands waiving the mere enjoyment 
of recognition and judging theory construction on its own merits.
This is the sense in which we wish to see our inquiries into a theory 
of society understood.


Notes
abbreviations
Luhmann, Aufklärung  Niklas Luhmann, Soziologische Aufklärung, 6 vols. 
(Opladen, 1970–1995)
Luhmann, Gesellschaftsstruktur  Niklas Luhmann, Gesellschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik, 4 vols. (Frankfurt, 1980–1995)
Luhmann, Kunst  Niklas Luhmann, Die Kunst der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995)
Luhmann, Systeme  Niklas Luhmann, Soziale Systeme: Grundriß einer 
allgemeinen Theorie (Frankfurt, 1984)
Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1  Luhmann, Theory of Society, vol. 1, trans. Rhodes 
Barrett (Stanford, 2012)
Spencer-Brown, Laws  George Spencer-Brown, Laws of Form (1969; new ed., 
New York, 1979)
chapter 4: differentiation
1.  See, e.g., Georg Simmel, Über sociale Differenzierung: Soziologische und psy­
chologische Untersuchungen (Leipzig, 1890); Émile Durkheim, De la division du tra­
vail social (2nd ed., 1893; repr., Paris, 1973); Renate Mayntz et al., ­Differenzierung 
und Verselbständigung: Zur Entwicklung gesellschaftlicher Teilsysteme (Frankfurt, 
1988); Soziale Differenzierung: Zur Geschichte einer Idee, ed. Niklas Luhmann (Op­
laden, 1985); Differentiation Theory and Social Change: Comparative and Historical 
Perspectives, ed. Jeffrey C. Alexander and Paul Colomy (New York, 1990).
2.  See critique in Charles Tilly, Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Compari­
sons (New York, 1984), esp. chaps. 2 and 3.
3.  In anticipation of later analysis, it should be noted that I am speaking about 
operations that separate system and environment. Where observations are con­
cerned, such reentry leads to the intrasystemic distinction between self-reference 
and other-reference.
4.  This tradition is dealt with in detail in chap. 5.
5.  Jacques Derrida criticized this, proposing a time-related concept of dif­
férance. The following investigations, too, are concerned not with the decomposi­

    Notes to Chapter 4
tion of an original unity but with the emergence of distinctions in a state of the 
world assumed to be unmarked.
6.  See § 13 of this chapter.
7.  Cybernetics deals with this under the heading of “positive feedback.” See 
Magoroh Maruyama, “The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying Mutual 
Causal Processes,” General Systems 8 (1963): 233–241.
8.  Theoretical biologists often overlook this, along with the fact that every­
thing that happens, happens simultaneously. John Maynard Smith’s statement 
that “Evolution is a historical process; it is a unique sequence of events” (Evolution 
and the Theory of Games [Cambridge, 1982], 8) is explicable only in these terms.
9.  Against this theoretical background, see, on the relationship between mutu­
ally dynamizing changes in the economic and legal systems, Michael Hutter, Die 
Produktion von Recht: Eine selbstreferentielle Theorie der Wirtschaft, angewandt auf 
den Fall des Arzneimittelpatentrechts (Tübingen, 1989), esp. 43ff..
10.  The tradition that operated with the whole-part schema knows no evolu­
tion theory; to describe the temporal dimension of societal development, it uses 
notions such as creation or the emanation of multiplicity from unity.
11.  The moral philosophers of the eighteenth century appear to have been the 
first to carry out such an analysis. However, they were concerned with people, 
and their aim—e.g., with the concept of sympathy in Adam Smith’s The Theory 
of Moral Sentiments [1759]—was to relativize the distinction between egoism and 
altruism.
12.  Edward Reynolds, A Treatise of the Passions and Faculties of the Soule of Man 
(London, 1640; repr., Gainesville, FL, 1971), 76, speaks, for example, “of the gen­
erall care of the Creator; whereby he hath fastened on all creatures, not only his 
private desire to satisfie the demands of their owne nature, but has also stamp’d 
upon them a generall charitie and feeling of Communion, as they are sociable 
parts of the Universe or common Body; wherein cannot be admitted (by reason 
of the necessarie mutuall connexion betweene the parts thereof) any confusion or 
divulsion without immediate danger to all the members.”
13.  Durkheim, De la division du travail social (cited n. 1 above).
14.  See Talcott Parsons, “Comparative Studies and Evolutionary Change,” in 
Comparative Methods in Sociology: Essays on Trends and Applications, ed. Ivan Val­
lier (Berkeley, CA, 1971), 97–139 (101–102); repr. in Talcott Parsons, Social Systems 
and the Evolution of Action Theory (New York, 1977), 279–320.
15.  One definition is offered by Walter L. Bühl, Ökologische Knappheit: Gesell­
schaftliche und technologische Bedingungen ihrer Bewältigung (Göttingen, 1981), 85: 
“‘Integration’ means the degree of functional cohesion [Verbundenheit] between 
the differentiated parts or components, so that the one component cannot take ef­
fect without the other.” It could be objected that “functional cohesion” under the 
conditions of functional differentiation consists precisely in the individual systems 
not performing the same function.

Notes to Chapter 4    
16.  For an up-to-date overview, see Helmut Willke, Systemtheorie, 3rd ed. 
(Stuttgart, 1991), 167ff.
17.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.
18.  It should also be noted that Gabriel Tarde proposes a quite different ap­
proach, which takes difference as the point of departure and describes the ensu­
ing developments as imitation and diffusion. But it has found no acceptance. See 
André Béjin, “Différenciation, complexification, évolution des sociétés,” Commu­
nications 22 (1974): 109–118.
19.  In Bernhard Peters, Die Integration moderner Gesellschaften (Frankfurt, 
1993), 92, we read that “social integration means a successful ratio of freedom to 
commitment.”
20.  A very similar formulation is used in a cultural anthropology context by 
Robert Anderson, “Reduction of Variants as a Measure of Cultural Integration,” 
in Essays in the Science of Culture in Honor of Leslie A. White, ed. Gertrude E. 
Dole and Robert L. Carneiro (New York, 1960), 50–62. See also Helmut Willke, 
“Staat und Gesellschaft,” in Die Verwaltung des politischen Systems, ed. Klaus 
Dammann, Dieter Grunow, and Klaus P. Japp (Opladen, 1994), 13–26 (20). Re­
duction of the options produced by society itself is a question of survival for 
modern society.
21.  See Helmut Willke, “Zum Problem der Integration komplexer Systeme: 
Ein theoretisches Konzept,” Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 
30 (1978): 228–252.
22.  See Lloyd A. Allport, “A Structuronomic Conception of Behavior: Indi­
vidual and Collective,” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 64 (1962): 3–30.
23.  For greater detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft 
(Frankfurt, 1988).
24.  See, e.g., Karin Knorr Cetina, “Zur Unterkomplexität der Differenzier­
ungstheorie: Empirische Anfragen an die Systemtheorie,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 
21 (1992): 406–419.
25.  Talcott Parsons would have spoken not of organization but of “collectiv­
ity” as a special level in the hierarchical structure of the social action system, which 
presupposes a collective capacity for action and consolidated consensus on values.
26.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, 287–288, and chap. 4.13 below.
27.  See chap. 4.14 below.
28.  See, e.g., Richard Münch, Theorie des Handelns: Zur Rekonstruktion der Be­
iträge von Talcott Parsons, Emile Durkheim und Max Weber (Frankfurt, 1982), and 
in many publications since.
29.  If this question of the primacy of differentiation forms is neglected, the 
historical continuity of the problems resulting from certain types comes to be 
overestimated; for example, in so-called world-system analysis with regard to the 
difference between center and periphery. See, e.g., Christopher Chase-Dunn, 
Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy (Oxford, 1989), esp. 201ff., 

    Notes to Chapter 4
Core/Periphery Relations in Precapitalist Worlds, ed. Christopher Chase-Dunn 
and Thomas D. Hall (Boulder, CO, 1991), and esp. the works of Immanuel 
Wallerstein.
30.  See Alexander A. Goldenweiser, “The Principle of Limited Possibilities in 
the Development of Culture,” Journal of American Folk-Lore 26 (1913): 259–290.
31.  This recalls the Marxian trick with the “two classes” that leaves out all strata 
that do not fit, such as the lower middle class [Kleinbürgertum] or the civil service 
[Beamtentum].
32.  See Heinz von Foerster, Observing Systems (Seaside, CA, 1981), esp. “Objects: 
Token for (Eigen-)Behaviors,” 274–285.
33.  This can be tested by examining the difficulties tribal societies (with or 
without ethnic differentiation) get into when world society obliges them to build 
states: Somalia and Afghanistan are prime examples.
34.  Similar sequences are to be found using other terms—e.g., primitive so­
cieties/traditional societies/industrial societies with respect to the organization of 
work in Stanley H. Udy Jr., Work in Traditional and Modern Society (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ, 1970). See also Eric R. Wolf, Europe and the People Without History 
(Berkeley, CA, 1982).
35.  This has sometimes been described as the increasing “insulation” of the so­
cietal system, e.g., by Colin Renfrew, The Emergence of Civilization: The Cyclades 
and The Aegean in the Third Millennium B.C. (London, 1972), esp. 12ff.
36.  See David Lockwood, “Social Integration and System Integration,” in So­
cial Change: Explorations, Diagnoses and Conjectures, ed. George K. Zollschan and 
Walter Hirsch (1964; New York, 1976), 370–383. Social and systemic integration 
are also distinguished, apparently quite independently, or at least without cita­
tion, in Jürgen Habermas, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns, vol. 2 (Frank­
furt, 1981), 179. From a historical point of view, this distinction is to be understood 
against the background of uncertainties in Talcott Parsons’s general theory of ac­
tion, which, while positing “integration” as a special function in the action sys­
tem, also has to explain how the different functional systems cohere, including the 
personal system and the social system. However, Parsons himself distinguished be­
tween integration (as special function) and interpenetration.
37.  For an analysis of inclusion relating to interaction (with quite different 
perspectives), see Bernhard Giesen, Die Entdinglichung des Sozialen: Eine evolu­
tionstheoretische Perspektive auf die Postmoderne (Frankfurt, 1991), 176ff.
38.  See T. H. Marshall, Class, Citizenship, and Social Development (Garden 
City, NY, 1964), esp. “Citizenship and Social Class,” 65–122.
39.  See Talcott Parsons, “Commentary on Clark,” in Perspectives in Political So­
ciology, ed. Andrew Effrat (Indianapolis, 1973), 299–308 (306).
40.  See Talcott Parsons, The System of Modern Societies (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1971), 11, 27, 88–89, 92ff.
41.  See esp. Talcott Parsons, “Equality and Inequality in Modern Society, or 

Notes to Chapter 4    
Social Stratification Revisited,” in id., Social Systems and the Evolution of Action 
Theory (New York, 1977), 321–380.
42.  “Persons” are understood as identity marks to which reference is made 
in the communication process, in contrast to the cellular, organic, and men­
tal processes that actually take place in the environment. See Niklas Luhmann, 
“Die Form ‘Person,’” Soziale Welt 42 (1991): 166–175. What is at issue is therefore 
not incorporation in the sense of mixing completely heterogeneous instances of 
autopoiesis but only interpenetration in the sense of overall reference to highly 
complex, individually uncontrollable (simultaneously actual) environmental 
processes.
43.  See, e.g., Bronisław Geremek, Les marginaux parisiens aux XIVe et XVe ­siècles 
(Paris, 1976), 11.
44.  Parsons, “Equality and Inequality” (cited n. 41 above), 26ff.
45.  After all, there are reports even from inhospitable Iceland that criminals 
managed to survive as robbers in inaccessible mountainous country. There are ap­
parently enough sheep.
46.  See esp. Werner Danckert, Unehrliche Leute: Die verfemten Berufe (Bern, 
1963).
47.  This is, incidentally, also indicated by the guildlike organizations of beggars 
in China. For Europe see, e.g., Christian Paultre, De la répression de la mendicité 
et du vagabondage en France sous l’ancien régime (Paris, 1906; repr., Geneva, 1975); 
­Geremek, Marginaux parisiens (cited n. 43 above); John Pound, Poverty and Vagrancy 
in Tudor England (London, 1971); Ernst Schubert, “Mobilität ohne Chance: Die 
Ausgrenzung des fahrenden Volkes,” in Ständische Gesellschaft und soziale Mobilität, 
ed. Winfried Schulze (Munich, 1988), 113–164; and on the very special conditions 
prevailing in Spain owing to a religiously determined exclusion policy, Les problèmes 
de l’exclusion en Espagne (XVIe–XVIIe siècles), ed. Augustin Redondo (Paris, 1983).
48.  On this subject and on the links with the preconditions for understanding 
theater, see Jean-Christophe Agnew, Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theater in 
Anglo-American Thought, 1550–1750 (Cambridge, 1986), esp. 57ff.
49.  See Philip G. Herbst, Alternatives to Hierarchies (Leiden, 1976), 69ff.
50.  The semantic career of “residual” concepts (e.g., residual risk) in recent 
years would be worth examining. It is due to a lack of reflection on the difference 
in relation to which the residual is a residual.
51.  See Hans-Georg Pott, Literarische Bildung: Zur Geschichte der Individual­
ität (Munich,1995).
52.  See Robert Mauzi, L’idée du bonheur dans la littérature et la pensée française 
au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1960); or the chapter “Conversation avec un laboureur” in 
Jean Blondel, Des hommes tels qu’ils sont et doivent être: Ouvrage de sentiment (Paris, 
1758), 119ff., which describes the possibilities for happiness open to a peasant as in­
ducement for the upper classes to think about their own chances of being happy. 
Or, a voice from England, Alexander Pope, Essay on Man (quoted from The Poems 

    Notes to Chapter 4
of Alexander Pope, vol. 3 [London, 1950]), Epistle 4, ll. 50–52: “Some are, and must 
be, greater than the rest, / More rich, more wise; but who infers from hence / That 
such are happier shocks all common sense.”
53.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Die Homogenisierung des Anfangs: Zur Aus­
differenzierung der Schulerziehung,” in Zwischen Anfang und Ende: Fragen an die 
Pädagogik, ed. id. and Karl Eberhard Schorr (Frankfurt, 1990), 73–111.
54.  Statutory offenses were especially drastically multiplied in England. 
See David Lieberman, The Province of Legislation Determined: Legal Theory in 
­Eighteenth-Century England (Cambridge, 1989).
55.  See also with reference to this period Michel Foucault, Histoire de la folie à 
l’âge classique: Folie et déraison (Paris, 1961); Naissance de la clinique: Une archéologie 
du regard médical (Paris, 1963); and Surveiller et punir (Paris, 1975).
56.  See Jan J. Loubser, “Calvinism, Equality, and Inclusion: The Case of Afri­
kaner Calvinism,” in The Protestant Ethic and Modernization: A Comparative View, 
ed. S. N. Eisenstadt (New York, 1968), 363–383.
57.  See, with a great deal of material from Brazil, Marcelo Neves, Verfassung 
und Positivität des Rechts in der peripheren Moderne: Eine theoretische Betrachtung 
und eine Interpretation des Falls Brasilien (Berlin, 1992). See also Volkmar Gessner, 
Recht und Konflikt: Eine soziologische Untersuchung privatrechtlicher Konflikte in 
Mexiko (Tübingen, 1976).
58.  See Dirk Baecker, “Soziale Hilfe als Funktionssystem der Gesellschaft,” 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie 23 (1994): 93–110; Peter Fuchs and Dietrich Schneider, 
“Das Hauptmann-von-Köpenick-Syndrom: Überlegungen zur Zukunft funktio­
naler Differenzierung,” Soziale Systeme 1 (1995): 203–224.
59.  New Guinea is the most important exception. See esp. Fredrik Barth, Rit­
ual and Knowledge Among the Baktaman of New Guinea (Oslo, 1975).
60.  This naturally presupposes that ecological conditions can absorb multi­
plication, that enough land is hence available. However, this does not mean that 
ecological constraints are the only cause of larger systems coming into being, with 
the concomitant consequences (hierarchy formation, the separation of roles, ritu­
alization). There are also likely to have been social structural grounds—e.g., better 
information gathering and risk distribution in hunter societies.
61.  See Isaac Schapera, Government and Politics in Tribal Societies (London, 
1956; repr. 1963), 2ff. On controversies about definatory issues, see Richard B. Lee, 
“!Kung Spatial Organization: An Ecological and Historial Perspective,” in Kala­
hari Hunter-Gatherers: Studies of the !Kung San and Their Neighbors, ed. id. and 
Irven DeVore (Cambridge, MA, 1976), 73–97.
62.  I use the well-known ascribed-achieved status distinction introduced by 
Ralph Linton, The Study of Man: An Introduction (New York, 1936). Talcott Par­
sons renamed it quality-performance. Both terms are unfortunate, because an 
achieved status is naturally also ascribed or taken as a quality of a person. This lack 
of clarity hides a lack of theoretical clarification.

Notes to Chapter 4    
63.  See Stanley H. Udy, Work in Traditional and Modern Society (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ, 1970).
64.  For such a case, see Alfred R. Radcliffe-Brown, “The Social Organization 
of Australian Tribes,” Oceania 1 (1930–1931): 34–63, 206–256, 322–343, 426–456.
65.  Fuzziness is a problem above all for ethnologists. See Raoul Naroll, “On 
Ethnic Unit Classification,” Current Anthropology 5 (1964): 283–291; Michael 
Moer­man, “Ethnic Identification in a Complex Civilization: Who Are the Lue?” 
American Anthropologist 67 (1965): 1215–1230; Morton H. Fried, The Evolution of 
Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology (New York, 1967), 154ff.
66.  See Schapera, Government and Politics, 153ff., 175ff., 200–201; David 
Easton, “Political Anthropology,” in Biannual Review of Anthropology 1959, ed. 
Bernard J. Siegel, 210–262 (232ff.); Marshall D. Sahlins, “The Segmentary Lin­
eage: An Organization of Predatory Expansion,” American Anthropologist 63 
(1961): 322–345. Remarkably, political anthropology, in particular, has taken an in­
terest in this phenomenon, because it is in search of a predecessor of the modern 
state and cannot find any.
67.  See Aidan W. Southall, Alur Society: A Study in Processes and Types of Domi­
nation (Cambridge, 1956).
68.  Should be maintained, we could say, given that a normative expectation is 
normatively expected.
69.  An alternative is the dichotomization of a tribe into halves whose differ­
ence structures the conflict. See, e.g., P. H. Gulliver, “Structural Dichotomy and 
Jural Conflict Among the Arusha of Northern Tanganyika,” Africa 31 (1961): 19–35.
70.  See Sally Falk Moore, “Descent and Legal Position,” in Law in Culture and 
Society, ed. Laura Nader (Chicago, 1969), 374–400, esp. 376.
71.  On the origin of the concept, see http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/peirce 
-semiotics and Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce (Cambridge, MA: Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press, 1960–1966), passim. Sociologists mostly quote 
Harold Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967), 4ff. 
See also Bernhard Giesen, Die Entdinglichung des Sozialen: Eine evolutionstheoret­
ische Perspektive auf die Postmoderne (Frankfurt, 1991), 25ff.
72.  Notions like collective mind or collective consciousness, associated with 
Durkheim’s sociology, come up against their limits in this context. One is more 
likely to become involved with them the less it prejudices the next situation.
73.  This also refutes the thesis of the growing individualization of the human 
being in the course of development. See the case study by Eleanor Leacock, “Sta­
tus Among the Montagnais-Naskapi of Labrador,” Ethnohistory 5 (1958): 200–209.
74.  “A man is a member of a political group of any kind in virtue of his non­
membership of other groups of the same kind. He sees them as groups and their 
members see him as a member of a group, and his relations with them are con­
trolled by the structural distance between the groups concerned. But a man does 
not see himself as a member of that same group in so far as he is a member of a 

    Notes to Chapter 4
segment of it, which stands outside of it and is opposed to other segments of it,” 
E. E. Evans-Pritchard writes in The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood 
and Political Institutions of a Nilotic People (Oxford, 1940), 136–137; see also 147–
148. In our terms, this is to say that a Roman is not an Italian qua Roman; an Ital­
ian is not a European qua Italian; a white man is not a human being qua white 
man. In segmentary societies, the individual does not belong to a comprehensive 
system because he belongs to a family that belongs to it but because he has to con­
duct relations with other families and groups to which he does not belong, and in 
these relations cannot be sustained by his own family alone. A clearer demonstra­
tion can scarcely be offered that the unity of society is constituted by differentia­
tion and not primarily by external boundaries.
75.  This example is taken from Godfrey Lienhardt, “The Western Dinka,” in 
Tribes Without Rulers: Studies in African Segmentary Systems, ed. John Middleton 
and David Tait (London, 1958), 97–135 (107).
76.  See, e.g., A. Irving Hallowell, “Ojibwa Ontology, Behaviour and World 
View,” in Culture in History: Essays in Honor of Paul Radin, ed. Stanley Diamond 
(New York, 1960), 19–52.
77.  Many studies have been conducted on the subject. See only Ruth Finnegan, 
Oral Poetry: Its Nature, Significance and Social Content (Cambridge, 1977); Jan 
Vansina, Oral Tradition as History (London, 1985); D. P. Henige, Oral History 
(London, 1988).
78.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 3.
79.  For already more developed civilizational conditions, see Gerdien Jonker, 
The Topography of Remembrance: The Dead, Tradition and Collective Memory in 
Mesopotamia (Leiden, 1995).
80.  See Margaret W. Conkey, “Style and Information in Cultural Evolution: 
Toward a Predictive Model of the Paleolithic,” in Social Archeology: Beyond Subsis­
tence and Dating, ed. Charles L. Redman et al. (New York, 1978), 61–85.
81.  Alfred R. Radcliffe-Brown, The Andaman Islanders (1922; repr., New York, 
1964), 23–24, observed linguistic differences even between tribes with a few hun­
dred members, and where the names of the tribes alluded to these differences. For 
the Baktaman, Barth, Ritual and Knowledge, 16, estimates that some 1,000 people 
could be reached linguistically. Beyond this limit it was difficult to communicate 
even the willingness to make oneself understood or one’s good intentions. Strangers 
were incomprehensible, were enemies, were edible.
82.  I take this example from Barth, Ritual and Knowledge.
83.  As Jan Assmann, Ägypten: Theologie und Frömmigkeit einer frühen Hochkultur 
(Stuttgart, 1984), shows for Egypt, such a combination and symbolization can suc­
ceed only in the course of a long development of advanced civilization. This shows 
impressively how difficult it is to draw conclusions about archaic conditions on the 
basis of the tribal cultures we can observe today.
84.  See Spencer-Brown, Laws, 56–57, 69ff.

Notes to Chapter 4    
85.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 2.
86.  This same can be said of the divinatory practices originating in archaic 
times that were rationalized into wisdom teachings with the aid of writing in ad­
vanced civilizations. Here, too, we are dealing not so much with predictions as 
with a parallel action to establish favorable/unfavorable times and conditions for 
action in the awareness of dependence on inscrutable powers; and here, too, the 
rules of divination can be rationalized into complex but familiar programs, and 
thus into learnable knowledge, so that a familiar means of handling unfamiliar 
conditions can develop. See esp. Jean-Pierre Vernant et al., Divination et ratio­
nalité (Paris, 1974).
87.  See E. E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande 
(Oxford, 1937), e.g., 407, 411, 438–439, 453ff. There are also many cases of encour­
aging speech with things in Homer. And even after the introduction of writing, 
even until well into the age of printing, the habit persisted of reciting or reading 
the recipe during an action without this serving to refresh the memory or provide 
information. See Michael Giesecke, “Überlegungen zur sozialen Funktion und zur 
Struktur handschriftlicher Rezepte im Mittelalter,” Zeitschrift für Literaturwissen­
schaft und Linguistik 51–52 (1983): 167–184. It is clearly a question of establishing a 
relationship with the secret of things.
88.  See the very differentiated studies on the relationship between “morals” 
and “pollution” in Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concept of 
Pollution and Taboo (London, 1966), 129ff.
89.  See Max Gluckman, Custom and Conflict in Africa (Oxford, 1955), 85. Vice 
versa, the identification of witches and wizards poses a moral problem for society 
(if not, as in early modern times, a legal problem); for they appear in the familiar 
world and thus cannot escape moral judgment.
90.  See, e.g., William Chase Green, Moira: Fate, Good and Evil in Greek 
Thought (Cambridge, MA,1944); Meyer Fortes, Oedipus and Job in West African 
Religion (Cambridge, 1959).
91.  See, with many references, G. E. R. Lloyd, Magic, Reason and Experience: 
Studies in the Origin and Development of Greek Science (Cambridge, 1979).
92.  There is therefore no section on tribal societies in the chapter on 
self-descriptions.
93.  Klaus E. Müller speaks of “overlaying societies” [Überschichtungsgesell­
schaften] in “Prähistorisches Geschichtsbewußtsein,” Mitteilungen des Zentrums 
für interdisziplinäre Forschung der Universität Bielefeld 3 (1995): 11.
94.  Despite criticism of details in older studies, this seems still to be generally 
recognized today. Among classical texts, see esp. Marcel Mauss, “Essai sur le Don: 
Forme et raison de l’échange dans les sociétés archaïques,” in id., Sociologie et an­
thropologie (Paris, 1950), 143–279; Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western 
Pacific (London, 1922), esp. 176ff.; Richard C. Thurnwald, “Gegenseitigkeit im 
Aufbau und Funktionieren der Gesellungen und deren Institutionen,” in Festgabe 

    Notes to Chapter 4
für Ferdinand Tönnies (Leipzig, 1936), 275–297; Claude Lévi-Strauss, Les structures 
élémentaires de la parenté (Paris, 1949), esp. 78ff.; Marshall D. Sahlins, “On the So­
ciology of Primitive Exchange,” in The Relevance of Models in Social Anthropology, 
ed. Michael Banton (London, 1965), 139–236; id., Tribesmen (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1968), 81ff. Particularly controversial is normative quality, or, to be more pre­
cise, the extent to which the form of reciprocity sanctions itself by withdrawal of 
performance in the event of violation. For a critical view, see E. Adamson Hoe­
bel, The Law of Primitive Man (Cambridge, MA, 1954), 177ff.; Isaac Schapera, 
“Malinowski’s Theories of Law,” in Man and Culture: An Evaluation of the Work of 
Bronislaw Malinowski, ed. Raymond Firth (London, 1957), 139–155; see also Ray­
mond Firth, Primitive Polynesian Economy (1939; 2nd ed. London, 1965), esp. 314ff.; 
Georg Elwert, “Die Elemente der traditionellen Solidarität: Eine Fallstudie in We­
stafrika,” Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 32 (1980): 681–704. 
Despite the differences in the degree of juridification, it must be assumed that a 
synallagmatic relationship also regulating incapacities, errors, and mistakes is not 
meant.
95.  Following the formulation by William H. Isbell, “Environmental Pertur­
bation and the Origin of the Andean State,” in Social Archeology, ed. Redman et 
al., 303–313.
96.  Evidence is provided by Risk and Uncertainty in Tribal and Peasant Econo­
mies, ed. Elisabeth Cashdan (Boulder, CO, 1990).
97.  On the relationship between positive and negative reciprocity, see Karl 
Hutterer, “Reciprocity and Revenge among the Ifugao,” Philippine Quarterly of 
Culture and Society 1 (1973): 33–38.
98.  However, this recalls the importance of developing means to store food. It 
makes the difference between hunter-gatherer societies and agrarian societies ap­
pear less sharp than had hitherto been assumed.
99.  On the lack of objective equivalence criteria (in the nature of “prices”), see 
Frederic C. Pryor and Nelson H. H. Graburn, “The Myth of Reciprocity,” in So­
cial Exchange: Advances in Theory and Research, ed. Kenneth J. Gergen, Martin S. 
Greenberg, and Richard A. Willis (New York, 1980), 214–237 (224ff.). It should, 
however, be noted that this does not call the reciprocity rule into question; on the 
contrary, it enhances its adaptability to different states of affairs and thus further 
ensures it unquestionable validity.
100.  For this reason, markets, too, insofar as they are differentiated institu­
tions, are excepted from the original sphere of reciprocity; they generate no lasting 
symbolic qualities but serve ad hoc to balance out surpluses. See Paul Bohannan 
and Laura Bohannan, Tiv Economy (London, 1968), esp. 142ff.
101.  See Leopold Pospisil, Kapauku Papuans and Their Law (New Haven, CT, 
1958); Lorna Marshall, “!Kung African Bands,” Africa 30 (1960): 325–355; Ronald 
M. Berndt, Excess and Restraint: Social Control Among a New Guinea Mountain 
People (Chicago, 1962).

Notes to Chapter 4    
102.  A compilation of such expressions is to be found in Firth, Primitive Poly­
nesian Economy, 371ff.
103.  In general, René Thom’s use of catastrophe theory in the social sciences 
has bogged down in mere metaphor. It makes sense only if the principle of stabil­
ity whose change is described as a catastrophe because it changes everything is pre­
cisely stated. In my inquiries, this is the primary form of societal differentiation. 
Another, more limited example is the collapse of hierarchies that had depended 
on control of the trade in prestige goods in consequence of the expansion of trade 
relations. See Jonathan Friedman, “Catastrophe and Continuity in Social Evolu­
tion,” in Theory and Explanation in Archaeology, ed. Colin Renfrew, Michael J. 
Rowlands, and Barbara Abbott Segraves (New York, 1982), 175–196. C. H. Wad­
dington, “A Catastrophe Theory of Evolution,” Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences 231 (1974): 32–42, uses the distinction between genotype and phenotype 
for biological evolution theory.
104.  See Peter Laslett, The World We Have Lost (New York, 1965; 2nd ed., Lon­
don, 1971).
105.  And clearly under the influence of the economic theory of the division of 
labor, which requires a sufficient scale. See, e.g., Thomas Hodgskin, Popular Politi­
cal Economy (London, 1827; repr., New York, 1966), 117ff.; Durkheim, De la divi­
sion du travail social (cited n. 1 above), 237ff.
106.  The markedly stratified society of the Tikopia (British Solomon Islands) 
numbered only between 1,200 and 1,300 when Firth investigated it. See Raymond 
Firth, We, the Tikopia: A Sociological Study of Kinship in Primitive Polynesia (Lon­
don, 1936; repr. of the 2nd ed., 1965); Firth, Primitive Polynesian Economy, 187ff. 
For Africa, the table in Tribes Without Rulers, ed. Middleton and Tait, 28, shows no 
connection between size and the beginnings of rank differentiation.
107.  See Roy A. Rappaport, Ecology, Meaning, and Religion (Richmond, CA, 
1979), 20ff.
108.  See Robert L. Winzler, “Ecology, Culture, Social Organization and State 
Formation in Southeast Asia,” Current Anthropology 17 (1976): 623–632. Also for 
a general treatment of monofactorial (at least statistically tenable) explanations in 
contexts of sociocultural evolution, see “The Cultural Evolution of Civilizations,” 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 3 (1972): 399–426.
109.  The discussion arose from criticism of underestimation of the sociostruc­
tural importance of this trade in Immanuel Wallerstein’s world-system theory in 
attempts to apply this theory to premodern conditions. For evidence, see, e.g., 
Centre and Periphery: Comparative Studies in Archaeology, ed. Timothy C. Cham­
pion (London, 1989).
110.  Ethnology offers the special category of “rank societies,” which, although 
they have already known generations of enduring differences of rank and wealth 
between families, have nevertheless not yet consolidated the difference in the form 
of stratification into differences in way of life, of equality of birth, etc. See, e.g., 

    Notes to Chapter 4
Morton H. Fried, The Evolution of Political Societies: An Essay in Political Anthro­
pology (New York, 1967).
111.  Others, too, have noticed that the term “sudden” is often applied to the 
history of the genesis of civilizations. Alexander Marshack, e.g., begins with this 
question in The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of Man’s First Art, 
Symbol, and Notation (London, 1972), 12 (with reference to a broader concept of 
civilization).
112.  In this context, I am referring to a very general systems-theoretical mecha­
nism. See Alfred Gierer, Die Physik, das Leben und die Seele: Anspruch und Grenzen 
der Naturwissenschaft, 4th ed. (Munich, 1988), esp. 137ff.
113.  Material on the diversity of forms in very different societies, hence evidence 
for the universality of the form “rank difference” is to be found in Barry Schwartz, 
Vertical Classification: A Study in Structuralism and the Sociology of Knowledge (Chi­
cago, 1981).
114.  See, e.g., Jonathan Friedman, “Tribes, States, and Transformations,” in 
Marxist Analyses and Social Anthropology, ed. Maurice Bloch (London, 1975), 161–
202; Kristian Kristiansen, “The Formation of Tribal Systems in Later European 
Prehistory: Northern Europe, 4000–500 B.C.,” in Theory and Explanation in Ar­
chaeology, ed. Renfrew et al., 241–280.
115.  This is the usual understanding of “chiefly societies.” See only Hans Wim­
mer, Evolution der Politik: Von der Stammesgesellschaft zur modernen Demokratie 
(Vienna, 1996), 193ff.
116.  See Elisabeth Colson, “A Redundancy of Actors,” in Scale and Social Or­
ganization, ed. Fredrik Barth (Oslo, 1978), 150–162.
117.  “Occasionally a son or other relative of a former headman may be chosen, 
although such a relationship is by no means the deciding factor” is a typical obser­
vation by John Gillin, “Crime and Punishment Among the Barama River Carib 
of British Guiana,” American Anthropologist 36 (1934): 331–344 (333). The same ob­
servations is made for another part of the world by K. E. Read, “Leadership and 
Consensus in a New Guinea Society,” ibid. 61 (1959): 425–436. For a general ty­
pology, see Marshall D. Sahlins, “Poor Man, Rich Man, Big Man, Chief: Politi­
cal Types in Melanesia and Polynesia,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 
5 (1963): 285–303.
118.  See the formulation by Friedman, “Tribes, States, and Transformations,” 
174: “ . . .  when a living lineage begins to occupy the previously ‘empty category’ 
defined by the imaginary segmentary locus at which all ancestral lines meet.”
119.  Natural scientists, too, use this concept to explain the historicality of sys­
tems. See esp. Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, Dialog mit der Natur: Neue 
Wege naturwissenschaftlichen Denkens (Munich, 1981), 165ff.; Order Out of Chaos: 
Man’s New Dialogue with Nature (New York, 1984), originally published as La 
Nouvelle alliance: Métamorphose de la science (Paris, 1984).
120.  Michel Serres, Le Parasite (Paris, 1980).

Notes to Chapter 4    
121.  Serres, quoted from the German translation (Frankfurt, 1981), 282.
122.  See, e.g., Elman R. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization: The ­Process 
of Cultural Evolution (New York, 1975); Klaus Eder, Die Entstehung staatlich organ­
isierter Gesellschaften: Ein Beitrag zu einer Theorie sozialer Evolution (Frankfurt, 
1976); Henry T. Wright, “Recent Research on the Origin of the States,” Annual Re­
view of Anthropology 6 (1977): 379–397; Origins of the State: The Anthropology of Po­
litical Evolution, ed. Ronald R. Cohen and Elman R. Service (Philadelphia, 1978); 
The Early State, ed. Henri J. M. Claessen and Peter Skalnik (The Hague, 1978); 
Elisabeth M. Brumfield, “Aztec State Making: Ecology, Structure, and the Origin 
of the State,” American Anthropologist 85 (1983): 261–284; Development and Decline: 
The Evolution of Sociopolitical Organization, ed. Henri J. M. Claessens, Pieter van 
de Velde, and M. Estellie Smith (South Hadley, MA, 1985); and State and Society: 
The Emergence and Development of Social Hierarchy and Political Centralization, ed. 
John Gledhill, Barbara Bender, and Mogens Trolle Larsen (London, 1988).
123.  Productivity growth itself has also been mentioned in this context—with 
reference, however, to societies in Polynesia, notorious for their propensity for 
conflict. See Marshall D. Sahlins, Social Stratification in Polynesia (Seattle, 1958). 
On critique, see Rappaport, Ecology, Meaning, and Religion, 14ff.
124.  Centre and Periphery in the Ancient World, ed. Michael Rowlands, ­Mogens 
Larsen, and Kristian Kristiansen (Cambridge, 1987); Centre and Periphery, ed. 
Champion (cited n. 109 above), and Core/Periphery Relations, ed. Chase-Dunn 
and Hall (cited n. 29 above) provide an overview of this novel field of research. 
From a historical point of view, this research has been motivated by an interest in 
broader economic and cultural contexts and not primarily by comparison of the 
evolutionary value of various differentiation forms.
125.  See David Wilkinson, “Cores, Peripheries, and Civilizations,” in Core/­
Periphery Relations, ed. Chase-Dunn and Hall, 113–166, with reference to Carroll 
Quigley, The Evolution of Civilizations: An Introduction to Historical Analysis (New 
York, 1961), 85–87.
126.  For an overview and analysis of the internal problems of such empire 
building, see S. N. Eisenstadt, The Political Systems of Empires (New York, 1963), 
and see the introduction to the paperback edition (New York, 1969) on center-
periphery differentiation.
127.  One of the reasons for the intensification of trade is likely to have been 
that the first advanced civilizations that were suitable as centers developed in the 
Nile Valley and Mesopotamia, areas extremely poor in raw materials.
128.  We needn’t share the view (e.g., in Barry K. Gills and André Gunder 
Frank, “5000 Years of World System History: The Cumulation of Accumulation,” 
in Core/Periphery Relations, ed. Chase-Dunn and Hall, 67–112) that this is a “ma­
terialistic” theory of history. On the contrary, hoarding material is far from being 
capital formation, which after all uses resources for purposes that are not intrinsic 
to their materiality.

    Notes to Chapter 4
129.  See critical remarks in the context of semiotic interests in Dean MacCan­
nell and Juliet F. MacCannell, The Time of the Sign (Bloomington, IN, 1982), 76ff.
130.  This distinction (with reference to Africa) in S. N. Eisenstadt, “Social Di­
vision of Labor, Construction of Centers and Institutional Dynamics: A Reassess­
ment of the Structural-Evolutionary Perspective,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 11–22 
(14–15), with reference to The Early State in African Perspective: Culture, Power and 
Division of Labor, ed. id., Michel Abitbol, and Naomi Chazan (Leiden, 1987). For a 
similar distinction, see also Core/Periphery Relations, ed. Chase-Dunn and Hall, 19ff.
131.  See Jonker, Topography of Remembrance (cited n. 79 above), esp. 38ff., 117ff.
132.  See Rudolf Stichweh, “Fremde, Barbaren und Menschen: Vorüberlegun­
gen zu einer Soziologie der ‘Menschheit,’” in Der Mensch—das Medium der Gesell­
schaft? ed. Peter Fuchs and Andreas Göbel (Frankfurt, 1994), 72–91.
133.  A model that does full justice to these requirements is analyzed by Rainer 
Grafenhorst, Das kosmographische System der Purānas: Zur Funktion und Struktur 
indischer Kosmographie (diss., Hamburg, 1993; Reinbek, 1996). The earth disc is di­
vided into a central continent and six surrounding, differently structured island con­
tinents separated by seas, all inhabited by humans. Each continent is surrounded by 
another environment, the last by a sea that reaches to the edge of the world. Subject 
to the same requirements of order such as religion and political rule, the quality of 
life on the continents decreases with distance from the center, but the requirements 
of order still confirm what is to count as a self-evident order. Only on the last island 
continent is everything that applies nullified. This continent completes the order of 
world society through its negation—but at a distance in space and practically un­
reachable: at the end of the world. Compared with the traditions from the (segmen­
tarily differentiated) older (Vedic) society, there is a clear shift from simple notions 
of space to differences viewed from a center and taught there, which can now only 
be brought together in a paradox of including the opposite.
134.  For a brief overview, see Core/Periphery Relations, ed. Chase-Dunn and 
Hall, 8ff. See also Owen Lattimore, Studies in Frontier History: Collected Papers, 
1928–1958 (Oxford and Paris, 1962), 480.
135.  Most of the literature (see n. 122 above) takes a different terminological 
option, speaking even at this point of the “state formation,” which makes possible 
a rough distinction between pre-state and state societies. But this blurs the differ­
entiation of a specifically political system identified as a “state,” a distinction that 
arises only in early modern times. In the early structures of rule, I instead stress the 
primacy of the differentiation of center and periphery.
136.  Where the discussion develops theoretical ambitions, it focuses on demo­
graphic analysis. But the answer to this question is inconclusive since the thesis 
that the decrease in population favors the development of territorial-political gov­
ernment has gained currency (see Henry T. Wright and Gregory Johnson, “Pop­
ulation, Exchange, and Early State Formation in Southwestern Iran,” American 
Anthropologist 77 [1975]: 267–289). For explicitly ecological (and hence also demo­

Notes to Chapter 4    
graphic) approaches, see Robert MacAdams, The Evolution of Urban Society: Early 
Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico (London, 1966); William T. Sanders and Bar­
bara J. Price, Mesoamerica: The Evolution of a Society (New York, 1968).
137.  The best-known example is the northern Chinese border. See Owen Lat­
timore, Inner Asian Frontiers of China (New York, 1940); id., “The Periphery as 
Locus of Innovation,” in Centre and Periphery: Spatial Variation in Politics, ed. 
Jean Gottmann (Beverly Hills, CA, 1980), 205–208; Thomas J. Barfield, The Peril­
ous Frontier: Nomadic Empires and China (Cambridge, MA, 1989). But we should 
also consider the formation of nomadic tribes in the Near East, symbolized by the 
“Exodus from Egypt.” On the nomadization of Palestine in the last centuries of 
the third millennium BCE, see Talia Shay, “A Cycle of Development and Decline 
in the Early Phases of Civilization in Palestine: An Analysis of the Intermediate 
Bronze Period (2200–2000 BC),” in State and Society, ed. Gledhill et al., 113–120. 
What is important is that it is not an original form of society.
138.  For a late observation, see J. H. Boeke, Economics and Economic Policy of 
Dual Societies as Exemplified by Indonesia (New York, 1953).
139.  See (with reference to the Soviet Union) Alexander Filippov, The Observer 
of the Empire (in Russian) (Moscow, 1991).
140.  See Edward Shils, “Centre and Periphery,” in The Logic of Personal Knowl­
edge: Essays Presented to Michael Polanyi on His Seventieth Birthday (London, 1961), 
117–131; id., Center and Periphery: Essays in Macrosociology (Chicago, 1975). And see 
also, e.g., S. N. Eisenstadt, Social Differentiation and Stratification (Glenview, IL, 
1971); The Politics of Territorial Identity: Studies in European Regionalism, ed. Stein 
Rokkan and Derek W. Urwin (London, 1982); and Stein Rokkan and Derek W. 
Urwin, Economy, Territory, Identity: Politics of West European Peripheries (London, 
1983). On the intensive participation of geographical research, see also Centre and 
Periphery, ed. Jean Gottmann (London, 1980). We now also find remarkable case 
studies that operate with this schema, e.g., John Bannerman, “The Lordship of 
the Isles,” in Scottish Society in the Fifteenth Century, ed. Jennifer M. Brown (New 
York, 1977), 209–240, and Jack P. Greene, Peripheries and Center: Constitutional 
Development in the Extended Policies of the British Empire and the United States, 
1607–1788 (Athens, GA, 1986).
141.  See Schriftkultur und Reichsverwaltung unter den Karolingern, ed. Rudolf 
Schieffer (Opladen, 1996). On the instability of approaches to empire building in 
illiterate African societies, see Jack Goody, The Logic of Writing and the Organiza­
tion of Society (Cambridge,1986), trans. as Die Logik der Schrift und die Organisation 
von Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1990), 187ff.
142.  Typical examples are reported from China (see, e.g., Jacques Gernet, La vie 
quotidienne en Chine à la veille de l’invasion mongole, 1250–1276 [1959; new ed., Paris, 
1978], 177–178). This could provide an explanation for many a peculiarity of an­
cient Chinese society, such as the multifunctional strength of the extended family 
and the guild system with functions of protection against politics, as well as the lack 

    Notes to Chapter 4
of civil law comparable to that of Rome or England. Not least of all, these relics of 
protective mechanisms could also explain why the transition to modern civilization 
has proved so much more difficult in China than in Japan. In strong contrast, the 
European Middle Ages had developed a high degree of individualization in prop­
erty with effective legal protection, particularly in England. See Alan MacFarlane, 
The Origins of English Individualism (Oxford, 1978).
143.  The polis culture of Greece shows that this can succeed even without em­
pire building merely on the basis of city formation. It is then explicitly formulated 
in terms of the polis/oikos distinction, thus leading to the “ethico-political” tradi­
tion of the West, by which nothing other was meant than emphasis on the atti­
tudes and virtues possible only in the city.
144.  See publications by Robert Redfield, e.g., Peasant Society and Culture: An 
Anthropological Approach to Civilization (Chicago, 1956). It should, however, be 
noted that this difference is not identical with that between center and periphery, 
but serves not least to depict, and thus to repeat, the difference between center and 
periphery in places on the periphery.
145.  Rokkan and Urwin, Economy, Territory, Identity, 7.
146.  See Bruce H. Mayhew and Roger L. Levinger, “Size and Density of In­
teraction in Human Aggregates,” American Journal of Sociology 82 (1976): 86–110. 
See also id., “On the Emergence of Oligarchy in Human Interaction,” American 
Journal of Sociology 81 (1976): 1017–1049.
147.  Whether this implies that in all older societies (with the important excep­
tion of the European Middle Ages) all nobility was urban nobility is a controver­
sial issue. See Gideon Sjoberg, The Preindustrial City: Past and Present (Glencoe, 
IL, 1960), for this thesis, and a critical analysis of it from a historian’s point of view 
in Paul Wheatley, “‘What the Greatness of a City is said to be’: Reflections on Sjo­
berg’s ‘Preindustrial City,’” Pacific Viewpoint 4 (1963): 163–188. To some extent, 
this is naturally a question of the criteria by which membership of the nobility 
is defined; they were still quite vague and open to interpretation even in the late 
Middle Ages in Europe up to enforcement of the requirement of state recognition 
or conferment (the beginning of the end of stratification).
148.  It is doubtful whether Ancient Egypt or China, the most impressive pro­
totypes of bureaucratic empires, can be described as stratified societies, despite 
considerable and stable differences in wealth. However, more exact studies of 
­bureaucracy-related mobility available on China soon show the influence of strati­
fication, precisely because of the examination system based on performance cri­
teria. See Francis L. K. Hsu, “Social Mobility in China,” American Sociological 
Review 14 (1949): 764–771; E. A. Kracke Jr., Civil Service in Early Sung China, 
960–1067 (Cambridge, MA, 1953); Robert M. Marsh, The Mandarins: The Circu­
lation of Elites in China 1600–1900 (Glencoe, IL, 1961); Ho Ping-ti, The Ladder of 
Success in Imperial China: Aspects of Social Mobility, 1368–1911 (New York, 1962). 
Wolfram Eberhard, Conquerors and Rulers: Social Forces in Medieval China (1952; 

Notes to Chapter 4    
2nd ed., Leiden, 1965), 7, notes that the assimilation of different strata was also a 
question of population density, and in cities and more densely populated areas, it 
had a stronger impact than elsewhere.
149.  In the sixteenth century, this postulate came to be termed “sovereignty”; 
and it was only in the seventeenth century that it could be effectively enforced in 
some territories, above all in France.
150.  The result was a very short reigns for individual rulers and individual dy­
nasties. John H. Kautsky, The Politics of Aristocratic Empires (Chapel Hill, NC, 
1982), 247–248, shows that depending on the empire, they were far shorter than 
a generation, variously citing six, eleven, or fourteen years. See also Brumfield, 
“Aztec State Making” (cited n. 122 above). However, no conclusions need be 
drawn about the instability of the differentiation form.
151.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Staat und Staatsräson im Übergang von traditio­
naler Herrschaft zu moderner Politik,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, vol. 3 (1989), 
65–148; Michael Stolleis, Staat und Staatsräson in der frühen Neuzeit: Studien zur 
Geschichte des öffentlichen Rechts (Frankfurt, 1990).
152.  See Colin Renfrew, The Emergence of Civilization: The Cyclades and The 
Aegean in the Third Millennium B.C. (London, 1972), esp. 440ff.
153.  See Talcott Parsons, Societies: Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 95ff.
154.  See specifically Lloyd, Magic, Reason and Experience (cited n. 91 above).
155.  See Joseph A. Tainter, The Collapse of Complex Societies (Cambridge, 1988). 
Tainter attributes the collapse of all empires in early modern times (where there 
was not merely a change of ruler) to self-overburdening through complexity. The 
cost of maintaining them was finally so great that political control of the system 
foundered on the effort.
156.  This can be followed in the family traditions of the upper stratum, which 
in Athens (unlike in Rome) placed no value on holding civic office, while highly 
prizing martial and sporting prominence, diplomatic missions, other activities in 
managing international relations, and, above all, naturally, financial generosity. 
See Rosalind Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record in Classical Athens (Cam­
bridge, 1989), 95ff.
157.  The general semantics of “ranking,” the observation of differences in rank 
had, of course, long been rehearsed See Richard Newbold Adams, Energy and 
Structure: A Theory of Social Power (Austin, TX, 1975), 165ff.
158.  I thus rule out the superimposition of a conquering people on an indig­
enous stratum of the population, which can lead to differentiations that can also 
be reproduced for a relatively long time.
159.  Hsiao-tung Fei, China’s Gentry: Essays on Rural-Urban Relations (1953; 
Chicago, 1972), 83: “Such people who were able to deal with the governmental of­
ficials are those who were called gentry.”
160.  For a report on the literature, see Jonathan Haas, The Evolution of the Pre­

    Notes to Chapter 4
historic State (New York, 1982). More systematic: Morton H. Fried, The Evolution 
of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology (New York, 1967), and Elman 
R. Service, Origins of the State and Civilization: The Process of Cultural Evolution 
(New York, 1975). There is also an abundance of regional studies dealing with this 
problem.
161.  See Gilles Deleuze, Logique du sens (Paris, 1969), esp. 50ff.
162.  Most studies deal with single regions. A Europe-wide overview is difficult to 
obtain. See, e.g., Wilhelm Stoermer, Früher Adel: Studien zur politischen Führungs­
schicht im fränkisch-deutschen Reich vom 8. bis 11. Jahrhundert, 2 vols. (Stuttgart, 1973), 
or La noblesse au moyen âge, XIe–XVe siècles, ed. Philippe Contamines (Paris, 1976).
163.  On the complicated conceptual and legal problems, for instance, the def­
inition of dignitas/nobilitas, which has to do with the problem of holding office 
and in both cases is differentiated from the plebs, see Bartolus de Saxoferrato, De 
dignitatibus, in id., Omnia, quae extant, Opera (Venice, 1602), 8: fols. 45v–49r. A 
natural-law justification of the special social status of the nobility is out of the 
question under such circumstances. Everyone, nobles like commons, is descended 
from Adam. The question is whether we are dealing only with a civil law institu­
tion or with a ius gentium [law of nations] to facilitate supraregional contacts—but 
if so, only in the sense of the Roman sources. With the development of the mod­
ern territorial state, nobility or peerage law also differentiated to consolidate only 
in the second half of the sixteenth century, supported by the printing press and 
the concept of honor, a general, early modern conception of nobility. On this de­
velopment, already apparent in medieval Italy at the level of the city republics, see 
Claudio Donati, L’idea di nobiltà in Italia: Secoli XIV–XVIII (Rome, 1988).
164.  This has to do with the fact that the old respect for the “eloquence” of the 
nobility had persisted longer in England than in France and had become adapted 
to new forms of knowledge. See, e.g., Henry Peacham, The Compleat Gentleman 
(1622; 2nd ed., Cambridge, 1627).
165.  See, e.g., Eisenstadt, Social Differentiation and Stratification (cited n. 140 
above), or, on the basis of role differentiation, Bernard Barber, Social Stratification: 
A Comparative Analysis of Structure and Process (New York, 1957). In this sense, we 
are dealing with a general dimension of all societies (except the most primitive), 
but precisely this particularity of the sociological concept is criticized by social 
anthropologists. See Michael G. Smith, “Pre-Industrial Stratification Systems,” 
in Social Structure and Mobility in Economic Development, ed. Neil J. Smelser and 
Seymour M. Lipset (Chicago, 1966), 141–176.
166.  These easily recognizable differences are mentioned by Cristoforo Lan­
dino, De vera nobilitate (ca. 1440; Florence, 1970), 41.
167.  See Nicolas Faret, L’honneste homme, ou l’art de plaire à la Cour (Paris, 1630; 
critical ed., Paris, 1925), 70.
168.  On the difficulties of an incipient juridical control with the aid of illus­
trative case examples, see Étienne Dravasa, “Vivre noblement: Recherches sur la 

Notes to Chapter 4    
dérogeance de noblesse du XIVe au XVIe siècles,” Revue juridique et économique du 
Sud-Ouest, série juridique, 16 (1965): 135–193; 17 (1966): 23–129.
169.  This also applies where the special status of the nobility was justified by 
a special occupation, namely, military service. This was naturally not a profes­
sion one could choose but a calling (vacation) to which one was born as a noble. 
On the survival of this profession-oriented description of the nobility, especially 
in France up to the crises of the second half of the sixteenth century, see Arlette 
Jouanna, L’idée de race en France au XVIe siècle et au début du XVIIe (1975; 2nd ed., 
2 vols., Montpellier, 1981), 1: 323ff.; Ellery Schalk, From Valor to Pedigree: Ideas of 
Nobility in France in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Princeton, NJ, 1986). 
That this notion so long survived changes in arms, army organization, and com­
bat tactics shows, incidentally, that it had long had key symbolic functions in jus­
tifying differences in rank.
170.  On the distinction between power differences and moral differences, see, 
e.g., Barry Schwartz, Vertical Classification: A Study in Structuralism and the Sociol­
ogy of Knowledge (Chicago, 1981), 79ff.
171.  Peacham, Compleat Gentleman, 3; Jouanna, L’idée de race, (1981), 1: 23ff.
172.  See, e.g., Leon Battista Alberti, De re aedificatoria (Florence, 1485; Latin-
Italian ed., Milan, 1966), 1: 264ff., 270ff. It would be interesting to compare these 
notions of urban planning with a city like Cardiff, in which such an order had 
been established as late as the nineteenth century, but only on the basis of property.
173.  “Virtuosus si staret, et viveret per mille annos, nisi transferatur in eum 
­aliqua dignitas, semper remanet plebeius,” according to Bartolus de Saxoferrato, 
De dignitatibus, fol. 45v and ad 93.
174.  Ibid., fol. 45v and ad 52: “Rusticus, licet probus, dives & valens, tamen 
non dicitur nobilis.”
175.  Thus (in the light of his own theory quite consistently, as it were with a 
sigh) Poggius Florentinus (Giovanni Francesco Poggio Bracciolini), De nobilitate 
(1440), in id., Opera (Basel, 1538), 64–87.
176.  Ibid., 81, e.g., states: “nullo autem pacto negandum est paternam nobili­
tatem migrare in filios et esse et dici nobiles quorum nondum virtus est cognita.” 
But it is also stressed that this is not self-evident but, as far as their conduct of life 
and public commitment was concerned, that the younger generation was expected 
to remain on the path of nobility: “illorumque posteros, modo ab eorum vestigiis 
non discedant, sed quoad illis animi ingeniique vires suppetunt,” as we read in 
Landino, De vera nobilitate, 41.
177.  On the discrepancy between legal institutional reality and the tradition 
and text-oriented nobility literature, see Klaus Bleeck and Jörn Garber, “Nobilitas: 
Standes- und Privilegienlegitimation in deutschen Adelstheorien des 16. und 17. 
Jahrhunderts,” Daphnis 15 (1982): 49–114, esp. 59ff.
178.  Aristotle Politics 1294a21f states: “eugeneia estin archaios ploutos kai aretē” 
[nobility means ancient wealth and virtue]. The definition, which is already geared 

    Notes to Chapter 4
to wealth, is clearly a product of a later period in which the status of noble fami­
lies was no longer determined by the constitution of the city but nevertheless still 
clearly imposed itself. See also Bartolus de Saxoferrato, De dignitatibus, ad 47 and 
48, who adds that what also counts is that the individual maintain a good moral 
standing for a long period (ten to twenty years). Hence, a single heroic deed does 
not suffice to ennoble a person, but a misdeed can cost him his nobility.
179.  In Landino, De vera nobilitate, 48, we read: “neque eos ad breve quidem 
tempus, sed qui diutius in illis perseveraverunt” and “Itaque quo antiquior erit 
­virtus eo maior spendescet nobilitas.”
180.  A text from the fifteenth century attributes this to the disposition at the 
time of conception (thus again to birth). See Diego de Valera, Un petit traictyé de no­
blesse, edited in Arie Johan Vanderjagt, Qui sa vertu anoblist: The Concepts of noblesse 
and chose publicque in Burgundian Political Thought (diss., Groningen, 1981), 235–
283 (258). This is, incidentally, a bit of secular nobility theory, for from a theologi­
cal point of view, the soul could not be transferred and conditioned by conception.
181.  “nec patiar illos aut assiduis laboribus aut longibus vigiliis aut nimia inedia 
corrumpit” (Landino, De vera nobilitate, 72).
182.  Thus writes Pierre Nicole, a Jansenist, who lays greater weight on other 
things (“De la grandeur,” in id., Essais de morale, contenus en divers Traitez sur plu­
sieurs devoirs importans, vol. 2 [1675; 4th ed., Paris, 1682], 154ff. [179ff.]).
183.  Peacham, Compleat Gentleman, 9–10.
184.  According to the modernization theories of the 1950s and early 1960s with ref­
erence to the distinctions ascribed/achieved (Ralph Linton) and quality/­performance 
(Talcott Parsons). On criticism of application to modern society, see Leon Mayhew, 
“Ascription in Modern Society,” Sociological Inquiry 38 (1968): 105–120.
185.  A related effect is that meritorious components like heroism and asceticism 
count more in morality than normative components.
186.  On the status of research on the question of the “epic occasion,” see Arthur 
Thomas Hatto, Eine allgemeine Theorie der Heldenepik, Vorträge G 307 der Rhein­
isch-Westfälischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Opladen, 1991).
187.  This might explain the indispensability of the Homeric mythology and 
polytheism as the form of religion in the Greek city. The figures were fixed through 
use in genealogies as points of reference for the origins of important families. On 
the penetration of the written word in this context, see Rosalind Thomas, Oral 
Tradition and Written Record in Classical Athens (Cambridge, 1989), 155ff. The con­
nection was noted at the latest by Plato and ironized in a sort of second-order ob­
servation; “every man has had countless thousands of ancestors and progenitors, 
among whom have been in any instance rich and poor, kings and slaves, barbar­
ians and Greeks” (Theaetetus 175A, trans. Fowler).
188.  References in Jouanna, L’idée de race (1981), 1: 275ff.
189.  This does not exclude nobles being more severely judged for certain 
crimes and even being threatened with loss of their noble status.

Notes to Chapter 4    
190.  When it comes to morality, a medium important throughout society, we 
also find formulations that address equality and inequality (similarity and dissimi­
larity). “In everie degree and sort of men vertue is commendable, but not egally: 
not onely because mens estates are unegall, but for that also vertue it selfe is not 
in every respect of egall value and estimation,” George Puttenham writes, for ex­
ample. “For continence in a king is of greater merit, then in a carter. . . . Therefore 
it is that the inferiour persons, with their inferiour vertues have a certain inferiour 
praise” (Puttenham, The Arte of English Poesie [London, 1589; repr. Cambridge, 
1970], 42–43). This was justified on the grounds that the greater freedom of ac­
tion in the upper strata promoted the moral code. What was naturally behind it, 
however, was that morality was a substantial element in the definition of nobility, 
and one could therefore neither accept equality in the moral situation nor exempt 
anyone in society from moral responsibility, from praise and blame.
191.  This is also the view taken by the literature on the “moral economy.” See 
only E. P. Thompson, “The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the 18th 
Century,” Past and Present 50 (1971): 76–136; James C. Scott, The Moral Economy 
of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia (New Haven, CT, 1976).
192.  See Otto Brunner, Adeliges Landleben und europäischer Geist: Leben und 
Werk Wolf Helmhards von Hohberg, 1612–1688 (Salzburg, 1949); id., “Das ‘ganze 
Haus’ und die alteuropäische Ökonomik,” in id., Neue Wege der Verfassungs- und 
Sozialgeschichte (2nd ed., Göttingen, 1968), 103–127. For older literature, see Sabine 
Krüger, “Zum Verständnis der Oeconomica Konrads von Megenberg: Griechische 
Ursprünge der spätmittelalterlichen Lehre von Hause,” Deutsches Archiv für Er­
forschung des Mittelalters 20 (1964): 475–561. On signs of dissolution in the tran­
sition to modern society, see also Wolf-Hagen Krauth, Wirtschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik: Wissenssoziologische Studien zum wirtschaftlichen Denken in Deutschland 
zwischen dem 13. und 17. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 1984); Erich Egner, Der Verlust der 
alten Ökonomik: Seine Hintergründe und Wirkungen (Berlin, 1985); and on the tem­
porary resuscitation of household theories after the devastation of the Thirty Years’ 
War, see Gotthardt Frühsorge, “Die Krise des Herkommens,” in Ständische Gesell­
schaft, ed. Schulze, 95–112.
193.  In 1737, the Halle jurist Johann Gottlieb Heinecke (Heineccius) still de­
fines family as comprising simple marital associations, parent-child relations, and 
the manorial order of lords/ladies and servants, for example. Systematically, the issue 
is not one of natural law, but of the law of nations based on natural law (ius gen­
tium). Heineccius, Elementa iuris naturae et gentium, trans. George Turnbull as A 
Methodical System of Universal Law (London, 1741); see German trans., Grundlagen 
des Natur- und Völkerrecht (Frankfurt, 1994), bk. 2, chap. 5, 384ff., citing Ulpian.
194.  The specificity is shown by intercultural comparison with societies in 
which precisely this penetration of societal rank arrangements into the individual 
family frequently occurs. See Michael G. Smith, “Pre-Industrial Stratification Sys­
tems” (cited n. 165 above), 157ff.

    Notes to Chapter 4
195.  See Martin Warnke, Hofkünstler: Zur Vorgeschichte des modernen Künstlers 
(Cologne, 1985), esp. 142ff.
196.  Plato must have expected prejudices with regard to his recommendation, 
since he introduces it so comprehensively in the fifth book of the Republic. It is, 
however, consistent to grant women the same rights and occupational opportuni­
ties in a stratified society based on households.
197.  Although there are semantic parallels—especially because the terminol­
ogy of government and the organism metaphor are applied to both fields; but this 
does not prevent a clear distinction being drawn between economic and politi­
cal matters. The semantic coincidences represent rather what we would now call 
“society.”
198.  This is stated explicitly by François Grimaudet, Les opuscules politiques 
(Paris, 1580), opuscule 14, fol. 93vff. “Que l’homme politique doit avoir esgard à se 
maintenir.” This includes family and descendants.
199.  See Renate Blickle, “Hausnotdurft: Ein Fundamentalrecht in der altstän­
dischen Ordnung Bayerns,” in Grund- und Freiheitsrechte von der ständischen zur 
spätbürgerlichen Gesellschaft, ed. Günter Birtsch (Göttingen, 1987), 42–64; id., 
“Nahrung und Eigentum als Kategorien der ständischen Gesellschaft,” in Ständische 
Gesellschaft, ed. Schulze, 73–93.
200.  There is an abundant literature on the subject, with broad regional cover­
age. For the late Middle Ages and early modernity, see esp. Patronage in the Renais­
sance, ed. Guy Fitch Lytle and Stephen Orgel (Princeton, NJ, 1981); Klientelsysteme 
im Europa der Frühen Neuzeit, ed. Antoni M¸aczak (Munich, 1988). From an eth­
nographic, comparative perspective or current regional standpoint, see also Paul 
Littlewood, “Patronaggio, ideologia e riproduzione,” Rassegna italiana di sociologia 
21 (1980): 453–469; Luigi Graziano, Clientelismo e sistema politico: Il caso dell’Italia 
(Milan, 1984); and esp. from the trust-building perspective, S. N. Eisenstadt and 
Luis Roniger, Clients and Friends: Interpersonal Relations and the Structure of Trust 
in Society (Cambridge, 1984). On the role of such networks for the organization of 
political resistance, see Perez Zagorin, The Court and the Country: The Beginning of 
the English Revolution (London, 1969).
201.  See further on this p. 71.
202.  See Mervin James, Family, Lineage, and Civil Society: A Study of Society, 
Politics, and Mentality in the Durham Region, 1500–1640 (Oxford, 1974), esp. 177ff.; 
and on the general spread of literacy in the England of this period, David Cressy, 
Literacy and the Social Order: Reading and Writing in Tudor and Stuart England 
(Cambridge, 1980).
203.  See J. H. Hexter, The Vision of Politics on the Eve of the Reformation: More, 
Machiavelli, and Seyssel (London, 1973). And see also Estienne de La Boétie, Dis­
cours de la servitude volontaire (1574), in id., Œuvres complètes (repr., Geneva, 1967), 
30: “Les livres et la doctrine donnent, plus que toute autre chose, aus [sic] hommes 
le sens et l’entendement des se reconnoistre et d’hair la tirannie.”

Notes to Chapter 4    
204.  See, with further references, Christopher Hill, “Protestantismus, Pam­
phlete, Patriotismus und öffentliche Meinung im England des 16. und 17. Jahrhun­
derts,” in Nationale und kulturelle Identität: Studien zur Entwicklung des kollektiven 
Bewußtseins in der Neuzeit, ed. Bernhard Giesen (Frankfurt, 1991), 100–120.
205.  “Dignité est une qualité qui fait difference entre les populaires” (i.e., 
among the people), we read in de Valera, Petit traictyé (cited n. 180 above), 251, 
with reference to Bartolus de Saxoferrato. On nobles/nonnobles as the point of 
departure for all further differentiations two hundred years later, see Estienne Pas­
quier, Les recherches de la France (new ed., Paris, 1665), 337ff. See also Otto Gerhard 
Oexle, “Die funktionale Dreiteilung als Deutungsschema der sozialen Wirklich­
keit in der ständischen Gesellschaft des Mittelalters,” in Ständische Gesellschaft, ed. 
Schulze, 19–51. Oexle points out how interdependent semantic and sociostructural 
developments were in the early Middle Ages. But orare and laborare, prayer and 
agricultural work, were still closely associated in the monastic culture of the sixth 
to the tenth centuries, and subsequently for the Cistercians.
206.  For more detail, see Herrschaft und Stand: Untersuchungen zur Sozialge­
schichte im 13. Jahrhundert, ed. Josef Fleckenstein (Göttingen, 1977).
207.  See, e.g., Jan Peters, “Der Platz in der Kirche: Über soziales Rangdenken 
im Spätfeudalismus,” Jahrbuch für Volkskunde und Kulturgeschichte 28 (1985): 77–
106. Such conflicts over rank (noble examples of which could naturally be cited) 
are an indicator of the internal barriers of stratificatory system differentiation. 
They therefore do not call system boundaries into question, but concern positions 
within systems. But they also copy the general rank architecture of the world and 
society into the subsystems and into role and personal relations. For a relatively 
late example of the contemporary perception of such exaggeration, see Julius Ber­
nhard von Rohr, Einleitung zur Ceremoniel-Wissenschaft der Privat-Personen (Ber­
lin, 1728), 105ff. (121–122 on disputes about church seating).
208.  “Plutot une fiction commode pour obtenir le payement des impôts,” ac­
cording to Roland Mousnier, “Les concepts d’‘ordres,’ d’‘états,’ de ‘fidélité’ et de 
‘monarchie absolue’ en France, de la fin du XVe siècle à la fin du XVIIIe,” Revue 
historique 247 (1972): 289–312 (299). For historical accounts, see, e.g., Ruth Mohl, 
The Three Estates in Medieval and Renaissance Literature (New York, 1933); Wilhelm 
Schwer, Stand und Ständeordnung im Weltbild des Mittelalters (2nd ed., Paderborn, 
1952); Georges Duby, Les trois ordres ou l’imaginaire du féodalisme (Paris, 1978); Ot­
tavia Niccoli, I sacerdoti, i guerrieri, i contadini: Storia de un’immagine della società 
(Turin, 1979).
209.  See Michel Pérronet, Les évêques de l’ancienne France (2 vols., Lille and 
Paris, 1977), esp. 1: 149ff., for thorough investigation, 1516–1789.
210.  See Pitirim A. Sorokin, Social and Cultural Mobility (1927; New York, 1964); 
also Barber, Social Stratification (cited n. 165 above), 334, for a general account. See 
also Edouard Perroy, “Social Mobility Among the French Noblesse in the Later 
Middle Ages,” Past and Present 21 (1962): 25–38; Diedrich Saalfeld, “Die ständische 

    Notes to Chapter 4
Gliederung der Gesellschaft Deutschlands im Zeitalter des Absolutismus: Ein 
Quantifizierungsversuch,” Vierteljahresschrift für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 
67 (1980): 457–483 (459–460), with interesting material on the impoverishment of 
the petty nobility in the Middle Ages; Lawrence Stone, “Social Mobility in ­England 
1500–1700,” Past and Present 33 (1966): 16–55; and esp. Ständische Gesellschaft, ed. 
Schulze. On the French discussion of this issue in the sixteenth century, see also 
Jouanna, L’idée de race (1981), 1: 153ff. In the villages, too, more families disappear 
and appear at much shorter generational intervals than had been suspected. See 
Peter Laslett, The World We Have Lost (2nd ed., London, 1971) and Alan MacFar­
lane, The Origins of English Individualism (Oxford, 1978).
211.  For Burgundy, where this is particularly striking owing to the size of the 
urban patriciate and administrative apparatus and highly developed literary inter­
ests, see Charity Cannon Willard, “The Concept of True Nobility at the Burgun­
dian Court,” Studies in the Renaissance 14 (1967): 33–48; Vanderjagt, Qui sa vertu 
anoblist (cited n. 180 above). Here the idea that animus or virtus is the real reason 
for nobility appears to have been put into practice for the first time.
212.  See Richard H. Brown, “Social Mobility and Economic Growth,” British 
Journal of Sociology 24 (1973): 58–66.
213.  On this less well known case, see Donati, Idea di nobiltà (cited n. 163 
above), 177–178.
214.  See Gaston Zeller, “Une notion de caractère historico-sociale: La déroge­
ance,” Cahiers internationaux de sociologie 22 (1957): 40–74; also, for an account of 
the many objections raised in legal cases against the strict application of dérogeance 
in the event of ignoble personal conduct, Dravasa, Vivre noblement (cited n. 168 
above).
215.  For a critical treatment of this myth of a rising class, see Helen Liebel, “The 
Bourgeoisie in Southwestern Germany 1500–1789: A Rising Class?” International 
Review of Social History 10 (1965): 283–307. See also J. H. Hexter, “The Myth of the 
Middle Class in Tudor England,” in id., Reappraisals in History (London, 1961), and 
on more recent investigation on bourgeoisie and Bürgerlichkeit in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries, see Bürger und Bürgerlichkeit im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Jür­
gen Kocka (Göttingen, 1988). This literature is mainly concerned with whether and 
in what sense we can speak of a uniform class. The structural question of where the 
ladder for the climb stood is disregarded.
216.  Luhmann regretted that the distinction between Differenzierung and Aus­
differenzierung was not lexicalized in English. This difference is so central to his 
thinking that a literal translation of Ausdifferenzierung is justified.—Trans.
217.  Max Weber’s posing of the question is naturally meant, but see also, e.g., 
John A. Hall, Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences of the Rise of the 
West (Berkeley, CA, 1985), chaps. 1 to 4. However, criticism of the study of agrar­
ian empires only intensifies the need to explain the uniqueness of specifically Eu­
ropean developments.

Notes to Chapter 4    
218.  I must slightly modify this statement with respect to resource concentra­
tion in the upper stratum of an aristocratic society.
219.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Am Anfang war kein Unrecht,” in id., Gesellschafts­
struktur und Semantik, vol. 3 (Frankfurt, 1989), 11–64, with reference to legal his­
tory research.
220.  See Hall, Powers and Liberties. On the legal tools of this anti-theocratic 
policy and what it had to do with the emergence of territorial states, see also Har­
old J. Berman, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983).
221.  See Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System: Capitalist Agricul­
ture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (New 
York, 1974).
222.  This had rightly been pointed out by Alois Hahn, “Identität und Nation 
in Europa,” Berliner Journal für Soziologie 3 (1993): 193–203. However, I feel that 
the concept of nation does not do justice to the complex problem of regional seg­
mentation. Until the end of the eighteenth century, very few territories in Europe 
could correctly be considered to have been united in terms of nation. The main 
exceptions were France and Spain (without Portugal, and with Catalonia and 
the Basque Country), as well as England, but without Scotland until the elimi­
nation of the clan structure and one of the biggest genocides in recent history 
in the mid-eighteenth century. Not Germany, or Austria, or Italy. And certainly 
not Poland (with or without Lithuania, with or without national independence 
and under strong external cultural influences). Perhaps Sweden, perhaps Den­
mark (with or without Norway)? The emergence of nations is a special process 
that was favored above all by the conversion of the nobility into an institution of 
the state, and that succeeded with the aid of the printing press and of state cul­
tural policy (administrative cities such as Montpellier; the founding of universi­
ties such as the University of the Holy Spirit in Oñati in the Basque country). But 
the exploitation of regional differences to experiment with functional priorities 
was hardly based on the national unification of territories, but on given, transi­
tory differences in development. In short, the establishment of national unity is 
apparent rather in historical retrospect after the map had been divided up into 
nation-states in the nineteenth century and the treatment of entities that did not 
fit in had come to be regarded as anomalies.
223.  It should perhaps be noted that in Italy the political use of trade profits 
could not be transferred from the urban context of the Middle Ages to a central 
power as happened elsewhere in the form of buying offices and titles or loans, be­
cause there was no such central power, and instead the transition from the medi­
eval city republics to small principalities was experienced as a loss of liberty and 
therefore required pointed legitimation. See also Luhmann, Kunst, esp. 256ff.
224.  This is not to deny ambitions on the part of rulers to introduce reforms in 
the light of stagnating efforts at reform within the Church. See Manfred Schulze, 

    Notes to Chapter 4
Fürsten und Reformation: Geistliche Reformpolitik weltlicher Fürsten vor der Refor­
mation (Tübingen, 1991).
225.  In Europe, this could be read in practically every treatise on princely rule 
and princely education until, in the final decades of the sixteenth century, raison 
d’État theory brought about a turn, although continuing to uphold the virtue of 
the ruler as a precept of raison d’État. Exactly the same structure is to be found in 
the Confucian conception of rule. See Pyong-Choom Hahm, The Korean Political 
Tradition and Law (Seoul, 1967). See now also Kun Yang, “Law and Society Stud­
ies in Korea: Beyond the Hahm Thesis,” Law and Society Review 23 (1989): 891–901.
226.  And usually appears implicitly in the definition of potestas as ius, the con­
cept being applicable to both political rule and household rule. See, e.g., Hermann 
Vulteius, Jurisprudentiae Romanae a Justiniano compositae libri II (6th ed., Marburg 
1610), 53: “Potestas est ius personae in personam quo una praeest, altera subest.”
227.  Here, in particular, the upward and downward irreversibility of relations 
between positions extended into technical legal discussions. And because the rights 
of the subject against the lord could not also very well be described as potestas or as 
dominium, a more abstract concept was needed—that of ius, which then provided 
a foil for defining the rights of the lord.
228.  See Richard Saage, Herrschaft, Toleranz, Widerstand: Studien zur poli­
tischen Theorie der niederländischen und der englischen Revolution (Frankfurt, 1981).
229.  See, e.g., Giovanni Botero, Della ragion di stato (1589; Bologna, 1930); 
Ciro Spontone, Dodici libri del governo di stato (Verona, 1599); Giovanni Antonio 
Palazzo, Discorso del governo e della ragion vera di stato (Venice, 1606).
230.  Despite numerous detailed studies (especially from England), little sys­
tematic research has been undertaken on this form of order. This is particularly 
true for studies that also cover the lower strata of society. On the current status of 
research, see Klientelsysteme, ed. M¸aczak.
231.  See also Helmut G. Koenigsberger, “Patronage, Clientage and Elites in the 
Politics of Philip II: Cardinal Granvelle and William of Orange,” in Klientelsysteme, 
ed. M¸aczak, 127–148. On patronage in the papal states, see Wolfgang Reinhard, 
Freunde und Kreaturen: “Verflechtung” als Konzept zur Erforschung historischer Füh­
rungsgruppen: Römische Oligarchie im 1600 (Munich, 1979).
232.  There was no lack of contemporary criticism either. For Burgundy, see 
Wim Blokmans, “Patronage, Brokerage and Corruption as Symptoms of Incipi­
ent State Formation in the Burgundian-Habsburg Netherlands,” in Ständische Ge­
sellschaft, ed. Schulze, 117–126.
233.  This is stressed, with all the effects on the economy and culture by Theo­
dore K. Rabb, The Struggle for Stability in Early Modern Europe (New York, 1975).
234.  That the “absolute state” was not governed by the rule of law must be seen 
as a liberal falsification of history. It was naturally not what the liberals wanted: 
it was not a “constitutional state” that monitored itself in the light of higher but 
positive law.

Notes to Chapter 4    
235.  For an overview of the German literature, see Bleeck and Garber, “Nobili­
tas” (cited n. 177 above).
236.  See Donati, Idea di nobiltà (cited n. 163 above).
237.  There had certainly been similar influences at an earlier date, such as when 
the entire Germanic nobility set itself up on the debris of Holy Roman imperial 
titles. On the medieval legal situation, which associated the right to ennoblement 
with the right to make law, thus restricting it despite considerable expansion, see 
Bartolus de Saxoferrato, De dignitatibus, ad 77 and 78.
238.  Even at court! One had to serve one’s lord faithfully and loyally, obey his 
commands, and was not permitted to contradict him—except in matters concern­
ing honor, according to Diomede Carafa, Dello optimo cortesano (1479; Salerno, 
1971), 122–123.
239.  “La condizione della Nobilità stà sui confini del Principato,” Spontone, 
Dodici libri, 274, tells us, and the practice of political ennoblement left hardly any 
alternative.
240.  An overview is provided by, e.g., Pietro Andrea Canonhiero, Dell’intro­
duzione alla politica, alla ragion di stato et alla pratica del buon governo (Antwerp, 
1614), 385ff. The Spaniards placed value on pure blood (on account of mixing with 
Moorish blood), the French on military service, the Germans on noble descent. 
The consequences were considerable for the law and marriage policy. For an older 
comparison, still fully focused on differing regional habits, see Poggius Florenti­
nus (Bracciolini), De nobilitate (cited n. 175 above), 67–72.
241.  See, e.g., Pasquier, Recherches (cited n. 205 above), 120.
242.  See (Alexandre) Belleguise, one of the officials responsible, Traité de no­
blesse et de son origine (Paris, 1700). E.g., to regain a title of which one had been 
stripped for engaging in unworthy activities (e.g., selling produce in one’s own 
name), lettres de réhabilitation were required, because otherwise one could lose and 
regain one’s title weekly.
243.  The distinction between hereditary nobility [Geburtsadel] and nonheredi­
tary nobility [Amtsadel ], whose titles were tied to office, became established; oc­
casionally it even led to the introduction of a fourth estate. Bernard de Girard, 
Seigneur Du Haillan, De l’Estat et succez des affaires de France (1570; Lyon 1596), 294, 
e.g., writes of four estates: église, noblesse, justice (i.e., noblesse de robe), and peuple. 
The legal consequences were, e.g., that one could renounce a nonhereditary title 
but not a hereditary one (e.g., to transfer to the business world) and that although 
a father’s disgrace could cost one his offices, it did not deprive his descendants of 
their hereditary rank. See, e.g., Pompeo Rocchi, Il gentilhuomo (Lucca, 1568), fol. 2.
244.  See Charles Loyseau, Traicté des ordres et simples dignitez (1610; 2nd ed., 
Paris, 1613), 92. Donati, Idea di nobiltà (cited n. 163 above), 182–183, points out 
that these possibilities of securing proof of nobility were now used as a means of 
securing the future of the families concerned—not least, of course, because they 
represented an asset (albeit nonnegotiable).

    Notes to Chapter 4
245.  This is a very widespread view in the raison d’État literature. For a legal 
opinion, see, e.g., Pierre Ayrault, Ordre, formalité et instruction judiciaire (1576; 
2nd ed., Paris, 1598), 111.
246.  Charles-Louis de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu, De l’esprit des lois, bk. 
2, chap. 4 (1748; Paris, 1949), 1: 20.
247.  For an example (typical for the seventeenth century), see Jacques Le 
Brun, “Das Geständnis in den Nonnenbiographien des 17. Jahrhunderts,” in 
Selbstthematisierung und Selbstzeugnis: Bekenntnis und Geständnis, ed. Alois Hahn 
and Volker Kapp (Frankfurt, 1987), 248–264.
248.  See Trade and Market in the Early Empires: Economies in History and Theory, 
ed. Karl Polanyi et al. (New York, 1957).
249.  See John Gledhill and Mogens Larsen, “The Polanyi Paradigm and a Dy­
namic Analysis of Archaic States,” in Theory and Explanation in Archaeology: The 
Southampton Conference, ed. Colin Renfrew et al. (New York, 1982), 197–229. 
But see also Johannes Renger, “Subsistenzproduktion und redistributive Palast­
wirtschaft: Wo bleibt die Nische für das Geld? Grenzen und Möglichkeiten für die 
Verwendung von Geld im alten Mesopotamien,” in Rätsel Geld: Annäherung aus 
ökonomischer, soziologischer und historischer Sicht, ed. Waltraud Schelkle and Man­
fred Nitsch (Marburg, 1995), 271–324.
250.  Often discussed. On the special conditions in England, where the nobil­
ity, too, was able to invest for profit, see Lawrence Stone, The Crisis of the Aristoc­
racy, 1558–1641 (1965; 2nd ed., Oxford, 1966), esp. 42ff., 547ff. Elsewhere a right 
for the nobility to engage in economy activities (instead of civil war) was sought in 
vain. Emeric de la Croix (Crucé), Le nouveau Cynée, ou Discours d’Estat représent­
ant les occasions et moyens d’establir une paix généralle et la liberté du commerce par 
tout le monde (1623; repr., Philadelphia, 1909), which was soon forgotten, is an im­
pressive example. In Italy, the solutions found for these problems differed consid­
erably from territorial state to territorial state; the nobility often had very close ties 
with long-distance trade once the nobility subject to the territorial sovereign had 
lost power. For a brief overview of literature on the so-called crisis of the European 
nobility, see, e.g., François Billacois, “La crise de la noblesse européenne, 1560–
1640,” Revue d’histoire moderne et contemporaine 23 (1976): 258–277; also Schalk, 
From Valor to Pedigree (cited n. 169 above).
251.  See Jean-Christophe Agnew, Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theater in 
Anglo-American Thought, 1550–1750 (Cambridge, 1986), esp. 57ff.
252.  “That the usurer is the greatest Sabbath breaker, because his plough goeth 
every Sunday,” Bacon remarks in his essay “Of Usury” (Bacon’s Essays [London, 
1895], 105).
253.  See Edward Misselden, Free Trade, or, The Meanes to Make Trade Florish 
(London, 1622; repr., Amsterdam, 1970), 9–10, with the distinction between “Per­
mission Money, Banck Money and Currant Money.” The aim is, however, rather 
to explain the mistakes made in England, and the focus is therefore on economic 

Notes to Chapter 4    
policy. Only incidentally (ibid., 117–118) does the proposal crop up of introducing 
tradable bonds in England as well.
254.  Ibid.; Edward Misselden, The Circle of Commerce, or The Balance of Trade, 
in Defence of free Trade (London, 1623; repr., Amsterdam, 1969); but also Gerard 
Malynes, The Center of the Circle of Commerce, or, A Refutation of a Treatise Intitu­
lated The Circle of Commerce (London, 1623). The controversy was concerned with 
whether “balance of trade” or “gaine” was the center of the “circle of commerce.”
255.  On the economic theory of the seventeenth century, which already incor­
porates this to some extent (albeit controversially) see Joyce O. Appleby, Economic 
Thought and Ideology in Seventeenth Century England (Princeton, NJ, 1978).
256.  It should not be overlooked that successful exceptions are still operating, 
especially in Italy.
257.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Zum Begriff der sozialen Klasse,” in Soziale Differ­
enzierung: Zur Geschichte einer Idee, ed. id. (Opladen, 1985), 119–162.
258.  “For now a days most men live above their callings, and promiscuously 
step forth Vice versa, into one anothers Rankes. The Country mans Eie is upon the 
Citizen: the Citizen upon the Gentleman: the Gentleman upon the Nobleman,” 
Misselden complains (Free Trade, 12). And resources were thus consumed, with 
the consequence that good money went abroad and became scarce in England.
259.  See Neil J. Smelser, Social Change in the Industrial Revolution: An Applica­
tion of Theory to the Lancashire Cotton Industry, 1770–1840 (London, 1959).
260.  See references in Reinhart Koselleck, Preussen zwischen Reform und Revo­
lution: Allgemeines Landrecht, Verwaltung und soziale Bewegung von 1791–1848 (2nd 
ed., Stuttgart 1975), 79.
261.  See only, specially for England, Lawrence Stone, The Family, Sex and 
Marriage in England, 1500–1800 (London, 1977), on the one hand and Alan Mac­
farlane, The Culture of Capitalism (Oxford, 1987), 123ff. (with overview of the lit­
erature) on the other.
262.  See Niklas Luhmann, Liebe als Passion: Zur Codierung von Intimität 
(Frankfurt, 1982).
263.  Such are the findings of Katherine and Charles H. George, “Roman 
Catholic Sainthood and Social Status: A Statistical and Analytical Study,” Journal 
of Religion 35 (1955): 85–98, unfortunately without explaining whether the variable 
“saintliness” increases or decreases under these circumstances. A later examination 
of the data with similar conclusions is to be found in Pierre Delooz, Sociologie et 
canonisations (The Hague, 1969), 413ff.
264.  See Emil Winkler, Sécurité (Berlin, 1939).
265.  Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd earl of Shaftesbury, Characteristicks of Men, 
Manners, Opinions, Times (2nd ed., 1714; Farnborough, UK, 1968), 290.
266.  Thus Shaftesbury’s interest in soliloquy, which could, however, be made 
known only through publication.
267.  See from contemporary literature, e.g., Jonathan Richardson, A Discourse 

    Notes to Chapter 4
on the Dignity, Certainty, Pleasure and Advantage of the Science of a Connoisseur 
(1719), quoted from id., Works (London, 1773; repr., Hildesheim, 1969), 241–346, 
and for a critical account from the perspective of the artist who denies the compe­
tence of mere critics, William Hogarth, The Analysis of Beauty, written with a view 
of fixing the fluctuating Ideas of Taste (London, 1753; Oxford, 1955).
268.  See Iain Pears, The Discovery of Painting: The Growth of Interest in the Arts 
in England, 1680–1768 (New Haven, CT, 1988).
269.  See Diedrich Saalfeld, “Die ständische Gliederung der Gesellschaft 
Deutschlands im Zeitalter des Absolutismus: Ein Quantifizierungsversuch,” Viertel­
jahresschrift für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 67 (1980): 457–483.
270.  A view now widely accepted. For an overview, see William Doyle, Origins 
of the French Revolution (Oxford, 1980).
271.  See, e.g., Hubert Rottleuthner, “Abschied von der Justizforschung: Für 
eine Rechtssoziologie ‘mit mehr Recht,’” Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie 3 (1982): 
82–119, and Rechtssoziologische Studien zur Arbeitsgerichtsbarkeit, ed. id. (Baden-
Baden, 1984).
272.  In chapter 5 we shall be coming back to the consequences of sustained 
self-description qua “honor.”
273.  See, following Derrida, Peter Goodrich, Languages of Law: From Logics 
of Memory to Nomadic Masks (London, 1990), 25ff. For numerous references, see 
Joan Evans, Pattern: A Study of Ornament in Western Europe from 1180 to 1900 (Ox­
ford, 1931; repr. New York, 1975), 1: 82ff.
274.  See Philippe Van Parijs, Evolutionary Explanation in the Social Sciences: 
An Emerging Paradigm (London, 1981), 138ff.
275.  See Jouanna, L’idée de race (1981). See also Schalk, From Valor to Pedigree 
(cited n. 169 above), 115ff.
276.  From the point of view of a reaction to the crisis of the nobility in the 
second half of the sixteenth century, see Schalk, From Valor to Pedigree, 65ff., 174ff. 
This does not exclude stressing, as does Rudolf Stichweh, Der frühmoderne Staat 
und die europäische Universität (Frankfurt, 1991), the closeness of the newly estab­
lished educational institutions to the state. The nobility and the state now sought 
a new symbiosis. At the same time, however, the nobility placed great value on 
not attributing its opportunities to educational qualifications, and therefore will­
ingly and demonstratively waived certificates and examination. For an example 
of the stress placed on the need for educating the nobility that is highly skeptical 
about university education, see François de La Noue, Discours politiques et mili­
taires (Basel, 1587; ed. F. E. Sutcliffe, Geneva, 1967), 133ff.
277.  Donati, Idea di nobiltà (cited n. 163 above), esp. 56 and 93, speaks of chi­
usura of aristocratizzazione culturale e sociale.
278.  A standard concept in the literature on courtoisie and conversation. See 
Daniel Mornet, Histoire générale de la littérature française classique, 1660–1700: Ses 
caractères véritables, ses aspects inconnus (Paris, 1940), 97ff.; Klaus Breiding, Unter­

Notes to Chapter 4    
suchungen zum Typus des Pedanten in der französischen Literatur des 17. Jahrhunderts 
(diss., Frankfurt, 1970). Apart from rejection of type, there are also refined analyses 
concerned specifically with science. Jacques de Caillière, La fortune des gens de qual­
ité et des gentilhommes particuliers (1658; Paris, 1662), 212ff., e.g., claims that scien­
tific knowledge unsuits one for life at court, because it always involves [extraneous] 
linkage, description takes too long, and attention is a conversational distraction. 
For criticism of the nobility’s rejection of education, see, e.g., François Loryot [S.J., 
Le P.], Les fleurs des secretz moraux sur les passions du cœur humain (Paris, 1614), 566ff.
279.  On the influence of moral theories of the seventeenth century, see Louis 
van Delft, Le moraliste classique: Essai de définition et de typologie (Geneva, 1982).
280.  This was believed to be the only way to justify the immanent (ethico-­
political) unity of wealth and virtue. See, e.g., Francesco de Vieri, Il primo libro 
della nobilità (Florence, 1574), 60–61. Given the way the economy operates, every 
other version would have limited the concept of virtue to purely economic com­
petence. There were therefore good reasons!
281.  See Francis Markham, The Booke of Honour, or, Five Decads of Epistles of 
Honour (London, 1625), 1–2.
282.  I shall be coming back to this in the chapter on the self-description of society.
283.  See Charles Duclos, Considérations sur les mœurs de ce siécle (1751; Laus­
anne, 1971), 239ff.
284.  In the eighteenth century, “credit” still had the old hierarchical political 
meaning, too. It was “l’usage de la puissance d’autrui”; “Le crédit en commerce et 
en finance ne présente pas une autre idée; c’est l’usage des fonds d’autrui” (ibid., 
269 and n. 1). For the context of political economy (esp. state loans), see also 
David Hume, “Of Public Credit” (1752), in id., Writings on Economics, ed. Eugene 
Rotwein (Madison, WI, 1970), 90–107. The background is always public trust (in 
the sense of creditur).
285.  See, with abundant material, Johanna Schultze, Die Auseinandersetzung 
zwischen Adel und Bürgertum in den deutschen Zeitschriften der letzten drei Jahrzehnte 
des 18. Jahrhunderts (1773–1806) (Berlin, 1925; repr., Vaduz, Liechtenstein, 1965).
286.  See Reinhart Koselleck, Preussen zwischen Reform und Revolution: Allge­
meines Landrecht, Verwaltung und soziale Bewegung von 1791 bis 1848 (2nd ed., 
Stuttgart, 1975), esp. 52ff. See also Hermann Conrad, Die geistigen Grundlagen des 
Allgemeinen Landrechts für die preussischen Staaten von 1794 (Cologne, 1958).
287.  See Anna Maria Battista, “Morale ‘privée’ et utilitarisme politique en 
France au XVII siècle,” in Staatsräson: Studien zur Geschichte eines politischen Beg­
riffs, ed. Roman Schnur (Berlin, 1975), 87–119.
288.  Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici (1643; Everyman’s Library, London, 
1965), 6.
289.  See the observations by Henry Adams in London between 1860 and 1870 in 
The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography (Boston, 1918), 194ff., 284ff., and, 
in this connection, the acceptance of evolution theory as the guiding semantics.

    Notes to Chapter 4
290.  “Integration” is understood here, as always, as the mutual restriction of 
the degree of freedom of systems—and not, e.g., as consensus.
291.  See Gordon Pask, “The Meaning of Cybernetics in the Behavioural Sci­
ences (The Cybernetics of Behaviour and Cognition: Extending the Meaning of 
‘Goal’),” in Progress in Cybernetics, ed. John Rose (London, 1970), 15–44 (32). In 
almost the same sense, we could say “redundancy of potential demand.”
292.  Especially for Germany and the pronounced openness to local as well as 
cosmopolitan patriotism, see Peter Fuchs, “Vaterland, Patriotismus und Moral—
Zur Semantik gesellschaftlicher Einheit,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 20 (1991): 89–103; 
and see also Bernhard Giesen and Kay Junge, “Vom Patriotismus zum Nationalis­
mus: Zur Evolution der ‘Deutschen Kulturnation,’” in Studien zur Entwicklung des 
kollektiven Bewußtseins in der Neuzeit (Frankfurt, 1991), 255–303.
293.  Clearly, this is hard to accept; hence, for example, the society/community 
[Gesellschaft/Gemeinschaft] distinction seeks to assign people a social place in the 
community, if not in society.
294.  “Appeared” because society had always consisted only of communications 
and could only have deceived itself about this, indeed, had to deceive itself in its 
self-description, because the older differentiation forms relied on assigning people 
to fixed places “in” society.
295.  They are nontrivial machines, as Heinz von Foerster puts it in Wissen und 
Gewissen: Versuch einer Brücke (Frankfurt, 1993), 247ff.
296.  See D. F. Aberle, A. K. Davis, M. J. Levy, and F. X. Sutton, “The Func­
tional Prerequisites of a Society,” Ethics 60 (1950): 100–111; Talcott Parsons, The So­
cial System (Glencoe, IL, 1951), 26ff.; and, in detail, Marion J. Levy, The Structure 
of Society (Princeton, NJ, 1952).
297.  See the treatment of the coding of symbolically generalized communica­
tion media. This topic is taken up once more in the systems-theoretical context 
to show that, and why, symbolically generalized media have a special contribu­
tion to make to the outdifferentiation of functional systems. But there are other 
forms of coding systems that do not code media at the same time, e.g., the selec­
tion code of the educational system. See Niklas Luhmann, “Codierung und Pro­
grammierung: Bildung und Selektion im Erziehungssystem,” in id., Aufklärung, 
vol. 4 (1987), 182–201.
298.  In the self-description of the functional system, this symbolization is sim­
plified for practical communication reasons. Only the positive value of the code 
counts as the real meaning of the system—only right, only truth, only love, etc.—
and the negative value then co-occurs as the expression of misfortune. This facili­
tates a teleological, purposeful account of the operations of the system, and puts 
the paradox of the unity of positive and negative values in a curiously ambivalent 
form: the desired side of the code is opposed to the side to be rejected, while at the 
same time being used to indicate the difference.
299.  See Gotthard Günther, “Cybernetic Ontology and Transjunctional Op­

Notes to Chapter 4    
erations,” in id., Beiträge zur Grundlegung einer operationsfähigen Dialektik, vol. 1 
(Hamburg, 1976), 249–328, esp. 286–287.
300.  With the concept of “higher amorality,” I wish to make a distinction 
from a closely related concept, Hegel’s Sittlichkeit [ethical life, social morality]. 
I thus do not follow the line of Hegelian theory, strangely modern as it is with 
its difference-theoretical approach. Hegel sets out from a distinction (in this case 
­instinct/moral duty [Trieb/moralische Pflicht] on the pattern of hot/cold), to then 
treat merely opposing these two sides as overtaxing the concept and to demand 
and conceptually realize the “cancellation” of the opposition (and thus of moral­
ity) in a higher unity that takes account of both sides. The result is formulated in 
the distinction between morality and Sittlichkeit. The concept of “higher amoral­
ity” does without the apotheosis of such a unity. It means only that, at a function­
ally equivalent point in the theory, the distinction of morality as a distinction can 
be rejected in the interest of other distinctions, and that this happens in the struc­
ture of the system of modern society at nonarbitrary points. Instead of the concept 
of “sublation” [Aufhebung], I use Gotthard Günther’s concept of rejection to gain 
greater logical structural diversity.
301.  There is controversial discussion as to whether one can speak of autopoi­
etic autonomy at all in the case of functional systems, which are, after all, sub­
systems of the societal system. See Gunther Teubner, “‘L’ouvert s’appuye sur le 
fermé’: Offene Fragen zur Offenheit geschlossener Systeme,” Journal für Sozial­
forschung 31 (1991): 287–291.
302.  Friedrich Schiller, Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer 
Reihe von Briefen, in id., Sämtliche Werke, 4th ed. (Munich 1967), 593.
303.  This operational coupling is due to the fact that the institutions of prop­
erty and contract serve in the structural coupling of the legal system and the 
economic system, and therefore ensure regular mutual irritations. On the concep­
tuality, see the index to this volume and Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.
304.  See Alfred North Whitehead, Science and the Modern World (New York, 
1925).
305.  See, with reference to schizophrenia research and the example of the incon­
ceivable unity of map and territory (Borges), Jacques Miermont, “Les conditions 
formelles de l’état autonome,” Revue internationale de systémique 3 (1989): 95–314.
306.  Questions of this sort have been discussed in philosophy and without any 
links with societal theory, above all further to Quine.
307.  See Luhmann, Kunst, 384ff.
308.  Apparently, the transaction concept cannot be further resolved in eco­
nomic (rather than jurisprudential) terms, notwithstanding this complex struc­
ture. This lends credence to the view that transactions are the final elements of 
the economic system, which is also advanced in the context of the theory of self-
referential, autopoietic systems offered by Hutter, Produktion von Recht (cited n. 9 
above), 131. However, Hutter reconstructs the distinctions that have been stressed 

    Notes to Chapter 4
above as different modes of observation—namely, from within (payments) and 
from without (transfers).
309.  Some authors have understood that decisions in this combinatorial scope 
of distinctions are social operations, and thus communications. Steve Fuller, So­
cial Epistemology (Bloomington, IN, 1988), 81, states, e.g., that “reference fixing is 
a ­social fact, as in the case of a contract or a promise.”
310.  It should be remembered that the concept of observation covers every 
practice of distinguishing indication, and thus includes actions.
311.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Staat und Politik: Zur Semantik der Selbstbesch­
reibung politischer Systeme,” in id., Aufklärung, vol. 4 (1987), 74–103.
312.  Also to the completely unnecessary academic distinction in German be­
tween Staatslehre [theory of the state] and politische Soziologie [political sociology], 
which moreover suggests that Politikwissenschaft [political science] has a domain 
of its own somewhere in between.
313.  For further examples, see Niklas Luhmann, Funktion der Religion (Frank­
furt, 1977), 54ff.; id. and Karl Eberhard Schorr, Reflexionsprobleme im Erziehungs­
system (new ed., Frankfurt, 1988), 34ff.
314.  Dynamics as opposed to statics, which finds expression in structural cou­
plings between functional systems.
315.  See chap. 5.5.
316.  As just explained, “performance” in relation to other systems is meant.
317.  With regard, e.g., to the political system, the question is whether this nor­
mal inflexibility does not give certain personalities, e.g., go-getters of the Gor­
bachev or Thatcher type, opportunity to raise their profile by acting against it.
318.  On repercussions for the temporal structures of modern society, see chap. 
5.12; Reinhart Koselleck, Vergangene Zukunft: Zur Semantik geschichtlicher Zeiten 
(Frankfurt, 1979); Hermann Lübbe, Zeit-Verhältnisse: Zur Kulturphilosophie des 
Fortschritts (Graz, Austria, 1983); Giacomo Marramao, Potere e secolarizzazione: Le 
categorie del tempo (Rome, 1983); and Helga Nowotny, Eigenzeit: Entstehung und 
Strukturierung eines Zeitgefühls (Frankfurt, 1989).
319.  A topic seldom addressed theoretically. But see Theodore Schwartz, “The 
Size and Shape of Culture,” in Scale and Social Organisation, ed. Fredrik Barth 
(Oslo, 1978), 215–252 (249–250).
320.  See chap. 5.13.
321.  Jürgen Habermas has sought to resolve this paradox under the traditional 
heading of reason.
322.  See Dirk Baecker, Information und Risiko in der Marktwirtschaft (Frank­
furt, 1988).
323.  See, e.g., Niklas Luhmann, “Gesellschaftliche Komplexität und öffentli­
che Meinung,” in id., Aufklärung, vol. 5 (1990), 170–182.
324.  See Niklas Luhmann, Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1990), 
passim.

Notes to Chapter 4    
325.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Weltkunst,” in id., Frederick D. Bunsen, and Dirk 
Baecker, Unbeobachtbare Welt: Über Kunst und Architektur (Bielefeld, 1990), 7–45, 
and Luhmann, Kunst, 92ff.
326.  See also Niklas Luhmann et al., Beobachter: Konvergenz der Erkenntnis­
theorie? (Munich 1990), 47–117 (117), on the various cognition/ontology relations 
in Humberto Maturana, “The Biological Foundations of Self Consciousness and 
the Physical Domain of Existence.”
327.  This is dealt with in detail in the next section.
328.  See, in detail, Luhmann, Systeme, 426ff.
329.  See with regard to memory Heinz von Foerster, “Was ist Gedächtnis, das 
es Rückschau und Vorschau ermöglicht,” in id., Wissen und Gewissen: Versuch einer 
Brücke (Frankfurt, 1993), 299–336.
330.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Zum Begriff der sozialen Klasse,” in Soziale Differ­
enzierung: Zur Geschichte einer Idee, ed. id. (Opladen, 1985), 119–162. And see also 
Bürger und Bürgerlichkeit im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Jürgen Kocka (Göttingen, 1988), 
on the semantic and structural confusions in the concept of Bürgertum from con­
cept of inclusion in a civil society to the idea of an estate and the concept of a so­
cial class defined through economic relations and education.
331.  See Karl Martin Bolte, “Von sozialer Schichtung zu sozialer Ungleich­
heit: Bericht über ein Forschungsprojekt der frühen 50er Jahre und einige seiner 
Weiterwirkungen,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 15 (1986): 295–301; Ulrich Beck, “Jen­
seits von Klasse und Stand? Soziale Ungleichheiten, gesellschaftliche Individu­
alisierungsprozesse und die Entstehung neuer sozialer Formationen,” in Soziale 
Ungleich­heiten, Sonderband 2 der Sozialen Welt, ed. Reinhard Kreckel (Göttingen, 
1983), 35–74; and Soziologie der sozialen Ungleichheit, ed. Bernhard Giesen and 
Hans Haferkamp (Opladen, 1987). Nowadays we note that the individual is ori­
ented less on social stratification than on “worlds of experience” in which dis­
similarities may play a role. See, e.g., Gerhard Schulze, Die Erlebnisgesellschaft: 
Kultursoziologie der Gegenwart (Frankfurt, 1992); Thomas Müller-Schneider, 
“Wandel der Milieulandschaft in Deutschland: Von hierarchisierten zu subjekto­
rientierten Wahrnehmungsmustern,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 25 (1996): 196–206.
332.  See the very controversial (above all for ideological reasons) theses of 
Kings­ley Davis and Wilbert E. Moore, “Some Principles of Stratification,” Ameri­
can Sociological Review 10 (1945): 242–249; also Melvin M. Tumin, “Some Prin­
ciples of Stratification: A Critical Analysis,” ibid. 18 (1953): 387–394; Dennis H. 
Wrong, “The Functional Theory of Stratification: Some Neglected Consider­
ations,” ibid. 24 (1959): 772–782; and Renate Mayntz, “Kritische Bemerkungen 
zur funktionalistischen Schichtungstheorie,” in Soziale Schichtung und soziale Mo­
bilität, ed. David V. Glass and René König, Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und 
Sozialpsychologie, special issue no. 5 (3rd ed., Cologne, 1968), 10–28.
333.  That these two functional systems develop such perverse selectivity more 
than others is also to be seen—under optimistic auspices and at an early date—in 

    Notes to Chapter 4
the fact that in their relations with the nobility, the bourgeoisie relied above all on 
money and education.
334.  Valuable insight into the dogged struggle against leveling down and ef­
forts to read social significance into the tiniest, “finest” distinctions is provided by 
Pierre Bourdieu, esp. in La distinction: Critique social du jugement de goût (Paris, 
1979), trans. as Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (Cambridge, 
MA, 1984). However, unlike Bourdieu, I consider this effort to be impressive pre­
cisely in its futility and in the absence of a social structural background.
335.  See Jürgen Habermas, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns (Frankfurt, 
1981). See also Achille Ardigò, Crisi di governabilità e mondi vitali (Bologna, 1980).
336.  On this apparently ineradicable misunderstanding, which is used as 
an argument against the theory of functional differentiation, see Max Haller, 
“­Sozialstruktur und Schichtungshierarchie im Wohlfahrtsstaat: Zur Aktualität des 
vertikalen Paradigmas in der Ungleichheitsforschung,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 19 
(1986): 167–187.
337.  In the sense of Gunther Teubner and Helmut Willke, “Kontext und Au­
tonomie: Gesellschaftliche Selbststeuerung durch reflexives Recht,” Zeitschrift für 
Rechtssoziologie 5 (1984): 4–35. See also Helmut Willke, Systemtheorie entwickelter 
Gesellschaften: Dynamik und Riskanz moderner gesellschaftlicher Selbstorganisation 
(Weinheim, 1989), esp. 111ff.
338.  See, e.g., Karl Mannheim, Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction 
(London, 1940); Julian S. Huxley, Evolutionary Ethics (London, 1943).
339.  Hans Jonas, Das Prinzip Verantwortung: Versuch einer Ethik für die tech­
nologische Zivilisation (Frankfurt, 1979), is best known.
340.  Peter Uwe Hohendahl speaks for many in warning against abandoning 
these hopes prematurely (Hohendahl, “Response to Luhmann,” Cultural Critique 
30 [1995]: 187–192). However, the question remains as to how, and above all how 
quickly, they can be translated into a far-reaching correction of the manifest state 
of modern society. Skepticism about the possibility of a “renunciation society” 
based on individual motivation, which this would amount to, is shared by Rich­
ard Münch, Dynamik der Kommunikationsgesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), esp. 34ff.
341.  The major exception is naturally Max Weber, who can only ascertain a 
tragic conflict between heterogeneous value relations and motives, but, for this 
very reason, feels obliged to waive a concept of society.
342.  This discussion is taken further by Ditmar Brock and Matthias Junge, 
“Die Theorie gesellschaftlicher Modernisierung und das Problem gesellschaftli­
cher Integration,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 24 (1995), 165–182. The concept of inte­
gration is dynamized here, being interpreted as the transfer of resources. But this 
presupposes a concept of resource independent of the media of functional systems.
343.  See Humberto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, The Tree of Knowledge: 
Biological Basis of Human Understanding (1984), trans. as Der Baum der Erkenntnis: 
Die biologischen Wurzeln des menschlichen Erkennens (Munich, 1987), 85ff.

Notes to Chapter 4    
344.  See only Mark Granovetter, “Economic Action and Social Structure: The 
Problem of Embeddedness,” American Journal of Sociology 91 (1985): 481–510.
345.  See Rudolf Stichweh, Der frühmoderne Staat und die europäische Universität 
(Frankfurt, 1991); id., Wissenschaft, Universität, Professionen: Soziologische Analysen 
(Frankfurt, 1994), esp. 174ff.; Luhmann, Kunst, 256ff.
346.  A comparable analysis for organizational systems is to be found in Gor­
don Donaldson and Jay W. Lorsch, Decision Making at the Top: The Shaping of 
Strategic Direction (New York, 1983). The financial self-regulation of an enterprise 
takes account of relations with various “constituencies” and depends of none of 
these external relations assuming a dominant role.
347.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Politik und Wirtschaft,” Merkur 49 (1995): 573–581.
348.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Verfassung als evolutionäre Errungenschaft,” 
Rechtshistorisches Journal 9 (1990): 176–220; id., Das Recht der Gesellschaft (Frank­
furt, 1993), 468ff. See also id., “Zwei Seiten des Rechtsstaates,” in Conflict and 
­Integration: Comparative Law in the World Today: The 40th Anniversary of the Insti­
tute of Comparative Law in Japan, Chuo University, 1988 (Tokyo, 1989), 493–506.
349.  See the appropriate concept of “political law” in Franz Neumann, Die 
Herrschaft des Gesetzes: Eine Untersuchung zum Verhältnis von politischer Theorie 
und Rechtssystem in der Konkurrenzgesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1980).
350.  An instructive case study is to be found in Vilhelm Aubert, “Einige soziale 
Funktionen der Gesetzgebung,” in Studien und Materialien zur Rechtssoziologie, 
ed. Ernst E. Hirsch and Manfred Rehbinder, Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und 
Sozialpsychologie, special issue no. 11 (Cologne, 1967), 284–309.
351.  A (now somewhat dated) diagnosis of this development is to be found in 
Zoltán Magyary, The Industrial State (New York, 1938).
352.  See Dieter Grimm, Die Zukunft der Verfassung (Frankfurt, 1991).
353.  See Luhmann, Recht der Gesellschaft, 452ff.
354.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Am Anfang war kein Unrecht,” in id., Gesellschafts­
struktur, vol. 3 (1989), 11–64.
355.  See Luhmann, Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft.
356.  See, e.g., David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, bk. 3, pt. 2, § II 
(Every­man’s Library, London, 1956), 2: 190ff.
357.  A still little explored terrain. But see Christian Wollschläger, “Zivil-
Prozeßstatistik und Wirtschaftswachstum im Rheinland von 1822 bis 1915,” in 
Das Profil des Juristen in der europäischen Tradition: Symposion aus Anlaß des 70. 
Geburtstages von Franz Wieacker, ed. Klaus Luig and Detlef Liebs (Ebelsbach, 
1980), 371–397.
358.  On this development, see Rudolf Stichweh, “Der frühmoderne Staat und 
die europäische Universität: Zur Interaktion von Politik und Erziehungssystem 
im Prozeß ihrer Ausdifferenzierung,” Rechtshistorisches Journal 6 (1987): 135–151; 
id., “System/Umwelt-Beziehungen europäischer Universitäten in historischer Per­
spektive,” in Forschungspotentiale sozialwissenschaftlicher Hochschulforschung, ed. 

    Notes to Chapter 4
Christoph Oehler and Wolf-Dietrich Webler (Weinheim, 1988), 377–394; id., Der 
frühmoderne Staat und die europäische Universität: Zur Interaktion von Politik und 
Erziehungssystem im Prozeß ihrer Ausdifferenzierung (16.–18. Jahrhundert) (Frank­
furt, 1991).
359.  Experience of this sort is now to be found above all in fields such as tech­
nology or risk assessment and forecasting. From the abundant literature, see, e.g., 
Peter Weingart, “Verwissenschaftlichung der Gesellschaft—Politisierung der Wis­
senschaft,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 12 (1983): 225–241; Arie Rip, “Experts in Public 
Arenas,” in Regulating Industrial Risks: Science, Hazards and Public Protection, ed. 
Harry Otway and Malcolm Peltu (London, 1985), 94–110; Hans-Joachim Braczyk, 
“Konsensverlust und neue Technologien,” Soziale Welt 37 (1986): 173–190; and for 
the very similar relationship between the science system and the legal system, see 
Roger Smith and Brian Wynne, Expert Evidence: Interpreting Science in the Law 
(London, 1989).
360.  For the programmatic impulse see, e.g., Robert von Mohl, “Über Staats­
dienstprüfungen,” Deutsche Vierteljahrs Schrift 4 (1841): 79–103.
361.  On the consequent purely symbolic use of constitutions, see Neves, Ver­
fassung und Positivität (cited n. 57 above); id., A constitucionalização simbólica (São 
Paulo, 1994).
362.  On this much discussed topic, see only Helmut Willke, Systemtheorie III 
Steuerungstheorie: Grundzüge einer Theorie der Steuerung komplexer Sozialsysteme 
(Stuttgart, 1995), 109ff.
363.  See Hutter, Produktion von Recht (cited n. 9 above).
364.  For an analysis at the organism level see, following Piaget, Jean Claude 
Tabary, “Interface et assimilation: Etat stationnaire et accomodation,” Revue in­
ternationale de systémique 3 (1989): 273–293. See also Jean-Baptiste Pierre Antoine 
de Monet de Lamarck, Philosophie zoologique (Paris, 1809; repr., Weinheim, 1960), 
1: 82ff.
365.  See Karl E. Weick, Sensemaking in Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA, 
1995).
366.  The best summary is to be found in Art. 53 of “L’admiration” in Descartes’s 
Les passions de l’âme (in id., Œuvres et lettres [Pléiade ed., Paris, 1952], 723–724).
367.  See Keith Hawkins, Environment and Enforcement: Regulation and the So­
cial Definition of Pollution (Oxford, 1984), 15, in more detail 23ff. Instead of judg­
ment, I would say communication.
368.  At this point this distinction should suffice. It should, however, be kept in 
mind that assignment to one side or other of the distinction takes place in the sys­
tem itself, and is thus decided through self-observing operations of the system and 
not in accordance with general and, as it were, ontologically fixed criteria. This is the 
precondition for being able to speak of enhancing the irritability of systems at all.
369.  See James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, Ambiguity and Choice in Orga­
nizations (Bergen, Norway, 1976).

Notes to Chapter 4    
370.  See Martha S. Feldman, Order Without Design: Information Production 
and Policy Making (Stanford, 1989).
371.  See Niklas Luhmann, Ökologische Kommunikation: Kann die moderne Ge­
sellschaft sich auf ökologische Gefährdungen einstellen? (Opladen, 1986).
372.  In a seminar paper presented at Bielefeld University on 24 November 
1992, Dirk Baecker expresses the hope that this will enable environmental prob­
lems to be better addressed.
373.  See the comparison between Islamic and American (Protestant) fundamen­
talism in Dieter Goetze, “Fundamentalismus, Chiliasmus, Revitalisierungsbewegun­
gen: Neue Handlungsmuster im Weltsystem?” in Transkulturelle Kommunikation 
und Weltgesellschaft: Theorie und Pragmatik globaler Interaktion, ed. Horst Reimann 
(Opladen, 1992), 44–59. The comparison shows strikingly that fundamentalism 
cannot be put down to the tradition with which its adherents associate themselves. 
It is a matter not of “survivals” but of new formations that seek opposition.
374.  Jürgen Habermas’s discourse theory, which has met with a great deal of 
sympathy, and which cannot be reduced to a variant of “ethics,” should also be 
mentioned in this context. By keeping the criteria problem open, it aims at reach­
ing a reasonable understanding.
375.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Wirtschaftsethik—als Ethik?” in Wirtschafts­
ethik und Theorie der Gesellschaft, ed. Josef Wieland (Frankfurt, 1993), 134–147.
376.  In the ethos concept of antiquity, be it noted, this was presupposed as the 
political nature of human beings; the individual accordingly had only to recognize 
his own nature. Transcendental philosophy relied on certain transcendental con­
ditions of possibility alike in all empirical human beings. This was followed by the 
assumption of a “social a priori” (Max Adler). But precisely this blocked the socio­
logical question of the empirical possibilities for still outstanding social coordina­
tion of behavioral premises (on the basis of unirritability!).
377.  Hegel would perhaps have spoken of a standpoint of emotion with which 
the individual affirms himself in his good convictions. See Vorlesungen über die 
Philosophie der Religion I, in id., Werke, vol. 16 (Frankfurt, 1969), 172ff. As long as 
one applies “ethics” to individual behavior and takes the concept of the individual 
empirically seriously, one will hardly get any further.
378.  This can naturally also be called “ethics”; but it is obvious that this is abus­
ing a title of tradition and serves only to prevent more precise analysis of the par­
ticularities of communication with reference to values.
379.  I use the terminology of Douglas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An 
Eternal Golden Braid (New York, 1979, with the intention of deconstructing this 
distinction, too.
380.  See Richard Newbold Adams, Energy and Structure: A Theory of Social 
Power (Austin, TX, 1975).
381.  See §15.
382.  See Luhmann, Ökologische Kommunikation.

    Notes to Chapter 4
383.  See Bettina Gransow, “Chinesische Modernisierung und kultureller Ei­
gensinn,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 24 (1995): 183–195, with pointers on the status 
of research.
384.  See Neves, Verfassung und Positivität (cited n. 57 above); id., A constitucio­
nalização simbólica (cited n. 361 above); and also Anais da XV Conferência Nacional 
da Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil: ética, democracia e justiça, Foz do Iguaçu, PR, 4 
a 8 de setembro de 1994 (Brasília, DF, 1994).
385.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Die Form ‘Person,’” Soziale Welt 1 (1995): 7–28.
386.  See, e.g., Joseph R. Gusfield, “Tradition and Modernity: Misplaced Po­
larities in the Study of Social Change,” American Journal of Sociology 72 (1967): 
351–362; Reinhard Bendix, “Tradition and Modernity Reconsidered,” Compar­
ative Studies in Society and History 9 (1967): 351–362. For a modified retention 
of the distinction see S. N. Eisenstadt, Tradition, Change and Modernity (New 
York, 1973).
387.  Those who see the term “optima” as an overstatement may instead read 
“rationalities” or “acceptable solutions.”
388.  Compare this with conditions in the late Middle Ages, when messengers 
had to hasten to Rome to win the papal Curia over to their position in important 
theological controversies.
389.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.10.
390.  See Nicolas Hayoz, Fictions socialistes et société moderne: Aspects sociologiques 
de l’effondrement programmé de l’URSS (thesis, Geneva, 1996) .
391.  Neves, Verfassung und Positivität (cited n. 57 above), 113ff., speaks of “con­
stitutionalização symbólica como alopoiese do sistema jurídico.”
392.  See also W. Ross Ashby, “Principles of the Self-Organizing System,” in 
Principles of Self-Organization, ed. Heinz von Foerster and George W. Zopf (New 
York, 1962), 255–278; repr. in Modern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist: 
A Sourcebook, ed. Walter Buckley (Chicago, 1968), 108–118.
393.  Georg Simmel repeatedly stresses the “ephemeral” connection between 
the “large-scale structures” of society; e.g., in Grundfragen der Soziologie (Indivi­
duum und Gesellschaft) (Leipzig, 1917), 13.
394.  On such connection organizations in functionally differentiated society, 
see Gunther Teubner, Organisation und Verbandsdemokratie (Tübingen, 1978). See 
also the analysis of “conversation circles” in Hutter, Produktion von Recht (cited 
n. 9 above) or the discussion of control through “negotiation systems” in Helmut 
Willke, Systemtheorie III: Steuerungstheorie (Stuttgart, 1995), 109ff.
395.  Among the classics, see Charles H. Cooley, Social Organization (New 
York, 1909), and among more recent authors, Craig Calhoun, “Indirect Relation­
ships and Imagined Communities: Large-Scale Social Integration and the Trans­
formation of Everyday Life,” in Social Theory for a Changing Society, ed. Pierre 
Bourdieu and James S. Coleman (Boulder, CO, 1991), 95–121.
396.  In a bar, this is less obvious and depends more on the way interaction 

Notes to Chapter 4    
develops. See Sherri Cavan, Liquor License: An Ethnography of Bar Behavior (Chi­
cago, 1966).
397.  The argument shows the structural coupling of (socialized) consciousness 
and societal communication that is particularly important in such transitions, and 
perhaps for this very reason communication is reduced to set phrases (e.g., “Come 
sta?” “How are you?”).
398.  On the frequently used term “reentry,” see Spencer-Brown, Laws, 56–57, 
69ff.
399.  See also Henri Bergson, Durée et simultanéité: A propos de la théorie 
d’Einstein (1922; 2nd ed., Paris, 1923).
400.  Alfred Schütz, Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt: Eine Einleitung in 
die verstehende Soziologie (Vienna, 1932), esp. 111ff.
401.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Gleichzeitigkeit und Synchronisation,” in id., 
Aufklärung, vol. 5 (1990), 95–130. Greater detail in Armin Nassehi, Die Zeit der 
Gesellschaft: Auf dem Weg zu einer soziologischen Theorie der Zeit (Opladen, 1993), 
esp. 249ff.
402.  See Robert Rosen, Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, Mathematical and 
Methodological Foundations (Oxford, 1985).
403.  After rebuttal of too-radical hypotheses about linguistic impossibilities 
(Whorf/Sapir), this is probably the prevailing view today. See, e.g., Ekkehart Ma­
lotki, Hopi Time: A Linguistic Analysis of the Temporal Concepts in Hopi Language 
(Berlin, 1983); Hubert Knoblauch, “Die sozialen Zeitkategorien der Hopi und der 
Nuer,” in Zeit als Strukturelement von Lebenswelt und Gesellschaft, ed. Friedrich 
Fürstenberg and Ingo Mörth (Linz, 1986), 327–355.
404.  Even a society that already makes use of a writing system can still follow 
even older prescriptions in the lead distinctions of its time semantics. E.g., the an­
cient Egyptian language had a concept for time as the result of past events (djet) 
and another concept for virtuality, that is, for future possibilities (nehe). That this 
is separated into two time concepts relating to the present indicates that this con­
ceptuality goes back to a time in which the difference between past and future 
could not yet be seen as a synchronization problem. This interpretation of djet and 
nehe follows Jan Assmann, “Das Doppelgesicht der Zeit im altägyptischen Den­
ken,” in Die Zeit, ed. Anton Peisl and Armin Mohler (Munich, 1983), 189–223.
405.  Elman R. Service, The Hunters (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 67–68, 
mentions cases in which people can count up to four or five, followed by “many,” 
with the result that past and future serve only to coordinate direct action and are 
not perceived as horizons for changes. The Baktaman can count up to twenty-
seven, which suffices only for coordination within phases of the moon. Beyond 
this they have only very vague notions of duration. This diminishes the probabil­
ity of envy complexes occurring or resentment enduring. See Barth, Ritual and 
Knowledge, 21ff., 135–136.
406.  See Joseph Needham, “Time and Knowledge in China and the West,” 

    Notes to Chapter 4
in The Voices of Time, ed. Julius T. Fraser (London, 1968), 92–135 (esp. 100). See 
also Jacques Le Goff, “Temps de l’Église et temps du marchand,” Annales ESC 15 
(1960): 417–433.
407.  See, e.g., “gesellige Mitteilung” (sociable utterance) in Friedrich von Schle­
gel’s essay on Georg Forster (in id., Werke in zwei Bänden [Berlin, 1980], 1: 101).
408.  This naturally also calls to mind long-distance trade, growing with the 
money economy, which had an impact on local production sites that had not been 
understood there and could not be mitigated through interaction (e.g., through 
efforts to improve quality).
409.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Interaktion in Oberschichten: Zur Transforma­
tion ihrer Semantik im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik, vol. 1 (Frankfurt, 1980), 72–161; id., “The Evolutionary Differentiation 
Between Society and Interaction,” in The Micro-Macro Link, ed. Jeffrey C. Alex­
ander et al. (Berkeley, CA, 1987), 112–131.
410.  See only Peacham, Compleat Gentleman (cited n. 164 above). In France, 
we find not so much changes in knowledge demands as the markedly oral, apho­
ristic, witty style of the science des mœurs, which allows the nobility to take part 
without excluding the bourgeoisie. See Louis van Delft, Le moraliste classique: 
Essai de définition et de typologie (Geneva, 1982).
411.  Madeleine de Scudéry, “De la conversation,” in id., Conversations sur div­
ers sujets (Paris, 1680), 1: 1–35 (2).
412.  At any rate in France, whereas in Italy, very much in the old style, it 
was said: “Le donne sono nate per istar in casa, non per andar vagando” (Vir­
gilio Malvezzi, “Pensieri politici e morali” (excerpt from various publications), in 
Politici e moralisti del seicento, ed. Benedetto Croce and Santino Caramella (Bari, 
1930), 255–283 (269). This means that if women are seen on the street, they are to 
be considered as objects of male vanity (not to say worse). In any case, they were 
not permitted to draw conclusions about their own conduct in other situations 
from behavior in interaction,
413.  Ultimately, the only way to be sincere is to commit oneself sincerely to in­
sincerity and act accordingly; so says the comte de Versac in Claude-Prosper Jolyot 
de Crébillon’s Les égarements du cœur et de l’esprit (1736–1738; Paris, 1961).
414.  Thus Gabriel Sénac de Meilhan describes the “homme aimable” com­
pletely devoted to interaction as an unknown quantity: “Il est de tous les âges, de 
toutes les conditions. Il n’est ni Magistrat, ni Financier, ni père de Famille, ni mari. 
Il est homme du monde: lorsqu’il vient à mourir, on apprend avec surprise qu’il 
avait quatre-vingt ans. On ne s’en seroit pas douté à la vie qu’il menoit. La société 
même ignoroit qu’il étoit ayeul, époux, père: qu’étoit-il donc à leurs yeux? Il avait 
un quart à l’Opera, jouoit au lotto, et soupoit en Ville” (Considérations sur l’ésprit 
et les mœurs de ce siècle [London, 1787], 317ff.).
415.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Sozialsystem Familie,” in id., Aufklärung. vol. 5 
(1990), 196–217.

Notes to Chapter 4    
416.  On this, see further chap. 5.20 below.
417.  See Stanley H. Udy Jr., Work in Traditional and Modern Society (Engle­
wood Cliffs, NJ, 1970).
418.  That this does not succeed in every regard and is initially attained mainly 
for men is illustrated by housework, which is now increasingly felt to be a dis­
advantagement of women. The example of the work women are expected to do 
(housework, bringing up children, hospitality) shows a residue of direct societal 
determination—all the more so when servants are no longer available and the 
housewife is expected to do the work herself. Instead of the usual trouble with the 
servants, housewives now have to cope with technical breakdowns and unloading 
their work on the market.
419.  After the abolition of slavery, e.g., work on the sugar plantations of Brazil 
became seasonal, with no provision for the interim.
420.  That one still has to reckon with clear links between stratification and 
training, statistically speaking, now comes to be seen as a problem of equal op­
portunities and social justice and not, or hardly any longer, as an opportunity to 
recruit characteristics that are guaranteed by stratification. The diplomatic service 
recruits aristocratic . . . names.
421.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Funktionen und Folgen formaler Or­
ganisation (Berlin, 1964).
422.  See G. L. S. Shackle, Imagination and the Nature of Choice (Edinburgh, 
1979), and id., “Imagination, Formalism, and Choice,” in Time, Uncertainty, and 
Disequilibrium: Exploration of Austrian Themes, ed. Mario J. Rizzo (Lexington, 
MA, 1979), 19–31, albeit with a way out in radical subjectivism. See also Nik­
las Luhmann, “Die Paradoxie des Entscheidens,” Verwaltungsarchiv 84 (1993), 
287–310.
423.  See Karl E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing (Reading, MA, 
1969), trans. as Der Prozeß des Organisierens (Frankfurt, 1985), 276ff. On a recent 
discussion of “postdecision surprises,” see J. Richard Harrison and James G. March, 
“Decision Making and Postdecision Surprises,” Administrative Science Quarterly 29 
(1984): 26–42, and Bernard Goitein, “The Danger of Disappearing Postdecision 
Surprise: Comment on Harrison and March ‘Decision Making and Postdecision 
Surprise,’” ibid., 410–413. See also Joel Brockner et al., “Escalation of Commitment 
to an Ineffective Course of Action: The Effect of Feedback Having Negative Impli­
cations for Self-Identity,” ibid. 31 (1986): 109–126; Niklas Luhmann, Soziologie des 
Risikos (Berlin, 1991), 201ff.
424.  On monitoring of water pollution, see, e.g., Hawkins, Environment and 
Enforcement (cited n. 367 above), esp. 57ff.
425.  This holds true, as has often been discussed, for policemen on the beat, 
for teachers, for social workers. But it is also realized that this is impossible when 
it comes to supervising high-risk industrial plant; and spectacular major accidents 
show that the system can be especially vulnerable at this outer boundary.

    Notes to Chapter 4
426.  I shall be coming back to the question of the “absorption of uncertainty” 
that can be achieved by sequencing decisions.
427.  See March and Olsen, Ambiguity and Choice (cited n. 369 above).
428.  One normally finds such thoughts in the literature on “collective agency.” 
Parsons speaks of “collectivities.” But it must then be ensured that joint action 
(sawing, moving loads, and so forth) is not taken to be collective action. How­
ever, this can be achieved only if one is geared to “communication on behalf of 
the collective.”
429.  Where such unplanned systems form, one speaks of “informal” organi­
zation. Typical of this is untypical structuring: no fixed membership, uncertain 
identifiability, motivation for deviant behavior—but at least motivation! etc. Re­
cently, one also finds organizations that link up different organizations at lower 
levels and that can no longer be clearly classified hierarchically. Such associations 
of firms are the result above all of the “just-in-time” delivery principle, which saves 
storage costs and speeds up production.
430.  In the introduction to the second edition of De la division du travail so­
cial (cited n. 1 above), Durkheim offers the evolutionary advance of a differentia­
tion between families and corporations as an example in treating the paradigm of 
differentiation.
431.  See Chester I. Barnard, The Functions of the Executive (1938; Cambridge, 
MA, 1987), 167ff.
432.  This does not exclude corruption from occurring quite normally and 
appearing to be indispensable in gaining access to organizations. In this sense, 
­patron-client relationships persist. In any case, such corruption is to be distin­
guished from corruption mediated by money, which is sometimes illegal (even if 
often without consequences).
433.  See James G. March and Herbert A. Simon, Organizations (New York, 
1958), 165–166.
434.  For the example of political parties, see Niklas Luhmann, “Die Unbeli­
ebtheit politischer Parteien,” Die politische Meinung 37, no. 272 (1992): 177–186.
435.  For Swedish experience, see Nils Brunsson, The Irrational Organization: 
Irrationality as a Basis for Organizational Action and Change (Chichester, UK, 
1985).
436.  For an impressive example, see the “Bilanz der Entbürokratisierung” 
in the West German Ministry of the Interior’s Zweiten Bericht zur Rechts- und 
­Verwaltungsvereinfachung (Bonn, 1986). In order to avoid unnecessary regulation, 
it suggests submitting each regulatory project to ten test questions, with up to 
eleven subquestions apiece (for a total of forty-eight), each of which again intro­
duces inadequately defined complexity into the decision-making process. For the 
sake of simplification, every decision is thus multiplied by 48, or, if interdepen­
dencies have to be taken into account, by 248! Only practical implementation can 
then ensure simplification.

Notes to Chapter 4    
437.  There is meanwhile a great deal of literature on “micropolicy” and corre­
sponding “games.” See, e.g., Tom Burns, “Micropolitics: Mechanisms of Institu­
tional Change,” Administrative Science Quarterly 6 (1961): 257–281; Michel Crozier 
and Erhard Friedberg, L’acteur et le système (Paris, 1977); Mikropolitik: Rational­
ität, Macht und Spiele in Organisationen, ed. Willi Küpper and Günther Ortmann 
(Opladen, 1988); and Günther Ortmann, Formen der Produktion: Organisation 
und Rekursivität (Opladen, 1995).
438.  For a detailed treatment of the link between expectation and decision, 
see Niklas Luhmann, “Soziologische Aspekte des Entscheidungsverhaltens,” Die 
­Betriebswirtschaft 44 (1984): 591–603.
439.  See, e.g., Herbert A. Simon, “Birth of an Organization: The Economic 
Cooperation Administration,” Public Administration Review 13 (1953): 227–236.
440.  Whoever really wants to know what opinions are entertained by “the 
economy” is better advised to read the stock exchange reports; for whenever com­
munication is organized, deception and mendacity are also possible.
441.  See Helmut Willke, Systemtheorie entwickelter Gesellschaften: Dynamik und 
Riskanz moderner gesellschaftlicher Selbstorganisation (Weinheim, 1989), esp. 44ff., 
103ff., 111ff.; id., Ironie des Staates: Grundlinien einer Staatstheorie polyzentrischer Ge­
sellschaft (Frankfurt, 1992); and id., Systemtheorie III: Steuerungstheorie: Grundzüge 
einer Theorie der Steuerung komplexer Sozialsysteme (Stuttgart, 1995). In contrast, a 
sharp distinction between primary societal subsystems and (their) organizations 
draws attention to the problem that organizations can, if at all, commit only them­
selves through communication—not “politics,” “the economy,” “science,” etc.
442.  See Adalbert Podlech, Gehalt und Funktionen des allgemeinen verfassungs­
rechtlichen Gleichheitssatzes (Berlin, 1971), 50.
443.  See only Democracy and Civil Society, ed. John Keane (London, 1988); 
Civil Society and the State: New European Perspectives, ed. id. (London, 1988); and 
Jean Cohen and Andrew Arato, Civil Society and Political Theory (Cambridge, 
MA, 1992).
444.  In economic theory, the growing understanding of the importance of or­
ganizations was closely associated with criticism of the theoretical premise of the 
market with perfect competition. See only Herbert A. Simon, Models of Man—
Social and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behavior in a Social 
Setting (New York, 1957). Another development took its course in the specifically 
economic version of input-output analysis. See from the pen of the inventor, Was­
sily W. Leontief, “Die Methode der Input-Output-Analyse,” Allgemeines statistisches 
Archiv 36 (1952): 153–166.
445.  See Karl-Heinz Ladeur, Postmoderne Rechtstheorie: Selbstreferenz—Selbst­
organisation—Prozeduralisierung (Berlin, 1992), esp. 176ff.
446.  On the development of the concept, which was still very hesitant in the 
first decades of the nineteenth century, see Niklas Luhmann, “Organisation,” in 
Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 6 (Stuttgart, 1984), cols. 1326–1328.

    Notes to Chapter 4
447.  Apropos of raison d’État, see Virgilio Malvezzi, Il ritratto del privato po­
litico christiano, in Opere del marchese Malvezzi (Milan, 1635), separately pag­
inated, 123. For a secular version, see Hegel, “Das Gesetz des Herzens, und 
der Wahnsinn des Eigendünkels” (The Law of the Heart, and the Frenzy of 
Self-Conceit), in id., Der Phänomenologie des Geistes, ed. Johannes Hoffmeister 
(Leipzig, 1937), 266ff.
448.  See Klaus Eder, “Die Institutionalisierung sozialer Bewegungen: Zur 
Beschleunigung von Wandlungsprozessen in fortgeschrittenen Industriegesell­
schaften,” in Sozialer Wandel: Modellbildung und theoretische Ansätze, ed. Hans-
Peter Müller and Michael Schmid (Frankfurt, 1995), 267–290 (284).
449.  See Parsons, System of Modern Societies, esp. 26ff.
450.  The literature on “moral economy” as the premise for peasant revolts 
stresses this difference. See references in n. 191 above.
451.  The sociological account of these movements does not go beyond the goal 
level and therefore remains descriptive. What is offered in the way of theory is lim­
ited to an account of historical continuity in very heterogeneous goals. See Lothar 
Rolke, Protestbewegungen in der Bundesrepublik (Opladen, 1987).
452.  One might well ask, and there has been discussion on the subject for 
some time now, whether xenophobia is a social movement at all or merely an 
eruption of the self-realization milieu. Representatives of the traditional new so­
cial movements tend to deny that the concept covers the new ones. But intellec­
tual hubris and politico-moral amour propre play an all-too-obvious role in this.
453.  For critique and resolution of this controversy in social constructivism, 
see also Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky, Risk and Culture: An Essay on Selec­
tion of Technological and Environmental Dangers (Berkeley, 1982).
454.  Kai-Uwe Hellmann, “Systemtheorie und soziale Bewegungen: Eine sys­
tematisch-kritische Analyse” (diss., Berlin, 1995), sees a “latent function” of the 
new social movements here as opposed to “manifest goals”; but can we then as­
sume, as usual among sociologists, that the latent function is the real one?
455.  See Helmuth Berking, “Die neuen Protestbewegungen als zivilisatorische 
Instanz im Modernisierungsprozeß?” in Ungewollte Selbstzerstörung: Reflexionen 
über den Umgang mit katastrophalen Entwicklungen, ed. Hans Peter Dreitzel and 
Horst Stenger (Frankfurt, 1990), 47–61 (57).
456.  These hypotheses naturally have to be regionally modified. They do not 
apply, e.g., in southern Italy, where such membership and dependence have re­
mained veritably essential, and individual mobility is restricted through internal­
ized, almost mafia-like, pressures.
457.  Elaboration of these variables could, for instance, in comparing Germany 
and Italy, explain why the breeding grounds of protest movements differ from re­
gion to region.
458.  See Klaus P. Japp, “Die Form des Protestes in den neuen sozialen Bewe­
gungen,” in Probleme der Form, ed. Dirk Baecker (Frankfurt, 1993), 230–251.

Notes to Chapter 4    
459.  Or the center of society beyond functional systems, with Eder, “Institu­
tionalisierung sozialer Bewegungen,” 286.
460.  On this distinction, see Jacques Ferber, “La kénétique: Des systèmes 
multi-agents à une science de l’interaction,” Revue internationale de systémique 8 
(1994): 13–27 (21ff.).
461.  Otthein Rammstedt, Sekte und soziale Bewegung: Soziologische Analyse der 
Täufer in Münster (1534/35) (Cologne, 1966), 48ff. speaks in another historical con­
text of the “teleologization of the crisis.”
462.  This is stressed particularly by Heinrich W. Ahlemeyer, Soziale Bewegun­
gen als Kommunikationssystem: Einheit, Umweltverhältnis und Funktion eines sozi­
alen Phänomens (Opladen, 1995).
463.  On this “ornamentation of movement,” see Hans-Georg Soeffner, “Rit­
uale des Antiritualismus: Materialien für Außeralltägliches,” in Materialität der 
Kommunikation, ed. Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht and K. Ludwig Pfeiffer (Frankfurt, 
1988), 519–546 (527).
464.  Like Fichte’s ego to his non-ego according to Jean Paul, Clavis Fichtiana 
seu Leibgeberiana, in id., Werke, vol. 3 (Munich, 1961), 1011–1056 (1043).
465.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Politische Verfassungen im Kontext des Gesell­
schaftssystems,” Der Staat 12 (1973): 1–22, 165–182.
466.  See Wilfried von Bredow and Rudolf H. Brocke, Krise und Protest: Ur­
sprünge und Elemente der Friedensbewegung in Westeuropa (Opladen, 1987), 61.
467.  See Jens Siegert, “Form und Erfolg—Thesen zum Verhältnis von Organ­
isationsform, institutionellen Politikarenen und der Motivation von Bewegung­
saktivisten,” Forschungsjournal Neue soziale Bewegungen 2, nos. 3–4 (1989): 63–66.
468.  We find this formulation in Jean Paul, Siebenkäs [Flower, Fruit, and 
Thorn; or, The Married Life, Death and Wedding of the Advocate of the Poor, 
Firmian Stanislaus Siebenkäs], chap. 3, in Jean Paul, Werke, vol. 2 (Munich, 1959), 
95, but here still with reference to performances of beggars on a special occasion, 
a fair.
469.  See Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts of Pollution 
and Taboo (New York, 1966), and id., “Risk as a Forensic Resource,” Dædalus 119, 
no. 4 (1990): 1–16 (4ff.). For a related case study on social movements concerned 
with job risks, see Janet B. Bronstein, “The Political Symbolism of Occupational 
Health and Risks,” in The Social and Cultural Construction of Risk: Essays on Risk 
Selection and Perception, ed. Branden B. Johnson and Vincent T. Covello (Dor­
drecht, 1987), 199–226.
470.  If we look back on the greatest achievements of theological reflection 
(above all, in Islam), the devil also had this problem. But in the sin cosmos of tra­
dition, he was able to find a unique position for himself. He was the only one to 
have committed a sin for which there is no repentance: the sin of observing God. 
See Peter J. Awn, Satan’s Tragedy and Redemption: Iblis in Sufi Psychology (Leiden, 
1983). Hegel solves this problem with elegance and convincing theory structure 

    Notes to Chapters 4 and 5
through the absolute spirit of his metaphysics. It distinguishes itself in itself (not 
from itself). But no social realization is to be found for this, so that the spirit is 
finally nothing other than the form that makes one sensitive to this problem. It 
symbolizes an inside without outside, a society without environment.
471.  Ahlemeyer, Soziale Bewegungen, also describes social movements as auto­
poietic systems of a particular type, but not in relation to the communication of 
protests but to mobilization as elementary autopoietic operation reproducing it­
self from its own results. See also id., “Was ist eine soziale Bewegung? Zur Distink­
tion und Einheit eines sozialen Phänomens,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 18 (1989): 
175–191.
472.  On the concepts, see Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, 60–61.
473.  See Gerald R. Salancik and Joseph F. Porac, “Distilled Ideologies: Values 
Derived from Causal Reasonings in Complex Environments,” in The Thinking 
Organization: Dynamics of Organizational Social Cognition, ed. Henry P. Sims Jr., 
Dennis A. Gioia, et al. (San Francisco, 1986), 75–101.
474.  See Wolfgang van den Daele, “Der Traum von der ‘alternativen’ Wissen­
schaft,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 16 (1987): 403–418.
475.  See, e.g., Todd Gitlin, The Whole World Is Watching: Mass Media in the 
Making and Unmaking of the New Left (Berkeley, CA, 1980). See also Rüdiger 
Schmitt-Beck, “Über die Bedeutung der Massenmedien für soziale Bewegungen,” 
Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 42 (1980): 642–662.
476.  See, e.g., Hans Mathias Kepplinger, Ereignismanagement: Wirklichkeit 
und Massenmedien (Zurich, 1992), 48–49.
477.  See, for an already mature stage, Richard P. Gale, “Social Movements 
and the State: The Environmental Movement, Countermovement, and the Trans­
formation of Government Agencies,” Sociological Perspectives 29 (1986): 202–240.
478.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Grenzwerte der ökologischen Politik: Eine Form 
von Risikomanagement,” in Risiko und Regulierung: Soziologische Beiträge zu Tech­
nikkontrolle und präventiver Umweltpolitik, ed. Petra Hiller and Georg Krücken 
(Frankfurt, 1997), 195–221.
chapter 5: self-descriptions
1.  I take this formulation, albeit in somewhat different form, from Peter Fuchs, 
Die Erreichbarkeit der Gesellschaft: Zur Konstruktion und Imagination gesellschaft­
licher Einheit (Frankfurt, 1992).
2.  See Spencer-Brown, Laws, 57.
3.  See with reference to Husserl, Niklas Luhmann, Die neuzeitlichen Wissen­
schaften und die Phänomenologie (Vienna, 1996), trans. as “The Modern Sciences 
and Phenomenology,” in id., Theories of Distinction: Redescribing the Descriptions 
of Modernity, ed. William Rasch (Stanford, 2002), 33–60.
4.  See § 13 below.

Notes to Chapter 5    
5.  See Sidney Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity (Ithaca, NY, 1963); 
id., “Self-Reference and Self-Awareness,” Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968): 555–567. 
Dieter Henrich, “‘Identität’—Begriffe, Probleme, Grenzen,” in Identität, ed. Odo 
Marquard and Karlheinz Stierle, Poetik und Hermeneutik VIII (Munich, 1979), 
133–186 (178), explicitly advices against transferring this and other views on the self-
relations of the individual to society. But what objection can there be if one does 
so with due attention to the undoubted differences between systems? That the phe­
nomenon of criterion-free self-identification had first been discovered with regard to 
the consciousness does not necessarily mean that this is and remains the only case.
6.  “It is that the current philosophy of wit, which, when the similar wit of phi­
losophy makes the I-subject into the object and vice versa, also reflects its ideas 
sub-objectively,” Jean Paul writes (Flegeljahre [The Teens], 1.12, in id., Werke, vol. 2 
(Munich, 1959), 641; trans. R.B.).
7.  Kant, “Von dem Schematismus der reinen Verstandesbegriffe” [On the 
Schematism of the Pure Concepts of Understanding], in id., Kritik der reinen Ver­
nunft [Critique of Pure Reason], B 176ff.
8.  As Hans-Georg Pott shows in Literarische Bildung: Zur Geschichte der In­
dividualität (Munich, 1995), this gives rise to fictional texts (the prototype being 
Don Quixote) that represent the distinction between subjectness and literature as 
undecidable. The subject lives what it has read and thus makes itself into reading 
matter.
9.  A thought adopted with reference to Wittgenstein by Spencer-Brown, 
Laws, 105, and by Gotthard Günther, e.g., in Beiträge zur Grundlegung einer opera­
tionsfähigen Dialektik, 3 vols. (Hamburg, 1976–1980), 1: 382–383.
10.  It must, however, be admitted that even Kant does not follow the logic of 
his conceptuality, but allows himself to be seduced to inconsequence by the every­
day world, as it were. Apart from self-reflection on the facts of consciousness, there 
is a second way to test generalizability: sorting out what can be communicated, 
which can take place only through factual attempts at communication (and not 
through self-deception). Kant speaks in Kritik der Urteilskraft [1790; trans. and ed. 
Paul Guyer as Critique of the Power of Judgement (Cambridge, 2000)], § 21, of “the 
necessary condition of the universal communicability of our knowledge, which is 
presupposed in every Logic and in every principle of knowledge that is not scep­
tical.” To assure theoretical consistency, Kant appears to be satisfied with the as­
sertion that that it is not a matter of psychological observation but of an “effect 
arising from the free play of our powers of cognition” (§ 20), which is then called 
common sense (Gemeinsinn, sensus communis). Embarrassed philosophy!
11.  Mary Douglas, How Institutions Think (Syracuse, NY, 1986), 55ff., albeit 
with an unclarified concept of institution, presupposed to be a “legitimized social 
grouping” (46).
12.  Louis H. Kauffman, “Self-Reference and Recursive Forms,” Journal of So­
cial and Biological Structures 10 (1987): 53–72 (53), states as the starting point for a 

    Notes to Chapter 5
series of mathematical deductions: “At least one distinction is involved in the pres­
ence of self-reference. The self appears, and an indication of that self can be seen as 
separate from the self. Any distinction involves the self-reference of ‘the one who 
distinguishes’. Therefore, self-reference and the idea of distinction are inseparable 
(hence conceptually identical).”
13.  This also applies to “deconstruction” in Derrida’s sense, i.e., to a decon­
struction of asymmetry assumptions that treats the object as only a supplément of 
the subject (see Jacques Derrida, “Le supplément de copule: La philosophie devant 
la linguistique,” in id., Marges de la philosophie [Paris, 1972], 209–246). In reality, 
however, the subject could not be a subject at all without an object (without the 
other side of its form)—just as philosophy cannot be philosophy without writing. 
As I interpret it, deconstruction is simply a return to the operational unity of self-
reference/distinction, which is of interest only as a medium for form formation.
14.  The philosophical discussion typically disregards this case of self-reference/
paradox—see, e.g., Reflexivity: A Source-Book in Self-Reference, ed. Steven Bartlett 
(Amsterdam, 1992). This is due primarily to the ties of philosophy to tradition, 
but also to a lack of groundwork in societal theory.
15.  To this extent, more recent social philosophy, following Alfred Schütz, must 
be conceded the right to introduce intersubjectivity simply as a given fact. On 
the discussion this set off, see Sozialität und Intersubjektivität: Phänomenoloische 
Per­spektiven der Sozialwissenschaften im Umkreis von Aron Gurwitsch und Alfred 
Schütz, ed. Richard Grathoff and Bernard Waldenfels (Munich, 1983). Theoreti­
cally, however, little has yet been gained.
16.  See also Dean MacCannell and Juliet F. MacCannell, The Time of the Sign: 
A Semiotic Interpretation of Modern Culture (Bloomington, IN, 1982), 190, for other 
(semiotics) approaches.
17.  See Harold Garfinkel, Studies in Ethnomethodology (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1967).
18.  Leaving aside a more profound problem with which Husserl had struggled 
with accustomed analytical stringency, namely, the question of whether the notion 
of intersubjectivity contradicts the concept of subject.
19.  The consequences for the theory of cognition have been addressed in Niklas 
Luhmann, Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1990).
20.  On the importance of other-observation for the identity formation of 
the subject, see, among many other sources, the excursus “Wie ist Gesellschaft 
möglich?” in Georg Simmel, Soziologie: Untersuchungen über die Formen der Verge­
sellschaftung, id., Gesamtausgabe, vol. 11 (Frankfurt, 1992), 42ff.
21.  See, in the context of general systems theory, Lars Löfgren, “Complexity 
Descriptions of Systems: A Foundational Study,” International Journal of General 
Systems 3 (1977): 197–214, and Robert Rosen, “Complexity as a System Property,” 
ibid., 227–232.
22.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 56–57, 69ff.

Notes to Chapter 5    
23.  Ibid., 57.
24.  This does not, incidentally, impose the consequence that objects are only 
observable as self-observers, drawn by Ranulph Glanville, Objekte (Berlin, 1988). 
And even then the question remains of whether objects can also observe them­
selves differently from the way they usually do—steam engines, e.g., not as steam 
engines but as fire-breathing monsters, as hard laborers, as explosion hazards.
25.  And in popular literature. See only John P. Briggs and F. David Peat, Look­
ing Glass Universe: The Emerging Science of Wholeness (New York, 1983).
26.  See Heinz von Foerster, Observing Systems (Seaside, CA, 1981); Francisco J. 
Varela, Principles of Biological Autonomy (New York, 1979); Fritz B. Simon, Unter­
schiede, die Unterschiede machen: Klinische Epistemologie: Grundlagen einer system­
ischen Psychiatrie und Psychosomatik (Berlin, 1988); Lars Löfgren, “Towards System: 
From Computation to the Phenomenon of Language,” in Nature, Cognition and 
System I: Current Systems-Scientific Research on Natural and Cognitive Systems, ed. 
Marc E. Carvallo (Dordrecht, 1988), 129–155; Niklas Luhmann et al., Beobachter: 
Konvergenz der Erkenntnistheorien? (Munich, 1990).
27.  Anthony Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity (Stanford, 1990), 15–16 
(emphasis in original).
28.  Ibid., 36ff.
29.  And to make the difference still clearer, it is not necessary to treat them as 
dependent elements of the distinction between utterance and information.
30.  See Reinhart Koselleck, “Zur historisch-politischen Semantik asymme­
trischer Gegenbegriffe,” in id., Vergangene Zukunft: Zur Semantik geschichtlicher 
Zeiten (Frankfurt, 1979), 211–259.
31.  See, e.g., Alfred Kuhn, The Logic of Social Systems: A Unified, Deductive, 
­System-Based Approach to Social Science (San Francisco, 1974), 154: “Culture is 
communicated learned patterns.” It can then involve television sets, piercing, 
cursing, nails, the treatment of women, and everything else that comes about only 
through deviation amplification or can be explained only in such terms in a cul­
ture. With this concept of culture, a distinction has to be made between culture 
and cultivation [Kultur und Kultiviertheit]. The treatment of women is always cul­
ture but not always cultivated.
32.  And when these problems are revealed, we find comments of the sort: “Le 
propre d’une culture, c’est de n’être pas identique à elle-même” (Jacques Derrida, 
“L’autre cap: Mémoires, réponses, responsabilités,” Liber (Le Monde) 5 (October 
1990): 11–13 (11).
33.  This need not exclude self-descriptions from stylizing themselves as knowl­
edge of the “essence,” the “nature,” the “truth” of the matter; but in second-order 
observation, this can be registered only as peculiarity of a certain sort of self-de­
scription. We shall be coming back to this when we look at old European world 
and societal semantics.
34.  Novalis, Philosophische Studien, 1795/96, in id., Werke, Tagebücher und Briefe 

    Notes to Chapter 5
Friedrich von Hardenbergs, ed. Hans-Joachim Mähl and Richard Samuel (Darm­
stadt, 1978), 2: 11.
35.  Quentin Skinner criticizes the usual treatment of language and social re­
ality as discrete spheres in “Language and Political Change,” in Political Innova­
tion and Conceptual Change, ed. Terence Ball, James Farr, and Russell L. Hanson 
(Cambridge, 1989), 6–23 (21–22).
36.  “Ideologies are implicated in and part of the very reality that they map,” 
as Jennifer Daryl Slack observes in The Ideology of the Information Age, ed. id. and 
Fred Fejes (Norwood, NJ, 1987), 2.
37.  See Horst Firsching, “Die Sakralisierung der Gesellschaft: Emile Dur­
kheims Soziologie der ‘Moral’ und der ‘Religion’ in der ideenpolitischen Ausein­
andersetzung der Dritten Republik,” in Religionssoziologie um 1900, ed. Volkhard 
Krech and Hartmann Tyrell (Würzburg, 1995), 159–193. The interpretation given 
above in the text would not allow us, however, to speak of the “sacralization of so­
ciety.” Durkheim is concerned rather to redescribe societies grounded in religion 
on the basis of the manifest/latent schema.
38.  The proof: description requires no more than a sentence. But society is 
never a sentence.
39.  See Jan Assmann, “Stein und Zeit: Das ‘monumentale’ Gedächtnis der 
altägyptischen Kulture,” in Kultur und Gedächtnis, ed. id. and Tonio Hölscher 
(Frankfurt, 1988), 87–114.
40.  In the case of consciousness systems, this view has been a topic in litera­
ture at least since Montaigne. (Other early modern writers are less well known in 
this respect; but see, e.g., John Donne, “The Progress of the Soul” [1612], in id., 
The Complete English Poems [Harmondsworth, UK, 1982], 76ff.) It is also appar­
ent that this problematization of self-knowledge breaks with the old view that at­
tributes self-knowledge to one’s own “nature” and thus to the state of perfection, 
however corrupted by sin. However, it seems that this step from nature to intrans­
parency was never taken for the self-observation of the societal system, probably 
because a culture of reflection initiated by human beings had always seen society 
as something external (at best internalizable). From a systems-theoretical point of 
view, however, the parallel between the self-observation problems in the two cases 
(despite the differences in modes of operation) is striking.
41.  See Anthony Wilden, System and Structure: Essays in Communication and 
Exchange (2nd ed., London, 1980), 155ff. However, it is questionable whether 
the concept of observation presented in the text ought to be followed by which 
Wilden treats the analog as a special type of difference, indeed, “the domain of 
difference” (ibid.,74).
42.  For the “census-tax-conscription” systems of older ruling bureaucracies, 
see Stanley Diamond, “The Rule of Law Versus the Order of Custom,” in The Rule 
of Law, ed. Robert P. Wolff (New York, 1971), 115–144 (albeit with a very one-sided 
selection of evidence from the West African kingdoms famous for this structure). 

Notes to Chapter 5    
See also Gerd Spittler, “Probleme bei der Durchsetzung sozialer Normen,” Jahr­
buch für Rechtssoziologie und Rechtstheorie 1 (1970): 203–225; id., Herrschaft über 
Bauern (Frankfurt, 1978); Wolfram Eberhard, Conquerors and Rulers: Social Forces 
in Medieval China (2nd ed., Leiden, 1965); Robert Eric Frykenberg, “Traditional 
Processes of Power in South India: An Historical Analysis of Local Influences,” in 
State and Society: A Reader in Comparative Political Sociology, ed. Reinhard Bendix 
(Boston, 1968), 107–125.
43.  See Foerster, Observing Systems (cited n. 26 above), esp. 273ff.
44.  On such “antonym substitution,” see Stephen Holmes, “Poesie der Indif­
ferenz,” in Theorie als Passion, ed. Dirk Baecker et al. (Frankfurt, 1987), 15–45; id., 
“The Permanent Structure of Antiliberal Thought,” in Liberalism and the Moral 
Life, ed. Nancy Rosenblum (Cambridge, MA, 1989), 227–253; id., The Anatomy of 
Antiliberalism (Cambridge, MA, 1993).
45.  In this sense, Mary Hesse, Models and Analogies in Science (Notre Dame, 
IN, 1966), 157ff., speaks of “redescription” and assigns this concept to the discus­
sion on the use of metaphor in theoretical explanations. There are similar analy­
ses to be found in a wide range of contexts, e.g., in the political theory of reform 
movements in Giovan Francesco Lanzara, Capacità negativa: Competenza proget­
tuale e modelli di interventi nelle organizzazioni (Bologna, 1993), esp. 227ff., and 
for art theory in Michael Baldwin, Charles Harrison, and Mel Ramsden, “On 
Conceptual Art and Painting and Speaking and Seeing: Three Corrected Tran­
scripts,” Art-Language, n.s., 1 (1994): 30–69.
46.  For India even at the end of the nineteenth century, see Ananda F. Wood, 
Knowledge Before Printing and After: The Indian Tradition in Changing Kerala 
(Delhi, 1985).
47.  This therefore disregards not only the impressive cosmographies of China, 
India, and the ancient Orient, but also the Jewish tradition, which because of the 
primacy it gives to God/human communication is much closer to the theoretical ac­
count given in this book than the old European tradition. “For the Greeks, follow­
ing Aristotle, things are not exhausted by discourse; for the Rabbis, discourse is not 
exhausted by things,” Susan A. Handelman writes, for example (The Slayers of Moses: 
The Emergence of Rabbinic Thought in Modern Literary Theory [Albany, NY, 1982], 8).
48.  On critique of this precondition and on the demand for a structurally 
more diverse logic, see Gotthard Günther, esp. in Beiträge (cited n. 9 above).
49.  This is not true in all cases, however, notably not in cases de futuris contin­
gentibus. Those with respect to being or nonbeing must be treated as still unde­
cided. But then logic can help itself via the meta-coding “already decided/not yet 
decided,” and once again requires the law of the excluded middle for this.
50.  A great deal of material on the paradox, thoroughly exploited particularly 
in the sixteenth century, of the “Nothing” that is something, but simply “noth­
ing,” is to be found in Rosalie Colie, Paradoxia epidemica: The Renaissance Tradi­
tion of Paradox (Princeton, NJ, 1966), esp. 219ff.

    Notes to Chapter 5
51.  “Non est nihil neque non est, neque est et non est.” For many similar pas­
sages, see Nicholas of Cusa, De deo abscondito, in Nicolaus Cusanus, Philosophisch-
theologische Schriften, vol. 1 (Vienna, 1964), 299–309 (306).
52.   Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.3.
53.  See Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 6 (Basel, 1984), s.v. Ontolo­
gie, cols. 1189–1200.
54.  Cf. the system/environment schema, where the observer can be both in­
ternal and external.
55.  On critique of this distinction triggered by the thing, and thus on criti­
cism of the supplement function of methodology, see Martin Heidegger, Die Frage 
nach dem Ding: Zu Kants Lehre von den transzendentalen Grundsätzen (Tübingen, 
1962), id., Gesamtausgabe, vol. 41 (Frankfurt, 1984). Besides a philosophical-the­
oretical critique of thing metaphysics and independently of it, one now has to 
expect changes provoked by the use of computers. They no longer require thing-­
reference because they provide for variable access to “virtual reality” with extremely 
restricted perception.
56.  See Louis Dumont, Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implica­
tions (London, 1970); id., Essais sur l’individualism (Paris, 1983).
57.  Hegel, Physikvorlesung IV,10, in id., Enzyklopädie der philosophischen Wis­
senschaften im Grundrisse [1817], § 258.
58.  “Ordo tempus non exigat, fatum exigat,” as we read, e.g., in Hieronymus 
Cardanus (Girolamo Cardano), “De uno liber,” in id., Opera omnia (Lyon, 1663), 
1: 277–283 (278).
59.  See Jacques Derrida, “Ousia et grammè: Note sur une note de Sein und 
Zeit,” in id., Marges de la philosophie (Paris, 1972), 31–78.
60.  See the thoughts on the subject in Leonardo da Vinci, Notebooks, trans. 
Edward MacCurdy (1938; New York,1954), 73–74, with the following (paradoxi­
cal) taking back of such nothing: “In the presence of nature nothingness is not 
found.”
61.  See only Hans Friedrich Fulda, “Ontologie nach Kant und Hegel,” in 
Metaphysik nach Kant? (Stuttgarter Hegel-Kongress 1987), ed. Dieter Henrich and 
Rolf-Peter Horstmann (Stuttgart, 1988), 44–82.
62.  See Ernst Kapp, Der Ursprung der Logik bei den Griechen (Göttingen, 
1965). On the development of logic from a “political” (urban) debate culture, see 
also Geoffrey E. R. Lloyd, Magic, Reason and Experience: Studies in the Origin and 
Development of Greek Science (Cambridge, 1979), esp. 246ff.
63.  Plato Sophist 253d–e is the reference normally given. Technē is deliber­
ately introduced (253a), incidentally with the paradox-avoidance precept that one 
should avoid saying that the same species is another and another is the same (253d: 
tauton/heteron).
64.  See, in detail, Dieter Nörr, Divisio und Partitio: Bemerkungen zur römischen 
Rechtsquellenlehre und zur antiken Wissenschaftstheorie (Berlin, 1972). It should be 

Notes to Chapter 5    
noted that Roman jurisprudence had been one of the most outstanding fields in 
which the genus technique proved its worth. See also Aldo Schiavone, Nascita 
della giurisprudenza: Cultura aristocratica e pensiero giuridico nella Roma tardo-re­
pubblicana (Bari, 1976), esp. 92, 94ff.
65.  See Lloyd, Magic, Reason and Experience (cited n. 62 above); id., Science, 
Folklore and Ideology: Studies in the Life Sciences in Ancient Greece (Cambridge, 
1983).
66.  In Christian Wolff, Psychologia rationalis [Frankfurt, 1734], § 741, we read 
“Persona dicitur ens, quod memoria sui conservat” (quoted from a manuscript by 
Peter Fuchs).
67.  See the clever distribution of this process in Ortensio Lando, Paradossi, cioè, 
sententie fuori del commun parere . . . (Venice, 1544), and id., Confutatione del libro 
de Paradossi nuovamente composta, et in tre orationi distinta (n.p. [Venice?], 1545).
68.  See A. E. Malloch, “The Technique and Function of the Renaissance Para­
dox,” Studies in Philology 53 (1956): 191–203; Colie, Paradoxia epidemica (cited n. 
50 above); Michael McCanles, “Paradox in Donne,” Studies in the Renaissance 14 
(1967): 266–287; F. Walter Lupi, “Ars perplexitatis: Etica e retorica del discorso 
paradossale,” in Figure del paradosso, ed. Rino Genovese (Naples, 1992), 29–59.
69.  Kant, Kritik der Urteilskraft [Critique of the Power of Judgement, cited n. 10 
above], Introduction, 6.
70.  See Kurt Röttgers, “Der Ursprung der Prozeßidee aus dem Geiste der 
Chemie,” Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte 27 (1983): 93–157.
71.  On Greek (and older) origins, see Geoffrey E. R. Lloyd, Polarity and Anal­
ogy: Two Types of Argumentation in Early Greek Thought (Cambridge, 1966).
72.  Early versions of this historical explanation are to be found in jurispru­
dence, but in this field were concerned precisely with a technical conceptuality 
guided by experience, memory, and rational judgment. See esp. Matthew Hale, 
The History of the Common Law of England (1713; 3rd ed., Chicago, 1971). See also 
“Reflection by the Lrd. Cheife Justice Hale on Mr. Hobbes. His Dialogue of the 
Lawe,” in William Holdsworth, A History of English Law (3rd ed., 1945; repr., Lon­
don, 1966), vol. 5, app. 3, 500–513. A corresponding history of nature took another 
hundred years to arrive.
73.  See the renaissance speculation of Cardanus, “De uno liber” (cited n. 58 
above). And see also nn. 76 and 77 below.
74.  See Richard Newbold Adams, Energy and Structure: A Theory of Social 
Power (Austin, 1975), 281ff.
75.  On the equal status of certain possibilities (including internal/external and 
is/is not), see Philip G. Herbst, Alternatives to Hierarchies (Leiden, 1976), 88–89.
76.  However, this, too, can happen. See, e.g., Cardanus, “De uno liber” (cited 
n. 58 above), 277–283.
77.  See, e.g., Cardanus’s awareness of an option, ibid., 279: “non ergo tendunt 
in unum, sed ab uno procedunt [therefore they do not tend toward one but pro­

    Notes to Chapter 5
ceed from one],” and the explanation that if one starts with the parts, aberration 
(aberratio) results.
78.  Justinian, Corpus juris civilis, Digests 1.1.10.1 (iustitia est constans et per­
petura voluntas ius suum cuique distribuendi) in the Glossa ordinaria (Irnerius) 
is thus interpreted with respect to its premises. See Gaines Post, Studies in Medi­
eval Legal Thought: Public Law and the State, 1100–1322 (Princeton, NJ, 1964), 540, 
with commentary.
79.  Despite reservations about “first time” claims, Giambattista Vico (1668–
1744) was arguably the first to pose this question.
80.  See M.-M. Davy, Essai sur la symbolique romane: XII siècle (Paris, 1955), 
24ff.
81.  For greater detail, see Herbert Grabes, Speculum, Mirror und Looking Glass: 
Kontinuität und Originalität der Spiegelmetapher in den Buchtiteln des Mittelalters 
und der englischen Literatur des 13. bis 17. Jahrhunderts (Tübingen, 1973). See also 
Gustav Friedrich Hartlaub, Zauber des Spiegels: Geschichte und Bedeutung des Spie­
gels in der Kunst (Munich,1951). In a long history of decline, the mirror metaphor 
served first as vanitas symbol (which preseupposed that ornatum/ornato was no 
longer used in the sense of older rhetoric emphasizing the essential but only as or­
nament), and finally as mere compensation for internal controls no longer func­
tioning: “For people of the world, the mirror is now the only conscience that 
reproaches them for their errors,” according to Jean Paul, “Die unsichtbare Loge,” 
in id., Werke, vol. 1 (Munich, 1960), 7–469 (178).
82.  On the history of the concept, see Anton-Hermann Chroust, “The Cor­
porate Idea and the Body Politics in the Middle Ages,” Review of Politics 9 (1947): 
433–452; Brian Tierney, Foundations of the Conciliar Theory: The Contributions of 
the Medieval Canonist from Gratian to the Great Schism (Cambridge, 1955); Ernst 
H. Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies: A Study in Medieval Political Theology 
(Princeton, NJ, 1957); Pierre Michaud-Quantin, Universitas: Expressions du mou­
vement communautaire dans le Moyen Age latin (Paris, 1970).
83.  John of Salisbury (Ioannis Saresberiensis), Policratici. . . .  libri VIII, ed. 
Clement C. J Webb (London, 1900; repr., Frankfurt, 1965).
84.  Cf., e.g., this distinction ignis/civiliter vivere in Aegidius Romanus [Giles 
of Rome, archbishop of Bourges], De regimine principum (1277–1279; Rome, 
1607; repr., Aalen, 1967), 406.
85.  See Cardano, “De uno liber” (cited n. 58 above), 279: “Praeterea est anima 
in nobis ut in mundo: at anima in mundo nullibi est, sed perpetua est & immor­
talis: talis igitur in nobis.”
86.  Aristotle Politics 1254a 28–31. Marius Salamonius, De principatu (1544; 
Milan, 1955), 26.
87.  See, e.g., Henry Peacham, The Compleat Gentleman, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, 
1627), 1ff. (p. 2: “Nobilitie then is nothing else than a certaine eminency, or notice 
taken of some above the rest, for some act performed. . . .  More particularly, No­

Notes to Chapter 5    
bilitie is the Honour of blood in a Race of lineage conferred formerly upon some 
or more of that family”).
88.  Aristotle De generatione animalium II 1.713b18.
89.  This argument (which nowadays we would describe as male-centric) is fre­
quent. See, e.g., Antoine de Nervèze, Œuvres morales (Paris, 1605), fol. 63v.
90.  Following Alexander von Hales, quoted by Wolf Hübener in Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 6 (Stuttgart, 1984), col. 1263, s.v. Ordnung.
91.  See Antony Black, Monarchy and Community: Political Issues in the Later Con­
ciliar Controversy 1430–1450 (Cambridge, 1970). On the history of the representation 
concept in general, see Hasso Hofmann, Repräsentation: Wort- und Begriffsgeschichte 
von der Antike bis ins 19. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 1974). On the range of the medieval 
discussion, see esp. Der Begriff der Repraesentatio im Mittelalter: Stellvertretung, Sym­
bol, Zeichen, Bild, ed. Albert Zimmermann (Berlin, 1971).
92.  See Michaud-Quantin, Universitas (cited n. 82 above).
93.  Marsilius of Padua, Defensor pacis [Defender of the Peace] (Latin-German 
ed., Darmstadt, 1958).
94.  In the passage in Salamonius, De principatu, cited in n. 86 above, the 
philosopher leaves resolution of the paradox (which here finds expression in the 
prince) to the theologian, claiming for himself only the argumentatio de parte ad 
partem [argument from part to part] and not that de toto ad seipsum [from whole 
to itself]. The source for this distinction is likely to be Aristotle’s Prior Analytics 
69a13–15. However, the proposition from part to part is compared with the infer­
ence from whole to part or from part to whole, and not the (theologically inspired) 
inference from whole to itself.
95.  This paraphrases Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae I, q. 65 a. 2 (Turin, 
1952), 1: 319.
96.  Here (and especially in Gracián) we find the beginnings of the thesis of the 
reflexive superiority of parts over the whole, subsequently developed in the twen­
tieth century.
97.  On the history of the idea, see n. 320 below.
98.  See Johannes Althusius, Politica methodice digesta (1614; Cambridge, MA, 
1932), Cap. 5 n. 10, p. 39. See also Cap. 9 n. 5, p. 88. However, read with reference 
to our question, the text is not unambiguous; and its main intention appears to 
have been to exclude direct participation (justified, as it were by the right of being) 
by the individual in political affairs.
99.  On the further development through theories of consensus, integration, 
and legitimation, see Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.
100.  See § 13 below.
101.  Novalis, Philosophische Studien, in id., Werke (cited n. 34 above), 2: 31.
102.  See, e.g., Karl Wilhelm Ferdinand Solger, Vorlesungen über Ästhetik, ed. 
Karl Wilhelm Ludwig Heyse (Leipzig, 1829; repr. Darmstadt, 1973), 52: “It is 
therefore clear that if there is beauty, the reason must lie in a region where the en­

    Notes to Chapter 5
tire relationship of exchange between manifold and simple no longer applies. . . . 
This is the point of higher self-awareness, and this unity of cognition we call idea.” 
Solger incidentally also abstracts from time, since unity must be presupposed if it 
is to be result.
103.  It is noteworthy that logicians see this foundational relation conversely and 
consider that one can distinguish only on the basis of a negation. We, in contrast, 
can see that this is an important case of the evolution of an autopoietic system. Dis­
tinguishing was in use long before language was coded and before logic developed. 
Only thus could logic evolve. But the system of logic then reverses the founding re­
lation, thus gaining autonomous access to the world that allows everything, includ­
ing distinguishing, to be described in terms of bivalent logic. This incidentally also 
explains why negation has been built into the premises of all classical and modern 
systems of logic. And we know moreover that with this premise, no consistent self-
justification of logic can succeed. Alternatively, one must resort to a logic of lan­
guage, like Wittgenstein, or of mathematical calculus, like Spencer-Brown.
104.  See the opening sentences of the Nicomachean Ethics.
105.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.9.
106.  After a careful review of contemporary physics publications, Jean Paul rea­
sons, e.g., “that there must in the end be a finest element, the ultimate one, that en­
compasses all other elements and does not require them” (id., “Mutmaßungen über 
einige Wunder des organischen Magnetismus” [Conjectures on Some Wonders of 
Animal Magnetism], in Jean Pauls Werke [Stuttgart, 1924], 2: 344–345; trans. R.B.).
107.  See only The Holographic Paradigm and Other Paradoxes, ed. Ken Wilber 
(Boulder, CO, 1982), or Pablo Navarro, El hologramma social: Una ontología de la 
socialidad humana (Madrid, 1994).
108.  See Roland Robertson, Globalization: Social Theory and Global Culture 
(London, 1992), esp. 97ff. and 131: “Universalism is needed to grasp particularism 
itself.” See also chap. 4.12 above.
109.  See Peter Spahn, “Oikos und Polis: Beobachtungen zum Prozeß der 
Polisbildung bei Hesiod, Solon und Aischylos,” Historische Zeitschrift 231 (1980): 
529–564.
110.  For history of the concepts, see Manfred Riedel, “Gesellschaft, Bürgerliche,” 
in Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe: Historisches Lexikon zur politisch-sozialen Sprache in 
Deutschland, ed. Reinhart Koselleck et al. (Stuttgart, 1972–), vol. 2 (1975), 719–800.
111.  See, e.g., Solidarität, ed. Giuseppe Orsi et al. (Frankfurt, 1995).
112.  Cicero De officiis 1.16 (Latin-Italian ed., Bologna, 1987), p. 64: “eius 
(= ­societas) autem vinculum est ratio et oratio.”
113.  See Lloyd, Science, Folklore and Ideology (cited n. 65 above).
114.  This original humanism is to be distinguished from the new versions that 
sought to address the problems of modern society around 1800, which came to 
be known as “neo-humanism” a century or so later. This new version was so strik­
ingly new that Foucault could even claim that the human being had been in­

Notes to Chapter 5    
vented only in the second half of the eighteenth century. At any rate, the human 
being was now no longer society but was either an ideal held up for approxima­
tion or an artifact. Helvétius writes, e.g.: “Né sans idée et sans vertu tout jusqu’à 
l’humanité est dans l’homme une acquisition [Born without ideas and without 
virtue, everything in man, including his humanity, is an acquisition]” (Claude-
Adrien Helvétius, De l’esprit, discourse 3, chap. 7, note b, in id., Œuvres complètes 
[1758; London, 1776], 103).
115.  See Davy, Essai (cited n. 80 above), esp. 90ff.
116.  See Marian Kurdziałek, “Der Mensch als Abbild des Kosmos,” in Begriff 
der Repraesentatio, ed. Zimmermann (cited n. 91 above), 35–75.
117.  Philip Sidney, The Defense of Poesy (1595; Lincoln, NE, 1970), 159 (empha­
sis added by N.L.).
118.  Aristotle Politics 1254a36–37.
119.  “Est enim hic ordo non solum rationalis, sed etiam naturalis. Natura enim 
semper ex imperfecto ad perfectum procedit,” Aegidius Romanus writes in De 
regimine principum (cited n. 84 above), 5.
120.  See the influential treatment of this relationship between ethics and pol­
itics in Joachim Ritter, Metaphysik und Politik: Studien zu Aristoteles und Hegel 
(Frankfurt, 1969).
121.  For many see Poggius Florentinus (Giovanni Francesco Poggio Braccio­
lini), De nobilitate (1440), in id., Opera (Basel, 1538), 64–87: “Animus facit nobi­
lem qui ex quacunque conditione supra fortunam licet exurgere” (80). But what 
then also counted was evocation of the ancestors, who were to be emulated (81). 
See also Cristoforo Landino, De vera nobilitate (ca. 1490; Florence, 1970). In many 
other tracts in dialogue form, the weighting of birth and ethos was left open.
122.  [René Girard, La violence et le sacré (Paris, 1972), 323: “les interdits ont une 
fonction primordiale; ils réservent au cœur des communautés humaines une zone 
protégée.”] It should, however, be noted that the money economy and the con­
comitant ostentatious luxury made it difficult the uphold this ethos-based distinc­
tion. It would be conspicuous if the king preferred a bourgeois host when visiting 
a city (as in a case from Kraków). And many a noble family had to retire to the 
country because in the city they were unable to live in the fashion commensurate 
with their status. It was as if the bourgeoisie had invented the noble ideal of “mag­
nificence” to entice the nobility onto the thin ice of indebtedness.
123.  See Quentin Skinner, The Foundations of Modern Political Thought, vol. 1 
(Cambridge, 1978), 28ff.
124.  See, e.g., O. B. Hardison, The Enduring Monument: A Study of the Idea of 
Praise in Renaissance Literary Theory and Practice (Chapel Hill, NC, 1962); John W. 
O’Malley, Praise and Blame in Renaissance Rome: Rhetoric, Doctrine, and Reform in 
the Sacred Orators of the Papal Court, c. 1450–1521 (Durham, NC, 1979).
125.  On this Italian development, see Claudio Donati, L’idea della nobiltà in 
Italia: Secoli XIV–XVIII (Rome, 1988).

    Notes to Chapter 5
126.  See, e.g., Ben Jonson, “To Kenelm, John, George,” in id., The Complete 
Poems, ed. George Parfitt (New Haven, CT, 1975), 240.
127.  See Francesco de’Vieri, Il primo libro della nobiltà (Florence, 1574), in­
cluding the vita activa/vita contemplativa distinction in the schema of distinction 
(p. 42). And thus it was claimed, allegedly in one dimension: “Alcune persone 
sono più eccellenti, & più nobili, che commandono, ò almeno sono degne di 
commandare, & indirizzare gl’altri nell opere virtuose”—precisely because the vir­
tuous life is the natural goal of all human beings.
128.  See Ellery Schalk, From Valor to Pedigree: Ideas of Nobility in France in the 
Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries (Princeton, NJ, 1986).
129.  See Otto Gerhard Oexle, “Die funktionale Dreiteilung als Deutungss­
chema der sozialen Wirklichkeit in der ständischen Gesellschaft des Mittelalters,” in 
Ständische Gesellschaft und soziale Mobilität, ed. Winfried Schulze, 19–51 (45). Loy­
seau [1564–1627] is clearly reacting to the growing heterogeneity of the non-noble 
stratum of society that can no longer be accurately be described in terms of (agricul­
tural) labor and production. On the odd continuity of agricultural production as a 
characteristic of the third estate up to the French Revolution, see Ottavia Niccoli, 
I sacerdoti, i guerrieri, i contadini: Storia di un imagine della società (Turin, 1979).
130.  Charles Loyseau, Traicté des ordres et simples dignitez (2nd ed., Paris, 1613), 92.
131.  On this honor/dueling-based homogenization of nobility semantics, 
which was not to be tied to the conditions and criteria of the territorial state, see 
Donati, Idea di nobiltà, 93ff. On the broader embedding of the concept in the 
contemporary literature, see, e.g., Ruth Kelso, The Doctrine of the English Gentle­
man in the Sixteenth Century (Urbana, IL, 1929), 96ff.; Arlette Jouanna, “La notion 
d’honneur au XVIème siècle,” Revue d’histoire moderne et contemporaine 15 (1968): 
597–623: id., L’idée de race en France au XVIe siècle et au début du XVIIe (1975; 2nd 
ed., 2 vols., Montpellier, 1981), 1: 269ff.
132.  See p. 82 above.
133.  See Werner Danckert, Unehrliche Leute: Die verfemten Berufe (Bern, 1963).
134.  See also Kelso, Doctrine (cited n. 131 above), 99–100: questions of honor 
were concerned neither with the divine order in accordance with God’s will nor 
with a just political order for societal life, but with a reality sui generis. For the 
rest, contemporary statements remain ambivalent. Morality taught that virtue was 
to be practiced for its own sake and not in the pursuit of reputation, but Francis 
Markham tells us in The Booke of Honour, or, Five Decads of Epistles of Honour (Lon­
don, 1625) that the “good opinion of the world” provides guidance and security, 
and that without it one would as lost as if adrift on the high seas (10).
135.  In what would now perhaps be considered a peculiar line of argument, 
this was justified on the grounds that honor was not an external good that one 
could waive; and precisely this made honor vulnerable to disrespect. See, e.g., 
Fabio Albergati, Del modo di ridurre a pace le inimicitie private (Bergamo, 1587), 
57ff., where this is at least seen as a problem and discussed.

Notes to Chapter 5    
136.  For a brief overview, see Norbert Conrads, “Tradition und Modernität im 
adeligen Bildungsprogramm der Frühen Neuzeit,” in Ständische Gesellschaft, ed. 
Schulze, 389–403.
137.  See Rudolf Stichweh, Der frühmoderne Staat und die europäische Universität: 
Zur Interaktion von Politik und Erziehungssystem im Prozeß ihrer Ausdifferenzierung 
(16.18. Jahrhundert) (Frankfurt, 1991), esp. 261ff.
138.  For Italian variants, see Pompeo Rocchi, Il gentilhuomo (Lucca, 1568), esp. 
fol. 26, where, explicitly turning against prevailing opinion, independence from 
birth and estate is stressed; and esp. Bernardino Pino da Cagli, Del galant’huomo 
overo dell’ huomo prudente, et discreto (Venice, 1604), who distinguishes between 
the moral virtuoso and the communication virtuoso (successor models, as it were, 
to ethics and rhetoric), and finds that nobility alone suffices for neither.
139.  Jacques Esprit, La fausseté des vertus humaines, 2 vols. (Paris, 1678), and, 
less systematically, La Rochefoucauld.
140.  Anselm of Canterbury, De casu diaboli, in id., Opera omnia, vol. 1 (Seckau, 
1938; repr., Stuttgart, 1968), 233–272.
141.  See Alois Hahn, “Zur Soziologie der Beichte und anderer Formen institu­
tionalisierter Bekenntnisse: Selbstthematisierung und Zivilisationsprozeß,” Kölner 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 34 (1982): 408–434.
142.  In the light of these facts, the usual thesis of retrogression, of “secular­
ization” in the sense of a de-Christianization since the “Christian” Middle Ages, 
needs profound correction.
143.  Jean Delumeau, Le péché et la peur: La culpabilisation en Occident (XIIIe–
XVIIIe siècles) (Paris, 1983); Peter-Michael Spangenberg, Maria ist immer und über­
all: Die Alltagswelten des spätmittelalterlichen Mirakels (Frankfurt, 1987).
144.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Ethik als Reflexionstheorie der Moral,” in id., 
Gesellschaftsstruktur, vol. 3 (1989), 358–447.
145.  See Peter Fuchs, “Vaterland, Patriotismus und Moral—Zur Semantik 
gesellschaftlicher Einheit,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 20 (1991): 89–103; id., Die 
Erreichbarkeit der Gesellschaft: Zur Konstruktion und Imagination gesellschaftlicher 
Einheit (Frankfurt, 1992), 144ff.
146.  Jean Paul, Vorschule der Ästhetik, in id., Werke, vol. 5 (Munich, 1963), 
340–341. He continues: “Its high school is the court, which has to unfold and re­
fine social life, for which it is not recreation but purpose and continuing life, since 
it has, so to speak, to bring the greatest oppositions of power and subordination, 
of respect for oneself and others into a friendly equilibrium of agreeable social 
appearances.”
147.  See, e.g., Lateinische Rechtsregeln und Rechtssprichwörter, ed. Detlef Liebs, 
5th ed. (Munich, 1991), or on study materials of the Salerno school of medicine, 
The School of Salernum: Regimen sanitatis Salerni: The English Version of Sir John 
Harington (1607; repr., Salerno, 1959).
148.  Blaise Pascal, “De l’esprit géométrique et de l’art de persuader,” in id., 

    Notes to Chapter 5
Œuvres (Pléiade ed., Paris, 1950), 362: “Car il est évident que les premiers termes 
qu’on voudrait définir, en supposeraient de précédents pour servir à leur explica­
tion, et que de même les premières propositions qu’on voudrait prouver en sup­
poseraient d’autres qui les précédassent.”
149.  Ibid., with reference to the (albeit limited) knowledge of geometry: “Mais 
il ne s’ensuit pas de là qu’on doive abandonner toute sorte d’ordre.”
150.  See Reinhart Koselleck, “Zur historisch-politischen Semantik asymme­
trischer Gegenbegriffe,” in Positionen der Negativität, ed. Harald Weinrich (Mu­
nich, 1975), 65–104.
151.  On the distinction between civilization and wilderness in early Mesopota­
mia, see Gerdien Jonker, The Topography of Remembrance: The Dead, Tradition and 
Collective Memory in Mesopotamia (Leiden, 1995), esp. 38ff.
152.  Montaigne, “Des cannibales,” in id., Essais (Pléiade ed., Paris, 1950), 239ff.
153.  In his Vienna lectures, Husserl asserted that all other groups of human be­
ings would Europeanize in their unbroken will to intellectual survival, “whereas 
we, if we understand ourselves rightly, would, for example, never indianize our­
selves” (Edmund Husserl, “Die Krisis des europäischen Menschentums und die 
Philosophie,” in Husserliana: Gesammelte Werke, vol. 6: Die Krisis der europäischen 
Wissenschaften und die Transzendentale Phänomenologie [The Hague, 1954], 320).
154.  More detail in Niklas Luhmann, “Kultur als historischer Begriff,” in id., 
Gesellschaftsstruktur, vol. 4 (1995), 31–54.
155.  See only Schiller’s Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer 
Reihe von Briefen [Letters on the Aesthetic Education of Man] and his essay “On 
Naïve and Sentimental Poetry.”
156.  To be able to be a “person,” as Baltasar Gracián would put it. See esp. the 
late work El criticón (1651–1657), trans. as The Critick by Sir Paul Rycaut (London, 
1681), which asserts “that everything in this life takes place in image, even imagi­
nation” and recommends in consequence that one “see, hear, keep silent” (Ger­
man trans., Criticón, oder: Über die allgemeinen Laster des Menschen [Hamburg, 
1957], 108, 49).
157.  See, lacking conceptual clarity, Günther Dux, Geschlecht und Gesellschaft. 
Warum wir lieben: Die romantische Liebe nach dem Verlust der Welt (Frankfurt, 1994).
158.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, 195ff.
159.  On the replacement of a ragione signorile by knowledge relating specifi­
cally to religion, law, and politics in the time of Quintus Mutius Scaevola, see Aldo 
Schiavone, Nascita della giurisprudenza: Cultura aristocratica e pensiero giuridico 
nelle Roma tardo-republicana (Bari, 1976).
160.  See Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France (1791; Every­
man’s Library, London, 1910).
161.  See, from the perspective of the nineteenth century, describing “conser­
vatism” as an ideology, Karl Mannheim, Konservatismus: Ein Beitrag zur Soziologie 
des Wissens (Frankfurt, 1984).

Notes to Chapter 5    
162.  See Gerald J. Postema, Bentham and the Common Law Tradition (Oxford, 
1986), esp. 3–80 on Coke and Hale. For the eighteenth century, see David Lieber­
man, The Province of Legislation Determined: Legal Theory in Eighteenth-Century 
England (Cambridge, 1989).
163.  One example: Nicolas Remond Des Cours, La véritable politique des 
personnes de qualité (Paris, 1692). In Julius Bernhard von Rohr, Einleitung zur 
­Ceremoniel-Wissenschaft der Privat-Personen (Berlin, 1728), we find, leaving aside 
all corporative references, a still further generalized abstraction: “Politica—
Klugheit zu leben [life wisdom],” in accordance with the schema of benefits and 
harms, as the context shows.
164.  John G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought 
and the Atlantic Republican Tradition (Princeton, NJ, 1975), refers to this appositely 
as “civic humanism.” On the ensuing discussion, see also Wealth and Virtue: The 
Shaping of Political Economy in the Scottish Enlightenment, ed. Istvan Hont and Mi­
chael Ignatieff (Cambridge, 1983).
165.  See, e.g., Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau, La science ou Les droits 
et les devoirs de l’homme (Paris 1774), 76: “Je vois que la société n’est qu’un amas 
d’achats et de ventes, d’échanges et de rapports des droits et de devoirs.”
166.  See, e.g., the agenda of Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, ed. Koselleck et al. 
(cited n. 110 above).
167.  This neither presupposes that the reflection theories of functional sys­
tems connect up in the science system nor excludes the possibility of their doing 
so, which may be the case to a greater or smaller degree. In any case, scientific 
assessment would make use of recursions other than those required for the self-­
description function of a functional system.
168.  Richelieu’s contemporary Jean-Louis Guez de Balzac described the aris­
tocracy accordingly: “Ils manquent point de fidélité, pourveu qu’on se fie en eux. 
Ils ne desservent point, mais ils veulent servir à leur mode. Ils veulent estre Ar­
bitres de leur devoir, et de leur obéissance” (Œuvres [Paris, 1665], 2: 170).
169.  See Michael Stolleis, Arcana imperii und Ratio status: Bemerkungen zur 
politischen Theorie des frühen 17. Jahrhunderts (Göttingen, 1980); id., Staat und 
Staatsräson in der frühen Neuzeit: Beiträge zur Geschichte des öffentlichen Rechts 
(Frankfurt, 1990); Niklas Luhmann, “Staat und Staatsräson im Übergang von 
traditionaler Herrschaft zu moderner Politik,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik, vol. 3 (Frankfurt, 1989), 65–148.
170.  This “paradox” of a contract that established legal commitments has been 
much discussed. It should be noted above all that authority was based on autho­
rization according to Hobbes (Leviathan 2.17), and thus not on nature or on spe­
cial qualities of reason.
171.  On the long parallel existence of the two terminologies, see Horst Dreit­
zel, Protestantischer Aristotelismus und absoluter Staat (Wiesbaden, 1970), 336ff. and 
id., “Grundrechtskonzeptionen in der protestantischen Rechts- und Staatslehre im 

    Notes to Chapter 5
Zeitalter der Glaubenskämpfe,” in Grund- und Freiheitsrechte von der ständischen 
zur spätbürgerlichen Gesellschaft, ed. Günter Birtsch (Göttingen, 1987), 180–214 
(200ff.).
172.  See Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay, The Federalist Pa­
pers (1787–1788; New York, 1961), esp. no. 10.
173.  See Benjamin Nelson, “Die Anfänge der modernen Revolution in Wis­
senschaft und Philosophie: Fiktionalismus, Probabilismus, Fideismus und 
katholisches ‘Prophetentum,’” in id., Der Ursprung der Moderne: Vergleichende 
Studien zum Zivilisationsprozeß (Frankfurt, 1977), 94–139; id., “Copernicus and 
the Quest for Certitude: ‘East’ and ‘West,’” in Copernicus Yesterday and Today, ed. 
Arthur Beer and K. A. Strand (New York, 1975), 39–46; id., “The Quest for Certi­
tude and the Books of Scripture, Nature, and Conscience,” in The Nature of Scien­
tific Discovery, ed. Owen Gingerich (Washington, DC, 1975), 355–372.
174.  See, e.g., Novalis, Philosophische Studien, in id., Werke (cited n. 34 above), 
2: 10, trans. in Novalis, Fichte Studies, ed. Jane Kneller (Cambridge, 2003), with 
the following steps:
(1) “What kind of a relation is knowledge? It is being outside of being that is 
nevertheless within being.”
(2) “What is outside being must not be a proper being”
(3) “An improper being outside being is an image”
(4) “Consciousness is a being outside of being that is within being”
175.  Cf. Gaston Bachelard, Le matérialisme rationnel (1953; 3rd ed., Paris, 1972), 
4ff.: chemistry as the science of material, thus as science of the future. General­
izations on the basis of obsolescent everyday suitabilities then become obstacles 
épistémologiques.
176.  For many contemporary references, see Russell Fraser, The War Against 
Poetry (Princeton, NJ, 1970).
177.  An adequate treatment of the historical material on the “profit” concept 
is lacking. But see Alfred F. Chalk, “Natural Law and the Rise of Economic In­
dividualism in England,” Journal of Political Economy 59 (1951): 332–347; Harold 
B. Ehrlich, “British Mercantilist Theories of Profit,” American Journal of Econom­
ics and Sociology 14 (1955): 377–386; G. L. S. Tucker, Progress and Profit in Brit­
ish Economic Thought 1650–1850 (New York, 1960); John A. W. Gunn, Politics and 
the Public Interest in the Seventeenth Century (London, 1969), esp. 205ff.; Joyce O. 
Appleby, Economic Thought and Ideology in Seventeenth Century England (Prince­
ton, NJ, 1978). It should always be remembered that the principle of adequate 
remuneration for merchant, which could lie only in the difference between the 
buying and selling prices, was naturally accepted. The problem was the unsocial 
nature of this difference, which escaped any social regulation—unless by the doc­
trine of the “just price,” which sought to combat blatant exploitation of distress 
but not to guarantee constant prices.
178.  As we know, Max Weber suspected that this was crucial for the transition 

Notes to Chapter 5    
to the modern “capitalist” social order. However, since he viewed it as legitimized 
by innovation, rather than by the opening up of markets and investment calcula­
tions, he regarded Calvinism/Puritanism as the decisive factor.
179.  This was the problem that led Adam Smith from the theories of moral phi­
losophy and jurisprudence to economic theory. Corresponding views had, however, 
been advanced at an earlier date. Daniel Defoe writes, e.g.: “It is a Great Mistake 
to say that every Man is only separately interested in, or concern’d for the Trade 
he himself carries on: There is a Relation in Trade to itself [!—N.L.] in every Part, 
every Branch of Trade has a Concern in the Whole, and the Whole in every Part” 
(Defoe, A Brief Account of the Present State of the African Trade [London, 1713], 53, 
quoted in Maximilian E. Novak, Economics and the Fiction of Daniel Defoe [2nd ed., 
New York, 1976], 20).
180.  See esp. Appleby, Economic Thought.
181.  See, in greater detail, Niklas Luhmann, Das Recht der Gesellschaft (Frank­
furt, 1993), 496ff.
182.  See Harold J. Berman, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western 
Legal Tradition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983).
183.  See, e.g., Charles Loyseau, Discours de l’abus des justices de village (Paris, 
1603), defining the given legal state of affairs quite simply as “abuse” and usurpa­
tion on the part of the local nobility.
184.  In eighteenth-century England and Scotland, we find this discussion 
above all in the triangle of common law, equity, and statute law, with a prefer­
ence for change through the courts (Blackstone, Lord Mansfield, Lord Kames) 
or through legislation (Bentham). See Lieberman, Province of Legislation (cited n. 
162 above).
185.  See, e.g., the citation of Helvétius in n.114 above.
186.  See Philippe Ariès, L’enfant et la vie familiale sous l’ancien régime (Paris, 
1960).
187.  August Hermann Niemeyer, Grundsätze der Erziehung und des Unterrichts 
(Halle, 1796; repr., Paderborn, 1970), 73, expressing a view made fashionable by 
Rousseau.
188.  On further developments in the specifically German context of “geisteswis­
senschaftlichen Pädagogik und ihrer Organisationsabhängigkeit” [humanistic ped­
agogy and its organizational dependence], see Niklas Luhmann and Karl Eberhard 
Schorr, Reflexionsprobleme im Erziehungssystem (2nd ed., Frankfurt, 1988).
189.  For a critical sociological view, see Helmut Schelsky, Schule und Erziehung 
in der industriellen Gesellschaft (Würzburg, 1957).
190.  For greater detail, see Luhmann, Kunst, 393ff.
191.  See, e.g., Sidney, Defense of Poesy (cited n. 117 above).
192.  Or as variable: “Suele faltarle de eminencia a la imitación, lo que alcanza 
de facilidad” (Baltasar Gracián, Agudeza y arte de ingenio [1649; Madrid, 1969], 2: 
257, discurso 63).

    Notes to Chapter 5
193.  For typical efforts, see Jean-Baptiste Dubos, Reflexions critiques sur la 
poésie et sur la peinture (Paris, 1733); Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into 
the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and the Beautiful (2nd ed., London 1759). 
Romanticism was then able to see the sublime only as a refined laxative, since it 
had other means at its disposal (reflection, irony, critique) to treat intellectual con­
stipation. See August Wilhelm von Schlegel, Vorlesungen über schöne Literatur und 
Kunst, vol. 1: Die Kunstlehre (Stuttgart, 1963), 58.
194.  See the classical monograph by Alfred Bäumler, Das Irrationalitätsprob­
lem in der Ästhetik und Logik des 18. Jahrhunderts bis zu Kritik der Urteilskraft (2nd 
ed., Darmstadt, 1967).
195.  Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten, Aesthetica, vol. 1 (Frankfurt a/O, 1750; 
repr., Hildesheim, 1970), 6 (§ 14). The distinction that defined the domain was ac­
cordingly that between sensory and rational cognition (aesthetics/logic).
196.  On the technique of antonym substitution in anti-liberal polemics, see 
Holmes, “Permanent Structure” (cited n. 44 above). However, liberalism itself had 
made use of this technique.
197.  See Talcott Parsons, “Comparative Studies and Evolutionary Change,” in 
id., Social Systems and the Evolution of Action Theory (New York, 1977), 279–320 
(esp. 307ff.).
198.  See 121–122 above.
199.  With respect to the education system, see Zwischen Technologie und Selb­
streferenz: Fragen an die Pädagogik, ed. Niklas Luhmann and Karl Eberhard Schorr 
(Frankfurt, 1982).
200.  Husserl, Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften (cited n. 153 above). See 
also Hans Blumenberg, Lebenswelt und Technisierung unter den Aspekten der Phän­
omenologie (Turin, 1963). Corresponding criticism—not by chance adopting the 
“lifeworld” concept [Lebenswelt]—is now developing on the basis of the distinc­
tion between lifeworld and system strongly favored by Habermas.
201.  On this temporal contingency, see also Niklas Luhmann, Die neuzeitli­
chen Wissenschaften und die Phänomenologie (Vienna, 1996).
202.  See only, e.g., Jules Michelet, L’amour (Paris, 1858); and of course 
Baudelaire.
203.  Novalis, Philosophische Studien, in id., Werke (cited n. 34 above), 2: 12.
204.  See only Herschel Baker, The Wars of Truth: Studies in the Decay of Chris­
tian Humanism in the Earlier Seventeenth Century (Cambridge, MA, 1952; repr., 
Gloucester, MA, 1969).
205.  See esp. Gracián, El criticón (cited n. 156 above).
206.  Ibid., 1957 German ed., 17.
207.  Ibid., 51, 67.
208.  Ibid., 101.
209.  See, e.g., Jean Domat, Les loix civiles dans leur ordre naturel (1689–1694; 
2nd ed., Paris, 1697), esp. lviff. and lxxiii–lxxiv.

Notes to Chapter 5    
210.  See Samuel Pufendorf, De jure naturae et gentium libri octo (Frankfurt, 
1744), 1: 313: “In ipso hominis vocabulo iudicator inesse aliqua dignatio.” Worth 
noting is the terminological switch from the usual dignitas to dignatio, which 
makes it clear that the estate-based barriers that divided people into those with 
and without dignitas were being undermined.
211.  On the much criticized individualism of the liberal tradition, see Stephen 
Holmes, The Anatomy of Antiliberalism (Cambridge, MA, 1993), chap. 2.
212.  See Ulrich Scheuner, “Die Verwirklichung der Bürgerlichen Gleichheit: 
Zur rechtlichen Bedeutung der Grundrechte in Deutschland zwischen 1780 und 
1815,” in Grund- und Freiheitsrechte im Wandel von Gesellschaft und Geschichte: 
­Beiträge zur Geschichte der Grund- und Freiheitsrechte vom Ausgang des Mittelalters 
bis zur Revolution von 1848, ed. Günter Birtsch (Göttingen, 1981), 376–401.
213.  See Hans Medick, Naturzustand und Naturgeschichte der bürgerlichen 
­Gesellschaft (Göttingen, 1973).
214.  For more detail, see Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 2.13, and § 14 
below.
215.  Jean Paul, Hesperus, in id., Werke, ed. Norbert Miller, vol. 1 (Munich, 
1990), 871, “sechster Schalttag”; trans. R.B. With regard to humanity as a whole, 
the author himself opts in the following pages for hope.
216.  See Hume, “Of the Original Contract,” cited n. 345 below.
217.  See Novalis, Philosophische Studien, in id., Werke (cited n. 34 above), 2: 
438–439, monologue, trans. Ferit Güven. This is worth quoting at length: “Mat­
ters concerning speech and writing are genuinely strange; proper conversation is a 
mere play of words. We can only marvel at the laughable error people make—be­
lieving that they speak about things. No one knows precisely what is peculiar to 
language, that it concerns itself merely with itself. For that reason, it is a wonderful 
and fertile mystery—that when someone speaks merely in order to speak, one pre­
cisely then expresses the most splendid and most original truths. Yet if one wishes 
to speak of something determinate, then temperamental language has them say 
the most laughable and perverse things. . . . If only one could make people grasp 
that the case of language is similar to the case of mathematical formulae—they 
constitute a world for themselves—they play with themselves alone.”
218.  See Friedrich von Schlegel, “Signatur des Zeitalters,” in id., Dichtungen 
und Aufsätze, ed. Wolfdietrich Rasch (Munich, 1984), 593–728.
219.  See Dean MacCannell and Juliet F. MacCannell, The Time of the Sign: A 
Semiotic Interpretation of Modern Culture (Bloomington, IN, 1982), 27.
220.  See only Reinhart Koselleck, Vergangene Zukunft: Zur Semantik geschicht­
licher Zeiten (Frankfurt, 1979). Also Niklas Luhmann, “Temporalisierung von 
Komplexität: Zur Semantik neuzeitlicher Zeitbegriffe,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 
vol. 1 (1980), 235–300; Armin Nassehi, Die Zeit der Gesellschaft: Auf dem Weg zu 
einer soziologischen Theorie der Zeit (Opladen, 1993), esp. 249ff. Most studies con­
centrate on single texts, authors, or epochs and do not go very far theoretically, 

    Notes to Chapter 5
however indispensable the examination and interpretation of the sources might 
be. In addressing the identity problem from a factual, temporal, and social point 
of view, § 22 of this chapter goes into detail.
221.  The early Middle Ages had only very vague concepts of time, which suf­
ficed, however, under the very confined circumstances of, say, the individual mon­
astery, manor, or small settlement. On this and on the transition in the thirteenth 
and fourteenth centuries, see Jean Leclercq, “Zeiterfahrung und Zeitbegriff im 
Spätmittelalter,” in Antiqui und Moderni: Traditionsbewußtsein und Fortschrittsbe­
wußtsein im späten Mittelalter, ed. Albert Zimmermann (Berlin, 1974), 1–20, with 
further references.
222.  See, e.g., Ricardo J. Quinones, The Renaissance Discovery of Time (Cam­
bridge, MA, 1972).
223.  On the development of the Fortuna allegory in the Renaissance, see Klaus 
Reichert, Fortuna oder die Beständigkeit des Wechsels (Frankfurt, 1985). For older liter­
ature, see also Alfred Doren, Fortuna im Mittelalter und in der Renaissance (Leipzig, 
1922). And see too Giovanni Gioviano [Ioannes Jov.] Pontano [1426–1503], De for­
tuna libri III, in id., Opera omnia (Basel, 1556), 1: 792–931, with all the exclusions 
of typically metaphysical definitions: “Fortunam . . . non esse Deum, . . . non esse 
naturam, . . . non esse intellectum, . . . non esse rationem” (chaps. 1–4), and pre­
cisely in these respects directed specifically at human beings: “quae ad hominem 
spectent” (chap. 15).
224.  On the latter, see Juliusz Domański, “‘Nova’ und ‘Vetera’ bei Erasmus 
von Rotterdam: Ein Beitrag zur Begriffs- und Bewertungsanalyse,” in Antiqui und 
Moderni, ed. Zimmermann, 515–528.
225.  It suffices to cite the controversy on ranking within the arts—poetry, 
painting, sculpture, etc.—that enlivened sixteenth-century art theory. It would 
not have occurred to anyone to take innovation potential as a ranking criterion, 
even though brilliant innovations were stressed and appreciated. For examples, see 
Trattati d’arte del cinquecento, ed. Paola Barocchi, 3 vols. (Bari, 1960–1963). On 
ambivalence about age and experience in the transitional period, see also Keith 
Thomas, The Perception of the Past in Early Modern England (London, 1983).
226.  See François de Grenaille, La mode, ou Charactère de la religion, de la vie, 
de la conversation, de la solitude, des compliments, des habits et du style du temps 
(Paris, 1642), 1–2. And p. 5: “Si la durée fait subsister toutes les partie du monde, 
la nouveauté les faict estimer.” See also pp. 39, 72ff.
227.  Not least through effective intervention in the arts and sciences in the 
interests of dogmatic and historically acceptable portrayal (the devil had to be 
shown with horns, angels with wings, Christ with a beard, whatever the aesthetic 
composition might require, and, naturally, not too much nudity). See Charles 
Dejob, De l’influence du concile de Trente sur la littérature et les beaux-arts chez les 
peuples catholique (Paris, 1884; repr., Geneva, 1969).
228.  Gracián, El criticón (cited n. 156 above), 1957 German ed., 19.

Notes to Chapter 5    
229.  Paolo Pini, Dialogo di pittura (Venice, 1548), cited in Trattati d’arte, ed. 
Barocchi, 1: 113, states: “la natura imita sé stessa.”
230.  See, e.g., Hermann Conring, De origine iuris germanici: Commentarius 
historicus (Helmstedt, 1643). The thesis of the introduction of Roman law in Ger­
many by an imperial law is refuted by historical studies, and the final chapter is 
devoted to the possibilities for improving laws.
231.  On this far-reaching, pre-romantic discussion, see, e.g., Peter Jones, 
“Hume and the Beginnings of Modern Aesthetics,” in The ‘Science of Man’ in the 
Scottish Enlightenment: Hume, Reid and Their Contemporaries, ed. id. (Edinburgh, 
1989), 54–67, or, from the contemporary perspective of the artist William Hog­
arth, The Analysis of Beauty, Written with a view of fixing the fluctuating Ideas of 
Taste (London, 1753; Oxford, 1955).
232.  Eccles. 1:13–18 (KJV): “And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wis­
dom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God 
given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith. / I have seen all the works that 
are done under the sun; and, behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. / That 
which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is wanting cannot be 
numbered. / I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great 
estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been before me in 
Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge. / And I 
gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly: I perceived that 
this also is vexation of spirit. / For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that in­
creaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.”
233.  See Edward Shils, Tradition (Chicago, 1981).
234.  Two examples from the wealth of statements on this subject: “But the 
present, as it were the transparent ice field between two times, flows away and 
freezes in equal measure, and nothing about it lasts but its eternal flight.—And 
the inner world, which creates and premeasures times, doubles and accelerates 
them hither; within is only becoming, as in the external world being only becomes” 
(Jean Paul, Vorschule der Ästhetik [cited n. 146 above], 238–239; trans. R.B.). And: 
“. . . how without any previous knowledge could one determine whether the age 
is really an individual or perhaps only point of collision of other ages, where with 
certainty it begins and ends? How can one correctly understand and punctuate 
the present period of the world if one cannot at least anticipate the general char­
acter of the succeeding period? (Friedrich von Schlegel, Fragmente, 426, in id., 
Werke in zwei Bänden [Berlin, 1980], 1: 253; trans. R.B.). In transferring this un­
derstanding of the present to his own time, Schlegel (ibid., 235) sees the latter as 
the “middle age” in the true sense.
235.  This schema seems anachronistic, however, in the context of the fascist 
adventure of Fiume as interpreted by Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, “I redentori della 
vittoria: On Fiume’s Place in the Genealogy of Fascism,” Journal of Contemporary 
History 31 (1996): 253–272.

    Notes to Chapter 5
236.  See Jean Paul, Vorschule der Ästhetik (cited n. 146 above), 262ff.
237.  See Luhmann, Kunst, 96ff., for greater detail.
238.  As Jean Paul prescribes to novelists [in Vorschule der Ästhetik, chap. 44, 
§ 74, “Regeln und Winke für Romanschreiber”]: “The knot is unravelled only by 
past, not by future.”
239.  On the closeness of the novelty schema to paradox, see also Dodo zu 
Knyphausen, “Paradoxien und Visionen: Visionen zu einer paradoxen Theorie 
der Entstehung des Neuen,” in Konstruktivismus: Geschichte und Anwendung, ed. 
Gebhard Rusch and Siegfried J. Schmidt (in the constructivist journal DELFIN, 
Frankfurt, 1992), 140–159. However, the paradox is resolved traditionally by refer­
ence to the visionary creativity of single individuals.
240.  Louis-Sébastien Mercier’s L’an deux mille quatre cent quarante: Rêve s’il en 
fut jamais (London, 1772) is regarded as the first publication of this type.
241.  As grounds for hope of liberty in the “époche actuelle,” Abbé Henri Gré­
goire adduces as “proverbe que le temps présent est gros d’avenir” (id., Refléxions, 
vol. 1, Mémoires de l’Institut nationale, Classe des sciences morales et politiques 
[Paris, 1798], 556).
242.  In colloquial speech, atopos also had other meanings, such as not in its 
place, nonsensical, wonderful. These connotations have to be taken into account 
when the moment is described as atopic.
243.  See Paul de Man, “The Rhetoric of Temporality,” in id., Blindness and 
Insight: Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism (2nd ed., London, 1983), 
187–228.
244.  In Imagination and the Nature of Choice (Edinburgh, 1979), G. L. S. Shackle 
proposes a corresponding concept of “choice.”
245.  For a still rare formulation of this view, see Bernard Ancori, “Temps histo­
rique et évolution économique,” Revue internationale de systémique 7 (1993): 593–
612 (598ff.).
246.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Das Risiko der Kausalität,” Zeitschrift für Wis­
senschaftsforschung 9–10 (1995): 107–119.
247.  For references, see Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 3, n. 226.
248.  John Dryden asserts, e.g., “that not only we shall never equal them, but 
they could never equal themselves, were they to rise and to write again. We ac­
knowledge them our Fathers in wit, but they have ruin’d their Estates themselves 
before they came to their childrens hands. . . . For the Genius of every Age is differ­
ent” (id., Of Dramatick Poetry: An Essay [2nd ed., 1684; London, 1964], 106–107).
249.  See chap. 4.10 above.
250.  See, e.g., The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography (1907; Bos­
ton, 1918).
251.  The end of ontology is also reduced to a risk formula: “L’être est la risque 
pur de l’Etre et du Néant” (Michel Serres, Génèse [Paris, 1982], 209).
252.  On the transition from historia in the sense of res gesta to the unity of 

Notes to Chapter 5    
history, see Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, ed. Koselleck et al. (cited n. 110 above), 
2 (1975): 593–717.
253.  For greater detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Realität der Massenmedien 
(Opladen, 1996).
254.  John W. Meyer, John Boli, and George M. Thomas, “Ontology and Ra­
tionalization in Western Cultural Account,” in George M. Thomas et al., Institu­
tional Structure: Constituting State, Society, and the Individual (Newbury Park, CA, 
1987), 12–37 (26).
255.  J. G. von Herder, “Erstes Kritisches Wäldchen” (1769), in id., Sämtliche 
Werke (ed. Suphan), vol. 3 (Berlin, 1878), 34.
256.  It is no accident that “security” has become a problem that has to be 
solved by social precautions. See Franz-Xaver Kaufmann, Sicherheit als soziolo­
gisches und sozialpolitisches Problem (Stuttgart, 1970).
257.  Cf. Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht, “Sign Conceptions in European Everyday 
Culture Between Renaissance and Early Nineteenth Century” (MS, 1992).
258.  See chap. 4.8 above.
259.  And in the case of the Enlightenment, it was now also about bringing in 
other sorts of experience, about sentiment, and about history, on the unmarked 
side of the discourse.
260.  On the oscillation of the securitas motif between objective and subjective 
definition, see Emil Winkler, Sécurité (Berlin, 1939).
261.  See Jean-Jacques Rousseau at the beginning of his Confessions, in id., 
Œuvres complètes, vol. 1 (Pléiade ed., Paris 1959), 5.
262.  See, e.g., Alexandre Vinet, “Sur l’individualité et l’individualisme,” in id., 
Philosophie morale et sociale, vol. 1 (Lausanne, 1913), 319–335; originally in Le ­Semeur: 
Journal religieux, politique, philosophique et littéraire (Paris), 13 April 1836.
263.  Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759), ed. D. D. Raphael 
and A. L. Macfie (Oxford, 1976).
264.  Ibid., 10: “Sympathy arises not so much from the view of the [other per­
son’s] passion, as from that of the situation which excites it.”
265.  The key narration in this context is naturally Fichte’s account of the gen­
eration of the non-I by the I in a relationship of mutual determination.
266.  Demanded, according to Friedrich von Schlegel, “Gespräch über die Poe­
sie,” in id., Werke in zwei Bänden (Berlin, 1980), 2: 129–195 (134), by the spirit, 
which cannot abide restriction, “doubtless because, without knowing it, it never­
theless knows that no human being is merely a human being but can and should 
also be the whole of humanity in reality and in truth” (trans. R.B.). The wording 
betrays that Schlegel was simply saying this, or, as he saw himself as author, simply 
writing it. Still, it is astonishing that the reader can be expected to find humanity 
in every individual without social and without categorial mediation. For Schlegel, 
the (no longer transcendental) guarantee of universal validity was accordingly to 
be found solely in the individuality of individuals.

    Notes to Chapter 5
267.  We shall be coming back to this. See pp. 295–296.
268.  Jean Paul, “Die wunderbare Gesellschaft in der Neujahrsnacht”(1801), in 
id., Werke (Stuttgart, 1924), 1: 293–308 (297).
269.  See Claudio Baraldi, “Condizioni dell’autonomia: Forme sociali e psy­
chiche,” Rassegna italiana di sociologia 33 (1992): 337–367; cf. also id., Socializzazione 
e autonomia individuale: Una teoria sistemica del rapporto tra communicazione e pen­
siero (Milan, 1992).
270.  Husserl had seen the unity of the difference between other-reference 
(phenomena, noemata) and self-reference (consciousness, noesis) and described 
it as intraconscious, subjective performance in the form of intentional acts. The 
conclusion drawn from failure to solve the problem of intersubjectivity is to be 
found in the fifth Cartesian Meditation (Husserliana: Gesammelte Werke, vol. 1: 
Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, ed. Stephan Strasser [The Hague, 
1950], 121ff.), which Husserl scarcely conceals with the concept of “intermonad­
ological community” (intermonadologische Gemeinschaft). The profundity of this 
analysis is apparent not least in the shallowness of the criticism and reactions that 
nowadays run under the heading of social phenomenology, which no longer pur­
sues any transcendental theoretical aims. It can, of course, be shown that Husserl 
nevertheless has some understanding of the social, or that the transcendental ap­
proach of his theory failed to solve the problem of “intersubjectivity,” even though 
it concerns an ultimately indisputable, easy-to-describe “phenomenon.” However, 
the theoretical perplexity of a social theory that insists on “subjects” can hardly be 
eliminated by describing the explicit paradox of “intersubjectivity” as phenome­
non (of which subject?) and then going on to treat it as a familiar fact of the world.
271.  Schütz (e.g., in Das Problem der Relevanz [Frankfurt, 1971]) adopts the 
concept of typification but also speaks of “idealization” when it is a question of 
the mutual interchangeability of standpoints and the intersubjective congruence 
of relevance structures. This requires operations that generate the corresponding 
observations in ego or alter to be dispensed with. Habermas also speaks of ideal­
izations in this sense, whereas Parsons uses the concept of symbolic generalization 
in the same functional context. But all this could be formulated without the con­
cept of the subject on the basis of the mere assumption of the mutual intranspar­
ency of empirical individuals.
272.  See Lexikon zur Soziologie, 3rd ed. (Opladen, 1994), 654, s.v. Subjekt.
273.  See, e.g., Richard Münch, Theorie des Handelns: Zur Rekonstruktion der 
Beiträge von Talcott Parsons, Emile Durkheim und Max Weber (Frankfurt, 1982).
274.  Alain Touraine, Le retour de l’acteur: Essai de sociologie (Paris, 1984).
275.  But on the need for a “multivalent logic” reacting precisely to this, see also 
Günther, Beiträge (cited n. 9 above). These considerations have so far been unable 
to find a foothold in sociology (aside from the lively interest shown by Helmut 
Schelsky).
276.  See Jürgen Habermas, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns, 2 vols. (Frank­

Notes to Chapter 5    
furt, 1981); also id., Vorstudien und Ergänzungen zur Theorie des kommunikativen 
Handelns (Frankfurt, 1984).
277.  See Jean-Christophe Agnew, Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theater in 
Anglo-American Thought, 1550–1750 (Cambridge, 1986).
278.  On this last development, see Peter Weingart, Jürgen Kroll, and Kurt Bay­
ertz, Geschichte der Eugenik und Rassenhygiene in Deutschland (Frankfurt, 1988).
279.  Gracián’s El discreto was translated into French [by Joseph de Courbeville] 
under the title L’homme universel (Paris, 1723).
280.  See Dietrich Schwanitz, “Verlorene Illusionen,” Soziologische Revue 19 
(1996): 127–136 (132).
281.  The fact that one can still find such conditions today is not to be denied; 
but accounts of them often do not escape exaggeration. See, e.g., Edward C. Ban­
field, The Moral Basis of a Backward Society (Chicago, 1958), as well as Sydel Sil­
verman, “Agricultural Organization, Social Structure and Values in Italy: Amoral 
Familialism Reconsidered,” American Anthropologist 70 (1968): 1–20, and William 
Muraskin: “The Moral Basis of a Backward Sociologist: Edward Banfield, the Ital­
ians and the Italian-Americans,” American Journal of Sociology 79 (1974): 1484–1496.
282.  See Richard Münch, “Modernity and Irrationality: Paradoxes of Moral 
Modernization,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 84–92.
283.  On the other hand, a new career now begins for irony—as characteristic 
of a written culture and as the subject matter of literary studies.
284.  Empirical research has shown that morality has repeatedly sought to es­
tablish an unconditional position. See only Gertrud Nunner-Winkler, “Wissen 
und Wollen: Ein Beitrag zur frühkindlichen Moralentwicklung,” in Zwischen­
betrachtungen—im Prozeß der Aufklärung: Jürgen Habermas zum 60. Geburtstag 
(Frankfurt, 1989), 574–600, and, going beyond infant socialization, id., Moral in 
der Politik—Eine Frage des Systems oder der Persönlichkeit? Festschrift Renate Mayntz 
(Baden-Baden, 1994), 123–149.
285.  This applies particularly to the proposal to aim for the neutral minimiza­
tion of losses by Nunner-Winkler, Moral in der Politik. The very urgent problem 
of risk is ignored.
286.  See, e.g., Gilles Deleuze, Logique du sens (Paris, 1969), 175, with an elabo­
rated sense for the paradox: “Ce qui est vraiment immoral, c’est toute utilisation 
des notions morales.”
287.  Only the positions of the eighteenth century (Kant, Bentham) have been 
mentioned in this book. But the basic question is quite another if one also takes 
material value-ethics or the natural-language argument into consideration.
288.  And it is from this very perspective of failure that they are observed today. 
See E. P. Thompson, “The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the 18th Cen­
tury,” Past and Present 50 (1971): 76–136.
289.  Gotthard Günter, “Cybernetic Ontology and Transjunctional Operations,” 
in id., Beiträge (cited n. above), 1: 249–328.

    Notes to Chapter 5
290.  See Richard Münch, “Moralische Achtung als Medium der Kommuni­
kation,” in id., Dynamik der Kommunikationsgesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), 214ff.
291.  This is by no means to say that adaptation is desirable. If this is asserted 
or denied, we have to switch to the level of second-order observation and to ob­
serve the observers. And they might well have good reason to recommend seman­
tic maladjustment (e.g., from the euphemistic point of view of argumentation 
reserves for the “critique” of society).
292.  Habermas, too, now shows a highly developed sense of the differences 
between ethical and legal discourse, even though his reflections run in a quite dif­
ferent direction. See Jürgen Habermas, Faktizität und Geltung: Beiträge zur Dis­
kurstheorie des Rechts und des demokratischen Rechtsstaates (Frankfurt, 1992).
293.  “Sans disparaître pour autant, le contenu de la théologie chrétienne ne 
vient plus avant l’éthique, pour la fonder en vérité, mais après elle, pour lui donner 
un sens,” as Luc Ferry puts it in L’homme-Dieu, ou Le sens de la vie (Paris, 1996), 60.
294.  See Alois Hahn, “Identität und Nation in Europa,” Berliner Journal für 
Soziologie 3 (1993): 193–203, and chap. 4 n. 222 above in general.
295.  What is more, wherever the point of departure for empire building was 
ethnically homogeneous (as in the case of the Macedonian and Islamic empires), 
such empires tended in their decline to leave behind ethnically unhomogeneous 
structures.
296.  See Pierre Nora, “Nation,” in Dictionnaire critique de la Révolution fran­
çaise, ed. François Furet, Mona Ozouf et al. (Paris, 1988), 801–811, and the famous 
contemporary text by Abbé Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, Qu’est-ce que le Tiers-Etat? 
(1789). See also Les lieux de mémoire, ed. Pierre Nora, vol. 2.1–2 (Paris, 1986).
297.  Following Marcel Gauchet, Marc-Olivier Padis, and Marcel Gauchet, La 
Genèse de la démocratie (Paris, 1996), 83: “Le roi en effet incarne l’unité de la Na­
tion dans son corps. Après la mort du roi, où l’unité peut-elle s’incarner?” That a 
succession had to be secured at all followed from the concept of nation. The main 
problem was that the body of the monarch had to be replaced by an organization 
of political decisions.
298.  Shortly before, the same ambivalence had characterized “patriotism”—
but on a purely moral level. One recognized the deficiencies of the community to 
which one belonged, and had, for this very reason, to support. But, at least in the 
German debate, the parameters were still indeterminate. They ranged from cos­
mopolitanism to petty principality or the home town. Universalism and particu­
larism were to be found under the same roof of a moral appeal. In the last two 
decades of the eighteenth century, this moral patriotism with its varying reach was 
already being treated with irony. This, too, indicated that the time was ripe for the 
new concept of nation. See Peter Fuchs, “Vaterland, Patriotismus und Moral: Zur 
Semantik gesellschaftlicher Einheit,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 20 (1991): 89–103; 
id., Die Erreichbarkeit der Gesellschaft: Zur Konstruktion und Imagination gesell­
schaftlicher Einheit (Frankfurt, 1992), 144ff.

Notes to Chapter 5    
299.  Things were, incidentally, quite different for the formation of ethnic enti­
ties, which was essentially a history of offense and oppression, of blame and strug­
gle, and was in this sense not a history of intellectuals but recorded the experience 
of the entire population. This has been abundantly demonstrated by the disinte­
gration of Yugoslavia, and gives little room to hope for a politically dictated settle­
ment. Memory is stronger than an alliance between reason and interests.
300.  See William H. McNeill, Polyethnicity and National Unity in World His­
tory (Toronto, 1986).
301.  Friedrich von Schlegel, “Reise nach Frankreich,” in id., Werke in zwei Bän­
den (Berlin, 1980), 2: 213–244 (234); emphasis in original.
302.  See Mathias Bös, “Zur Evolution nationalstaatlich verfaßter Gesell­
schaften,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 159–169.
303.  On the relations between the concepts of people [Volk] and nation, see 
Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, ed. Koselleck et al. (cited n. 110 above), 7 (1992): 141–
431, s.vv. Volk, Nation, Nationalismus, Masse.
304.  This obviously completely reversed the traditional precedence in the Eu­
ropean tradition of religious universalism over political particularism—a process 
of “secularization,” which also indicates that this semantic recasting would scarcely 
have been possible before the eighteenth century.
305.  On the unsatisfactory integration of German intellectuals, in particular, 
in the economy, the public service, and the newly developing university science, 
see Bernhard Giesen, “Code und Situation: Das selektionstheoretische Programm 
einer Analyse sozialen Wandels—illustriert an der Genese des deutschen Nation­
albewußtseins,” in Sozialer Wandel: Modellbildung und theoretische Ansätze, ed. 
Hans-Peter Müller and Michael Schmid (Frankfurt, 1995), 228–266 (252–253), and 
id., Die Intellektuellen und die Nation: Eine deutsche Achsenzeit (Frankfurt, 1993).
306.  S. N. Eisenstadt, “Die Konstruktion nationaler Identitäten in verglei­
chender Perspektive,” in Nationale und kulturelle Identität: Studien zur Entwick­
lung des kollektiven Bewußtseins in der Neuzeit, ed. Bernhard Giesen (Frankfurt, 
1991), 21–38 (34), speaks of the possibility of nationalist and socialist ideologies 
being able to rebel “against the institutional realities of modern civilization in their 
own symbols.”
307.  [NL is referring to the fact that none of the then Great Powers had any 
objection to his policy toward the Jews—see, e.g., Mark Mazower, Hitler’s Empire: 
How the Nazis Ruled Europe (New York, 2008).—Trans.] International law has 
since changed, as we know, and now condemns “ethnic cleansing” as a means of 
establishing national unity. But the effects of this change in law are also not very 
convincing.
308.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Zum Begriff der sozialen Klasse,” in Soziale 
Differenzierung: Zur Geschichte einer Idee, ed. id. (Opladen, 1985), 119–162.
309.  Of the secondary literature, see esp. Robert Mauzi, L’idée du bonheur dans 
la littérature et la pensée française au XVIIIe siècle (Paris, 1960). However, it is diffi­

    Notes to Chapter 5
cult to judge the credibility of the argument. Even in antiquity it was regarded as 
exaggerated and treated with irony. However, what is of interest for us is only that 
society considered such an argument to be necessary.
310.  On the etymology, see Arthur E. Bestor Jr., “The Evolution of the Social­
ist Vocabulary,” Journal of the History of Ideas 9 (1948): 255–302 (273). J. E. S. Hay­
ward, “Solidarity: The Social History of an Ideal in Nineteenth Century France,” 
International Review of Social History 4 (1959): 261–284. See also Italo De Sandre, 
“Solidarietà,” Rassegna italiana di sociologia 35 (1994): 247–263; and Solidarität, ed. 
Giuseppe Orsi et al. (Frankfurt, 1995).
311.  See only Amitai Etzioni, The Active Society: A Theory of Societal and Politi­
cal Processes (New York, 1968).
312.  See, e.g., Ulrich Beck, “Jenseits von Stand und Klasse? Soziale Unglei­
chheiten, gesellschaftliche Individualisierungsprozesse und die Entstehung neuer 
sozialer Formationen und Identitäten,” in Soziale Ungleichheiten, special no. 2 of 
Soziale Welt, ed. Reinhard Kreckel (Göttingen, 1983), 35–74; Stefan Hradil, Sozial­
strukturanalyse in einer fortgeschrittenen Gesellschaft: Von Klassen und Schichten zu 
Lagen und Milieus (Opladen, 1987); Zwischen Bewußtsein und Sein: Die Vermittlung 
“objektiver” Lebensbedingungen und “subjektiver” Lebensweisen, ed. id. (Opladen, 
1992); Klassenlage, Lebensstil und kulturelle Praxis, ed. Klaus Eder (Frankfurt, 1989); 
Gerhard Schulze, Die Erlebnisgesellschaft: Kultursoziologie der Gegenwart (Frank­
furt, 1993). Since we are only dealing with self-descriptions here, it is not necessary 
to decide whether a corresponding change is really involved or whether sociology 
is not merely leaving the sinking good ship “Class Society” and throwing light on 
other aspects with the extremely formal concept of inequality. At any rate, there 
have always been “milieus.”
313.  See Schlegel, “Signatur des Zeitalters” (cited n. 218 above): “The first bad 
sign of this sort is probably the inner unease that nevertheless breaks out every­
where when stable and well-founded external peace endures and has become so 
obvious to all observers, since it appears almost to multiply and spread in mount­
ing progression” (trans. R.B). Schlegel’s own way back to religion had not con­
vinced his contemporaries; indeed, he must have seemed to them to embody the 
negative diagnosis of the age.
314.  Ibid.: the absolute as the real enemy of humankind, the absolute as “ruth­
less,” the “ultra-essence” [Ultrawesen] as bad, etc.
315.  Novalis, no. 1921, in id., Fragmente, ed. Ewald Wasmuth, vol. 2 (Heidel­
berg, 1957), 53, trans. R.B.
316.  See, e.g. (on the old rhetorical pattern), Jean-Fréderic Bernard, Éloge 
d’enfer: Ouvrage critique, historique et moral, 2 vols. (The Hague, 1759). Hell is ex­
ecuted morality.
317.  See Bernard Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick 
Benefits [1714], ed. F. B. Kaye (Oxford, 1924).
318.  See Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, marquis de Condorcet, Essai sur 

Notes to Chapter 5    
l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité des décisions rendue à la pluralité des voix 
(Paris, 1785; repr., New York, 1972). Now known as Arrow’s theorem of the impos­
sibility of aggregating preferences.
319.  See Schlegel, “Signatur des Zeitalters” (cited n. 218 above), 713.
320.  The history of ideas has not adequately investigated these issues. But with 
reference to the economics literature, see Raimund Ottow, “Modelle der unsicht­
baren Hand vor Adam Smith,” Leviathan 19 (1991): 558–574. The way was paved 
in the seventeenth century for the renunciation of special providence and the un­
knowability thesis of Puritanism. At any rate, the repeatedly cited Adam Smith 
was not the inventor [of the “invisible hand” metaphor]. “Nature works by an in­
visible hand in all things,” we read, e.g., in Joseph Glanvill, The Vanity of Dogma­
tizing (London, 1661; repr., Hove, Sussex, 1970), 180, and Royal Society of London 
circles were opposed, with regard to problems of salvation, to any hasty explana­
tion of phenomena as a sign from God. Then, in the eighteenth century, the entire 
cosmology switched to admiration of an invisible order as the reason for visible 
disorder. Newton’s laws were, after all, “invisible.” “The disorder in the world is 
only apparent, and where it appears to be greatest, true order is still more glorious 
but all the more hidden,” Johann Heinrich Lambert states in Cosmologische Briefe 
über die Einrichtung des Weltbaues (Augsburg, 1761), 116 (trans. R.B.). See also 
Edna Ullman-Margalit, “Invisible-Hand Explanations,” Synthese 39 (1978): 263–
291; Stephen D. Benin, “The ‘Cunning of God’ and Divine Accommodation,” 
Journal of the History of Ideas 45 (1984): 179–191; and Alfonso M. Iacono, “Adam 
Smith e la metafora della ‘mano invisibile,’” Theoria 5 (1985): 77–94.
321.  See also Jean-Pierre Dupuy, Ordres et désordres: Enquête sur un nouveau 
paradigme (Paris, 1982); id., “L’auto-organisation du social dans la pensée libérale 
et économique,” in L’Auto-organisation: De la physique au politique, ed. Paul Du­
mouchel and Jean-Pierre Dupuy (Paris, 1983), 377–384; and id., “Shaking the In­
visible Hand,” in Disorder and Order: Proceedings of the Stanford International 
Conference (Sept. 14–16, 1981), ed. Paisley Livingston (Saratoga, CA, 1984), 129–144.
322.  See Staat und Gesellschaft, ed. Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde (Darmstadt, 
1976) for its worth. See also Niklas Luhmann, “Die Unterscheidung von Staat und 
Gesellschaft,” in id., Aufklärung, vol. 4 (1987), 67–73.
323.  See, e.g., Nicolaus Hieronymus Gundling, Jus naturae ac gentium, 3rd ed. 
(Halle, 1736), 40.
324.  See, e.g., François Véron Duverger de Forbonnais, Principes et observations 
oeconomiques (Amsterdam, 1767), 1–2.
325.  See Eigentum und Verfassung: Zur Eigentumsdiskussion im ausgehenden 18. 
Jahrhundert, ed. Rudolf Vierhaus (Göttingen, 1972).
326.  The new semantic version gained the upper hand from about 1850, and 
appears to have been motivated by the fact that the concepts “individualism” 
and “socialism,” which date from the 1820s, had meanwhile become ideologically 
charged—a good example of the description of society being observed in society 

    Notes to Chapter 5
and provoking corresponding reactions. The older terminology had distinguished 
only between collective and distributive, thus addressing problems of distribution 
and justice.
327.  More detail in Niklas Luhmann, “Individuum, Individualität, Individual­
ismus,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, vol. 3 (1989), 149–258.
328.  See above § 13.
329.  Note the curious amalgam of religious and individual-related semantics 
that spread, especially in Germany, around 1800, a historical time of transition 
when unity was adhered to as the decisive external reference, at least in meta­
phorical usage. We face the same problem today when the terminologies of eman­
cipation and participation amalgamate with the new external maximum value 
parameter, with the ecology problem.
330.  See Ferdinand Tönnies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft: Abhandlung des 
Communismus und des Socialismus als empirische Culturformen (Leipzig, 1887); 
later editions were subtitled Grundbegriffe der reinen Soziologie. See also René 
König, “Die Begriffe Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft bei Ferdinand Tönnies,” 
­Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 7 (1955): 348–420. Mediated 
(and theoretically alienated) by Parsons’s “pattern variables” conceptuality, this 
distinction still influenced developmental sociology and modernization research 
in the 1950s, and it was not until the 1980s that it came under criticism, generally 
leveled at the simplistic comparison between traditional and modern societies. 
The distinction has continued to serve as foil to historical retrospectives. See, e.g., 
Lars Clausen and C. Schlüter, Hundert Jahre “Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft”: Fer­
dinand Tönnies in der internationalen Diskussion (Opladen, 1991).
331.  A good overview is provided by the article by U. Dierse in the Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 1 (Basel, 1971), cols. 267–294.
332.  See Juan Eusebio Nierembert, De la diferencia entre lo temporal y eterno 
(Madrid, 1640), trans. René Esturmy de Villecour as La balance du temps et de 
l’éternité (Le Mans, 1676).
333.  Ulrich Schulz-Buschhaus, “La Bruyère und die Historizität der Moral—
Bemerkungen zu De la Mode 16,” Romanistische Zeitschrift für Literaturgeschichte 
13 (1989): 179–191, points to parallel disintegration owing to the specialization of 
occupational roles, thus to factual complexity.
334.  See Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, ed. Koselleck et al. (cited n. 110 above), 5 
(1984): 653–788 (653, 725ff.), s.vv. Revolution, Rebellion, Aufruhr, Bürgerkrieg; Mona 
Ozouf, “Révolution,” in Dictionnaire critique de la Révolution française (cited n. 
296 above), 847–858. The thesis of a new interpretation during the French Revolu­
tion is controversial above all because the debate has never clarified what this new 
interpretation really is; for it must naturally be assumed that both temporal refer­
ence and the element of violence had long been familiar, and that, at least since 
the Glorious Revolution [in England], it had no longer been a question of a re­
turn to old conditions.

Notes to Chapter 5    
335.  See the contribution by Reinhart Koselleck on the development of the 
modern concept of history as a “collective singular” in Geschichtliche Grundbe­
griffe, ed. id. et al. (cited n. 110 above), 2 (1976): 647–717.
336.  But by no means in Max Weber, as sociologists often assume. See, e.g., 
Louis de Bonald, “De la manière d’écrire l’histoire” (1807), in id., Œuvres complètes, 
vol. 9 (Paris, 1856; repr., Geneva, 1982), 78–122 (91): “ce n’est que dans l’ensemble 
ou la généralité même des faits qu’on peut étudier l’histoire de la société.”
337.  Along with other “temporal distortions,” this has also struck Anthony 
Giddens; see his The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration 
(Berkeley, CA, 1984), 236ff. (242).
338.  Progress had, however, always been seen as balanced progress with high 
costs. The bourgeois protagonists of progress could not be accused of naïveté 
in this respect. See, e.g., Jean Blondel, Des hommes tels qu’ils sont et doivent être: 
­Ouvrage de sentiment (London, 1758); Simon-Nicolas-Henri Linguet, Théorie des 
loix civiles, ou Principes fondamentaux de la société (2 vols., London, 1767); Mira­
beau, La science (cited n. 165 above), xxi: “dégradation necessairement résultant 
des progrès mêmes de notre perfectibilité possible.”
339.  Friedrich H. Tenbruck, Geschichte und Gesellschaft (Berlin, 1986), combats 
the loss of the question “What is history?” by the means of sociological theory—
only to renounce the question “What is society?”
340.  Despite all criticism from the historians, epochal divisions have not quite 
died out in sociology. And how should one otherwise demonstrate trends empiri­
cally? See, e.g., Darcy Ribeiro, O processo civilizatório: Etapas da evolução sóciocul­
tural (Rio de Janeiro, 1968), trans. Betty J. Meggers as The Civilizational Process 
(Washington, DC, 1968); Wolfgang Schluchter, Die Entwicklung des okzidentalen 
Rationalismus (Tübingen, 1979).
341.  See Horst Folkers, “Verabschiedete Vergangenheit: Ein Beitrag zur unauf­
hörlichen Selbstdeutung der Moderne,” in Theorie als Passion, ed. Dirk Baecker et 
al. (Frankfurt, 1987), 46–83.
342.  However, the literature on time has so far devoted little attention to this. 
See Ingrid Oesterle, “Der ‘Führungswechsel der Zeithorizonte’ in der deutschen 
Literatur,” in Studien zur Ästhetik und Literaturgeschichte der Kunstperiode, ed. 
Dirk Grathoff (Frankfurt, 1985), 11–75. See also Nassehi, Zeit (cited n. 220 above), 
esp. 233ff.
343.  See chap. 4.3 above.
344.  Reinhart Koselleck in Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, ed. id. et al. (cited n. 
110 above), introduction, 1: xiii–xxvii (xvii–xviii).
345.  David Hume, “Of the Original Contract,” in id., Philosophical Works, 
vol. 3: Essays Moral, Political, and Literary (London, 1882; repr., Aalen, 1964), 
443–460 (443).
346.  Carlo Mongardini, “Dimensionen der Zeit in der Soziologie,” in Zeit 
als Strukturelement von Lebenswelt und Gesellschaft, ed. Friedrich Fürstenberg and 

    Notes to Chapter 5
Ingo Mörth (Linz, 1986), 37–58 (51), calls this the “magic return of the increasing 
fragmentation of the social to the homogeneous unity of our rationality model.”
347.  Today these conditions have significantly reversed. Progressives have 
themselves become conservative in their ideas, and now, since they no longer have 
a theory of society at their disposition, they oscillate between reflection and po­
lemics. So-called neoconservatism is their invention, not the self-description of 
another group.
348.  The inventor of the concept of ideology was Antoine-Louis-Claude Des­
tutt de Tracy, in whose Élémens d’idéologie (5 vols., Paris, 1801–1815) “ideas” are un­
derstood as sensualized notions.
349.  Since this development there has been discussion—seemingly without 
issue—on how this connection with interests could be “scientifically” demonstrated 
if there is no prospect of also achieving general agreement with the interested par­
ties observed. See on the extension of this problem to science itself, Barry Barnes, 
Interests and the Growth of Knowledge (London, 1977), esp. 27ff. It therefore seems 
that the ideology concept imposes partiality for epistemological reasons alone.
350.  One might well ask how, in the light of this theory, Marx saw himself as 
a publicist. Can capitalists who read Marx at least learn that they cannot see what 
they cannot see? And what conclusion is to be drawn from the recursive intercon­
nection of seeing not-seeing? But, like Hegel, Marx appears to have been unable to 
take his own theory into account in his own theory—except as scientific proof for 
the prospect and clarification of conditions for the predicted revolution.
351.  See, e.g., on the salon philosophers of the Enlightenment, Simon-­Nicolas-
Henri Linguet, Le fanatisme des philosophes (London [Abbeville?], 1764); and “con­
servative” views of the French Revolution, e.g., Ernst Brandes, Über einige bisherige 
Folgen der französischen Revolution in Rücksicht auf Deutschland (Hannover, 1792).
352.  See Dietrich Schwanitz, Systemtheorie und Literatur: Ein neues Paradigma 
(Opladen, 1990), 181ff.
353.  The 25th Congress of the German Society for Sociology, which aimed to 
address this subject, barred the way from the outset with its wording, “Die Mod­
ernisierung moderner Gesellschaften” [The Modernization of Modern Societies] 
(emphasis added by N.L.). See the proceedings edited by Wolfgang Zapf, Die 
Modernisierung moderner Gesellschaften (Frankfurt, 1991).
354.  See Nicolas Hayoz, Fictions socialistes et société moderne: Aspects soci­
ologiques de l’effondrement programmé de l’URSS (thesis, Geneva, 1996).
355.  See, e.g., Daniel Lerner, “Modernization I: Social Aspects,” in Interna­
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (New York, 1968), 10: 387–395.
356.  See, an exception in sociology, Anthony Giddens, The Nation-State and 
Violence (Cambridge, 1985). The inflation of political concepts into a format cov­
ering society as a whole should be mentioned—e.g., the power concept in late 
Foucault, or, attracting less attention, the concept of “constitution” in David 
­Sciulli, “Foundations of Societal Constitutionalism: Principles from the Concepts 

Notes to Chapter 5    
of Communicative Action and Procedural Legality,” British Journal of Sociology 39 
(1988): 377–408.
357.  See, e.g., naturally only with respect to the computer, Die Zukunft der In­
formationsgesellschaft, ed. Philipp Sonntag (Frankfurt, 1983); also, especially con­
cerning the effects of such a self-description, The Ideology of the Information Age, 
ed. Jennifer D. Slack and Fred Fejes (Norwood, NJ, 1987). See also Karl Stein­
buch, Die informierte Gesellschaft: Geschichte und Zukunft der Nachrichtentechnik 
(Reinbek, 1968); Simon Nora and Alain Minc, L’informatisation de la société: Rap­
port à M. le Président de la République (Paris, 1978); Lothar Späth, Wende in die 
Zukunft: Die Bundesrepublik auf dem Weg in die Informationsgesellschaft (Reinbek, 
1985); David Lyon, “From ‘Post-Industrialism’ to ‘Information Society’: A New 
Social Transformation?” Sociology 20 (1986): 577–588; id., The Information Soci­
ety: Issues and Illusions (Cambridge, 1988); Ian Miles, Howard Rush, Kevin Turner, 
and John Bessant, Information Horizons: Social Implications of New Information 
Technologies (Aldershot, UK, 1988); and Bruno Tietz, Wege in die Informationsge­
sellschaft: Szenarien und Optionen für Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft (Stuttgart, 1989). 
These detailed (but far from exhaustive) references are also intended, in anticipa­
tion of the next section, to illustrate the influence of the mass media. Publications 
on single phenomena such as electronic data processing and their consequences 
generate headlines owing to the need to choose a pithy title for a book, and the 
result is a follow-up literature that takes it seriously and treats the book title as a 
concept summarizing essential characteristics of modern society.
358.  See, e.g., Ulrich Beck, Risikogesellschaft: Auf dem Weg in eine andere Mod­
erne (Frankfurt, 1986), and the ensuing discussion. On the question of an epoch-
making turning point, see esp. Ditmar Brock, “Die Risikogesellschaft und das 
Risiko soziologischer Zuspitzung,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 20 (1991): 12–24. Jef­
frey C. Alexander and Philip Smith, “Social Science and Salvation: Risk Society 
as Mythical Discourse,” ibid. 25 (1996): 251–262, plead for a more strongly “cul­
tural” interpretation.
359.  See Marc Uri Porat, The Information Economy (Stanford, 1976), which has 
had considerable influence on later linguistic usage.
360.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Entscheidungen in der ‘Informationsgesellschaft’” 
(1996), in Reform und Innovation in einer unstabilen Gesellschaft, ed. Giancarlo 
Corsi and Elena Esposito (Stuttgart, 2005), 27–40.
361.  See Jean Voge, “The Information Economy and the Restructuring of 
Human Organization,” in Laws of Nature and Human Conduct, ed. Ilya Prigogine 
and Michèle Sanglier (Brussels, 1987), 237–244.
362.  See, e.g., Wolfgang Bonß, Vom Risiko: Unsicherheit und Ungewißheit in 
der Moderne (Hamburg, 1995).
363.  This has been above all the case since the publication of Fritz Machlup’s 
Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States (Princeton, NJ, 
1962), which, however, still distinguished between these two concepts.

    Notes to Chapter 5
364.  Similar ambivalence is also to be found in older societies such as ancient 
China or Mesopotamia, which obtained information by means of divination tech­
niques. This “information society” could interpret lines on surfaces (on bones or 
tortoise shells), the flight of birds, or the intestines of sacrificial animals as signs 
of something hidden. With the interpretation of the signs, each divination repro­
duced the religious precondition of a hidden meaning. And, since information is 
quickly needed to determine meaning, just as is the case today, the accuracy of the 
information was not the issue.
365.  See, e.g., the distinction between risk and rationality discussed in Klaus 
Peter Japp, “Das Risiko der Rationalität für technisch-ökologische Systeme,” in 
Riskante Entscheidungen und Katastrophenpotentiale: Elemente einer soziologischen 
Risikoforschung, ed. Jost Halfmann and Klaus Peter Japp (Opladen, 1990), 34–
60. In this view, having arrived at a superordinate standpoint—attitudes toward 
risks—risk society ceases to be a society based on rationality.
366.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 1.
367.  In this way we can, e.g., speak of “post-industrial” society although in­
dustrial production quite obviously continues and is actually more indispensable 
than ever. Criticism can be eluded through the blatant lack of seriousness of such 
talk; it indicates that one doesn’t mean what one says—without saying what one 
means when one says that one doesn’t mean what one says. The list is long: neo-
Marxism, poststructuralism, neofunctionalism, neoconservatism; or such labels as 
new social movements, new individualism, new media. The structure is always the 
same: the assertion of a temporal difference evidenced by isolated phenomena al­
lows one to proceed without overall analysis and in describing society to focus on 
what is new (or what is considered to be so) as substitute for the essential.
368.  But see Peter Heintz, Die Weltgesellschaft im Spiegel von Ereignissen (Dies­
senhofen, Switzerland, 1982); Frank Marcinkowski, Publizistik als autopoietisches 
System: Politik und Massenmedien. Eine systemtheoretische Analyse (Opladen, 1993).
369.  Thus, with Gramsci’s concept, Todd Gitlin, The Whole World Is Watching: 
Mass Media in the Making and Unmaking of the New Left (Berkeley, CA, 1980).
370.  There were precursors in many discussion contexts, e.g., in the form of 
the distinction between opinion and knowledge. Or in the concept of “common 
sense.” Or in the thesis that raison d’État prescribes that the prince respect the 
opinions of his subjects but not necessarily act in accordance with them.
371.  Torvald Sande, “Risk in Industry,” in Risk and Decisions, ed. W.T. Single­
ton and Jan Hovden (Chichester, UK, 1987), 183–189 (186), estimates the contri­
bution of accidents and disasters to GNP at 2 percent (without details and perhaps 
counting only preventive measures, to the exclusion of compensatory payments).
372.  See also Deleuze, Logique du sens (cited n. 286 above), 9ff., 50ff.
373.  See chap. 4.15 above.
374.  See Ungewollte Selbstzerstörung: Reflexionen über den Umgang mit katas­
trophalen Entwicklungen, ed. Hans Peter Dreitzel and Horst Stenger (Frankfurt, 

Notes to Chapter 5    
1990), and esp. in this Rolf Lindner, “Medien und Katastrophen: Fünf Thesen” 
(124–134).
375.  On this change in approach in recent media research, see Winfried Schulz, 
Die Konstruktion von Realität in den Nachrichtenmedien: Analyse der aktuellen Berich­
terstattung (Freiburg, 1976). On the recent discussion and transfer of the “radical con­
structivism” of epistemology to mass-media theory, see a number of contributions in 
Die Wirklichkeit der Medien: Eine Einführung in die Kommunikationswissenschaft, ed. 
Klaus Merten, Siegfried J. Schmidt, and Siegfried Weischenberg (Opladen, 1994); 
Niklas Luhmann, Die Realität der Massenmedien, 2nd ed. (Opladen, 1996).
376.  On the need for and use of such “distinctions” see Pierre Bourdieu, La 
distinction: Critique sociale du jugement de goût (Paris, 1975).
377.  That this has a far-reaching influence on the style of advertising does not 
need to be demonstrated. The objects really for sale can be relegated to the back­
ground of a prestige setting. And one is still be able to advertise cigarettes even if 
it is forbidden, since there is no longer any need to state explicitly what one is ad­
vertising or why.
378.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.3.
379.  For the one argument, that of the philosopher, see Kant’s well-known an­
swer to the question “Was ist Aufklärung?” (What is enlightenment?) (1784); for 
the other, that of the politician, see Jacques Necker, De l’administration des finances 
en France (1784), in id., Œuvres complètes, vols. 4 and 5 (Paris, 1821; repr., Aalen, 
1970), 1: 49ff. On the semantic overburdening of the concept at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century, see also Stephen Holmes, Benjamin Constant and the Mak­
ing of Modern Liberalism (New Haven, CT, 1984), 241ff.
380.  See V. O. Key Jr., Public Opinion and American Democracy (New York, 
1961), 38.
381.  On the adverse effect of this problem of uncertainty absorption on the 
process of utterance selection, see Denis McQuail, Uncertainty About the Audience 
and the Organization of Mass Communication, Sociological Review Monograph 13 
(1969), 75–84. From a practical point of view, this problem is solved very effec­
tively by time pressure in editorial departments.
382.  See explicitly Talcott Parsons and Gerald Platt, The American University 
(Cambridge, MA, 1973). A remarkably critical reflection on this syndrome is to be 
found in the late work of Helmut Schelsky, esp. Die Arbeit tun die anderen: Klas­
senkampf und Priesterherrschaft der Intellektuellen (Opladen, 1975), mixing reflec­
tion culture and polemic renouncing any account of reflection that in terms of the 
prevailing habits of thought is considered “conservative.”
383.  For a more recent example, see Ulrich Beck, Risikogesellschaft (cited n. 
358 above), and in even sharper tone, id., Gegengifte: Die organisierte Unverant­
wortlichkeit (Frankfurt, 1988).
384.  On such “omissions,” see, e.g., Jacques Derrida, Marges de la philosophie 
(Paris, 1972).

    Notes to Chapter 5
385.  The observer would immediately come up against the complications, in­
cluding the need for a multivalent logic of warning, discussed by Lars Clausen and 
Wolf R. Dombrowsky, “Warnpraxis und Warnlogik,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 13 
(1984): 293–307.
386.  See Ungewollte Selbstzerstörung, ed. Dreitzel and Stenger (cited n. 374 
above).
387.  And deliberately. But how consciously? See only Beck, Gegengifte (cited 
n. 383 above). There are, of course, abundant instances in evidence—as well as cor­
respondingly inappropriate reactions. I limit myself to sociologists.
388.  See Peter Fuchs, Moderne Kommunikation: Zur Theorie des operativen Dis­
placements (Frankfurt, 1993), and also id., Die Erreichbarkeit der Gesellschaft: Zur 
Konstruktion und Imagination gesellschaftlicher Einheit (Frankfurt, 1992).
389.  See on the same subject Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World, trans. 
Hélène Iswolsky (Bloomington, IN, 1984). Also on the shift in the sense of par­
ody in modernity, see David Roberts, Art and Enlightenment: Aesthetic Theory after 
Adorno (Lincoln, NE, 1991), esp. 164ff.
390.  August Wilhelm von Schlegel, Die Kunstlehre (pt. 1 of Vorlesungen über 
die Schöne Literatur und Kunst, 1801ff.) (Stuttgart, 1963), 49. The answer is “grop­
ing in the dark.” The context makes it clear that the gibe is directed not so much 
at physics as at empirical psychology.
391.  Thus—from Marx to Adorno—“fetishism.” See also Alfonso M. Iacono, 
Le fétichisme: Histoire d’un concept (Paris, 1992).
392.  And to this extent, one is “doing what comes naturally,” to quote Stanley 
Fish, Doing What Comes Naturally: Change, Rhetoric, and the Practice of Theory in 
Literary and Legal Studies (Oxford, 1989).
393.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 76: “The observer, since he distinguishes the space 
he occupies, is also a mark.”
394.  See Theodor W. Adorno et al., Der Positivismusstreit in der deutschen Sozi­
ologie (Neuwied, 1969). Although the topic of this controversy is not negligible, it 
is senseless as controversy. Leaving aside the problem of “dialectics,” the distinction 
can be reduced to the difference between first- and second-order observation and a 
correspondingly differing understanding of latency, critique, and enlightenment.
395.  For an example, see Niklas Luhmann, Ökologische Kommunikation: Kann 
die moderne Gesellschaft sich auf ökologische Gefährdungen einstellen? (Opladen, 1986).
396.  Today’s sociology of science has taken this path anyway—see, e.g., David 
Bloor, Knowledge and Social Imagery (London, 1976); Karin Knorr-Cetina, Die Fab­
rikation von Erkenntnis: Zur Anthropologie der Naturwissenschaft (Frankfurt, 1984); 
and Barry Barnes, About Science (Oxford, 1985). It lacks only a correspondingly rad­
icalized epistemology, and this could be remedied if one were to use the possibili­
ties of a theory of operationally closed systems. See Niklas Luhmann, Erkenntnis 
als Konstruktion (Bern, 1988); id., Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft (cited n. 19 above).
397.  With regard to organisms, Humberto Maturana, Erkennen: Die Organisa­

Notes to Chapter 5    
tion und Verkörperung von Wirklichkeit [Knowledge: The Organization and Em­
bodiment of Reality] (Braunschweig, 1982), 36–37, has this to say: “With reference 
to the observer, the niche therefore appears to be part of the environment; for the 
observed organism, by contrast, the niche represents the entire interactional area 
that belongs to him. As such it can therefore not be part of an environment that 
lies exclusively in the cognitive domain of the observer. Niche and environment 
therefore overlap only to the extent in which the observer (including his tools) 
and the organism possess comparable organizations.” Where this distinction is ad­
opted by sociology, it should be added that the cognitions of the first- and second-
order observer always take shape in the medium of meaning, and that the overlap 
between their domains of cognition is ensured by both observers using communi­
cations as observational operations.
398.  That one is obliged in third-order description to become involved in para­
dox is obvious considering that contingency is defined in terms of the negation of 
necessity. And it is just as clear that we find ourselves in a supramodal sphere that 
was once reserved to God.
399.  It was thus not by accident that the thesis of the contingency of the world 
was first formulated by theology in an effort to observe God as the Creator, and 
hence as observer. The idea of God as primary observer who does not need to dis­
tinguish himself in order to observe offers special guarantees that have to be aban­
doned if one conceives of the position of primary observer as occupied by normal 
empirical systems.
400.  See, also, on the “blindness” of this striving for values, William James, 
“On a Certain Blindness in Human Beings,” in id., Talks to Teachers on Psychol­
ogy and to Students on Some of Life’s Ideals (1912), in id., Works (Cambridge, MA, 
1983), 132–149.
401.  For details, see Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 2.
402.  See Foerster, Observing Systems (cited n. 26 above), esp. 73ff.
403.  See Ernst Cassirer, Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff (Berlin, 1910).
404.  Whether the thrust is to be seen as critical or affirmative remains moot for 
Kingsley Davis, “The Myth of Functional Analysis as a Special Method in Sociology 
and Anthropology,” American Sociological Review 24 (1959): 757–772. In the Frank­
furter Allgemeine Zeitung’s literary supplement, 13 November 1990, L12, Stefan 
Breuer argued that, contrary to my intentions, my analyses have considerable criti­
cal potential, saying: “criticism and protest are notoriously far from his thoughts.”
405.  Elena Esposito, L’operazione di osservazione: Costruttivismo e teoria dei 
sistemi sociali (Milan, 1992), suggests that at the level of second-order observation 
eigenvalues assume a form that can be described only in modal theoretical terms.
406.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Deconstruction as Second-Order Observing,” 
New Literary History 4 (1993): 763–782.
407.  See, e.g., Paul de Man, The Resistance of Theory (Minneapolis, 1986), who 
calls the language of literature “the language of self-resistance” (20).

    Notes to Chapter 5
408.  See Arthur C. Danto, The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art (New 
York, 1986) “Philosophy as/and/of Literature” and “Philosophizing Literature,” 
135–161, 163–186.
409.  See only Willard Van Orman Quine, “Two Dogmas of Empiricism,” repr. 
in id., From a Logical Point of View (1953; 2nd ed., Cambridge, MA, 1961), 20–46.
410.  See E. T. A. Hoffmann’s caveat in “Des Kapellmeisters Johannes Kreislers 
Gedanken über den hohen Wert der Musik,” in id., Musikalische Novellen und 
Schriften, ed. Richard Münnich (Weimar, 1961), 196–207 (197): “the unpleasant 
thing about reading, in my view, is that one is, so to speak, forced to think about 
what one is reading” (trans. R.B.).
411.  See Mary Douglas, How Institutions Think (Syracuse, NY, 1986), esp. 81ff.
412.  Seeking to dissolve this morally obligating perspective through the semi­
otic deconstruction of social reality, Dean MacCannell and Juliet F. MacCannell 
write, from outside the disciplinary tradition of sociology: “American sociology, in 
particular, has aligned itself with the moral imperative to please others: one ought 
to understand the other, to be open and truthful, to construe the other’s meaning 
in a positive way” (MacCannell and MacCannell, The Time of the Sign: A Semiotic 
Interpretation of Modern Culture [Bloomington, IN, 1982], 55).
413.  For greater detail, see chap. 5.1 above.
414.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 1.
415.  The underlying seriousness is often misunderstood because paradoxical 
theses often sound whimsical and are in turn parodied. But see, e.g., from the 
comprehensive retrospective literature, A. E. Malloch, “The Techniques and Func­
tion of the Renaissance Paradox,” Studies in Philology 53 (1956): 191–203; Michael 
McCanles, “Paradox in Donne,” Studies in the Renaissance 13 (1966): 266–287; and 
Colie, Paradoxia epidemica (cited n. 50 above).
416.  Kenneth J. Gergen, Toward Transformation in Social Knowledge (New 
York, 1982), speaks of “generative capacity, that is, the capacity to challenge the 
guiding assumptions of the culture, to raise fundamental questions regarding con­
temporary social life, to foster reconsideration of that which is ‘taken for granted’ 
and thereby to generate fresh alternatives for social action,” and goes on to say: 
“One may also foster generative theory by searching for an intelligible antithesis 
to commonly accepted understandings” (142). See also id., “Correspondence Ver­
sus Autonomy in the Language of Understanding Human Action,” in Metatheory 
in Social Science: Pluralism and Subjectivities, ed. Donald W. Fiske and Richard A. 
Schweder (Chicago, 1986), 136–162.
417.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Paradoxie der Form,” in Kalkül der Form, ed. 
Dirk Baecker (Frankfurt, 1993), 197–212; id., “The Paradoxy of Observing Sys­
tems,” Cultural Critique 31 (1995): 37–55.
418.  See Jurgen Ruesch and Gregory Bateson, Communication: The Social Ma­
trix of Psychiatry (New York, 1951), 191ff.
419.  See Dietrich Schwanitz, “Kommunikation und Bewußtsein. Zur system­

Notes to Chapter 5    
theoretischen Konstruktion einer literarischen Bestätigung der Systemtheorie,” 
in Kommunikation und Differenz: Systemtheoretische Ansätze in der Literatur- und 
Kunstwissenschaft, ed. Henk de Berg and Matthias Prangel (Opladen, 1993), 101–113.
420.  See Luhmann, Theory of Society, 1, chap. 1.3.
421.  See the detailed account in Luhmann, Systeme, 92ff.
422.  “Redescription” in the sense of Mary Hesse, Models and Analogies in Sci­
ence (Notre Dame, 1966), 157ff.
423.  Adopting the traditional view supported by a great deal of literature, Tim 
Ingold, Evolution and Social Life (Cambridge, 1986), 102, sees evolution as “con­
tinuous, directed and purposive movement,” whereas I base a differing description 
(redescription) of it on the requirements of a plausible self-description of society 
that includes history.
424.  It should be noted that this argues against all fixation of types, against 
every prescription of “forms of being.”
425.  Similar ideas as regards the legal system of society are to be found in 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur, Postmoderne Rechtstheorie: Selbstreferenz—Selbstorganisation—
Prozeduralisierung (Berlin, 1992), esp. 167ff.
426.  See Luhmann, Kunst, 482ff. See also Zeitgeist in Babel: The Postmodernist 
Controversy, ed. Ingeborg Hoesterey (Bloomington, IN, 1991).
427.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Why Does Society Describe Itself as Post­
modern?” Cultural Critique 30 (1995):171–186. The opposing view is to be found 
in Zygmunt Bauman, “Sociological Responses to Postmodernity,” Thesis Eleven 23 
(1989): 35–63, but without an adequate analysis of the alleged break between mod­
ern and postmodern society.
428.  See Jean-François Lyotard, La condition postmoderne: Rapport sur le Savoir 
(Paris, 1979).
429.  Even at the beginning of the twentieth century, after all, we find this said 
by a “Christian-conservative” anarchist, once again calling an epochal division 
into question; in The Education of Henry Adams (cited n. 250 above), 423–424, 
we read: “but paradox had become the only orthodoxy in politics as in science.”
430.  See Scott Lash, “Discourse or Figure: Postmodernism as a ‘Regime of Sig­
nification,’” Theory, Culture and Society 5 (1988): 311–336, and also id., “Tradition 
and the Limits of Difference,” in Detraditionalization: Critical Reflections on Au­
thority and Identity, ed. Paul Heelas, Scott Lash, and Paul Morris (Oxford, 1996), 
250–274. Lash stresses that the consequence of undermining distinctions is the 
transition from the discursive treatment of topics to sensory perception. See also 
Stewart R. Clegg, Modern Organizations: Organization Studies in the Postmodern 
World (London, 1990), 1–2, 11–12.
431.  Thus apparently Bauman, “Sociological Responses to Postmodernity” 
(cited n. 427 above).
432.  See chap. 4.1.
433.  See Günter Küppers and Rainer Paslack, “Chaos—Von der Einheit zur 

    Notes to Chapter 5
Vielheit: Zum Verhältnis von Chaosforschung und Postmoderne,” Selbstorganisa­
tion 2 (1991): 151–167. The title is somewhat misleading: what is at issue is precisely 
not crossing from one side to the other within a distinction, even that between 
unity and multiplicity. The problem is that crossing sides is possible in every dis­
tinction, and that it requires time and motivation and is therefore unpredictable.
434.  Albeit with a tendency toward jargon and without clarifying what virtus 
transforms the merely possible into something virtual. One thinks mostly of the 
possibility of allowing the computer (like the nervous system) to participate un­
seen, so that an illusionary reality comes into being with the aid of gloves, suits, 
etc., and distinguishing between illusion and reality is no longer possible in per­
ception itself. But this is only an additional demonstration that the brain works as 
an operationally closed system.
435.  This was already pointed out in one of the earliest reviews of Spencer-
Brown’s Laws of Form: see Heinz von Foerster, “Laws of Form,” Whole Earth Cata­
log, Spring 1969: 14; German version, “Gesetze der Form,” in Kalkül der Form, ed. 
Baecker (cited n. 417 above), 9–11.

Index to Volume 2
This index is based on the index to the original German edition, Die Gesellschaft der 
Gesellschaft. Band 2 (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag 1997).
Abandonment of redundancy, 98
Absorption of uncertainty, 143, 147–148, 152
Acceleration, 257
Accident. See Chance
Action theory, 273
Action, 9
Admiratio, 116
Advanced civilizations. See Stratification
Advertising, 262, 320
Aesthetics, 205, 239
Affected parties. See Involvement
Affiliation, 157
Agreement. See Understanding
Agriculture, 28
Aliens. See Strangers
Alternatives, 143–144, 162–163, 274
Amorality. See Higher amorality
Analog/digital, 110, 179
Analogy, 52, 194, 198, 199, 210
Analytic/synthetic truth, 95
Anarchism, 297
Anticipatory reactions, 137
Appeals, 100
Arbitrariness, 173, 212, 231–234
Art as imitation, 206
Art, 68, 81, 103, 116, 206, 238–239, 245, 248, 
345
Ascribed status, 28
Attribution, 260
Author, 180
Authority, 103, 147–148, 181–182, 196, 207, 
339
Autology, 170, 172, 175, 183, 305, 312, 328, 
329–332, 335–338, 345
Autonomy, 108–110
Autopoiesis, 8, 16, 89, 90–93, 95–100, 115–
117, 133–134, 178, 195, 218, 252, 312, 319, 
329
Balance. See Equilibrium
Basic research, 96
Beauty, 239
Before/after, 136
Beginning and end, 134, 136
Beginning. See Origin
Belief, 246
Bifurcation, 41, 53, 180, 325, 343
Bildung. See Education (Bildung)
Binary coding, 90–95, 128, 169, 280–282, 
318–319
Blind spot, 164, 177, 258, 304, 314, 323, 329, 
330, 338
Body, 26, 126
Borders. See Boundaries
Borrowing. See Credit
Boundaries, 31, 32, 33, 35, 43–46, 73, 94, 121, 
129–130
Calculus of probability, 247
Capital, 78
Capital/labor, 290
Capitalism, 310, 313
Careers, 86, 103, 261, 266
Cassandra, 324
Catastrophe, 15, 38, 49, 53, 67, 290 324, 
361n103
Categories, 190
Causality, 7, 92, 238, 260
Censorship, 78, 255
Center, 151

 
  Index to Volume 2
Center/periphery, 12, 13, 38, 39, 42–50, 104, 
141, 157, 164, 179, 184, 196, 223
Central bank, 111
Centralism. See Political centralism
Ceremonial, 220
Chance, 34, 101, 270
Charity, 26
Chiefly societies, 40–41
Child, 237–238
Circulation, 235
City, 287–288
Civil society, 109, 152, 228, 250, 267, 287, 
291
Class society, 179, 208, 289–292
Classes. See Class society; Social classes
Closure. See Operational closure
Coding of morality, 92, 214, 279–280, 336
Cognition, 168
Collectivity, 295
Communal terror, 132
Communication, 133–138, 340–341
Community, 220
Comparison, 225–226, 279, 333. See also 
Culture
Complexity, 30–31, 85, 88, 95, 98–101, 105, 
122, 141,162
Computer, 310–311, 312, 347
Concepts, 338
Conditioning, 130–131
Confession, 21–22, 214, 219, 256
Conflict, 6, 29, 31, 55, 148, 317
Consciousness, 133, 144–145, 172, 271
Consensus, 7, 172, 179, 212, 315–316
Conservatism, 303, 322, 327
Constitution, 112, 159, 232, 237, 241, 294, 308
Constraint, 274
Constructivism, 330, 333, 339, 348
Consumption, 75
Contacts. See Redundancy of possible 
contacts
Contingency, 90, 91, 240, 311, 330–331
Continuum. See Reality continuum
Contract, 31, 69, 112, 141–142, 198, 204
Control, 93, 108, 116, 125, 151, 307, 320
Conversation, 139
Corporations, 146
Corruption, 71, 147, 199, 207
Cosmologies, 184, 203, 205
Counter-concepts, 182
Counter-Enlightenment, 304
Coupling. See Loose/strict coupling; 
Structural coupling
Covert. See Secrecy
Creation, 200, 203, 262
Credit, 77, 83, 234
Crisis, 104, 327, 337–338
Criteria, 169, 225,268
Criticism. See Critique
Critique, 225–226, 243, 249, 314, 322–323, 
327–329, 333, 338, 339, 342
Critique of ideology, 327
Crossing, 187, 261, 346, 348
Cultural elites, 184
Culture, 176, 225–226, 249
Deception, 248
Decision-making. See Premises for decision-
making
Decisions, 101, 105–106, 143–145, 147–153, 
251, 259–260, 300
Deconstruction, 400n13
Dedifferentiation, 8, 14, 346,
Democracy, 101, 152, 156, 159, 289, 308
Demonstrations ,156, 158
Demystification, 274
Depression. See Statistical depression
Descent, 56–58
Descriptions of the world, 94, 208
Development aid, 21, 26
Deviation amplification, 25, 104, 107, 118
Devil, 154, 397n470
Dialectics, 192–193
Différance (Derrida) 347, 351n5
Differences in rank, 40–41. See also 
Stratification
Differentiation forms, 5, 9, 10–16. See also 
System
Differentiation, 1–165
Differentiation/generalization, 241–242, 293
Diffusion, 44
Digitization, 179
Dignitas, 62
Distinctions, 189–195, 205, 250, 330–332, 
337, 338–341, 346–349
Disturbance, 102, 104–105, 247
Divination, 395n86, 432n364
Division of labor, 42, 67, 98, 105, 235
Divisions, 190
Double contingency, 36, 132, 133, 135, 142, 279
Double series, 52

Index to Volume 2    
Duel, 82, 139, 216
Duplication rules, 91
Ecology, 39, 99, 108, 120, 126,–127, 155, 160, 
317, 324
Economy, 74, 85, 95, 96, 98, 99, 111, 152, 
275, 308, 309
Economy, 996
Education (Bildung), 22, 85, 175, 205, 221–
223, 237–238, 268, 274, 308–309
Education (Erziehung), 82, 113–114, 142, 205, 
221, 222–223, 237–238, 308, 309
Education (Erziehung) and Selection, 238
Eigenstates. See Eigenvalues
Eigenvalues, 13, 169, 180, 305, 314, 318, 321, 
332–334
Emanation, 197, 199, 218
Emancipation, 127, 205, 271, 273–274, 307, 
344, 428n329
Emergence, 200
Empires, 43, 44–46, 68, 130
Endogamy, 12, 40, 42, 48, 51, 54, 64
Enlightenment, 23, 81, 85, 204, 225, 242, 
248, 255, 334
Ennoblement, 61, 64, 71, 72, 82
Entertainment, 262
Environment, 269
Episodes, 134, 136
Epochal divisions, 10, 14, 299
Epochs. See Epochal divisions
Equality, 151, 160, 179, 242, 248, 263, 264–
265, 267, 270, 289–291, 301
Equality/inequality, 58–59
Equations, 247
Equifinality, 28, 39
Equilibrium, 89, 117–118, 131, 153, 235, 247
Error, 190, 191, 194
Erziehung. See Education (Erziehung)
Estates, 63, 216, 290, 291
Eternity, 252, 253, 256, 258, 297–298, 300, 
347
Ethic of responsibility, 108
Ethics, 108–109, 121–124, 125, 159, 207, 209–
220, 277–280, 282–283
Ethnic groups, 121, 425n299
Event society, 292
Events, 259, 342
Evidence, 80
Evolution, 11–15, 120–121, 194, 200, 296, 312, 
341–344
Evolution theory. See Systems theory and 
evolution theory
Evolutionary advances, 15
Examination system, 81
Examples, 203
Exempla. See Examples
Expectations, 117
Experts, 113–114
Explanation, 260
Factual dimension, 340
Familiar/unfamiliar, 34
Family, 27–28, 30, 31, 35, 36, 38–41, 79, 110, 
127, 130, 147, 209, 221, 239–240, 290, 
301, 318
Fashion, 298
Fate, 34, 58, 277
First/second-order observation, 5, 49, 102–
103, 105, 109, 153, 173, 192, 206, 235, 268, 
270, 299–300, 304–305, 313, 316, 325, 
328–332
Fluctuations, 129
Forgetting. See Memory
Form, 2, 10, 91, 347–349. See also Reentry
Fortuna, 252, 253
Freedom, 218, 242, 291, 295, 301, 306, 237–
238, 265, 267, 268, 270, 272, 274, 277, 
281, 301, 308, 348
Freedom of contract, 237
Freedom of opinion, 308
Freedom of the press, 255
French Revolution, 81, 139, 227, 242, 257, 
258, 264, 284, 286, 291, 293, 298, 301, 
302, 306–307, 327
Function, 96, 332–333
Functional differentiation, 8–9, 13, 16, 20, 
24–26, 51, 53, 65–68, 78, 84, 87–89, 93, 98, 
102, 106–108, 109–110, 115, 120, 124–126, 
127–131, 139, 149, 229, 242, 285, 293, 332
Functional primacy, 90, 98, 108
Fundamentalism, 121, 123, 128, 129, 183, 208, 
267, 276, 289, 389n373
Future, 88, 89, 194, 234, 251, 252, 256–265, 
279, 292, 298, 299–301, 302, 303, 306, 
311, 312
Genealogy, 35, 55, 56, 58
General/particular, 239
Genus. See Species/genera
Ghetto development, 128, 283

 
  Index to Volume 2
Gift, 199
Globalization, 127–131. See also World 
society
God, 186, 190, 197, 198, 203–205, 207–208, 
211, 218, 254, 300, 325–326, 334
Grace, 204
Growth, 316
Guilds, 20, 45, 66, 141, 147, 222
Happiness, 22, 127, 291
Hermeneutics, 181, 239,
Hierarchy, 146, 201, 227
Higher amorality, 92, 293
Historical process, 193, 342
History, 35, 177, 182, 241–242, 251–252, 256, 
260–262, 300, 313
History of society, 299
Honestas/utilitas, 215
Honor, 72, 73, 81–83, 216–217
House. See Household
Household, 37, 59–63, 110, 209–210, 280. 
See also Families
Housework, 393n418
Human beings. See Humanity
Human dignity, 248
Human rights, 23, 232, 248, 267, 270, 301
Humanism. See Humanity
Humanity, 44–45, 87, 101, 198, 204–205, 
211, 212–213, 214, 217, 237, 241–242, 245, 
269–270, 276, 324–325
Hypercomplexity, 173, 183
Hypocrisy, 22, 277
Identity, 22, 121, 174, 181, 209, 263, 276, 286
Ideology, 103, 162, 170, 225, 249, 267, 274, 
282, 296, 299, 301–302, 304, 322, 402n36
Ignorance, 321, 324
Imitation, 213, 238–239, 254
Implausible evidence, 80
Improbability, 27, 65
Inclusion, 84, 101, 270, 271, 287, 295, 300–
301
Inclusion and exclusion, 16–27, 56, 121, 146, 
151–152, 280
Inclusion of exclusion, 125, 313
Incommunicability, 276
Incongruent perspectives, 124
Inconsistency, 204–205
Indeterminacy. See Intrasystemic 
indeterminacy
Indexical expressions, 30, 177,
Individual, 268, 276, 289, 296, 2, 17, 18, 
20–23, 28, 84–86, 101–102, 103, 106, 120, 
126–127, 141–142, 154, 156, 171, 176, 204, 
213, 234, 235, 239, 263–264, 271, 286, 
295–296, 306, 314
Individualism, 263, 267
Inequality, 290
Inflation, 99
Inflation/deflation, 282
Information, 116, 258, 262
Information society, 310–213
Innovation, 119. See also Novelty
Inside/outside, 266
Institution, 171
Integration, 5–8, 16, 96–97, 108, 137
Intellectuals, 322
Interaction/society, 131–140
Interaction systems, 132–137
Interdependence. See Interruption of 
interdependence
Interests, 266, 275, 279, 304
Interference. See Disturbance
Internalization, 274
Interruption of interdependence, 103–104, 
152,–153, 340
Intersubjectivity, 172–173, 304, 422n270
Intimacy, 22, 132, 140
Intransparency, 178, 204
Intrasystemic indeterminacy, 6, 88, 143, 174, 
346
Inviolate level, 122, 123, 303. See also Values
Invisible hand, 200, 204, 235, 294, 297, 
427n320
Involvement, 156, 335
Irony, 279, 335, 348
Irritation, 16, 97, 100, 102, 104, 110, 115–124, 
148, 179, 261, 312, 322
Iurisdictio, 236
Ius, 202
Jurisprudence of concepts, 95, 237
Jurisprudence of interests, 95, 237
Kinship, 27–28, 31, 40, 42, 51, 53, 60
Knowledge, 232, 242–243, 320
Knowledge of people, 83
Language, 249–250
Latency, 103, 329–330, 332

Index to Volume 2    
Law, 29–30, 32, 68, 69, 78–79, 83, 85, 201, 
202, 221, 230, 231, 232, 236, 308
Learning capacity, 117
Liberal/socialist, 111
Liberalism, 268, 288, 294, 302, 327
Life-world, 172
Limit values, 163
Logic, 92, 155, 186, 191, 196, 205, 228, 242, 
323
Loose/strict coupling, 324
Love match, 240
Love, 79, 101, 186
Magic, 33–34
Majority decisions, 294
Marked/unmarked, 176
Market, 360n100, 75, 101
Mass media, 140, 159 160, 162, 163, 262, 278, 
288, 314–323, 335, 336. See also Printing
Material, 189
Mathematics, 247
Meaning, 167, 244, 334, 340–345
Membership, 142–143
Memory, 30, 106–107, 123, 126, 134, 138, 193, 
224, 227,256–257, 262–263, 287–288, 
298, 320, 336, 346
Migration, 121, 128, 283, 289
Miracle, 186
Mirror, 198, 213, 318, 334
Mobility, 6, 60–61, 63–64
Modernity, 87, 260, 305–309, 344
Moment, 253
Money, 37, 61, 74–77, 142, 143, 275. See also 
Economy
Monsters, 187
Morality, 34, 59, 72, 92, 103, 194, 214, 217–
218, 242, 242, 249, 277–283, 317, 336. See 
also Coding of morality
Motives and purposes, 207, 214, 276
Motives, 139, 279
Movement, 188, 207, 252, 297, 300, 340, 347
Multifunctionality, 30
Multiple self-descriptions, 182–183. See also 
Hypercomplexity; Self-description
Myths, 35, 177
Narratives, 177, 180
Nation, 285–287, 375n222
National languages, 47, 287
Nationalism, 87
Nation-states, 129, 310
Natural/artificial, 296, 331
Natural law, 237
Nature, 55, 189, 194, 198,–199, 207, 211–212, 
227, 246–251, 402n40
Negation, 164, 206
Negative integration, 24
Negotiating systems, 115, 390n394
Neoconservatism, 327
Networks, 127–128, 131, 153
Newness. See Novelty
Nobility, 11–13, 48–49, 51, 53, 55–57, 61–66, 
68
Non-being. See Nothing
Non-trivial machines, 118
Norms, 20–30
Nothing, 186–187, 190
Novel, 276
Novelty, 116, 251, 253–255, 258, 316
Observation, 171, 176–177, 186–187, 189, 191, 
195, 293, 346
Oikos. See Household
Old European semantics, 183–226, 334
Ontology, 185–189, 191–196, 205–207, 220, 
242, 260, 330, 347
Opaqueness. See Intransparency
Operational closure, 4, 90, 97–98, 104–105, 
109, 116, 143, 145, 318. See also Autopoiesis
Opinions, 191
Opportunities, 82, 101. See also Chance
Oral/written, 138, 183
Order, 186
Organization, 9, 141–154
Origin, 190, 194, 198, 240, 248, 251, 253, 255, 
261–262, 270, 286, 287, 299
Origin of the state. See Theories on the 
origin of the state
Originality, 255, 265. See also Origin
Ornaments, 32
Orthodoxy, 180
Oscillation, 90, 106, 157, 165, 233
Other reference. See Self-reference and 
other-reference
Others. See Strangers
Outdifferentiation, 2, 15, 87
Paradox, 35, 120–122, 144, 154, 156, 162, 170, 
185, 193, 197, 207, 230, 233, 251, 293–305, 
338, 345

 
  Index to Volume 2
Parasites, 42
Participation, 202–203
Past, 227, 251–252, 256–260, 262, 298
Past/future, 101, 144, 346
Patriotism, 87, 220, 224, 278, 424n298
Patron-client relations, 38, 62, 71, 266
Payments, 8, 77, 85, 93, 95, 112
Pedagogy, 223
Perception of being perceived, 133
Perfection, 201, 203, 204, 207, 212, 249
Performance, 96–99
Person, 17–18, 31–32, 105–106, 126, 148, 193, 
248, 265, 277, 316
Personality. See Person
Philosophy, 242, 315
Physical force, 26
Physics, 326
Planning, 109, 116
Pleasure, 266
Pluralism, 332
Political centralism, 52
Political opposition, 71, 159
Political rivalry, 70–71,
Political society, 210
Political system, 79, 85, 100–102, 111–112, 115, 
124, 150, 152, 157
Polycontexturality, 183, 225, 281, 282, 313, 
337, 343
Poor relief, 26
Population increase, 120
Population, 276, 296
Position. See Post
Positive feedback. See Deviation 
amplification
Positive law, 119, 232, 237
Positivism dispute, 329
Post, 145
Postmodernism, 183, 272, 292, 305, 345–349
Potestas, 69, 70
Practice, 272
Preadaptive advances, 42
Premises for decision-making, 145, 147, 148
Presence, 133–135
Present, 136, 137–138, 188–109, 255–259, 263, 
298, 300
Prestige goods. See Trade in prestige goods
Principles, 249
Printing, 62, 69, 78, 185, 205, 219, 222, 227, 
229, 251, 254, 258, 277, 283, 287, 299
Privileges, 72
Problem/problem-solving, 119, 125, 145, 
243–244
Production, 247
Profit, 234
Program, 92, 105, 150. See also Criteria
Progress, 242, 252, 255, 299
Prohibition of self-exemption, 337
Property, 31, 57, 66, 69, 112–113, 295
Protest movements, 125, 154–165
Protest, 156
Prudentia, 71, 241, 253
Psychoanalysis, 276. See also Unconscious
Public opinion, 102, 160, 162, 163, 241, 255, 
315, 318, 335, 336
Publicness, 225
Purposes, 136, 207
Quasi-objects, 33
Raison d’État, 49, 70–72, 228, 229, 231, 281, 
376n225
Ratio, 211
Rationality, 120, 144, 235
Rationality demands, 84
Reality, 102, 103, 164–165, 171, 334. See also 
Constructivism
Reality continuum, 192
Reason, 198, 268
Reciprocity, 33, 35–41, 140
Recursion, 7, 13, 28, 93–94, 116, 180
Redescription, 183, 342–343
Redundancy, 117, 133–134. See also 
Abandonment of redundancy; 
Redundancy of possible contacts
Redundancy/variety, 257, 261
Redundancy of possible contacts, 41
Reentry, 3, 34, 121, 135, 143,159, 167, 169, 
173
References, 114
Reflection, 96, 169, 177
Reflection theories, 181, 226–242
Regional autonomy, 306–309
Regional differentiation. See World society
Regions, 127–131
Rejection value, 92
Relativism, 332. See also Pluralism
Religion, 33–34, 74, 78–79, 80, 157, 178, 197, 
200, 203, 204, 239, 245–246, 251, 267, 
278, 279, 282–283, 296, 297, 308, 323
Repetition, 32, 117, 178, 243

Index to Volume 2    
Representation, 201–203, 206, 289
Res. See Thing
Residual, 21
Resistance. See Right of resistance
Responsibility, 147–148
Revolution, 298–299, 302, 306
Rhetoric, 214, 241
Ridiculousness, 279
Right of resistance, 202
Risk society, 310–313
Risks, 148, 261, 311–313
Ritual, rites, 32
Rivalry. See Political rivalry
Role complementarities, 84, 140–141, 287
Roles, 105
Romanticism, 259, 293
Rule of law, 71, 308
Rules, 30, 33, 38
Sacrifice, 37
Salvation, 219
Salvation, 257
Saving, 37
Scandal, 100, 158
Scarcity, 37, 96, 235, 242
Schemata, 30, 126, 162, 185, 321, 324
Schematism, 169
School, 237–238
Schools, 220–223
Science, 69, 80, 85, 94, 96, 98, 99–100, 113–
114, 232, 233, 308, 335
Scripts, 30, 126, 158, 162, 321, 324
Secrecy, 33, 71, 313. See also Mystery
Secret. See Secrecy
Security, 80, 265, 266, 300
Segmentary differentiation, 12, 27–28, 31–
32, 38, 42,–43, 47, 48, 54, 61, 98, 108, 
283
Self-description, 29, 35, 167–349, 248, 313, 
322, 392n298
Self-exemption. See Prohibition of self-
exemption
Self-interest, 248, 270, 293–294
Self-love, 266
Self-organization, 200
Self-realization, 22, 127, 170, 296, 305
Self-reference, 167, 168
Self-reference and other-reference, 94–96, 
125, 134, 165, 168, 171, 175, 176, 178–179, 
195, 330
Self-substitutive orders, 93
Semantics, 32, 47, 179, 180, 323
Semiotics, 250, 333
Series rerum, 203
Signs, 189, 222, 250–251, 266
Simulation/dissimulation, 266
Simultaneity, 7–8, 130, 136, 137, 179, 263
Sin, 161, 224, 257
Sincerity, 140, 234
Skepticism, 194,206, 222, 227, 249, 303
Social, 214, 291
Social classes, 12, 24, 78, 86, 106
Social contract, 267
Social dimension, 340–342
Social mobility, 60, 63–65
Social movements. See Protest movements
Social welfare, 21, 26
Socialism, 288, 291, 302, 306, 313
Sociality, 268
Socialization, 85
Society, 339
Society/community, 382n293, 296
Sociology, 177, 299, 322–323, 328–329, 331–
332, 334
Solidarity, 210, 285, 291
Soul, 200, 266
Sources of law, 236
Sovereignty, 73, 229
Species/genera, 192–193, 942
Spirit, 397n469, 331, 344
State, 69–70, 96, 150, 152, 157, 231, 270, 
287–288, 314
State and society, 288, 294, 295
Statistical depression, 316
Strangers, 8, 31, 32, 358 n81
Stratification, 12, 13, 16, 18, 38–39, 42, 50–65, 
84, 86, 87, 104, 106, 107, 139, 147, 179, 
184, 200, 239,288
Structural coupling, 5, 59–60, 109–110, 163, 
312
Structural drift, 163
Structure, 177
Subject, 101, 259, 263–277, 296, 304, 326
Subject/object, 168, 169–175
Subjects, 231
Sublime, 239
Surplus possibilities. See Meaning
Symbiosis, 204
Symbols, 33–34
Symmetry, 36

 
  Index to Volume 2
Synchronization, 137–138, 147, 151
System differentiation, 1–9, 97–98, 341. See 
also Differentiation forms
System/environment, 2–6, 10, 88–89, 100, 
104, 116, 117–120, 125–126, 175
System integration/social integration, 16–17
System rationality, 119
Systems theory and evolution theory, 4
Taste, 81, 239, 255, 320
Technology, 243–244, 246–247
Teleology, 91–92, 213
Telos, 252
Territoriality, 28, 31, 42
Text, 180
Theater, 275
Theories on the origin of the state, 52
Theory, 240–242
Theory of society, 161–162, 266–267, 269, 
273, 242
Thing, 187–188
Time, 35, 36, 89, 101, 117, 138, 169, 171, 188–
190, 213–214, 251–263, 297–298, 347–348
Time and position, 261
Time dimension. See Time
Time measurement, 252, 258, 262
Trade in prestige goods, 39–40, 74, 361n103
Tradition, 128, 180–181, 182, 226–228, 256, 
278–279, 299
Transaction, 95
Truth, 206
Uncertainty. See Absorption of uncertainty
Unconscious, 296
Understanding, 101, 140, 165
Uniqueness, 265
Unirritability, 121–122, 243
Universal/particular, 208, 245, 286
Universalism, 277
Universality/specification, 10, 30, 67, 129, 
242, 245, 282
Universitas, 202, 204
Universities, 113–114, 124, 290
Unmarked space, 10, 63, 125, 176, 209, 255, 
269, 312, 323, 324
Unmarked state. See Unmarked space
Utility, 241
Utopia, 160, 164, 258, 291, 302, 328
Utterance. See Information
Validity, 303
Value change, 336
Values, 103, 105, 121–124, 154, 303, 331–332
Violence, 121
Virtual reality, 347
Visible/invisible, 204
Volk, 286
Warfare, 75, 288, 289, 314
Warning. See Cassandra
Welfare state, 309
What/how questions, 246, 250
Whole/parts, 3, 4–6, 97, 196–198
Wisdom, 315
Work, 76–77, 79, 141–142, 235
World, 170–171, 186, 194–195, 208, 226, 269, 
323, 339
World society, 129–131, 208, 286, 288, 292, 
306. See also Globalization
Writing, 35, 46,–47, 137, 138–139, 177–178
Zeitgeist, 286, 299

Index to Volume 1
This index is based on the index to the original German edition, Die Gesellschaft der 
Gesellschaft. Band 1 (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1997). It is included in Volume 2 
as a reference.
Acceptance, 43
Acceptance/rejection, 135, 137, 138–139, 173, 
190–191, 277
Accident. See Chance
Action, 45, 180–181, 200–204, 262
Action theory, 14–15, 31, 45
Actuality and potentiality, 21–22, 25–26, 27
Actuality, 23
Adaptation, 55, 262, 265, 268–269, 284, 324, 
342
Admiratio, 85, 407n223
Advanced civilizations. See Stratification
Aesthetics, 210
Affected parties, 323
Agreement, 42n109
Agriculture 306–307
Alphabet, 309
Alternatives, 284
Ambiguity, 52, 87
Ambivalence. See Ambiguity
Amplification, 194–195
Anticipatory reactions, 123
Art, 93, 209–211, 231, 290
Art criticism, 225n322
Artificial intelligence, 181
Attribution, 74, 200–204
Authenticity, 101, 143–144, 165–166
Author, 180
Authority, 81, 164, 174, 185, 188, 202
Autology, 1, 11, 26, 31, 78, 83, 104, 110, 118, 
330
Autonomy, 29, 59, 134, 224, 236, 245, 298
Autopoiesis, 18, 32–35, 39, 42, 53, 74, 78–79, 
103, 183–184, 115, 117, 122, 131–132, 137, 
264, 338
Banks, 294
Beautiful/ugly, 29, 227, 338–339
Before/after, 23, 266, 346, 348
Beginning, 267, 358
Beginning and end, 266
Being/non-being, 133, 254, 357
Belatedness, 65, 156
Binary coding, 62, 132–133, 134–138, 215–227, 
233, 276–277, 339–341
Blind spot, 110, 118, 258, 326–327
Boundary, 38–39
Causal technology, 217
Causality, 52, 56, 74, 94, 180, 201, 248, 253, 
264, 271, 286, 302, 317, 344–345
Censorship, 187
Center/periphery, 283, 295, 301
Chance, 32, 67, 134, 142, 189, 225, 258–259, 
263, 265, 270–271, 275–276, 279, 284–
285, 303–304, 310, 336–337
Church, 296
Cinema. See Film
Circulation, 234–235
Co-evolution, 325–326, 328, 338
Cognition, 68–73
Coinage, 197, 268, 307
Collective consciousness, 42
Common sense, 549
Communication, 1, 15–16, 34, 35–40, 41–49, 
113–249
Comparison, 17, 93–94, 248–249, 355–357
Complexity, 5–6, 77–83, 249, 269–270, 279, 
294, 305–312
Complexity, enhancement through 
reduction, 306

 
  Index to Volume 1
Computer, 66–67, 180–187, 249–250, 320–
321
Condensation/confirmation, 38, 82n190
Conditioning, 72, 138, 193
Conditions of possibility, 166
Conflict repression, 280
Conflicts, 190–191, 278, 279–282
Consciousness, 42–43, 44, 51, 56–57, 71n163, 
329–330
Consensus, 6, 7–9, 42, 64, 65, 122
Consensus and dissent, 242–243
Conservatism, 293, 299
Consistency, 30, 152, 161, 178, 333
Constructivism, 12, 13, 53n128, 90, 237, 337
Context, 14
Contingency, 25, 79, 82, 86, 95, 126, 282, 334
Contingency formulae, 282
Contract, 213, 308
Contradiction, 286
Corporations, 296–297
Creatio continua, 254
Creation, 11, 18, 85, 101, 251–256, 282, 315
Criteria, 226, 323, 339
Criticism, 5, 13, 109–110, 165, 191, 235, 275, 
284, 298, 329
Critique. See Criticism
Crossing, 24, 27, 29, 82, 134, 216, 225, 299
Culture, 87, 94–95, 98–99, 248–249, 
324n211, 354–358
Danger, 322–323
Deception, 135
Decisions, 95
Deconstruction, 335
Democracy, 224
Demographic growth, 87
Determinate/indeterminate, 144
Deviation, 273, 282–282
Deviation amplification, 94, 253, 263, 285–
286, 345
Dialectic, 335
Dialogue, 172
Différance (Derrida), 38
Differences in rank. See Stratification
Differentiation forms, 294–295, 300–301, 311
Diffusion, 310–311
Digitization, 55, 71, 215
Dissemination media, 120–121, 162, 187–191, 
311–312
Dissipative structures, 94, 111
Distinctions, 20–23, 25–35, 161–162, 350–
352, 357–358
Disturbance, 321
Divination, 140, 142, 144, 157–158, 170
Divisions into epochs, 255–256, 312, 336. See 
also Stage models
Dogmatics, 333
Double closure, 40
Double contingency, 127, 199, 201, 239
Duplication rules, 218
Dynamic stability, 23, 118, 160, 260, 297–
298, 340
Ecology, 55, 67, 73–77, 108–109, 269, 293, 
342
Economy, 337–338, 340–346, 343
Economy/household, 199
Education, 246–247
Eigenbehavior. See Eigenvalues
Eigenvalues, 9, 130, 131, 188, 237
Electronic media, 180–186
Element, 32
Element and relation, 78–79
Emergence, 77–78, 251, 274
Empires, 84–85, 170, 187, 344
Empirical knowledge, 13–14, 225
Energy, 315, 322
Enlightenment, 5, 179, 329
Entropy, 252, 324
Epochal divisions, 257–258, 311–312. See also 
Stage models
Equifinality, 284, 307, 310–311
Equilibrium, 292–293, 297
Error, 135–136
Eternity, 346
Ethics, 100, 214, 223, 239, 245
Events, 23–24, 36–37, 64–65, 80–81, 160
Evidence, 330, 331, 332
Evolution, 28, 59, 69, 76, 79, 110, 121, 124, 
158–159, 214, 251–358
Evolutionary advances, 305–312
Expectations, 238, 253
Experience, 200
Explanation, 11–12, 15–16
Externalization, 38–39, 237, 295
Fanaticism, 229
Fashion, 231–232
Fictionality, 161, 166–167, 169, 210
Film, 183

Index to Volume 1    
Fluctuations, 111
Forgetting, 349–352, 355. See also Memory
Form, 22–24, 27, 29–34, 117–118, 128, 384, 385
Freedom, 118, 257
French Revolution, 308, 334
Friendship, 196
Functional differentiation, 17–18, 75–76, 
86–87, 91–92, 108–109, 214, 222, 294, 
296–301, 358
Future, 19–20, 71–72, 238, 322–324
Genealogies, 168, 268
Global system, 10
Globalization. See World society
God, 26, 47, 85, 91–92, 133n52, 141, 145, 170, 
253–254, 280, 288–289, 291, 294, 297
Grammar, 132
Guidance media, 217
Guilds, 309
Heterarchy,187–188
Hierarchy, 187, 242–243
Historical process, 347
History, 164, 255, 285, 343–350
History as process, 256–257
Horizon, 26, 85–86, 88
Human being, 6–7, 69, 83, 115, 179
Humanism. See Humanity
Humanity, 315–316, 319
Humor, 101, 287
Hypercomplexity, 80
Hypocrisy, 239n358
Ideas, evolution of, 324–336
Identification, 351
Identity, 19, 51
Ideology, 1, 106, 110, 205
Ignorance, 14–15, 35, 76, 109, 140, 143, 181, 
188, 270, 318
Implausible evidence, 6
Improbability, 127, 132, 138, 146, 190–193, 
214–215, 251–253, 258, 274, 286, 345
Improbability of communication, 113–114
Inclusion, 91, 239
Inclusion and exclusion, 97–98
Inclusion of exclusion, 4, 322, 257
Incongruent perspectives, 11, 17
Individual, 2–3, 111, 126, 146, 149, 173, 177–
179, 241, 262, 263, 342
Individualism, 67, 334
Inflation, 295, 340
Inflation/deflation, 230–232, 243
Information, 19, 36–37, 44–45, 49, 113–114
Information and utterance, 39, 44–45, 53, 
70–71, 113, 114, 125, 141, 155, 183, 184, 325
Innovation, 29f, 175–176, 277, 283, 285, 293–
299, 321, 328, 333, 336–337
Input/output, 31, 57
Integration, 188
Intellectuals, 95, 275
Intensive/extensive reading, 175
Intention, 45
Interaction/society, 287–288
Interests, 340
Interpenetration, 60, 227
Interrupting the circle, 68, 89, 134, 200
Interruption of interdependence, 311
Intervention, 318
Intransparency, 40, 58, 59, 80
Intrasystemic indeterminacy, 33, 52, 56, 78, 
87
Inviolate level. See Values
Invisible hand, 255, 256, 283, 111
Irritation, 58–59, 63, 66–67, 70, 72, 108, 127, 
271, 304
Justice, 282
Knowledge, 70–72, 195–197
Known/unknown, 139, 142–143, 151
Language, 20, 60–64, 122, 123–138, 269–
270, 276
Law, 96, 98, 176, 179, 201, 213, 220, 226, 
236, 268, 281–282, 308, 338, 341, 344
Legitimacy, 252 n5, 282
Levels, distinguishing between, 40–42, 46, 
106
Limitationality, 282
Limited possibilities, 310–311
Logic, 113, 172, 199, 219–220, 251, 255, 
276n93, 298
Loose/strict coupling, 117, 118, 119–220, 128, 
132, 160, 191, 209, 211–212, 241–242, 253, 
317–318. See also Medium/form
Love, 201, 206–207, 217, 220–221, 223–226, 
231, 290–291, 297, 319
Machines, 68–69, 320–321
Marked/unmarked, 85, 89

 
  Index to Volume 1
Market, 317n192
Marking, 137
Mass media. See Printing
Meaning, 18–28, 55, 82–83, 119–120, 273
Meaningful, 20–21, 23–25
Medical care, 246–247
Medium/form, 28, 116–119, 156, 160
Memory, 18–19, 19, 39, 65, 69, 119, 130, 162–
163, 163, 171, 178–179, 217, 282, 327, 330, 
339, 348–358
Methodological individualism, 15, 35
Methodology, 13–18
Mind, 218, 257, 301n151
Miracles, 254
Modernity, modernization, 91–92, 343
Money, 207–209, 231, 345
Monsters, 254
Morality, 138–51, 170, 190–191, 194, 214–215, 
222–223, 234, 239–245, 296–297 328, 332
Morality, coding of, 139, 146–147, 222–223, 
239–244
Morality and printing, 328
Morality and religion, 144–149, 170–171
Motives, 240
Motives and purposes, 101, 106
Movement, 255–256
Mystery, 85, 89
National languages, 176–177
Natural law, 190, 242, 297, 314, 317
Natural selection, 56, 256, 259, 263–265, 
268, 287, 292, 337
Nature, 99–101, 301, 314–318, 322, 333, 354
Necessity, 282
Needs, 228
Negation, 20n51, 21, 133–134, 136–137, 187, 
195, 220, 245, 257–258, 277, 338
Newness. See Innovation
Nobility, 100, 178, 268–269, 279–280, 312
Nonknowledge. See Ignorance
Non-meaning, 21, 23
Non-negatability, 282
Nonsense. See Non-meaning
Objects, 28, 30, 37, 54, 353
Obscenity, 228
Observation, 35–36, 49–50, 69, 104, 110
Observation, first and second-order, 49, 83, 
87–88, 148, 168, 173, 188, 203, 224–225, 
230, 291
“Obstacles épistémologiques” (Bachelard), 6
Offices, 197–198
Old/new, 283–284
Ontology, 255
Operational closure, 34, 38, 44–45, 49–67, 
53, 54, 70, 72, 74, 75–76 265, 325, 338
Oral/written, 42, 122, 130, 150–155, 161, 162–
163, 165–166, 167–169, 171–172, 176–179, 
181, 327
Organization, 75–77, 95, 111, 229–230, 296–
297, 299–300 321–321
Origin, 26, 164, 178, 255–256, 258, 266, 302
Originality. See Origin
Ornaments, 353
Oscillation, 19, 134–135, 351–353, 357–358
Paradox, 4, 25–28, 41–42, 48–49, 65, 78–80, 
85–86, 89–90, 104–105, 108–111, 132, 145–
146, 150, 160n127, 207, 216, 219, 224, 251, 
255, 258, 270, 299, 326, 331
Past/future, 23, 86, 162, 351–353, 357
Peace, 292
Perception, 56–57, 68–69, 227–229
Perception of being perceived, 57, 124
Perfection, 248, 254, 283, 290
Person, 59–60, 147n103
Philia, 196, 199, 206
Philosophy, 327
Physical force, 228–229, 525n5, 281
Planning, 260–262, 299
Plausibility, 191, 222, 330–335, 335
Pluralism, 90, 103, 110, 323
Pluralistic ignorance, 122, 237
Political power/rule, 281–282
Political system, 96, 213, 228, 233, 282, 338
Polycontexturality, 13, 46, 149
Population, 255, 263–264 272–273, 292, 
294, 335
Positive feedback. See Deviation 
amplification
Positive law, 77, 297
Possibility. See Potentialization
Postmodernism, 331, 335
Potentialization, 21, 82, 166, 259, 319
Power, 212–214, 223–228, 231, 281, 289–290, 
339–340
Prayer, 254
Preadaptive advances, 236, 302, 309, 335
Preference codes, 61, 215, 218–219, 221, 222, 
246

Index to Volume 1    
Preferences, 103, 111, 204, 209, 217, 221
Present, 22, 23, 162, 238, 266, 267, 350–351
Printing, 87, 119, 121, 148–149, 154, 172, 174–
180, 187, 214, 239, 327, 328–329, 331, 333
Procedure, 102
Process/structure, 37n93
Processual reflexivity, 223
Profession, 111
Profit, 290, 297
Programs, 217–218, 226f
Progress, 256, 260–261, 335
Property, 197–198, 201, 226, 281
Protest, 323
Prudentia, 144
Public opinion, 187, 189, 308
Purposes, 101
Quasi-objects, 141, 163, 353
Randomness. See Chance
Rationality, 99–112
Rationality and evolution theory, 336
Rationality continuum, 100–102, 105, 110
Reading, 164–165, 318
Reality, 5, 11, 13–16, 50–51, 57, 65–66, 72, 82, 
100, 104, 107–108, 131, 152, 161, 166, 173, 
183–184, 186, 195, 210, 282, 291, 317, 325, 
332, 349, 351, 357
Reason, 109–110, 190–191, 301n152
Reason of state, 297
Recursion, 19–20, 37–38, 52–53, 57, 80, 
81–82, 87, 123, 125, 127–128, 130, 156, 
190,193, 201, 233, 237, 252, 267, 325, 350, 
352
Redescription, 40, 48, 69
Reduction of complexity, 83, 307, 317
Redundancy, 30, 37, 70, 78, 80, 121, 128, 151, 
155–156, 165, 214, 219, 254
Redundancy/variety, 23, 78, 138, 163, 254, 
320
Reentry, 14, 19, 21–22, 27, 40, 53, 54, 105–
108, 110, 347, 348
Reflection theories, 219
Regional differentiation, 96–98
Relativism. See Pluralism
Religion, 100, 121, 138–146, 148–150, 151–152, 
170–171, 174, 177, 198, 202, 210, 232, 236, 
240–242, 246–247, 254–255, 279, 282–
283, 288–291, 295, 297, 314, 341, 346
Religion and morality, 144–145, 148, 170, 198
Repetition, 37, 38, 58, 80, 82, 128, 349, 351–352
Representation of the world, 87
Reproduction, 53, 189, 223, 245, 262, 264–
265, 267, 273–274, 278, 292–293, 302, 
324 327, 338 342–343
Requisite variety, 56, 59, 70
Respect/disrespect, 239–240, 241
Responsibility, 76
Restabilization, 252, 258–259, 272–274, 281, 
283–284, 292–300, 300–312, 325, 329–331, 
336, 338, 340, 342, 344–345, 358
Revelation, 171, 346
Revolution, 293, 346
Rhetoric, 48, 87, 100, 168, 171, 172, 194, 223, 
328, 330–331
Rich/poor, 219, 222
Ridiculousness, 332
Risk, 140–141, 146, 173, 189, 271, 313, 316, 
319, 321–324, 339
Ritual, rites, 139, 141–142, 161, 173, 289, 327, 
353
Robustness, 76, 317
Romanticism, 166, 179, 315, 332
Rule of law, 213
Sacralization, 152
Sacrifice, 139
Scarcity, 207–208, 284, 282
Schemata, 61, 64, 330, 331
Science, 205, 313–315, 343
Scripts, 61, 330
Secondary coding, 220
Secrets, 138–146. See also Mystery
Security, 25
Segmentary differentiation, 68, 92, 95, 140, 
164, 196, 279, 288, 295, 300, 312
Selection, 258–259, 264–265, 272–310, 325, 
329–329, 344–345, 358
Self, 49
Self-description, 11, 47, 54, 78, 105–106, 122, 
197, 269, 332, 342, 347
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 4, 142
Self-generated uncertainty, 72, 162
Self-gratification, ban on, 229
Self-observation, 45–47, 49, 69, 70, 78, 107, 
184, 199, 332
Self-organization, 32, 50, 74, 77, 87, 126, 
134, 259, 304, 341
Self-reference, 4, 22, 29, 53–54, 77, 81, 125, 
134, 179, 200, 297, 348

 
  Index to Volume 1
Self-reference and other-reference, 19, 22, 
28, 39, 46, 49, 52–53, 67, 106–107, 111, 
139, 334, 339
Semantics, 119, 172, 188, 325–327
Semiotics, 44, 107
Sexuality, 228–229
Signs, 107, 124–128, 320
Simultaneity, 23, 30, 43, 64, 82, 128–129, 152, 
153, 159, 163, 263, 266–267, 319, 320, 343
Simultaneity of the non-simultaneous, 256
Sincerity, 101, 135–136, 186, 207
Size, 79
Skepticism, 3, 102, 330–331, 333
Social contract, 7, 190
Social movements. See Protest
Social system, 40–48
Society, 40–48
Sociobiology, 265, 273n81
Sociology, 1–5, 15–16, 356
Solidarity, 5, 7–8, 35, 121, 196, 322–324
Soul, 9, 240, 297
Sound/meaning, 128, 153–154
Space, 151, 189–190
Special providence, 254
Specialization, 260
Species/genera, 94, 254–255
Stability/instability, 242–243
Stage models, 256, 272. See also Epochal 
divisions
State, 268, 294, 344–345
Statistics, 333
Stratification, 95, 281, 283–284, 309, 311–312, 
332, 336
Structural coupling, 32, 49–67, 74, 126, 180, 
227, 229–230, 269–271, 322, 329
Structure, 119, 260–261, 264–265
Style, 297
Subconscious, 110
Subcultures, 288
Subject, 314–315
Sublime, 144
Success media, 120–123
Surface/depth, 182. See also Divination
Surplus possibilities. See Meaning
Suspicion of manipulation, 184
Symbiotic symbols, 227–229
Symbolic/diabolic, 192
Symbolic generalization, 62, 147
Symbolically generalized communication 
media, 121–122, 190–238, 289, 291
Symbols, 141, 173–174, 191–193
Synchronization, 129
System/environment, 9, 18–19, 27, 28–40, 
44, 108–109, 262–267
System differentiation, 67–68, 75, 86, 325–
328
System rationality, 107–109
Systems theory and evolution theory, 260–
271, 343–344
Systems therapy, 282n111
Taboo, 138–139
Tact, 287
Technology, 220, 234, 247n370, 312–324
Technicization, technicity. See Technology
Telecommunications, 180–186
Teleology, 248–249
Television, 88, 183
Territorial concept of society, 6, 9–10
Text, 155–166, 289, 329–330
Theater, 341
Theodicy, 170
Theology, 280, 328
Thing (res), 24, 26, 146n98
Time, time dimension, 24, 43, 64–65, 72, 80–
82, 85–86, 118, 129–130, 134–135, 159–167, 
221, 239–240, 253, 267–267, 302, 346–347
Tolerance, 242
Topics/functions, 39
Tradition, 97, 178, 310, 327–328, 356
Trance, 20, 151, 170
Transcendence, 139, 289
Transmission, 116, 120, 272, 293
Trust, 135, 188, 198, 230–231, 237
Truth, 203–207, 289–290
Understanding, 36–37, 42, 137, 192, 267
Universal/particular, 98
Universality/specification, 148, 209–210, 
225, 247, 335
Universities, 341
Unmarked state/space, 21, 133, 139, 182, 276
Unmoved mover, 255
Unstable criteria, 297
Utterance. See Information
Utterance and understanding, 267
Validity, 205
Values, 137, 204–206, 221–228, 231–232, 
242–245, 247, 249, 282, 331

Index to Volume 1    
Variables, 14–15
Variation, 258–259, 272–291, 300–305
Variation/selection, 272
Virtual reality, 20, 182
Welfare state, 295, 338
What/how questions, 11–12, 314
Witchcraft, 281
World, 19–22, 24–26, 30, 47, 50–52, 72–73, 
82, 84–85, 127, 133–134, 161, 166–167, 
210–211, 319
World society, 40, 83–99, 182, 323
World time, 85–86, 88
Writing, 36, 38, 42, 46, 121, 130, 142–146, 150–
173, 178, 188–189, 194–196, 248, 279–280, 
288, 300, 303, 306, 327–330, 333, 353–354
Zeitgeist, 356

Cultural Memory  in the Present
Ilit Ferber, Philosophy and Melancholy: Benjamin’s Early Reflections on Theater and 
Language
Alexandre Lefebvre, Human Rights as a Way of Life: On Bergson’s Political 
Philosophy
Theodore W. Jennings, Jr., Outlaw Justice: The Messianic Politics of Paul
Alexander Etkind, Warped Mourning: Stories of the Undead in the Land of the 
Unburied
Denis Guénoun, About Europe: Philosophical Hypotheses
Maria Boletsi, Barbarism and its Discontents
Sigrid Weigel, Walter Benjamin: Images, the Creaturely, and the Holy
Roberto Esposito, Living Thought: The Origins and Actuality of Italian Philosophy
Henri Atlan, The Sparks of Randomness, Volume 2: The Atheism of Scripture
Rüdiger Campe, The Game of Probability: Literature and Calculation from Pascal 
to Kleist
Niklas Luhmann, A Systems Theory of Religion
Jean-Luc Marion, In the Self’s Place: The Approach of Saint Augustine
Rodolphe Gasché, Georges Bataille: Phenomenology and Phantasmatology
Niklas Luhmann, Theory of Society, Volume 1
Alessia Ricciardi, After La Dolce Vita: A Cultural Prehistory of Berlusconi’s Italy
Daniel Innerarity, The Future and Its Enemies: In Defense of Political Hope
Patricia Pisters, The Neuro-Image: A Deleuzian Film-Philosophy of Digital Screen 
Culture
François-David Sebbah, Testing the Limit: Derrida, Henry, Levinas, and the 
Phenomenological Tradition
Erik Peterson, Theological Tractates, edited by Michael J. Hollerich
Feisal G.  Mohamed, Milton and the Post-Secular Present: Ethics, Politics, 
Terrorism

Pierre Hadot, The Present Alone Is Our Happiness, Second Edition: Conversations 
with Jeannie Carlier and Arnold I. Davidson
Yasco Horsman, Theaters of Justice: Judging, Staging, and Working Through in 
Arendt, Brecht, and Delbo
Jacques Derrida, Parages, edited by John P. Leavey
Henri Atlan, The Sparks of Randomness, Volume 1: Spermatic Knowledge
Rebecca Comay, Mourning Sickness: Hegel and the French Revolution
Djelal Kadir, Memos from the Besieged City: Lifelines for Cultural Sustainability
Stanley Cavell, Little Did I Know: Excerpts from Memory
Jeffrey Mehlman, Adventures in the French Trade: Fragments Toward a Life
Jacob Rogozinski, The Ego and the Flesh: An Introduction to Egoanalysis
Marcel Hénaff, The Price of Truth: Gift, Money, and Philosophy
Paul Patton, Deleuzian Concepts: Philosophy, Colonialization, Politics
Michael Fagenblat, A Covenant of Creatures: Levinas’s Philosophy of Judaism
Stefanos Geroulanos, An Atheism that Is Not Humanist Emerges in French Thought
Andrew Herscher, Violence Taking Place: The Architecture of the Kosovo Conflict
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, On Historicizing Epistemology: An Essay
Jacob Taubes, From Cult to Culture, edited by Charlotte Fonrobert and Amir Engel
Peter Hitchcock, The Long Space: Transnationalism and Postcolonial Form
Lambert Wiesing, Artificial Presence: Philosophical Studies in Image Theory
Jacob Taubes, Occidental Eschatology
Freddie Rokem, Philosophers and Thespians: Thinking Performance
Roberto Esposito, Communitas: The Origin and Destiny of Community
Vilashini Cooppan, Worlds Within: National Narratives and Global Connections 
in Postcolonial Writing
Josef Früchtl, The Impertinent Self: A Heroic History of Modernity
Frank Ankersmit, Ewa Domanska, and Hans Kellner, eds., 
Re-Figuring Hayden White
Michael Rothberg, Multidirectional Memory: Remembering the Holocaust in the 
Age of Decolonization
Jean-François Lyotard, Enthusiasm: The Kantian Critique of History
Ernst van Alphen, Mieke Bal, and Carel Smith, eds., The Rhetoric of Sincerity
Stéphane Mosès, The Angel of History: Rosenzweig, Benjamin, Scholem
Pierre Hadot, The Present Alone Is Our Happiness: Conversations with Jeannie 
Carlier and Arnold I. Davidson

Alexandre Lefebvre, The Image of the Law: Deleuze, Bergson, Spinoza
Samira Haj, Reconfiguring Islamic Tradition: Reform, Rationality, and Modernity
Diane Perpich, The Ethics of Emmanuel Levinas
Marcel Detienne, Comparing the Incomparable
François Delaporte, Anatomy of the Passions
René Girard, Mimesis and Theory: Essays on Literature and Criticism, 1959-2005
Richard Baxstrom, Houses in Motion: The Experience of Place and the Problem of 
Belief in Urban Malaysia
Jennifer L. Culbert, Dead Certainty: The Death Penalty and the Problem of 
Judgment
Samantha Frost, Lessons from a Materialist Thinker: Hobbesian Reflections on 
Ethics and Politics
Regina Mara Schwartz, Sacramental Poetics at the Dawn of Secularism: When God 
Left the World
Gil Anidjar, Semites: Race, Religion, Literature
Ranjana Khanna, Algeria Cuts: Women and Representation, 1830 to the Present
Esther Peeren, Intersubjectivities and Popular Culture: Bakhtin and Beyond
Eyal Peretz, Becoming Visionary: Brian De Palma’s Cinematic Education of the 
Senses
Diana Sorensen, A Turbulent Decade Remembered: Scenes from the Latin American 
Sixties
Hubert Damisch, A Childhood Memory by Piero della Francesca
José van Dijck, Mediated Memories in the Digital Age
Dana Hollander, Exemplarity and Chosenness: Rosenzweig and Derrida on the 
Nation of Philosophy
Asja Szafraniec, Beckett, Derrida, and the Event of Literature
Sara Guyer, Romanticism After Auschwitz
Alison Ross, The Aesthetic Paths of Philosophy: Presentation in Kant, Heidegger, 
Lacoue-Labarthe, and Nancy
Gerhard Richter, Thought-Images: Frankfurt School Writers’ Reflections from 
Damaged Life
Bella Brodzki, Can These Bones Live? Translation, Survival, and Cultural Memory 
Rodolphe Gasché, The Honor of Thinking: Critique, Theory, Philosophy
Brigitte Peucker, The Material Image: Art and the Real in Film
Natalie Melas, All the Difference in the World: Postcoloniality and the Ends of 
Comparison

Jonathan Culler, The Literary in Theory
Michael G. Levine, The Belated Witness: Literature, Testimony, and the Question of 
Holocaust Survival
Jennifer A. Jordan, Structures of Memory: Understanding German Change in Berlin 
and Beyond
Christoph Menke, Reflections of Equality
Marlène Zarader, The Unthought Debt: Heidegger and the Hebraic Heritage
Jan Assmann, Religion and Cultural Memory: Ten Studies
David Scott and Charles Hirschkind, Powers of the Secular Modern: Talal Asad 
and His Interlocutors 
Gyanendra Pandey, Routine Violence: Nations, Fragments, Histories
James Siegel, Naming the Witch
J. M. Bernstein, Against Voluptuous Bodies: Late Modernism and the Meaning of 
Painting
Theodore W. Jennings, Jr., Reading Derrida / Thinking Paul: On Justice
Richard Rorty and Eduardo Mendieta, Take Care of Freedom and Truth Will Take 
Care of Itself: Interviews with Richard Rorty
Jacques Derrida, Paper Machine
Renaud Barbaras, Desire and Distance: Introduction to a Phenomenology of 
Perception
Jill Bennett, Empathic Vision: Affect, Trauma, and Contemporary Art
Ban Wang, Illuminations from the Past: Trauma, Memory, and History in Modern 
China
James Phillips, Heidegger’s Volk: Between National Socialism and Poetry
Frank Ankersmit, Sublime Historical Experience
István Rév, Retroactive Justice: Prehistory of Post-Communism
Paola Marrati, Genesis and Trace: Derrida Reading Husserl and Heidegger
Krzysztof Ziarek, The Force of Art
Marie-José Mondzain, Image, Icon, Economy: The Byzantine Origins of the 
Contemporary Imaginary
Cecilia Sjöholm, The Antigone Complex: Ethics and the Invention of Feminine 
Desire
Jacques Derrida and Elisabeth Roudinesco, For What Tomorrow . . . : A Dialogue
Elisabeth Weber, Questioning Judaism: Interviews by Elisabeth Weber
Jacques Derrida and Catherine Malabou, Counterpath: Traveling with Jacques 
Derrida

Martin Seel, Aesthetics of Appearing
Nanette Salomon, Shifting Priorities: Gender and Genre in Seventeenth-Century 
Dutch Painting
Jacob Taubes, The Political Theology of Paul
Jean-Luc Marion, The Crossing of the Visible
Eric Michaud, The Cult of Art in Nazi Germany
Anne Freadman, The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis
Stanley Cavell, Emerson’s Transcendental Etudes
Stuart McLean, The Event and Its Terrors: Ireland, Famine, Modernity
Beate Rössler, ed., Privacies: Philosophical Evaluations
Bernard Faure, Double Exposure: Cutting Across Buddhist and Western Discourses
Alessia Ricciardi, The Ends of Mourning: Psychoanalysis, Literature, Film
Alain Badiou, Saint Paul: The Foundation of Universalism
Gil Anidjar, The Jew, the Arab: A History of the Enemy
Jonathan Culler and Kevin Lamb, eds., Just Being Difficult? Academic Writing in 
the Public Arena
Jean-Luc Nancy, A Finite Thinking, edited by Simon Sparks
Theodor W. Adorno, Can One Live after Auschwitz? A Philosophical Reader, 
edited by Rolf Tiedemann
Patricia Pisters, The Matrix of Visual Culture: Working with Deleuze in Film 
Theory
Andreas Huyssen, Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory
Talal Asad, Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity
Dorothea von Mücke, The Rise of the Fantastic Tale
Marc Redfield, The Politics of Aesthetics: Nationalism, Gender, Romanticism
Emmanuel Levinas, On Escape
Dan Zahavi, Husserl’s Phenomenology
Rodolphe Gasché, The Idea of Form: Rethinking Kant’s Aesthetics
Michael Naas, Taking on the Tradition: Jacques Derrida and the Legacies of 
Deconstruction
Herlinde Pauer-Studer, ed., Constructions of Practical Reason: Interviews on Moral 
and Political Philosophy
Jean-Luc Marion, Being Given That: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness
Theodor W. Adorno and Max Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment
Ian Balfour, The Rhetoric of Romantic Prophecy

Martin Stokhof, World and Life as One: Ethics and Ontology in Wittgenstein’s Early 
Thought
Gianni Vattimo, Nietzsche: An Introduction
Jacques Derrida, Negotiations: Interventions and Interviews, 1971-1998, ed. 
Elizabeth Rottenberg
Brett Levinson, The Ends of Literature: The Latin American “Boom” in the 
Neoliberal Marketplace
Timothy J. Reiss, Against Autonomy: Cultural Instruments, Mutualities, and the 
Fictive Imagination
Hent de Vries and Samuel Weber, eds., Religion and Media
Niklas Luhmann, Theories of Distinction: Re-Describing the Descriptions of 
Modernity, ed. and introd. William Rasch
Johannes Fabian, Anthropology with an Attitude: Critical Essays
Michel Henry, I Am the Truth: Toward a Philosophy of Christianity
Gil Anidjar, “Our Place in Al-Andalus”: Kabbalah, Philosophy, Literature in Arab-
Jewish Letters
Hélène Cixous and Jacques Derrida, Veils
F. R. Ankersmit, Historical Representation
F. R. Ankersmit, Political Representation
Elissa Marder, Dead Time: Temporal Disorders in the Wake of Modernity 
(Baudelaire and Flaubert)
Reinhart Koselleck, The Practice of Conceptual History: Timing History, Spacing 
Concepts
Niklas Luhmann, The Reality of the Mass Media
Hubert Damisch, A Theory of /Cloud/: Toward a History of Painting
Jean-Luc Nancy, The Speculative Remark: (One of Hegel’s bon mots)
Jean-François Lyotard, Soundproof Room: Malraux’s Anti-Aesthetics
Jan Patočka, Plato and Europe
Hubert Damisch, Skyline: The Narcissistic City
Isabel Hoving, In Praise of New Travelers: Reading Caribbean Migrant Women 
Writers
Richard Rand, ed., Futures: Of Jacques Derrida
William Rasch, Niklas Luhmann’s Modernity: The Paradoxes of Differentiation
Jacques Derrida and Anne Dufourmantelle, Of Hospitality
Jean-François Lyotard, The Confession of Augustine

Kaja Silverman, World Spectators
Samuel Weber, Institution and Interpretation: Expanded Edition
Jeffrey S. Librett, The Rhetoric of Cultural Dialogue: Jews and Germans in the 
Epoch of Emancipation
Ulrich Baer, Remnants of Song: Trauma and the Experience of Modernity in Charles 
Baudelaire and Paul Celan
Samuel C. Wheeler III, Deconstruction as Analytic Philosophy
David S. Ferris, Silent Urns: Romanticism, Hellenism, Modernity
Rodolphe Gasché, Of Minimal Things: Studies on the Notion of Relation
Sarah Winter, Freud and the Institution of Psychoanalytic Knowledge
Samuel Weber, The Legend of Freud: Expanded Edition
Aris Fioretos, ed., The Solid Letter: Readings of Friedrich Hölderlin
J. Hillis Miller / Manuel Asensi, Black Holes / J. Hillis Miller; or, Boustrophedonic 
Reading
Miryam Sas, Fault Lines: Cultural Memory and Japanese Surrealism
Peter Schwenger, Fantasm and Fiction: On Textual Envisioning
Didier Maleuvre, Museum Memories: History, Technology, Art
Jacques Derrida, Monolingualism of the Other; or, The Prosthesis of Origin
Andrew Baruch Wachtel, Making a Nation, Breaking a Nation: Literature and 
Cultural Politics in Yugoslavia
Niklas Luhmann, Love as Passion: The Codification of Intimacy
Mieke Bal, ed., The Practice of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary 
Interpretation
Jacques Derrida and Gianni Vattimo, eds., Religion

