
theory of society, volume 1


Cultural Memory
in
the
Present
Mieke Bal and Hent de Vries, Editors


Theory of Society  
Volume 1
Niklas Luhmann
Translated by Rhodes Barrett
stanford university press
stanford, california

Stanford University Press
Stanford, California
English translation ©2012 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior 
University. All rights reserved.
Theory of Society, Volume 1 was originally published in German under the title Die 
Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. Band 1 ©Suhrkamp Verlag Frankfurt am Main 1997.
The translation of this work has been published with the assistance of the 
Volkswagen Foundation.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of 
Stanford University Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Luhmann, Niklas, 1927–1998, author.
  [Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft. English]
  Theory of society / Niklas Luhmann ; translated by Rhodes Barrett.
       2 volumes cm.--(Cultural memory in the present)
  “Originally published in German under the title Die Gesellschaft der 
Gesellschaft.”
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-8047-3949-8 (cloth : alk. paper)--ISBN 978-0-8047-3950-4 (pbk. : 
alk. paper)
 1.  Sociology. 2.  Social systems. 3.  Communication.  I. Title. II. Series: Cultural 
memory in the present. 
  HM590.L84513 2012
  301--dc23	
	
	
	
	
	
2012021883
Typeset by Bruce Lundquist in 11/13.5 Adobe Garamond

Id quod per aliud non potest concipi, per se concipi debet.
spinoza, Ethica I, Axiomata II
That which cannot be conceived through anything else must be 
conceived through itself (trans. R.H.M. Elwes [1883]).


Contents
Preface
xi
Translator’s Note
xv
1.	 Society as a Social System
1
	 1.1.	 The Sociological Theory of Society
1
	1.2.	 Preliminary Remarks on Methodology
13
	 1.3.	 Meaning
18
	1.4.	 The Distinction Between System and Environment
28
	 1.5.	 Society as a Comprehensive Social System
40
	1.6.	 Operational Closure and Structural Couplings
49
	1.7.	 Cognition
68
	1.8.	 Ecological Problems
73
	1.9.	 Complexity
77
	1.10.	 World Society
83
	1.11.	 Demands on Rationality
99
2.	 Communication Media
113
	2.1.	 Medium and Form
113
	2.2.	 Dissemination Media and Success Media
120
	2.3.	 Language
123
	2.4.	 Morality and the Secrets of Religion
138
	2.5.	 Writing
150
	2.6.	 Printing
174
	2.7.	 Electronic Media
180

x    Contents
	2.8.	 Dissemination Media: Summary
187
	2.9.	 Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 1:  
Function
190
	2.10.	 Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 2:  
Differentiation
199
	2.11.	 Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 3:  
Structures
214
	2.12.	 Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 4:  
Self-Validation
236
	2.13.	 Moral Communication
239
	2.14.	 Effects on the Evolution of the Societal System
245
3.	 Evolution
251
	 3.1.	 Creation, Planning, Evolution
251
	3.2.	 Systems-Theoretical Basis
261
	3.3.	 The Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
272
	3.4.	 The Variation of Elements
275
	3.5.	 Selection Through Media
284
	3.6.	 The Restabilization of Systems
292
	3.7.	 Differentiation of Variation, Selection,  
and Restabilization
300
	3.8.	 Evolutionary Advances
305
	3.9.	 Technology
312
	3.10.	 The Evolution of Ideas
324
	3.11.	 The Evolution of Subsystems
336
	3.12.	 Evolution and History
343
	3.13.	 Memory
348
Notes
359
Index
455

Preface
On my appointment to the Department of Sociology established at 
the University of Bielefeld in 1969, I was asked what research projects I had 
running. My project was, and ever since has been, the theory of society; 
term: thirty years; costs: none. As far as the time frame was concerned, my 
estimation of the difficulties was realistic. At that time, the literature in so-
ciology gave little cause to consider such a project possible at all, not least 
because neo-Marxist precepts blocked any ambition of producing a the-
ory of society. My discussion with Jürgen Habermas was published shortly 
after­ward under the title Theorie der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie—
Was leistet die Systemforschung? (Theory of Society or Social Technology: 
What Does Systems Research Accomplish?) [Frankfurt, 1971]. The irony of 
the title was that neither author wished to stand up for social technology, 
but we differed on what a theory of society ought to be; and it is symptom-
atic that the theory of society first came to public attention in the form, 
not of a theory, but of a controversy.
My initial plan had been to publish the theory of society in three 
parts: an introductory chapter on systems theory, a treatment of the societal 
system, and a third part dealing with the most important functional systems 
of society. The basic concept has remained, but I have had to correct my 
ideas about the size of the undertaking more than once. In 1984, I brought 
out the “introductory chapter” in book form under the title Soziale Systeme: 
Grundriß einer allgemeinen Theorie (Social Systems: Outline of a General 
Theory).1 In essence, my aim was to apply the concept of self-referential 
operation to the theory of social systems. This aim has not fundamentally 
changed, although progress in general systems theory and epistemologi-
cal constructivism has repeatedly offered opportunities to extend it. Some 
contributions have been published in collections of essays under the title 
Soziologische Aufklärung (Sociological Enlightenment). Other material is 
available only in manuscript form or has fed into this book.

xii    Preface
Since the early 1980s, it has become increasingly clear how impor-
tant the comparability of functional systems is for the theory of society. 
This had already been a basic consideration in Talcott Parsons’s theory 
construction. The theoretical importance of comparability is even greater 
if we concede that society cannot be deduced from a principle or a basic 
norm, be it the customary justice, solidarity, or reasoned consensus. For 
even those who do not recognize or who violate such principles contribute 
to societal operations, and society itself must take account of this possibil-
ity. On the other hand, it is not by chance that widely differing functional 
areas such as ­science and law, economics and politics, the mass media, 
and intimate relations can be shown to have comparable structures—not 
least because their differentiation requires systems to be formed. But can 
this be shown? Parsons attempted to guarantee it through the analytic of 
the action concept. If the thought is not convincingly elaborated, we can 
do no more than formulate theories for individual functional systems and 
test whether, despite all differences between fields, we can work with the 
same conceptual apparatus—including autopoiesis and operational clo-
sure, first- and second-order observation, self-description, medium and 
form, coding and, in orthogonal relation thereto, the distinction between 
self-reference and other-reference as internal structure.
As a result, I gave priority to theories for individual functional sys-
tems. The following have already been published: Die Wirtschaft der Gesell­
schaft (The Economy as a Social System) (1988), Die Wissenschaft der 
Gesellschaft (Science as a Social System) (1990), Das Recht der Gesellschaft 
(Law as a Social System) (1993),2 and Die Kunst der Gesellschaft (Art as a 
Social System) (1995).3 Further texts of this type are to follow. Meanwhile, 
however, work on the theory of the societal system had also progressed. I 
had produced several thousand pages of manuscript, partly to accompany 
lectures, without having put the material in publishable form. My then 
secretary retired and the position was frozen for many months. In this situ-
ation, the University in Lecce offered me an opportunity to work. So I fled 
to Italy with the project and the manuscripts. There I wrote a short version 
of the theory of society, which, translated into Italian, revised several times 
and adapted for use at an Italian university, has since been published.4 The 
manuscript then produced became the basis for a more extensive German 
edition, on which, once again provided with a secretary, I was able to work 
in Bielefeld. The present text is the result of this eventful history.

Preface    xiii
The system under consideration is that of society itself, as opposed 
to all social systems that develop within society in the performance of so-
cietal operations: the functional systems of society, as well as interaction 
systems, organizational systems, and social movements, all of which pre-
suppose that a system of society has already been constituted. The key issue 
is therefore what operation produces and reproduces this system whenever 
it occurs. The answer, discussed in Chapter 2, is communication. It is a 
circular relationship: society cannot be conceived of without communica-
tion, nor can communication be conceived of without society. Questions 
of genesis and morphogenesis cannot be answered by any hypothesis of 
origin and are obscured rather than resolved by the thesis that “the human 
being” is genuinely social in nature. Chapter 3 entrusts these questions to 
an appropriate evolution theory.
The thesis of self-production by communication postulates clear 
boundaries between system and environment. The reproduction of com-
munications from communications takes place in society. All further phys-
ical, chemical, organic, neurophysiological, and mental conditions are 
environmental conditions. Society can substitute for them within the limits 
of its own operational capabilities. No human being is indispensable to so-
ciety. This naturally does not mean that communication is possible without 
consciousness, without brains well supplied with blood, without life, with-
out a moderate climate.
All systems formed in society depend in turn on communication; 
otherwise we would not be able to say that they take place in society. It 
also means that system formations within society cannot connect with any 
section of the environment. This is true for segmentary differentiation and 
even more so, across all intermediate stages, for functional differentiation. 
In the environment of the societal system there are no families, no nobil-
ity, no politics, no economy.
The assumption of reflexive self-reference is built into the concept 
of communication. Communication always communicates that it com-
municates. It might correct itself in retrospect or deny that it had meant 
what it appeared to mean. It can be interpreted by means of communica-
tion on a scale from credible to incredible. But it is always accompanied 
by memory, even though it might be only short-term, which practically 
excludes any assertion that it has not taken place at all. Retrospectively, 
norms and excuses, tact requirements and counterfactual disregard arise, 

xiv    Preface
with which communication detoxifies itself in the event of the occasional 
malfunction.
This is probably why all societies appear to ensure that communi-
cation can relate to the societal system as the framework condition of its 
own possibility, as the unity of the coherence of communications that is 
always connoted. Like Parsons, many have inferred the need for basic con-
sensus, shared values, or unthematic, “life-world” concord. I make do with 
the slimmed-down concept of self-description, which also allows for the 
existence of fundamental dissension, and that this dissension is commu-
nicated about.
With the concept of a system that describes itself and contains its own 
descriptions, we venture into logically intractable terrain. A society that de-
scribes itself does so internally, but as it were from outside. It observes itself 
as an object of its own knowledge, but in performing its operations, it can-
not itself feed the observation into the object, because this would change 
this object and require further observation. Whether it observes itself from 
within or without is a question that society has to leave open. If it also at-
tempts to say so, it opts for a paradoxical identity. The solution sociology 
found has been styled the “critique” of society. Effectively, this amounts 
to constantly renewed description of descriptions, the constant introduc-
tion of new metaphors or reuse of old metaphors, and thus of “redescrip-
tions” in Mary Hesse’s sense.5 This can very well bring new insights, even 
though methodologically steeled investigators would not accept them as 
“explanations.”
This text is itself an attempt at communication. It seeks to provide 
a description of society in full knowledge of the predicament outlined. If 
the communication of a theory of society succeeds as communication, 
it changes the description of its object and thus the object receiving this 
­description. To keep this in sight from the outset, the book was titled Die 
Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft (The Society of Society).

Translator’s Note
Like Prufrock, the translator does well to point out that he is “not 
Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be.” Even if no more than an “attendant 
prince” to the author, he must escape the self-deprecation of Eliot’s mel-
ancholy figure to cultivate his positive qualities: “Deferential, glad to be of 
use, / Politic, cautious, and meticulous.” Taking on the world according to 
Niklas Luhmann is certainly not a task not to be assumed without humil-
ity, caution, and care (“Do I dare / Disturb the universe? / In a minute there 
is time / For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse”). And not 
without a great deal of informed help.
My first venture in the field appeared in 1993 under the title Risk: A 
Sociological Theory.1 To my great fortune I was able to discuss my efforts 
with Luhmann to my and his satisfaction.
Without the invaluable, consistent, and ever ready help and advice 
of the outstanding Luhmann expert Dirk Baecker, the present transla-
tion of Volume 1 of Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft would not have been 
possible.


theory of society, volume 1


1
Society as a Social System
1. The Sociological Theory of Society
The investigations that follow address the social system of modern so-
ciety. Such a project, it should be said at the outset, engages a circular rela-
tionship with its subject matter. What this subject matter is cannot be said 
in advance. The word “society” does not refer to a clear-cut idea. Even the 
common term “social” has no incontestably objective reference. Nor can 
the attempt to describe society be made outside of society. It uses commu-
nication. It activates social relations. It exposes itself to observation in soci-
ety. However we define the subject, its definition is itself already one of the 
latter’s functions. What is described performs the description. In so doing 
it must therefore also describe itself. It must treat its subject as one that de-
scribes itself. Borrowing an expression from logical analysis in linguistics, 
we could say that every theory of society must have an “autological” com-
ponent.1 Whoever feels that the theory of science cannot accommodate 
this must do without a theory of society, linguistics, and much else.
Classical sociology has sought to establish itself as the science of so-
cial facts—facts as opposed to mere opinions, value judgments, or ideo-
logical prejudices. Within the context of this distinction, this is not to be 
disputed. The problem, however, is that the ascertainment of facts can 
enter the world only as fact. Sociology therefore has to take account of its 
own factuality. This requirement applies throughout its domain of research 
and is not to be redeemed by a special interest in a “sociology of sociology.” 
This, as we now know, violates the premises of a bivalent, or two-valued, 

 
  Society as a Social System
logic.2 In choosing limited research topics, this can be disregarded on prag-
matic grounds. The investigator sees himself as a subject outside his topic. 
For the purposes of a theory of society, however, this view is untenable, for 
the work on such a theory necessarily involves self-referential operations. 
It can be communicated only within the system of society.
Sociology has hitherto failed to address this problem with the nec-
essary stringency and consistency. It has hence failed to produce anything 
approaching an adequate theory of society. Toward the end of the nine-
teenth century, any integration of a description of society into its object 
tended to be seen as “ideology” and, as such, rejected. On this basis, the 
raising of sociology to the academic status of a strict science would have 
been inconceivable. Some even felt they should make do without the con-
cept of society and limit themselves to the strictly formal analysis of social 
relations.3 Concepts concerned with difference such as individualization 
and differentiation seemed sufficient to mark the research interests of so-
ciology. Others, notably Emile Durkheim, considered a strictly positive 
­science of “social facts” and of society as the condition for their possibility 
to be feasible. Still others were satisfied with the distinction between the 
natural sciences and the humanities and with the historical relativization 
of all descriptions of society. Whatever the details, the distinction between 
subject and object was considered binding for epistemological reasons, 
leaving a choice only between a scientistically naïve and a transcendental 
theoretical position.
Many of the peculiarities of what are now classical sociologies must 
be attributed to the limitations of this selection schema and to efforts to 
get by nonetheless. This can be said of the strange links between transcen-
dentalism and social psychology we find in Georg Simmel. And of Max 
Weber’s value theoretical concept of action, a loan from Neo-Kantianism. 
It is also true of Helmut Schelsky’s call for a “transcendental theory of soci-
ety” beyond the reach of normal empirical methods, which, attaching the 
concept of “transcendental” to the individual subject, made no headway.4 
These positions are now interesting at best for interpreting the classics. In 
spite of this unquestioned commitment to the subject/object schema and 
despite the insoluble problem of its subject matter, classical sociology has 
produced the only description of society to date. This perhaps best explains 
the lasting fascination the sociological classics continue to exert, which in a 
strict sense has made seemingly timeless texts of them. Almost all theoreti-

Society as a Social System    
cal endeavors today are concerned with retrospection and reconstruction. 
It is well worth considering what made this success possible.
Without acknowledging a circular relationship with the subject mat-
ter! That much can be said. The solution, which hid the problem from 
the classics, lay in a historical self-location, in the dissolution of the circle 
by a historical difference in which the theory could define itself histori-
cally (and only historically). Nascent sociology had reacted to the struc-
tural and semantic problems that had arisen in the nineteenth century, and 
was aware of having done so. Even where it expressed concepts in abstract 
terms, they owed their plausibility to the historical situation. The end of 
confidence in progress had to be accepted; a belief in the positive nature 
of development at whatever cost was replaced by structural analysis, above 
all, by analysis of social differentiation, organizational dependencies, and 
role structures. The economy-focused (“political economy”) concept of so-
ciety that had held sway since the final decades of the eighteenth century 
could thus be abandoned. This provoked controversy between those who 
defined society in material (economic) terms and those who adopted a 
more intellectual (cultural) approach. At the same time, the position of 
the individual in modern society became the central problem, a referen-
tial problem, so to speak, inviting a skeptical view of society as a whole, 
which could no longer automatically be considered progressive. Concepts 
such as socialization and role signaled the need for theoretical mediation 
between the “individual” and “society.” Together with the historical differ-
ence, this distinction between “individual” and “society” provided a basis 
for theory formation. But, as in the case of history, this context could not 
accommodate the question of the distinction’s unity. To ask what history is 
was ruled out methodologically,5 and what constituted the unity of the dif-
ference between individual and society was not even recognized as a prob-
lem, because, in keeping with the entire tradition, society was assumed to 
be composed of individuals. This was then the basis for a “critical” analy-
sis of society, which was not to be “deconstructed” by questions about the 
unity of the difference between individual and society. In Max Weber, fi-
nally, the skepticism such a theoretical approach permitted went so far as 
to affect assessment of modern Western rationalism. Nor should it be for-
gotten that a literature arose at the same time that demonstrated that nei-
ther within nor outside society does the modern individual find a secure 
basis for self-observation, self-realization, or, to use the fashionable term, 

 
  Society as a Social System
“identity.” It suffices here to mention Flaubert, Mallarmé, Henry Adams, 
and Antonin Artaud.6
Since the classics, sociology has made no progress worth mention-
ing toward a theory of society in the course of the past 100 years or so. 
Following the unwelcome ideology dispute of the nineteenth century, the 
paradox of communication about society in society was addressed in theo-
retical controversy by such oppositions as structuralist/processualist, dom-
ination/conflict, affirmative/critical, and even conservative/progressive.7 
However, since maintaining a position within such “frames” required con-
frontation with the contrary position and thus the inclusion of exclusion, 
opting for one side rather than the other was always infected with paradox, 
and to unfold paradox through controversy was convincing only where it 
made political sense. Given the inherent dynamism of the political sys-
tem, this has proved less and less convincing, even though intellectuals 
have continued to play such games. There is no denying that sociology has 
achieved much in other fields, both methodologically and theoretically 
and especially in the collection of empirical knowledge; but it has, so to 
speak, omitted to describe society as a whole. This presumably has to do 
with its commitment to the subject/object distinction. There has indeed 
been specific research into a “sociology of sociology,” and a sort of “reflex-
ive” sociology of science has recently emerged.8 Problems of self-reference 
arise in such contexts, but they are, as it were, isolated as special phenom-
ena and treated as peculiarities or methodological difficulties. The same 
can be said of the “self-fulfilling prophecy” trope.
The only systematic sociological theory currently available was elab-
orated by Talcott Parsons as a general theory of the action system. It pro-
vides a codification of classical sociological knowledge and a treatment of 
the conceptual understanding of action with the aid of cross-tabulation. 
But it fails to answer the question of cognitive self-implication, because 
it has nothing to say about the degree of congruence between analyti-
cal conceptualization and actual system formation. It merely postulates 
an “analytical realism,” thus reducing the problem of self-implication to a 
paradoxical formula. What it leaves out of account is that the cognition of 
social systems depends on social conditions, not only on account of its ob-
ject, but also as cognition; indeed, the cognition (or definition or analysis) 
of actions are themselves actions. Parsons consequently does not himself 
occur in any of the many boxes of his own theory. And this is ultimately 

Society as a Social System    
why the theory cannot distinguish systematically between social system 
and society; it only offers impressionistic, more or less feuilletonistic views 
of modern society.9
In the long course of history, the description of human social life 
(for more ancient times, we can speak of “society” only with reserva-
tions) was guided by ideas insufficiently congruent with existing reality. 
This was true of the old European tradition, with its characteristic sense 
of the natural perfectibility of humankind and its pursuit of education 
and the forgiveness of sins. But it still holds true for modern Europe, 
for the Enlighten­ment and its double deity Reason and Critique. Even 
in the present century, this awareness of inadequacy has been kept alive 
(see ­Husserl or Habermas) and associated with the notion of modernity. 
Richard Münch still considers this focus on the tension between reason 
and reality to be a basic characteristic of modernity and an explanation for 
its distinctive dynamics.10 However, the sense of problem has now shifted 
from ideas to reality itself; and only now is sociology called upon. First, we 
have to under­stand why society causes itself so many problems, even if we 
forgo any proposals for improvement (more solidarity, emancipation, rea-
soned agreement, social integration, etc.). Sociology must understand its 
relationship with society as one of learning, not instruction. It must ana-
lyze the problems it discovers, possibly postpone tackling them, possibly 
declare them insoluble, albeit without knowing how to proffer “scientifi-
cally proven” solutions. All this requires a theoretically grounded descrip-
tion of modern society.
If sociology has to admit to not having produced a theory of society 
in this format, how can it explain this failure to perform a task so clearly 
within its purview and of such importance for its standing in society?
It can obviously be argued that society is immensely complex, and 
that a practicable methodology for dealing with highly complex and dif-
ferentiated systems (so-called organized complexity) is lacking. This argu-
ment is all the more weighty if we point out that the description of the 
system is part of the system, and that there can be a plurality of such de-
scriptions. The conventional methodology, which operates on a very small 
scale or under conditions appropriate for statistical analysis, is particularly 
unsuited for “hypercomplex” systems of this sort. But this argument nec-
essarily prompts renunciation of a theory of society and restricts efforts to 
develop methods for dealing with highly complex or even hypercomplex 

 
  Society as a Social System
systems. But this has been done anyway, although with little success, since 
the discovery of the methodological problem some fifty years ago.11
Another consideration might be headed “epistemological obstacles” 
(“obstacles épistémologiques,” a term coined by Gaston Bachelard),12 re-
ferring to burdens of tradition that prevent adequate scientific analysis 
and raise expectations that can neither be met nor, despite these evident 
weaknesses, replaced.13 Tradition might be said to have responded to natu-
ral questions, and therefore to have provided largely convincing answers. 
As science evolved, however, these natural questions gave way to theory-­
dependent scientific problems whose solution could be judged only in the 
scientific context. In retrospect, the guiding principles of these obstacles 
épistémologiques are insufficiently complex; they overestimate themselves 
and result in a uniformization of the object matter that is finally no longer 
convincing. Not only have the answers we now require become more dif-
ficult (more contingent, more improbable, less convincing); extant ques-
tions and answers obstruct further development, which has to detour via 
implausible evidence.
Such epistemological obstacles are to be found in the prevailing un-
derstanding of society in the form of four interconnected, mutually rein-
forcing assumptions:
(1) that society consists of actual people and relations between people14
(2) that society is constituted or at least integrated by consensus among 
human beings, by concordant opinion and complementary purpose
(3) that societies are regional, territorially defined entities, so that Brazil as 
a society differs from Thailand, and the United States from Russia, as does 
Uruguay from Paraguay
(4) that societies, like groups of people and like territories, can be observed 
from outside
Assumptions 1 to 3 prevent precise conceptual definition of the sub-
ject “society.” The “human being” (as opposed to animals) was tradition-
ally described on the basis of distinctions (such as reason, intelligence, 
will, imagination, emotion, morality), received ideas that, although re-
vised, were specified neither empirically nor in their mode of operation. 
These distinctions seemed to suffice for mutual clarification, but their 

Society as a Social System    
neuro­physiological basis remained unclear.15 In particular, these “anthro-
pological” concepts offer no possibility for connecting with the psychic/
social distinction. The difficulties grow if we abandon these distinctions 
in favor of scientific and empirical denotability. The problematization of 
human individuality with regard to the nature of the individual’s associa-
tions and affective development began in about the mid-eighteenth cen-
tury, long before the industrial revolution.16 This exploded the traditional 
positioning of the human being in an order that gave him status and a 
way of life. Instead, the relationship between the individual and society 
became a problem. However traditional concepts, especially “reason” are 
maintained, it is clear that not everything that individuates the human 
being (if anything at all about him) belongs to society. Society does not 
weigh exactly as much as all human beings taken together, nor does its 
weight change with every birth and death. It is not reproduced, for exam-
ple, by an exchange of macro­molecules in the individual cells of a person 
or by the exchange of cells in the organisms of individual human beings. 
It is therefore not alive. Nor would anyone seriously regard neurophysi-
ological processes in the brain inaccessible to consciousness as societal 
processes, and the same is true of all perceptions and trains of thought 
occupying the attention of the individual consciousness at a given time. 
Georg Simmel, who attributed this problem to modern individualism, 
preferred in the circumstances to sacrifice the concept of society rather 
than his sociological interest in individuals. Aggregate concepts, as he 
saw the problem, were questionable and should be replaced by relational 
theories. After all, he pointed out, astronomy was not a theory of the 
“starry sky.”17
If it is no longer obvious that society by its nature comprises actual 
human beings whose solidarity is prescribed as ordinata concordia [well-
ordered concord] and in particular as ordinata caritas [well-ordered love], 
a theory of consensus can step in with a substitute concept. In the seven-
teenth and eighteenth centuries, this led to the resuscitation and radical-
ization of the theory of social contract.18 At least in Hobbes, the concept 
of nature is reduced to the extrasocial domain, in other authors (such as 
Pufendorf) to an inclination for contract formation. However, this theory 
soon had to be abandoned. It was a legally circular construction and thus 
unable to explain the absolute and permanent binding force of the con-
tract; and, in the light of rapidly growing historical knowledge, it could 

 
  Society as a Social System
be handled historically only as a fiction without explanatory value. It 
was superseded in the nineteenth century by consensus theories and by a 
­notion of solidarity and integration on the basis of consensus. Finally, in 
still weaker dilution, “legitimacy” was demanded for institutions able to 
impose order even in the absence of consensus, and therefore against re-
sistance. Thus, with Emile Durkheim and Max Weber, sociology begins. 
Despite all concessions to reality, integration on the basis of consensus has 
remained the principle by which society is identified as an entity—one 
might say as an “individual.”
However, the whole theoretical system collapses if we inquire more 
closely into how consensus is to be possible at all in a psychically actu-
alizable sense, and, moreover, how interacting expectations are to be ad-
equately coordinated. Max Weber had taken a first step by reducing the 
problem to a type-constraint principle as the condition for understanding 
socially intended meaning. Talcott Parsons, in keeping with Durkheim, 
sees the solution in a consensus on values that reacts to growing differen-
tiation by growing generalization. Although this built-in abstention from 
concretization took account of the individuality of actors and the complex-
ity of the societal system, it so diluted what remained of the society concept 
that the theory could at best function only in sufficiently dense subsections 
of society. Moreover, against our better judgment, we would then have to 
deny that social conflicts, dissent, and deviant behavior are part of society, 
or make do with the assertion that they, too, presuppose some sort of con-
sensus (for example, about the offensive value of certain abuse). John Rawls 
conversely feels obliged to postulate that the circumstances under which 
contract-like principles of justice are established are concealed by a “veil of 
ignorance,” which prevents individuals from knowing their position and 
interests;19 he thus posits individuals without individuality. This is merely 
another way of obscuring the paradox of every return to origins.
Another consequence of the assumption that individuals material-
ize society through their behavior lies in the hypothesis that structural 
problems of society (e.g., excessive differentiation without sufficient in-
tegration, or contradictions in the structures and behavioral expectations 
of society) manifest themselves in deviant individual behavior and can be 
empirically ascertained in such behavior. The classical monograph on the 
subject is Durkheim’s study on suicide.20 But family instability, crime, drug 
taking, or withdrawal from social engagement could also be mentioned. 

Society as a Social System    
While people may react to anomie however they choose, we are dealing in 
essence with functionally equivalent attitudes that serve the sociologist as 
indicators of problems whose roots he has to seek in society. But even if 
such correlations could be demonstrated statistically, the question remains 
of how the individual comes—or fails—to display symptoms of societal 
pathologies. Particularly important to consider are the structural problems 
of society in any way liable to translate into deviant individual behavior. 
This question is imposed not least by ecological problems.
All this should give sociology cause to doubt whether consensual in-
tegration is of any constitutive importance for a society at all. After all, 
it would suffice to assume that, as communication proceeds, it generates 
identities, references, eigenvalues, objects—whatever the individual human 
being experiences when confronted by it.21
This line of reflection converges with a version of systems theory that 
focuses constitutively (with respect to concept and reality) on the distinc-
tion between system and environment. If we accept the system/­environment 
distinction, the human being as a living and consciously sentient being 
must be assigned either to the system or to the environment (dividing a 
human into halves or thirds for distribution between the two sides is em-
pirically impossible). If we see the human being as part of the societal sys-
tem, we are obliged to construct the theory of differentiation as a theory of 
the distribution of human beings—be it among strata, nations, or ethnic 
or other groups. This brings us into conspicuous conflict with the concept 
of human rights, especially the concept of equality. Any “humanism” of this 
ilk would thus founder on its own conceptions. The only option is to regard 
human beings in their entirety, body and soul, as part of the environment 
of the societal system.
If, despite all obvious discrepancies and the well-known philosophical 
criticism of its anthropological foundations,22 a human-centric, “human­
istic” concept of society is maintained,23 this is presumably owing to the 
fear that every standard for judging society and every right to demand that 
society be “humanely” constructed would have to be abandoned. Even if 
this were the case, we would still, regardless of such criteria, first have to 
ascertain what society makes of people and why.
Similarly evident objections can be raised to the territorial concept 
of society.24 More than ever before, worldwide interdependencies now in-
tervene in all the details of societal occurrences. Were we to ignore this, we 

 
  Society as a Social System
would have to fall back on a concept of society defined in terms of domi-
nation or on a culturally nostalgic concept. We would have to make the 
concept of society dependent on arbitrarily drawn national borders,25 or, 
in spite of all concomitant uncertainties, focus on the unity of a regional 
“culture,” on language and the like. All the conditions relevant for further 
development would be left to another concept, for instance, the “global 
system.”26 For Anthony Giddens, the concept of society equates with that 
of nation-state, and it is therefore almost superfluous; we are then left with 
the “world-embracing” nature of modern institutions.27 But this would 
make the concept of global system the successor to what was traditionally 
called “society” (societas civilis). If we tie the concept of society to a premise 
of centralized power or values, we underestimate not only the diversity and 
complexity of communicative circumstances at the regional level but also 
the extent of worldwide, decentralized, and connectionistic communica-
tion via networks in the “information society”—a tendency that comput-
erization is likely to intensify still further in the foreseeable future.
Humanistic and regionalistic (national) concepts of society are theo-
retically no longer acceptable; they survive only in colloquial usage. Cur-
rent sociological theory leaves a contradictory, Janus-faced impression: 
it uses concepts that have not yet abandoned tradition, but that enable 
questions that could explode its framework.28 To adjust to eventual funda-
mentals, it treats action as a basic concept, continually recalling that only 
individual human beings can act. The notion of the global system enables 
it to acknowledge globalization, while leaving the concept of society at the 
level of the nation-state.
In the case of the anthropocentric concept of society, too much is 
included; in that of the territorial concept, too little. In both cases, this 
insistence on such unserviceable concepts may have to do with the desire 
to think about society as something that can be observed from outside. 
However, we must then rely on a long-since obsolete theory of cognition, 
a theory based on the distinctions between thought/being, knowledge/
object, and subject/object that can grasp the real procedure of cognizing 
on the one side of this distinction only as reflection. This was abandoned 
at the latest with the linguistic turn in philosophy, notwithstanding all 
the logical problems that arose with the transition to a “naturalized epis-
temology” (Willard Van Orman Quine). Why does sociology find it so 
difficult to emulate this turn?

Society as a Social System    
Perhaps because it knows society too well (or must in any case claim 
to do so) to take any pleasure in the notion that it is itself part of this real-
ity. Sociology would like to be able to persist in opposition to society, or at 
least in resolute Frankfurt-style resignation. But this would also be possible 
if one’s own theory were to be recognized as part of its own subject matter; 
indeed, precisely then. One could copy Perseus’s facility and indirect sight-
ing in lopping off the Medusa’s head (in sociology, too, only heads are at 
issue).29 One could point out that theology had invented the figure of the 
devil for the purpose of observing God and His creation, and that great 
sophists of the nineteenth century such as Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud 
were characterized by their “incongruent perspectives.”30 The problem is 
therefore more likely to lie in the difficulties of a logical and technical theo-
retical nature that sociology has to face when dealing with what linguistics 
calls “autological” concepts, obliging it to discover itself in its own object 
of study: sociology as the self-description of society. Ultimately, this means 
that, although the notion that reality is to be recognized by the resistance 
it exerts can be retained, it has to be admitted that such resistance to com-
munication can be exercised only through communication. If we can ac-
cept this, the subject/object distinction would be “deconstructed,”31 and 
this would eliminate the secret support for the prevailing epistemological 
obstacles. And then the humanistic and regionalistic conceptual traditions 
could be allowed to founder on their own inutility.
In its present understanding of science, sociology can hardly renounce 
pretensions to explaining the phenomena of social reality. This ­requires de-
marcation of the phenomena to be explained and the most precise possible 
definition of the characteristics that distinguish them from one another. 
However, even as questions, “What are . . .” questions like “What is an enter-
prise?” “What is a social movement?” or “What is a city?” require informa-
tion on essential characteristics, and hence essentialistic concept formation, 
entrenched no longer in nature but in the methodological requirements of 
scientific research. How, we must therefore ask, is sociology to formulate a 
theory of society if it cannot say what it is after with this concept?
But it should also be noted that sociology puts itself in a state of per-
manent restlessness with such “What . . . ?” questions, thus establishing it­
self as an autopoietic system. There can be neither any final answers to such 
questions nor fixed points inaccessible to further research; only observa-
tion of what consequences certain conceptual definitions entail. In the 

 
  Society as a Social System
mode of second-order (self-)observation, and hence in the mode of con-
structivist epistemology, all definitions of characteristics therefore dissolve, 
and we see their necessity for research as well as their contingency. They 
are, so to speak, self-definitions to be tried out, research programs that are 
indispensable, but replaceable if there is to be any question of the differ-
ence between truth and nontruth.
In the broad field of interdisciplinary research, there are now many 
approaches that take this into account, for instance, the grounding of 
every sort of cognition in the operational closure of observing systems; or 
chaos theory, the mathematics of nonlinear functions and the prediction 
of unpredictability; or the evolutionary theory of the random induction of 
structure formation. Where need be, I shall make use of them. Particularly 
for sociology, these desiderata come together in the endeavor to achieve a 
theory of society, for in society it has an object that has always itself pro-
duced what research needs in the way of object determination (essential 
characteristics). At issue is therefore only how this state of affairs can be 
taken into account by defining what the term “society” means.
The inquiries that follow venture this transition to a radically anti-
humanistic, radically anti-regional, and radically constructivist concept of 
society.32 They do not, of course, deny that there are human beings, nor do 
they ignore the glaring differences in living conditions between the vari-
ous regions of the globe. They merely refrain from making these facts a 
criterion for defining the concept of society and determining the boundar-
ies of the object under study. And it is precisely this reticence that enables 
one to recognize normative and evaluative standards in dealing with peo-
ple—for example, human rights or Habermasian understanding-oriented 
communication norms—and, ultimately, attitudes toward differences in 
development between regions, as internal achievements of society, instead 
of having to posit them as regulative ideas or components of the commu-
nication concept. But the preliminary issue remains: How does society 
bring itself to give currency to this and other matters?
In “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life,” Nietzsche 
rebelled against the dependence of his contemporaries on history, accus-
ing them of adopting an ironic if not cynical attitude along the lines of: 
Things can go on neither like this nor in any other way. The diagnosis 
may well still hold true, but instead of irony, we now encounter theoreti-
cally helpless embarrassment. It is hence of little use to focus not on his-

Society as a Social System    
tory but on life and thus evoke the ability to forget. The recommendation 
today is therefore to make better use of the theoretical resources avail-
able—not least, for reconstructing the relationship with history and its se-
mantic heritage.
2. Preliminary Remarks on Methodology
In keeping with its concept of science, sociology concerns itself with 
social reality as it actually exists. Normative questions have to be derived 
from within this reality; they cannot be submitted to society as ideal con-
ceptions of sociology from the outside. As a result, the confrontation be-
tween ideal and reality still current in the early nineteenth century has 
been replaced by the twin questions “What’s the case?” and “What’s be-
hind it?”33 Only for the “resolution” of this difference do ideal construc-
tions (such as emancipation or a normative concept of rationality) still play 
a role. From Marx to Habermas, a “critical” sociology developed along 
these lines that replaced methodology by evaluation of the views of (what 
it regarded as) its opponents in terms of its critical ambitions. But this is to 
give the verdict before the trial.
I shall pursue this line of argument no further. Furthermore, I shall 
distance myself, too, from what is usually treated as “empirical” research in 
the discipline.34 The classical methodology requires researchers to behave 
as if they were a single “subject,” in hope of sustaining the (logical and 
onto­logical) tradition of a distinction between thinking and being, which 
seeks to attain being in thought. Agreement is doubtless a praiseworthy 
goal, but we must also ask what is lost if research is directed toward this 
goal. After all, modern society, in which research, too, has to be carried 
on, is a polycontextural system admitting a plurality of descriptions of its 
complexity. Research can therefore hardly be expected to impose a mono-
textural description on society—at any rate, not when a theory of society 
is at issue.
From a constructivist point of view, the function of methodology 
cannot be limited to ensuring that reality is correctly (and not incorrectly) 
described. It is more likely to be concerned with refined forms of intrasys-
temic information generation and processing. Methods can thus enable 
scientific research to surprise itself. This requires interruption of the direct 
continuum of reality and knowledge initially assumed by society.

 
  Society as a Social System
The confrontation between quantitative and qualitative methods 
that dominates the debate on sociological methods tends to divert atten-
tion from the real problems. Above all, it fails to settle how to transform 
distance from the object into insight, and how both to confirm and rise 
above the street smarts of the socially experienced participants in social 
communication who will be answering questions. Treating the relevant ut-
terances as “data” is naturally no solution to this.
The usual method recommended is formulated in terms of variables, 
addressing relations between variables, perhaps correlations, and the con-
ditions on which they depend.35 In research conducted in project form, the 
few variables that can be handled are treated as a closed area, while, thanks 
to a methodological fiction, everything else is assumed to be indifferent. 
What is ignored or left aside for methodological reasons is that the relation­
ship between inclusion and exclusion is regulated by social systems themselves; 
and, moreover, that the use of meaning in social systems always provides ref­
erence to the unknown, the excluded, the indeterminable, to lacking informa­
tion, and personal ignorance.36 This can happen by reference to the future 
and to the possibilities for determination in prospect (as in Husserl’s phe-
nomenology) or in the form of a negative terminology, which only negates 
what it determines, leaving open what is in its stead. Although the excuse is 
offered that the “context” has to be taken into account, this remains a para-
doxical demand: the “context” would have to be transformed into a “text.” 
Above all, however, if we assign key theoretical importance to the concept 
of communication, we would always have to note what is not said when 
something is said;37 for reactions in social intercourse are very often deter-
mined by taking account of what remains unsaid. But if we are to do jus-
tice to social reality, we cannot abstract from the circumstance that all the 
forms of meaning used have another side to them, which they exclude for 
the moment of their use. I shall attempt to take this into account with the 
concept of meaning, and with the concept of form, the mathematical con-
cept of the “reentry” of a form into the form, and essentially by adopting a 
differentialist approach to theory.
The familiar question about relations between variables corresponds 
very well to action-theoretical notions of the object. Not, however, because 
action is a particularly suitable object for empirical research. There are good 
reasons for questioning this. But actions are easy to imagine in interactional 
contexts if we follow Max Weber and attribute socially intended meaning 

Society as a Social System    
to action. The motives of actors (and possibly their rationally selective struc-
ture) then serve to explain what form interaction takes. But this is the very 
circumstance that shuts out the other side of the form or at most includes it 
as rationally nonselectable. The main question for a theory of society, how-
ever, is why almost all possible actions and inter­actions do not take place. 
They are apparently outside the schema of possible motives and rational 
calculations. How does society manage to sort out what is possible? Why is 
it part of the meaning of the forms of social life that these vast surplus pos-
sibilities are disregarded as unmarked space? It is at least conceivable that 
societal structures arise not as aggregates of preferred motives for action but 
much more elementarily as inclusion of this exclusion in the form.
The tendency of methodological individualism (whether of neces-
sity or not) to interrogate the individual about his knowledge or views 
and then to analyze the resulting data statistically misses the essence of the 
communication phenomenon, for communication is typically occasioned 
by ignorance.38 We must be able to judge which utterances mean informa-
tion for others, adding something they did not know or did not know for 
certain. Conversely, every participant has to be ignorant of something if 
he is to be able to receive information. This role of ignorance cannot be 
reduced to individual knowledge about the ignorance of others. It is also 
completely unrealistic to assume that an individual knows what he does 
not know.39 Communication itself generates and tests the ignorance nec-
essary for its continued operation. We could say that it lives from the un-
equal distribution of knowledge and ignorance. It is based on the form of 
knowledge, which always has a concurrent other side: that which is not 
yet known. And every participant must be able to judge what cannot be 
known at all so that he can avoid talking manifest nonsense. This being so, 
it is hardly surprising that the theoretical premises of the usual methodol-
ogy address action—and not communication.
Another point concerns the methodological preference for the sim­
plest possible explanation—simple in relation to the complexity of the data. 
At least since Henri Poincaré, we have known that this is a convention with 
no basis in reality, and hence a convention with which science serves itself.40 
The question of what has thus been excluded (i.e., included as excluded) 
has never really occupied sociology, not even where it was well aware that 
science is carried out within society. The problem is not to be resolved 
with Popper’s falsification methodology. It arises in attempts at both falsi-

 
  Society as a Social System
fication and verification. We could assume that the chaos behind all cog-
nizable structures is excluded, but that would divide the world only into 
cognizable and noncognizable. Another, probably more convincing answer 
would be that society itself with its other possibilities of communication 
is excluded and accordingly prevented from interfering in the production 
of scientific truth. Society can provide for scientific research within itself 
only if it allows research to try out the easiest possible (e.g., mathemati-
cal) explanatory models and to cease further investigation if the explana-
tion satisfies methodological requirements; or otherwise to venture on to 
more complex data specifications. There is nothing to be said against this. 
However, where a theory of society is concerned, this permission to certify 
one’s own success or failure with the aid of conventions would have to be 
included as a particularity of the object of research in the investigation. A 
theory would be needed that disavows the methodological framework of 
research; Jacques Derrida would perhaps use the word “deconstruct.”
After a century of the customary empirical research in sociology, we 
can say (if I may extrapolate) that although it can capture macrosociological 
phenomena (such as rising/falling crime rates, migrations, divorce rates), it 
has failed to produce a theory of society (as the totality of social phenom-
ena), and the prospects of it doing so are not exactly favorable. The am-
bition of empirical research is rooted in trust of its own tools and in the 
premise (the “prejudice”) that it can arrive at reality by these means, rather 
than only validating its own constructions. We could object that the co-
incidence of empirical knowledge and reality cannot be empirically deter-
mined, and from an epistemological point of view must accordingly be 
treated as accidental. This need not mean that the results of empirical re-
search are to be ignored. But they typically provoke stimulating questions 
(Why this? Why so?) and not answers in the sense of established knowl-
edge, which could be invalidated only by (albeit typically to be expected) 
social change.
If we are guided by the alternative between critical and positive (meth-
odologically “empirical”) sociology, we shall not get very far. We need not 
reject it (that would not help). We must complement it. Suggestions can be 
made in both factual and conceptual respects.
As far as facts are concerned, much is obviously known and requires 
no further empirical study; it is also clear that the known facts often have 
far more serious consequences than common sense tells us or empirical re-

Society as a Social System    
search ascertains. A great deal could therefore be gained by throwing new 
light from unusual, incongruent angles on what is known or by placing it 
in a new context.41 What we lack at present is an elaborated methodology, 
which is likely to depend more strongly than generally supposed on the 
development of theory.
The conceptualization of a theory of society needs to enhance its po-
tential for complexity, namely, for interpreting more heterogeneous facts 
with the same concepts and thus ensuring the comparability of widely dif-
fering facts. Functional comparison is a way of treating even the extremely 
unlike as comparable. Above all, it excludes a purely classificatory method; 
for classifications assume that, in the case of unlikeness, another class must 
be considered. I shall not, of course, cease to assign facts to general con-
cepts, but I do not consider classification, hence a sort of naming, to be the 
form in which methodological efforts to attain cognition can be appeased.
The methodological desideratum of functional comparison reflects 
peculiarities of modern society, and this is another reason for no longer 
relying on tradition in either theory or method. For, as I shall show at 
length, modern society is characterized by the functional autonomization 
and operational closure of its most important subsystems. Its functional 
systems are free to organize themselves and reproduce themselves. But this 
means that the overall system can no longer assert itself through opera­
tional control, but only through the structural effects of its differentiation 
form on subsystems. This insight has methodological consequences: nei-
ther ideals nor norms can offer a basis for methodological guidelines (e.g., 
measures of approximation); for this would only shift the problem to why 
society burdens itself with ideas to which it can do no justice, and to how 
it selects such ideas. Instead, we must establish the societal contingency of 
findings by demonstrating that, and how, the same basal structures can be 
found in completely differing functional areas (family and politics, reli-
gion and economics, cognitive science and creative art or normative law). 
The argument is then that such coincidences cannot be accidental; they 
can and must be attributed to the form of the societal system.
The following inquiries thus depend not only theoretically but also 
methodologically on very abstract conceptual decisions. The reasons lie in 
a circular argument. These assumptions about the specificity of modern 
society and about what can in this connection be considered a sufficiently 
evident fact naturally depend on the mode of observation and the distinc-

 
  Society as a Social System
tions with which the theory of society establishes itself. This cannot be 
avoided, for the theory of society must be formulated in society. “Meth-
odology,” too, offers no a priori point of departure that can be introduced 
from outside.42 If we wish to take account of this fact, the only possibil-
ity is to construct our theory as transparently as possible and to recognize 
concepts as decisions that can be revised with manifest consequences.
3. Meaning
I have sought to clarify the concept of meaning in a number of pub-
lications.43 In the context of a theory of society, we must at least briefly re-
turn to this issue, because it can be assumed that neither theory nor society 
itself can go beyond what must always be presupposed as meaning. For no 
societal operation can begin without using meaning.
If we take the general theoretical pattern of “autopoiesis” as the basis, 
presupposing meaning in no way contradicts generating meaning in the net-
work of the operations that always presuppose it. On the contrary, the spec-
ificity of the medium meaning is a necessary correlate to the operational 
closure of cognitive systems. Meaning exists only as meaning of the oper-
ations using it, and hence only at the moment in which it is determined 
by operations, neither beforehand nor afterward. Meaning is accordingly a 
product of the operations that use meaning and not, for instance, a quality 
of the world attributable to a creation, a foundation, an origin.44 There is ac-
cordingly no ideality divorced from factual experience and communication. 
Although Plato was right in thinking that ideas have to do with memory, 
remembering does not take us back to the real, almost forgotten meaning 
of that which is, its forms of being, ideas; the memory constructs struc-
tures only for momentary use to maintain selectivity and limit connectivity. 
Meaning-constituting systems delude themselves if they think there have 
always been and will continue to be enduring identities, and that we can 
therefore refer to them as extant. All orientation is construction, is difference 
reactualized from moment to moment.
We reach beyond this statement, which at first sounds like a mere as-
sertion (there is no meaning outside the systems that use and reproduce 
meaning as a medium), if we call to mind a consequence of operational 
closure for relations between the system and its operationally unattainable 
environment. Living systems, that is, organisms, create a special environ-

Society as a Social System    
ment for their cells, which protects them and enables them to specialize. 
They protect themselves by means of material boundaries in space. Psychic 
and social systems shape their operations as observational undertakings, 
which allow the system itself to be distinguished from its environment—
even though (and I must add because) the operation can take place only 
within the system. In other words, they distinguish between self-reference 
and other-reference. For them, boundaries are therefore not material arti-
facts but forms with two sides.
In abstract terms, this is a “reentry” of a distinction into what it 
has itself distinguished. The system/environment distinction occurs twice 
over: as difference produced through the system and as difference observed 
in the system. With the concept of “reentry,” I cite consequences that 
George ­Spencer-Brown has described as constraints of a mathematical cal-
culus restricted to arithmetic and algebra.45 The system becomes incalcu-
lable for itself. It attains a state of indeterminacy that is attributable, not to 
the unpredictability of external effects (independent variables), but to the 
system itself. Memory, a “memory function,” is therefore needed to make 
the results of past selections available as a present state (in which forget-
ting and remembering play a role).46 And it puts itself in a state of oscilla-
tion between positive and negative operations and between self-reference 
and other-­reference.47 It confronts itself with a future it cannot itself de-
termine, for which, so to speak, adjustment reserves are laid aside for un-
foreseeable situations.
I shall be referring to the results of these consequences of reentry ap-
parent to the system itself as “meaning.”
If we accept this theoretical disposition, we can neither assume that 
an existing world consists of things, substances, and ideas nor take the 
concept of world to refer to their totality (universitas rerum). For meaning 
systems, the world is not a gigantic mechanism that produces states from 
states and thereby determines the systems themselves. The world is an im-
measurable potential for surprises; it is virtual information, needing, how-
ever, systems to produce information, or, in more precise terms, to give 
selected irritations the sense of information.48 All identity must accord-
ingly be understood as the result of information processing or, if relating 
to the future, as a problem. Identities do not “exist,” they merely have the 
function of ordering recursions so that in processing meaning, we can draw 
on and anticipate something that can be used recurrently. This requires se-

 
  Society as a Social System
lective condensation and, at the same time, confirmatory generalization of 
something that can be called the same as distinguished from other.49
That meaningful identities (empirical objects, symbols, signs, figures, 
sentences, and so on) can be produced only recursively has far-reaching 
epistemological consequences. While it is clear that the meaning of such 
entities goes far beyond what can be grasped at the moment of observing, 
this does not mean that they “exist” when they are not observed. Beneath 
the premises of the traditional logical-ontological view of reality, a further 
level, another operational activity, becomes apparent that constitutes ob-
jects and the possibilities of indicating them in the first place. Where re-
cursions refer to the past (to tried and tested, known meaning), they refer 
only to contingent operations whose results are presently available and not 
to substantiating origins. Where recursions refer to the future, they point 
to an infinite number of possibilities for observation, hence to the world 
as virtual reality; and we cannot know whether observational operations 
will ever feed this reality into systems (and into which ones). Meaning 
is accordingly a thoroughly historical form of operation and only its use 
bundles the contingent emergence and indeterminacy of future uses. All 
determinations must use this medium, in which no registration has any 
other grounds than its facticity as secured by recursions.
In the communicative production of meaning, this recursivity is pro-
vided above all by the vocabulary, which can be used as the same in many 
situations.50 There are, however, also objects that as perceivable things can 
be enriched with social meaning, so that they can perform a coordinating 
function not dependent on language—such as religious objects or peo-
ple in trances (prophets, “mediums”) purportedly possessed by spirits; or 
kings, coins, or footballs. The particular way in which “home” is identified 
can also not be attributed to language alone and can therefore not be ade-
quately expressed in language. This is also true for the structuring of spatial 
relations through architecture or for the meaning of actions. We are always 
dealing with the basic function of ordering recursions available at the given 
moment (and only then).
In the self-constituted medium of meaning, it is indispensable to 
orient operations on distinctions. This alone can produce the selectivity 
necessary for recursion.51 Meaning implies that everything currently indi-
cated connotes and captures reference to other possibilities. Each mean-
ing thus means itself and other things.52 It would, moreover, run contrary 

Society as a Social System    
to our experience to assume that a thing disappears if we lose sight of it in 
turning our attention to other things (for then we would never be able to 
risk letting it out of our sight). Meaning is co-present as reference to the 
world in everything that is actualized, and it is “appresented” [appräsentiert 
(­Husserl’s terminology)] in actuality. This includes reference to the condi-
tions of our own ability, our own capacity for achievement and the limits 
set them in the world. Even the distinction between actual and possible can 
still be rendered meaningful by considering its function in the phenom-
enology of the world, for example, thus reflecting on functional equiva-
lents, on other possibilities. What this meaning thesis excludes is only the 
contrary, namely, absolute void, nothingness, chaos in the original sense of 
the word, and also what Spencer-Brown calls the “unmarked state” of the 
world. At the same time, however, all meaningful operations always repro-
duce the presence of what has been excluded,53 for the world of meaning is 
a complete world, which can exclude what it excludes only in itself. “Non-
meaning” (“non-sense”), too, can therefore be thought and communicated 
only in the medium of meaning, only in the form of meaning.54 All nega-
tion accordingly potentializes what it explicitly negates,55 and preserves it, 
hence reestablishing the unmarked space into which every operation, in-
cluding the negating operation, etches itself through a distinction.
How meaning functions can be discussed with the aid of specific dis-
tinctions that define meaning. Meaning can be described phenomenologi-
cally as surplus reference accessible from actually given meaning. Meaning 
is accordingly an infinite and hence indeterminable referential complex 
that can be made accessible and reproduced in a determined manner—and 
I attach great importance to the paradoxical formulation.56 We can describe 
the form of meaning as the difference between actuality and potentiality, 
and can therefore also assert that this and no other distinction constitutes 
meaning. When talking about meaning, we then have something tangible 
(something we can indicate, distinguish) in mind; and this also means that 
the meaning thesis limits what we can otherwise make out about society. 
Society is a meaning-constituting system.
The modalization of actuality by the distinction between actual and 
possible concerns the meaning actualized in system operations. It is doubly 
asymmetrical; for actualized meaning is and remains possible, and possible 
meaning, actualizable. The distinction therefore provides for the “reentry” 
of the distinction into what it distinguishes. Meaning is hence a form that 

 
  Society as a Social System
contains a copy of itself on both sides. This leads to the symmetrization of 
the initially asymmetrical distinction between actual and possible,57 and 
meaning consequently appears to be the same everywhere in the world. 
Re-asymmetrization is possible, indeed, necessary for observation, but it 
must be introduced by further distinctions, for example, that between sys-
tem and environment or signifier and signified.
Systems using meaning are systems that, by their very medium, can 
observe and describe themselves and their environments only in the form of 
meaning, in other words with reentry of the form into the form. There are 
no psychic and social systems that cannot distinguish between themselves 
and others in the medium of meaning (whatever freedoms may be actual-
ized in matters of causal attribution). More specifically, from moment to 
moment reentry is used, the treatment of actual meaning is reproduced, 
and possibilities are thus anticipated. Actuality is, as it were, the track on 
which ever-new system states are projected and realized. To the system, 
actuality therefore appears to be a momentary present and, through self-­
thematization, to be of (however precarious) duration. Such systems cannot 
avoid the structural consequences of reentry, especially the self-overburden-
ing with possibilities that no observation or description can capture, and 
that can be observed only as selectivity. A historically much favored way of 
dealing with such self-overburdening is to measure the system against ideas 
(e.g., perfection) that it cannot realize.
Systems that operate in the medium of meaning can, indeed, must, 
distinguish between self-reference and other-reference; and they must do 
so in such a way that the actualization of self-reference always compre-
hends other-reference, and that the actualization of other-reference al-
ways comprehends self-reference as the other side of the distinction. All 
forms in the medium of meaning must therefore be constituted relative to 
the system, regardless of whether the accent is on self-reference or other-­
reference at the given moment. It is this distinction that makes such pro-
cesses as learning, system development, and the evolutionary development 
of complexity possible. And it also makes it possible to set out from two 
operationally very different meaning-constituting systems that reproduce 
through consciousness and communication, each producing its own point 
of departure for the distinction between self-reference and other-reference, 
while always relating to each another through presupposed or actualized 
other-reference: psychic systems and social systems.

Society as a Social System    
As the universal medium of all psychic and social systems, all con-
sciously and communicatively operating systems, meaning regenerates ef-
fortlessly and as if of its own accord with the autopoiesis of these systems. 
By contrast, it is difficult to produce nonmeaning, “non-sense,” because the 
effort to do so again produces meaning, “makes sense.” This problem can 
be observed in efforts at nonsense art.58 Nonmeaning can be produced only 
if we take a narrower concept of meaningful (e.g., what is usual in every­
day life, what can be expected) and then distinguish nonmeaning from it. 
This is also the case where, having made an effort to achieve something 
particularly “meaningful,” we have to accept the futility of the venture.59 In 
the generally unnegatable medium of meaning, secondary positive/nega-
tive breaks can be introduced; but this inevitably means that such a distinc-
tion again has meaning as a distinction and reproduces meaning. Although 
meaning can therefore be described as a form by distinguishing meaning 
from nonmeaning (sense from nonsense) and making it possible to cross 
the boundary, this can happen only where the meaning/nonmeaning dif-
ference attains meaning at the moment of its use, hence reproducing mean-
ing as the medium of all form formation.60
Meaning arises and is reproduced in certain (consciousness and so-
cial) systems as “eigenbehavior,”61 because these systems produce their ul-
timate elements as events that arise at a point in time only immediately 
to disintegrate, can have no duration, and occur for a first and last time. 
They are temporalized systems, which can gain stability only in the form 
of dynamic stability, only through the continuous replacement of transient 
elements by other, new elements. Their structures have to be adapted ac-
cordingly. The given actual present is brief and so interpreted that every-
thing that happens in this present happens simultaneously.62 It is not yet 
really time. But it becomes time if it is understood as separating a “before” 
from an “after,” a past from a future. Meaning therefore appears in time 
and can at any moment switch to temporal distinctions; in other words, 
it can use time to reduce complexity, namely, treat what is past as no lon-
ger actual and what is future as not yet actual.63 If (and only if) we use 
this distinction can we produce redundancies via the past and variety via 
the future; and producing means making present in the present.64 How-
ever, temporalizing the present is only one of a number of possibilities for 
dealing meaningfully with variety (namely, through specific distinctions). 
The present is primarily the side of the form of meaning that, in contrast 

 
  Society as a Social System
to the other side, I have called actuality. The other side of the form is then 
everything accessible from the first side, whether directly and really or only 
potentially, in the course of perception, or only in thought or imagination. 
With loose reference to Spencer-Brown, we could distinguish the inside 
of the form from its outside as the attractor of the operation.65 Operat-
ing meaningfully then means that all operations on the inside of the form 
take place (or do not take place) actually; but also that meaning requires 
another side of the form: the outside as a space of other possibilities reach-
ing to infinity.
That the temporal dimension of meaning can become relevant for 
differentiation can have a considerable impact on social conditions. The 
temporal dimension prevents the material consolidation of the social di-
mension. At the next moment, others may observe otherwise; within the 
factual dimension of meaning, they are temporally mobile. The extent 
to which societies accept this varies historically with the complexity of 
the societal system—which is easy to verify if we consider the context 
of the semantics of thing [Ding-Semantik] (res), bivalent logic, the treat-
ment of dissenting opinion as error, and the isolation of special views as 
mere doxa/opinio in the old European tradition, whereas the temporal 
contingency of all attitudes toward the world is now much more strongly 
assumed.
If every operation is an event dependent on a point in time that van-
ishes as soon as it is actualized, and that consequently has to be replaced 
by another event, if a sequence of operations, that is to say, a system is to 
come about (which need not be the case), continued operation requires 
the boundaries of the form to be crossed, requires a transition to some-
thing on the other side that had previously not been indicated. I shall not 
go into the logical or mathematical problems of this “crossing” (Spencer-
Brown) but simply note that selection is needed to reduce what is and re-
mains possible on the other side to a specific, indicatable actuality. Which 
in turn requires another side to the form, a surplus of references, a world 
full of possibilities that cannot simultaneously be actualized. Sequencing 
operations keeps the totality of potentialities co-present, carrying it along, 
regenerating it as a world without which no further operations could be 
selected and the operating system could never be reproduced. In short, 
meaning can be reproduced only as form. The world itself, as co-occurring 
other side of all meaning forms, remains unobservable. Its meaning can be 

Society as a Social System    
symbolized only in self-reflection on the use meaningful operations make 
of the form.
The problem is that, despite the clarity (or lack of clarity), distinc-
tiveness, and factual indisputability of momentary actualization (Descartes 
naturally comes to mind), meaning can represent the world of what is ac-
cessible from this perspective only as a surplus of reference, thus as a se-
lection constraint. What has actually been appropriated is secure,66 but 
unstable; the other side of the meaning form is stable, but insecure, be-
cause everything depends on what will be intended in the next moment. 
The unity of the totality of possibilities and, of course, the unity of the 
form itself, the unity of actuality and potentiality, cannot be actualized. In-
stead of giving world, meaning points to selective processing. And this also 
holds true (as we shall see) if concepts, descriptions of the world, semantics 
referring to the world are formed; for this, too, must take place in a mean-
ingful operation that distinguishes what it indicates from something else 
(e.g., Sein from Seiendes). Without exception, actualized meaning comes 
about selectively and without exception points to further selection. Its 
contingency is a necessary element of meaningful operation.
All this presupposes the operationally functioning unity of what 
is differentiated, comprehensible only as paradox, but not observable.67 
Meaning has to function simultaneously with the two sides of its form; 
otherwise, it cannot be used operationally to indicate something (and 
nothing else). Meaning in every sense, too, can be indicated only by actu-
alizing a difference that entails something nonindicated as the other side of 
the distinction. We can, of course, also indicate the actuality/potentiality 
distinction itself (I have just done so), but only through a further distinc-
tion that distinguishes this from other distinctions and localizes it in the 
world. Meaningfully processing systems can thus well imagine and com-
municate that there are other systems for which there is no meaning, for 
example, stones. But this, too, is possible only with an appropriate distinc-
tion, hence only in the form of meaning. Meaningfully operating systems 
remain bound to the medium of meaning. It alone gives them reality in 
the form of the sequential actualization of their own operations. They can 
neither understand nor simulate meaning-free systems. They remain de-
pendent on meaning as the form of complexity reduction specific to them.
Whereas the use of a distinction is necessary and cannot be avoided, 
the determination of a distinction takes place explicitly. It presupposes vis-

 
  Society as a Social System
ible selection and may need to be justified. Linguistically, the distinction 
implied in every phrase is not expressed; when we talk about an apple, for 
example, it is often not clear what we are distinguishing it from. The deter­
mination of a distinction, in contrast, is clearly marked and used to direct 
further communication;68 but, of course, in the medium of meaning.
That all observation depends on differences explains the wealth of 
meaning in the world; for we can identify what we are indicating by expos-
ing it to one difference after another. Various observations by various ob-
servers can hence be coordinated, and coordinated in their very diversity. 
This applies to differences in the temporal dimension and in the social di-
mension; it holds true for the use of a succession of distinctions and for var-
ious observers focusing on the same thing.
Traditional ontological metaphysics had given free rein to this—
backed, however, by transcendental critical values. Seiendes was under-
stood under the form of thing. Time pointed to an “origin” (archē, origo, 
principium, source, ground) that, despite changes in currently actualized 
distinctions, remained the same (and did so in the given present). And 
this origin was ultimately God as the sole being not defined through dis-
tinctions.69 The radicalization of the meaning concept as a medium for 
­distinction-dependent observation allows these premises to be cancelled. 
In all the dimensions of meaning, the world can now be understood as the 
framework (or as Husserl puts it, the horizon) that permits the exchange 
of distinctions with which we observe the same. However, this presupposes 
that the world is no longer understood as the totality of things and their 
relations but as that which cannot be observed, which is reproduced with 
every change of distinction.
Every distinction represents the world by entailing its other side, 
what is not indicated at the moment. As Spencer-Brown puts it: “distinc-
tion is perfect continence.”70 Distinctions exercise self-control; they spare 
themselves external references because they already contain them as their 
other side. They contain continence. For this reason alone the meaning 
form can never go beyond itself. But in its particular case, it can also itself 
distinguish only by using itself, in other words “autologically.” It is the ab-
solute medium of itself.
This does not exclude taking further steps toward the inquiries into 
the theory of society that follow. We take recourse to the paradox of dif-
ferentiation that secures “perfect continence.” As an operational unity of 

Society as a Social System    
distinction and indication, meaning is a form that contains itself, namely, 
the distinction between distinction and indication. A form is essentially 
a distinction that recurs in itself as what is distinguished. We can escape 
this situation only by a leap, by a deparadoxization directive, by conceal-
ing the paradox with a further distinction. To this end, Russell and ­Tarski 
have proposed distinguishing between types or levels. Despite widespread 
criticism, this may be useful for the purposes of logic and linguistics. 
­Spencer-Brown manages by ignoring the initial paradox, carrying out his 
calculus on the basis of a directive (“draw a distinction”) to the point 
where the possibility of an imaginary “reentry” of the form into the form 
emerges.71
With respect to the specific form of meaning, namely, the distinc-
tion between actuality and potentiality, meaning therefore becomes opera-
tional only by the form reentering the form. The inside of the form must 
be able to accept this reentry. The difference between momentary actual-
ity and open possibility must itself be actually available for consciousness 
and/or communication. We must be able to see in actuality how the cross-
ing of this boundary is possible and what subsequent steps come into con-
sideration. This cannot mean that the “unmarked space” of “everything 
possible” can be accommodated in the “marked space” of what is actually 
indicated; for it constitutes what is actual precisely by crossing the bound-
ary. Nevertheless, certain possibilities can be captured and indicated in 
actuality and pre-­orient a crossing of the boundary between actual and 
potential; only, however, where this possibility is realized as an actual op-
eration, hence reconstituting the difference between actuality and poten-
tiality. In this fashion, namely, through reentry of the form into the form, 
meaning becomes a continually self-regenerating medium for the ongoing 
selection of particular forms.
The description of this state of affairs verifies it itself, so to speak, and 
is thus an autological operation. But it also shows that it is possible only in 
the form of a paradox, for the form reentering the form is the same and is 
not the same form.
This well-considered audacity in unfolding the meaning paradox can 
encourage us to look at other distinctions capable of reentry into themselves. 
In what follows, systems theory is understood as the theory of the distinc-
tion between system and environment, with reentry possible on the side of 
the system if the system itself, that is to say, in its own operations, distin-

 
  Society as a Social System
guishes between self-reference and other-reference. Treatment of communi-
cation as the operation that reproduces specific social systems is guided by 
the distinction between medium and form. This distinction occurs within it-
self inasmuch as loosely or strictly coupled elements are presupposed on the 
two sides that are cognizable only as forms, that is to say, they presuppose 
a further distinction between medium and form.72 The final medium that 
meaning systems cannot transcend is therefore meaning. But in this me-
dium, forms have to be constructed through system operations—whether 
by directing conscious attention or by communicating. In the case of lin-
guistic communication,73 words are joined to form sentences complying 
with the rules of grammar and the requirements of meaning formation. Fi-
nally, the theory of societal evolution also uses a distinction that unfolds its 
paradox. The paradox that something persists that changes is not resolved in 
the old manner in the distinction between mobile and immobile (­mutable/
immutable) elements or parts. On the model of Darwinian theory, it is re-
placed by the distinction between variation and selection, in which varia-
tion itself proceeds selectively, since the system cannot be arbitrarily but 
only highly selectively irritated, in other words, stimulated to variation.
4. The Distinction Between System and Environment
The theoretical resources for a “meaningful” revolutionization of 
the theory of society paradigm are not taken from sociological tradition. 
Rather, they are introduced from outside the discipline, based on recent 
developments in systems theory and developments in fields such as cyber-
netics, the cognitive sciences, communication theory, and evolution the-
ory. In any case, the discussion runs in interdisciplinary contexts, which 
have changed radically over the past two to three decades and now have 
little in common with the systems concepts of the 1950s and 1960s. These 
are quite new, fascinating intellectual developments, which for the first 
time make it possible to avoid the old confrontation between the natural 
sciences and the liberal arts, the hard sciences and the humanities, or be-
tween subject matter in natural law form and in text (hermeneutic) form.
The farthest-reaching change, indispensable in understanding what 
follows, is that we speak no longer of objects but of distinctions. More-
over, we understand distinctions, not as existing facts (differences), but as 
deriving from directives to draw them, because if we did not we would be 

Society as a Social System    
unable to indicate anything. We would have nothing to observe and hence 
nothing to pursue.74 George Spencer-Brown conceptualizes forms, not as 
(beautiful or otherwise) shapes, but as boundaries, as markings of differ-
ences that oblige us to make clear which side we are indicating, and thus 
which side of the form we are on, our point of departure for further opera-
tions. The other side of the boundary (the “form”) is given simultaneously. 
Each side of the form is the other side to the other side. Neither side is 
anything on its own. We actualize a side only by indicating it and not the 
other side. In this sense, form is unfolded self-reference, to be more precise 
temporally unfolded self-reference. For we must always set out from the in-
dicated side and need time for a further operation in order to stay on the 
indicated side or to cross the boundary constituting the form.
Crossing is creative. For whereas repeating an indication merely con-
firms its identity (and we’ll say later: tests and hence condenses its mean-
ing in various situations), crossing back and forth is not repetition and can 
therefore not be contracted into a single identity.75 This is merely another 
way of saying that a distinction cannot identify itself in use. And this, as 
will be shown in detail with regard to binary coding, is the basis for the 
productiveness of crossing.
Although this concept of form somewhat resembles Hegel’s concept 
of the concept in that the inclusion of a distinction is constitutive for both, 
Hegel built in much farther-reaching pretensions, which we cannot ac-
cept and do not need. Unlike form in our sense, his concept undertakes to 
solve the problem of its unity itself. It eliminates the autonomy of what is 
distinguished (in the concept “human being,” for example, the indepen-
dence of the opposing elements sensibility and reason), doing so through 
the specific distinction between general and particular upon whose disso-
lution the concept constitutes itself alone. This can be countered only by 
recalling that form is the distinction itself, in that it imposes the indication 
(and thus the observation) of the one side or the other and (quite differ-
ently from the concept) can for this very reason not realize its unity on its 
own. The unity of the form is not its “higher,” intellectual meaning. It is 
rather the excluded middle that cannot be observed as long as we observe 
with the aid of the form. The concept of form also presupposes that the 
two sides are determined by reference of the one to the others. This should, 
however, be regarded as prerequisite, not for a “reconciliation” of oppo-
sites, but for drawing a distinction.

 
  Society as a Social System
Determining, indicating, cognizing, acting are all operations that es-
tablish such a form; like the Fall of Man, they cause a break in the world, 
give rise to a difference, to simultaneity and a need for time, and render 
inaccessible the indeterminacy ahead.
The form concept no longer differs only from the concept of content 
but also from that of context.76 A form may consist in the difference be-
tween something and everything else, in the difference between something 
and its context (for instance, between a building and its urban or rural sur-
roundings), or in the difference between a value and the countervalue to 
the exclusion of third possibilities. Whenever the form concept marks the 
one side of a distinction on the condition that there is another side deter-
mined by it, there is also a superform, namely, the form of the distinction 
of the form from something else.77
With the help of this concept developed for a calculus of forms, for 
processing distinctions, we can also interpret the distinction between sys-
tem and environment.78 From the point of view of a general calculus of 
forms, it is a special case, a case of application. From a methodological 
standpoint, it is therefore not merely a matter of replacing an explana-
tion of society in terms of a principle (be it “mind” or “matter”) by one in 
terms of a distinction. Although we assign key status to the distinction be-
tween system and environment, and thus to the form “system,” we do so 
only in the sense that this is the point from which we organize the consis-
tency of the theory, the coherence between a multiplicity of distinctions. 
This is an inductive procedure, not a deductive one; it tries out what gen-
eralizations of a form have to say for others. And consistency in this regard 
means nothing other than the production of sufficient redundancies, in 
other words, the parsimonious handling of information.
This form concept helps systems theory make it clear that it is con-
cerned, not with special objects (let alone technical artifacts or analytical 
constructs), but with a special sort of form, a special form of forms, so 
to speak, that explicates the general properties of every two-sided form 
in terms of “system and environment.” All the properties of form apply 
here, too, such as the simultaneity of system and environment, and the 
time requirement for all operations. Above all, this mode of presenta-
tion can show that, although system and environment are separate as two 
sides of a form, neither can exist without the other.79 As a difference, the 
unity of the form remains presupposed; but the difference itself is not a 

Society as a Social System    
vehicle of operations. It is neither substance nor subject; from a historical 
point of view, it replaces these classical figures. Operations are possible 
only as operations of a system, hence only on the inside of the form. But 
the system can also operate as observer of the form; however, it can ob-
serve the unity of the difference, the two-sided form as a form only if it 
constitutes another form for this purpose, only if the distinction itself can 
distinguish. Systems, if sufficiently complex, can then apply the distinc-
tion between system and environment to themselves; but only if they per-
form an operation of their own that does this. In other words, they can 
distinguish themselves from their environment, but only in an operation 
within the system itself. The form, which they generate blindly by oper-
ating recursively, thus differentiating themselves out, is available to them 
again if they observe themselves as systems in environments. And only 
thus, only under these conditions, does systems theory provide the basis 
for a certain practice of distinguishing and indicating. It uses the distinc-
tion between system and environment as the form of its observations and 
descriptions; but in order to do so, it must be able to distinguish this 
distinction from other distinctions, for example, those of action theory; 
and if it is to operate in this manner, it must form a system: here, too, it 
must be science. When applied to systems theory, the concept therefore 
satisfies the requirement we set, namely, the self-implication of theory. 
Its relationship with its object obliges it to make “autological” inferences 
about itself.
If we accept this difference-theoretical point of departure, all devel-
opments in recent systems theory can be seen as variations on the theme 
of “system and environment.” The initial concern was to use notions of 
metabolism or input and output in explaining that there are systems not 
subject to the law of entropy but able to develop negentropy, and thus 
to reinforce the distinction between the system and its environment pre-
cisely through the system’s openness and dependence on the environ-
ment. This invited the conclusion that independence of and dependence 
on the environment were not mutually exclusive characteristics of the sys-
tem, but could under certain circumstances be enhanced alongside. The 
question was under what circumstances. Evolution theory pointed the 
way to an answer.
The next step in development was to include self-referential—that is, 
circular—relationships. At first, consideration was given to the structures 

 
  Society as a Social System
of the system being organized by processes intrinsic to the system, by what 
was called self-organization. The environment was understood as the source 
of unspecific (meaningless) “noise,” from which the system could never­
theless obtain meaning in the context of its own operations. It was then 
postulated that the system could organize itself and develop its own order 
in dependence on the environment, and never without the environment, 
but without ever being determined by it: order from noise.80 From the per-
spective of the system, the environment acts randomly on the system;81 but 
this very randomness is indispensable for the emergence of order, and the 
more complex order becomes, the more this is the case.
At this stage of the discussion, Humberto Maturana introduced a 
new element with the concept of autopoiesis.82 Autopoietic systems are 
systems that themselves produce not only their structures but also the el-
ements of which they consist in the network of these same elements. The 
elements (which from a temporal point of view are operations) that con-
stitute autopoietic systems have no independent existence. They do not 
simply come together. They are not simply connected. It is only in the 
system that they are produced (on whatever energy and material basis) 
by being made use of as distinctions. Elements are information, distinc-
tions that make a difference in the system. They are hence units of use for 
the production of further units of use for which there is no counterpart 
in the environment of the system.
In the light of a far-reaching and critical discussion, the low explan-
atory value of the autopoiesis concept should be pointed out. It requires 
only that all explanations start with the specific operations that reproduce 
a system—both the explained and the explaining system. It says nothing 
about what specific structures develop in such systems owing to structural 
couplings between system and environment. Nor does it explain the his-
torical states of the system from which further autopoiesis proceeds. The 
autopoiesis of life is a one-off biochemical invention of evolution; but this 
does not mean that worms and humans had to be. Similarly for commu-
nication. The autopoietic operation of the communication presupposing 
communication produces society, but this does not yet decide what sort of 
society. Autopoiesis is accordingly an invariant principle for the system in 
question, and, once again, for both the explained and the explaining sys-
tem. This is to abandon the ontological mode of explanation with its in-
variants of being and hence the distinction between subject and object. 

Society as a Social System    
But this does not yet tell us what historical situations set the course for 
specifying structures via structural couplings. It tells us only that to answer 
this question, we must examine the system itself.
Autopoiesis is therefore not to be understood as the production of 
a certain “gestalt.” What is decisive is the production of a difference be-
tween system and environment.83 Uncoupling the system from what then 
remains as environment affords internal latitude, since the system is not 
determined by its environment. Correctly understood, autopoiesis is in the 
first place the generation of indeterminacy within the system, which can be 
reduced by the system itself forming structures. This explains not least of 
all why societal systems have invented the medium of meaning to take ac-
count of this openness for further determinations in operations within the 
system. The only operations of their own they know are therefore commu-
nications selecting meaning forms.
This autopoietic reproduction naturally cannot happen without an 
environment (otherwise, as we know, the other side of the form would not 
be a system). But we now have to state much more precisely (for the ben-
efit of our theory of society) how autopoietic systems, which themselves 
produce all the elements they need to continue their autopoiesis, organize 
their relations with the environment. All the external relations of such a 
system are therefore unspecific (which naturally does not exclude an ob-
server being able to specify what he himself wants to see and can see. Every 
specification, including that of relations with the environment, presup-
poses action by the system itself and a historical state of the system as the 
condition of its action. For specification is itself a form, and thus a distinc­
tion; it consists of selection from a self-constructed selection area (infor-
mation); and this form can be produced only in the system itself. There is 
no input of elements into the system and no output of elements from the 
system. The system is autonomous, not only at the structural level, but also 
at the operational level. This is what autopoiesis means. The system can 
constitute operations of its own only further to operations of its own and 
in anticipation of further operations of the same system. But these are far 
from all the conditions for existence, and I repeat: How can we now dis-
tinguish this recursive dependence of operation on itself from its doubt-
less continuing dependence on the environment? The answer can be found 
only by analyzing the specificity of autopoietic operations (in other words, 
the answer does not lie in the often superficially understood concept of 

 
  Society as a Social System
­autopoiesis itself). These reflections will lead us to assign key importance 
to the concept of communication in the theory of society.
To begin with, the concepts as so far defined also clarify the now fre-
quently used concept of operational (or self-referential) closure of the sys-
tem. This does not, of course, imply that the system is causally isolated, 
without contact, or self-contained. The insight offered by the theory of 
open systems that independence and dependence can increase with and 
through one another remains intact. The wording merely changes: we now 
say that all openness is based on the closure of the system. In somewhat 
more detail, this means that only operationally closed systems can develop 
a high level of inner complexity, which can then serve to specify the re-
spects in which the system reacts to conditions of its environment, while 
in all other respects, thanks to its autopoiesis, it can remain indifferent.84
Nor does this contradict Gödel’s insight that no system can close it-
self off to form a logically consistent order.85 In effect, it says no more than 
what we presuppose: that the system concept refers to the environment 
concept and can therefore be neither logically nor analytically isolated. At 
the operational level (in our case with regard to communication), Gödel’s 
argument is based on the insight that a statement about numbers implies 
a statement about a statement about numbers (in other words, communi-
cation can function only self-referentially). It should be stressed, however, 
that this concerns only an observer observing with the aid of the system/
environment distinction or with regard to operations, and does not yet set-
tle the question how the unity of the system comes about.
Insight into the circular, self-referential, and hence logically symmet-
rical structure of these systems has raised the question how this circle can 
be interrupted and asymmetries produced. Who is then to say what is 
cause and what effect? Or, putting it more radically, what happens before 
and what after, what inside and what outside? The authority that decides is 
now often called the “observer.” But we are not thinking only about pro-
cesses of consciousness, only about psychic systems. The concept is used 
highly abstractly and independently of the material substratum, the infra-
structure, or the specific mode of operation that enable observations to be 
carried out. Observing means simply distinguishing and indicating, and 
it is in this sense that I shall be using it in what follows. The concept of 
observing draws attention to the fact that “distinguishing and indicating” 
constitute a single operation; we can indicate nothing that we do not, in so 

Society as a Social System    
doing, distinguish; just as distinguishing makes sense only in that it serves 
to indicate one side or the other (but not both sides). In the terminology of 
traditional logic, the distinction is, in relation to the sides it distinguishes, 
the excluded middle. Observation in the performance of observing is thus 
also the excluded middle. If, finally, we consider that observing is always 
an operation that has to be performed by an autopoietic system, and if we 
term the concept of this system in this function “observer,” we can say that 
the observer is the excluded middle of his observation. He cannot see him-
self observing. As Michel Serres has put it, the observer is the nonobserv-
able.86 The distinction he uses to indicate the one side or the other serves as 
the invisible condition of seeing, as blind spot. And this can be said for all 
observation, whether the operation be psychic or social, whether it be car-
ried out as actual process of consciousness or as communication.
The system of society is accordingly characterized, not by a specific 
“nature,” let alone a specific morality (spread of happiness, solidarity, the 
harmonization of living conditions, reasoned-consensual integration, and 
so on), but solely by the operation that produces and reproduces society:87 
communication.88 By communication (as by operation), we consequently 
mean historically concrete and hence context-dependent activity—and 
not merely the application of rules of correct speech.89 If communication 
is to occur, knowledge and ignorance are required of all participants. I 
noted this as an argument against methodological individualism in my 
preliminary remarks on methodology. For how can we understand igno-
rance as a state of consciousness if not in dependence on communicative 
situations that specify certain requirements or signal certain information 
opportunities. For this reason alone, communication is an autopoietic op-
eration, because it produces the distribution of knowledge and ignorance 
only by changing it.
In the practice of meaning, communication, too, is obliged to draw 
distinctions to indicate one side and to ensure connections on this side. 
The autopoiesis of the system is thus continued. But what happens with 
the other side? It remains nonindicated and therefore does not need to be 
controlled for consistency. No attention is paid to contexts. We thus soon 
forget what that which was indicated was distinguished from—whether 
unmarked space or counterconcepts to be left out of account in further op-
erations. Although the other side always co-occurs, because no distinction 
would otherwise be drawn, it is not used to achieve anything specific.

 
  Society as a Social System
That the elementary operation of society is an event bound to a point 
in time that disappears as it occurs is an insight that takes us further. This 
is true of all components of communication: information, which can sur-
prise only once; utterance, an act tied to a point in time; and understand-
ing, which also cannot be repeated but at best recalled. And it is true of 
both oral and written communication, with the difference that the dissem-
ination technology of writing can distribute the communication event in 
time and space to many addressees and can thus be realized at unpredict-
ably many points in time.
With this time-point related concept of communication, we also 
correct a popular conception of information. Information is a surprising 
selection from among several possibilities. As a surprise, it can be neither 
enduring nor able to be transported; and it has to be produced within the 
system, since it presupposes comparison with expectations. Furthermore, 
information cannot be gained purely passively as a logical consequence of 
signals received from the environment. It always contains a volitional com-
ponent, that is to say, foresight into what can be done with it.90 Before in-
formation can be produced, interest in it must therefore develop.
If we understand communication as an entity comprising the three 
components information, utterance, and understanding, which are pro-
duced only in communicating, this excludes the possibility of assigning 
ontological primacy to one of these components. It can neither be as-
sumed that there is a factual world that can then be talked about nor does 
the origin of communication lie in the “subjective” act of communicating 
that imparts meaning; nor is there a society at the outset that prescribes 
via cultural institutions how something is to be understood as communi-
cation. The unity of communicative events cannot be deduced objectively, 
subjectively, or socially; and for this very reason communication creates 
the medium of meaning in which it can decide continuously whether fur-
ther communication seeks its problem in information, utterance, or un-
derstanding. The components of communication presuppose one another; 
they are circularly connected. They can therefore no longer fix their exter-
nalizations ontologically as properties of the world; they have to seek them 
in the transition from one communication to another.
The time-boundedness of the communication operation relates to 
the time point of understanding on the basis of observing a difference be-
tween information and utterance. It is understanding that then generates 

Society as a Social System    
communication (we need this to be established to enable us to include 
written communication, as well as communication by means of money). 
Communication is thus a certain way of observing the world by means of 
the specific distinction between information and utterance. It is one of the 
possibilities for obtaining universality by means of specification. It is not 
“transmission” of meaning,91 although at the time point of understanding 
wide time horizons can be constructed for better understanding commu-
nication with regard to the point in time of the utterance. However, com-
munication cannot control what happens simultaneously at the time of 
understanding, and must therefore always rely on inferences from its own 
past, on redundancies, on self-constructed recursions.
In communicative contexts, understanding would therefore be quite 
impossible if it depended on deciphering what was going on psychologi-
cally at the same time. Although it must be assumed that consciousness is 
involved, no one participating in communication can know the details of 
what happens—either for the others involved or for themselves. Commu-
nication (hence society) must rather procure the necessary understanding 
itself. This is achieved through nonarbitrariness in connecting communica-
tive events, hence through the self-referential structure of communication 
processes. For each individual event gains meaning (= understandability) 
only because it refers to others and restricts what they can mean; and this 
is precisely how it determines itself.92
A communication system accordingly exists only at the moment 
of its operation; but to determine its operations, it uses the medium of 
meaning, which enables it to relate selectively from each operation to 
other operations, and to do so within horizons that present the simul-
taneously existing world to the system.93 All duration must therefore be 
produced by transition to other events. Communicative systems are pos-
sible only as recursive systems, since their single operations can be pro-
duced only by recursion to and anticipation of other operations of the 
same system.94 This in turn imposes the double requirement of continu-
ity and discontinuity, raising the question how meaning can be treated in 
other situations as the same. It is necessary to install cognizable ­repetition. 
Only if and insofar as this is the case can the classical conceptuality, 
which speaks of “elements” and “relations,” and that presupposes stable 
objects, be retained.95 And the question is how this is possible in the me-
dium of meaning.

 
  Society as a Social System
In George Spencer-Brown’s theory of form, this desideratum is ex-
pressed by the double concept of condensation and confirmation,96 which 
cannot be reduced to a single concept. Recursions must produce identities 
suitable for reuse; this can be done only through selective condensation, 
by leaving out unrepeatable elements of other situations. However, they 
must also preserve the condensed meaning in new situations, and this re-
quires generalization. If these requirements have to be repeatedly met, for 
instance, with the aid of language, generalized meaning variants develop 
whose signification cannot be sufficiently captured in the form of defini-
tions. They arise from experience in use, which depends entirely on the 
user system. I consider this a cause of the evolution of symbolically gener-
alized communication media.97
Jacques Derrida has argued in the same vein under the heading dif­
férance.98 Not only in writing but also in speaking, indeed in every type of ex-
perience, signs have to be set and transferred to other situations. Distinctions 
(fractures, ruptures) thus have to be transported in time. This can be done 
only if what the sign refers to (above all the intention) is absent.99 In short, 
the necessity of temporal sequencing imposes differentiation between system 
and environment and the operational closure of recursions in the system.
The concept of self-referential, operational closure alters the concept 
of system boundary, complicating it in a way that requires careful analy-
sis. For living systems, for the autopoietic organization of molecules in 
space, we can still speak of spatial boundaries. Indeed, boundaries in this 
case are special organs of the system, membranes of cells, the skin of or-
ganisms, that perform specific functions in shielding the system and in the 
selective mediation of exchange processes. This form of boundary (which 
is of course visible only to the external observer and simply lives in the sys-
tem) does not occur in the case of systems that operate in the medium of 
meaning. Such systems are not limited in space at all; they have a quite 
different, namely, purely internal, form of boundary. This is the case with 
consciousness, which thus distinguishes itself from the brain and can “ex-
ternalize” the neurophysiological self-observation of the organism only in 
this manner.100 And it applies a fortiori for the communication system so-
ciety, as has been evident since the invention of writing and at the latest 
since the advent of telephony. The boundary of this system is produced 
and reproduced in every single communication in that the communication 
determines itself as communication in the network of the system’s own op-

Society as a Social System    
erations and does not accept any physical, chemical, or neurophysio­logical 
components. In other words, every operation contributes to the ongoing 
differentiation of the system and cannot otherwise attain its own unity. 
The boundary of the system is nothing other than the type and concretion 
of its operations, which individualize the system.101 It is the form of the 
system whose other side thus becomes the environment.
The same can be formulated with the aid of the distinction between 
self-reference and other-reference. Meaningfully operating systems repro-
duce themselves in ongoing implementation of the distinction between 
self-reference and other-reference. The unity of this distinction cannot be 
observed; it is carried out only operationally and only internally (other­wise 
we could not speak of self-reference and other-reference). Like living sys-
tems, systems operating with meaning never go beyond their own boundar-
ies with their own operations. But in the medium of meaning, boundaries 
always have another side, as forms they always exist as two-sided forms (and 
not as pure facticity of the operational act). This means that the observation 
accompanying progression from operation to operation always notices the 
selectivity of the recursive connection and hence something that belongs 
not to the system but to the environment. In communication, information 
about something is actualized and changed that is not communication it-
self. In the network of communication, other-reference always co-occurs in 
the search for suitable connections. The boundary of the system is therefore 
nothing other than the self-produced difference between self-reference and 
other-reference, and as such is present in all communications.
With the continuously reproduced distinction between informa-
tion and utterance, a social system can observe itself. An observer of this 
observing, a second-order observer (for example, the social system sci-
ence) can also distinguish between the topics and functions of communi-
cation and thus observe the conditions for the iterativity of operations (in 
this case, communications). Topics enable a distinction to be drawn be-
tween topics and items, hence between structures and operations, which 
then attach to the inner side of the boundary to the environment. This al-
lows the sequential ordering of communication, leading to a memory or-
dered by topic, locally (“topically”), as it were.102 Functions, by contrast, 
relate to the autopoiesis of the system and the required reproduction, al-
teration, or development of structures. In communication about com-
munication, topics and functions of communication can in turn become 

 
  Society as a Social System
a topic—a reentry of the distinction into itself. The system closes itself at 
the reflexive level, thus attaining a state of double closure,103 which guar-
antees high internal flexibility but also imposes intransparency for every 
observer.
As we shall see, this analysis commits us to assuming a single system 
of world society, which, so to speak, pulsates as it grows or shrinks depend-
ing on what is realized in the way of communication. A multiplicity of soci-
eties is conceivable only if there are no communicative links between them.
5. Society as a Comprehensive Social System
In the understanding elaborated here, the theory of society is the the-
ory of the comprehensive social system that encompasses all other social sys-
tems. This definition is almost a quotation. It recalls the opening sentences 
of Aristotle’s Politics defining the political community (koinōnia politikē) as 
the supreme (kyriōtatē) community that includes all others within it (pasas 
periechousa tas allas).104 We thus follow in the old European tradition as far 
as the concept of society is concerned. However, all components of the def-
inition (including the concept of inclusion = periechon, resolvable for the 
purposes of systems theory with the concept of differentiation) are under-
stood differently, for we are concerned with a theory of modern society for 
modern society. The link with the old European tradition is hence retained, 
but a redescription of its key statements is called for.105
Society is therefore understood as a system; and the form of the sys-
tem, as we have seen, is nothing other than the distinction between system 
and environment. But this does not mean that general systems theory suf-
fices to deduce by logical inference what society is about. We also have to 
determine the specificity of social systems, and what within the theory of so-
cial systems constitutes the specificity of a system of society; in other words, 
what is implied when we refer to society as the comprehensive social system.
We must therefore distinguish between three levels in analyzing society:
(1) general systems theory and, within it, the general theory of autopoietic 
systems;
(2) the theory of social systems;
(3) the theory of the societal system as a special instance of social system.

Society as a Social System    
At the level of the general theory of autopoietic, self-referential, op-
erationally closed systems, the theory of society draws on conceptual deci-
sions and findings of empirical research that also apply to other systems of 
this type (e.g., brains). Far-reaching interdisciplinary exchanges of experi-
ence and ideas are possible in this regard. As explained in the previous sec-
tion, I base the theory of society on innovative developments in this field.
At the level of the theory of social systems, we are concerned with 
the specificity of autopoietic systems that can be understood as social sys-
tems. Here we have to determine the specific operation whose autopoietic 
process leads to the formation of social systems in corresponding environ-
ments. This is communication. The theory of social systems thus brings 
together all statements that apply to all social systems, even to interac-
tion systems of short duration and little importance (and only such state-
ments).106 ­Society at this level (like the classical societas civilis) appears to 
be one social system among many others, and can be compared with other 
types such as organizational systems and systems of face-to-face interaction.
Only at the third level does the specificity of societal systems come 
to bear. It needs to be explained at this point what is meant by “compre-
hensive,” an attribute that goes back to the beginning of Aristotle’s Politics. 
It is clearly based on a paradox. It states that one social system (koinōnia) 
among others includes all others within it. Aristotle resolved this paradox 
through emphasis and ultimately through an ethical understanding of pol-
itics. It was thus rendered invisible for tradition. This paradox is unfolded 
by the distinction between levels proposed here for the analysis of society, 
occasionally permitting recollection of the paradoxical foundations of the 
overall theory (for the distinction between “levels” in my conceptualiza-
tion is a “form” that has two sides; the concept of level implies that there 
are other levels).
Notwithstanding the distinction made between these levels, the sub-
ject of the inquiry (its “system reference”) remains the system of society. In 
other words, in the context of distinguishing between the levels to analyze 
the subject, society, we are not concerned with systems that could also be 
addressed on the other levels. Methodologically, drawing a distinction be-
tween levels invites us to exhaust the possibilities of abstraction, to extend 
comparisons between systems to systems that are as diverse as possible, 
and to make any knowledge gained from the analysis of society available 
in the greatest possible measure for exploitation at more general levels. 

 
  Society as a Social System
This is not, as sociologists so often fear, a matter of analogical inference, 
nor is it a “merely metaphorical” use of biological ideas. The distinction 
says nothing about the being or the nature of things in the “analogy of 
being” (analogia entis) sense. It is nothing other than a form for unfolding 
the paradox of self-inclusive unity, and has the specific function of encour-
aging the exchange of ideas between disciplines and enhancing the poten-
tial for mutual stimulation. Nonetheless, it is not a statement of fact but a 
construction specific to science.
I shall use systems-theoretical means at all levels in analyzing the sys-
tem of society to specify the necessary theoretical decisions. The general 
theory of autopoietic systems requires precise identification of the opera-
tion that carries out the autopoiesis of the system and thus demarcates the 
system from its environment. In the case of social systems, this is done 
through communication.
Communication has all the required properties: it is a genuinely so-
cial operation (and the only genuinely social one). It is genuinely social 
in that, although it presupposes a multiplicity of participating conscious-
ness systems, it cannot (for this very reason) be attributed to any individ-
ual consciousness. Moreover, under the conditions of its own functioning, 
it excludes consciousness systems’ knowing the given inner state of the 
other or others:107 in oral communication because interlocutors partici-
pate in ­utterance/understanding simultaneously; in written communica-
tion because the partners participate in their absence. Communication can 
therefore only assume that adequate understanding also has psychic cor-
relates.108 In this sense (and “interpenetration” can mean no other), it de-
pends on operational fictions that have to be tested only occasionally and 
only through communication.
Communication is also genuinely social in that a “common” (col-
lective) consciousness can by no means and in no sense be produced, and 
that consensus in the full sense of complete agreement is hence also un-
attainable; communication operates in its place.109 It is the smallest pos-
sible unit of a social system, namely, the unit to which communication 
can still react through communication.110 In another version of the same 
argument, communication may be said to be autopoietic in that it can be 
produced only in recursive relation to other communications, thus every 
single communication contributes to reproducing only in a network.111 
A unit of communication is completed with understanding or misun-

Society as a Social System    
derstanding regardless of the essentially infinite possibilities for clarifying 
what has been understood. But this completion takes the form of a tran-
sition to further communication that can pursue this clarification or turn 
to other topics. The production of elements is autopoiesis. Communicat-
ing acceptance or rejection of the proposed meaning of a communication 
is already another communication, and, regardless of all thematic ties, does 
not arise of itself from the preceding communication. An essential pre-
condition for the auto­poiesis of society and its structure formation is that 
communication does not of itself contain its own acceptance; this has to 
be decided through further, independent communication.
Since communication requires time to connect communications to 
communications, this mode of operation results in a temporal uncoupling 
of system and environment. The system and the environment nonethe-
less exist simultaneously and this simultaneity underlies all constitution 
of time.112 But within the limitations this imposes, the system has to con-
stitute an “eigentime” that adapts the speed of operation and the tempo-
ral perspectives of the system to internal possibilities. The system must 
then renounce one-to-one couplings between environmental events and 
systemic events and create arrangements within that take into account that 
other temporal relations obtain in the environment than in the system. 
The system develops structures (memories and expectations) to enable it 
in its operations to keep the temporal relations in the system and those in 
the environment apart and to organize eigentime. To some extent, the sys-
tem must gain time vis-à-vis the environment, in other words, take pre-
cautions; and to some extent, too, it must be able to accept and cope with 
surprises. It must be able to delay or accelerate reactions while something 
quite different has begun to happen in the environment. But this becomes 
a problem only because system and environment inevitably operate simul-
taneously, and because the system can neither forge ahead into the future 
of the environment nor lag behind in its past. The system can hence never 
attain a temporal situation in which it can be sure that nothing is happen-
ing in the environment.
This is particularly true for the relationship between communica-
tion and consciousness, for processes of consciousness and, above all, for 
processes of perception that are to be presupposed in the environment 
of society. This difference, too, requires and permits temporal decoupling 
in indisputably simultaneous interaction. Since George Herbert Mead’s 

 
  Society as a Social System
­pioneering studies,113 we have known that communication does not come 
about only through an organism perceiving how another behaves and 
adapting accordingly; nor does it come about by imitating the gestures 
of the other (for instance, threat gestures or play gestures). Such behavior 
leads only to mutual irritation and stimulation of the (autopoiesis of ) or-
ganisms, to more or less occasional and possibly relatively frequent coor-
dination. According to Mead, what is decisive is that symbols come into 
being that enable the individual organism to coordinate within itself with 
the behavior of others, while itself using the appropriate “vocal gestures,” 
to permit the coordination of the coordinations of organisms, as Hum-
berto Maturana puts it.114 This explanation can be developed in the direc-
tion of a social semiotics. However, it does not lead to a theory of society 
as a social system that differentiates itself from an environment (also of the 
organisms involved) through communication.115 All propositions about 
communication remain propositions about the “behavioral organism,” 
about the nervous system (biological) or consciousness (psychological).
This does not yet take account of the fact that participation in com-
munication requires a high, steady speed in identifying successive particles 
of meaning. Otherwise, the short-term memory of communication would 
fail. On the other hand, the consciousness is not prepared for this in its 
neurophysiological basis and must evolve in a very specific sense if it is to 
keep up.116 For this purpose, communication has clearly distinct combina-
tions of sounds at the ready. At any rate, this is where the real problem of 
the co-evolution of the brain, consciousness, and language lies, and not in 
the mere treatment of signs.
Nothing about these insights requires to be corrected or withdrawn, 
but there remains the question of whether and how communication can 
be an operation that leads to the emergence and operational closure of an 
autonomous social system with its own environment that cannot be per-
ceived (!), but only denoted. Or, to transfer an argument of Maturana’s 
from cell biology to the theory of social systems: a description of the total-
ity of the states of participating nervous systems or consciousness systems 
does not suffice to tell us how autopoiesis is possible for social systems.
What is likely to be decisive is that speaking (and gestures imitat-
ing it) makes the intention of the speaker apparent, thus imposing a dis-
tinction between information and utterance and then a reaction to this 
distinction that also employs linguistic means.117 Only thus—as a compo-

Society as a Social System    
nent of this distinction—can information with informational value arise; 
in other words, information that changes the state of the system process-
ing it (in the sense of Gregory Bateson’s famous dictum “a difference that 
makes a difference”). Moreover, and this distinguishes communication 
from biological processes of all types, it is an operation endowed with the 
capacity for self-observation. Every communication must at the same time 
communicate that it is a communication and mark who has uttered what 
so that follow-up communication can be determined and autopoiesis con-
tinued. It therefore not only generates a difference through mere imple-
mentation as operation (this as well!) but also uses a specific distinction, 
that between utterance and information, to observe that this happens.
This realization has far-reaching consequences. It means not only 
that the identification of utterance as “action” is the construct of an ob-
server, that is, the construct of a communication system observing itself. 
It means above all that social systems (including society) can come about 
only as self-observing systems. This obliges me, in contrast to Talcott Par-
sons and everything currently on the market in the action theory sector, 
to renounce an action-theoretical (and hence “individualistic”) founda-
tion for sociology.118 At the same time, it presents us with a problem, but 
initially nothing more than that of a system forced to observe itself con-
tinuously; observation that, as we have seen, is an operation contingent 
on a distinction that at the moment of operating itself functions as the 
excluded middle. All self-observation, too, is conditional on a blind spot. 
It is possible only because it cannot see its seeing. Communication thus 
functions operationally as the unity of the difference between informa-
tion, utterance, and understanding without being able to communicate 
this unity. But for subsequent self-observation, it uses the distinction be-
tween information, utterance, and understanding to determine whether 
further communication has to react to doubts about information, to pre-
sumed intentions of the utterance (e.g., deception), or to difficulties in 
understanding. No self-observation is therefore in a position to capture 
the full reality of the system that carries it out. It can only do something 
instead, only choose substitute solutions; and it does so by selecting dis-
tinctions with which the system observes itself. If sufficiently complex, a 
system can pass from observation of its operations to observation of its 
observation, and finally to observation of the system itself. In this case, it 
must take the distinction between “system and environment” as the basis, 

 
  Society as a Social System
and thus be able to distinguish between self-reference and other-reference. 
However, this too takes place through operations of the system in the sys-
tem—otherwise it would not be self-observation. The distinction between 
self-reference and other-reference is one practiced within the system and 
thought about as such. One might also call it a construction of the system.
Given the impossibility of capturing the fullness of being or mak-
ing the system transparent to itself, a complex structure of distinctions 
develops that guides the observation process of the system, steering it in-
ward or outward depending on which side of the distinction is indicated 
as “inside” and “outside.” If the system has appropriate storage capabili-
ties at its disposal, for example, writing, it can then gather experience, 
condense situational impressions through repetition, and develop an op-
erational memory without running the risk of constantly confusing itself 
with the environment. All this takes place following the basal distinction 
between self-reference and other-reference with other suitable distinctions.
The concept of self-observation does not assume that there is only 
one such possibility in a system. Many communications can be simulta-
neously performed and self-observed. This also holds true for observation 
of the unity of the system in distinction to the environment. A social sys-
tem—particularly, of course, a society—can observe itself at the same time 
or successively in quite different, we could say “polycontextural,” ways. As 
far as the object is concerned, there is therefore no obligation to integrate 
self-observations. The system does what it does.
What has been said so far applies to social systems of widely dif-
fering types, for example, to organizations or, as family therapists well 
know, to families. Turning now to the third level on which the specificity 
of a societal system is to be treated, the problems posed by the diversity 
of possible self-observations prove particularly evident and far-reaching. 
For society as the comprehensive social system knows no social systems 
outside its bounds. It cannot thus be observed from without.119 Although 
psychic systems can observe society from outside, this has no social con-
sequences if it is not communicated, if, that is to say, the observation is 
not carried out within the social system. In other words, society is the ex-
treme case of polycontextural self-observation, the extreme case of a sys-
tem obliged to observe itself without functioning as an object about which 
there can be only one correct opinion, so that all deviation is to be treated 
as error. Even if society routinely distinguishes itself from its environment, 

Society as a Social System    
it is by no means clear in advance what is thus being distinguished from 
its environment. And even where texts, that is to say, descriptions, are pre-
pared to guide and coordinate observations, this does not mean that there 
is only one correct description in each case. One cannot without further 
ado claim that South Chinese fishermen regarded Confucian ethics as the 
basis of the empire as did mandarins and bureaucrats. The Indian caste 
system as a representation of unity through difference, too, takes widely 
varying forms incompatible with the unity of a hierarchical order. And it 
remains an empirical question who in the late Middle Ages outside the 
clergy, the nobility, and the legally schooled magistrates and administra-
tive officials knew and believed in the three estates theory. From the peas-
ants’ point of view, society was rather a one-class affair, with the exception 
of the lord of the manor and his family.
For in the case of society, there is no external description that ­allows 
correction, however much men of letters and sociologists may aspire to such 
a position. Tradition had externalized interest in an infallible description, 
naming the relevant position “God.” God could do everything except err. It 
had, however, to be conceded that the judgment of priests about the judg-
ment of God could be fallible, and that the correct description, the true 
catalogue of sins would be known only when the world came to an end, at 
the Last Judgment, and then in the form of a surprise.
In the light of this thesis of surplus possibilities for self-observation 
and self-description, I shall attempt in the final chapter [of Volume 2] 
to show that self-descriptions are nevertheless not the product of chance. 
There are structural conditions for the plausibility of descriptions; and 
there are historical trends in the evolution of semantics that severely re-
strict the scope for variation. Sociological theory can then recognize in-
terrelationships from the type of correlations between societal structures 
and semantics; but it can also realize that such theories are their own con-
structs and should not be confused with the current description of the so-
cietal system.
In sum, society has no essence. Its unity cannot be discovered by 
reduction to the essential, allowing contradictory views to be rejected as 
erroneous (for this, too, would have to be communicated in society and 
would thus change what is being spoken about). The unity of the soci-
etal system therefore lies only in external demarcation, in the form of the 
system, in the difference reproduced continuously through its operations. 

 
  Society as a Social System
This is the point any “redescription” of the old European tradition has to 
emphasize.
When we say that only communications and all communications 
contribute to the autopoiesis of society and thereby redefine the attribute 
“comprehensive,” this thesis also contains a far-reaching break with tradi-
tion. At issue are neither goals nor good convictions, neither cooperation 
nor conflict, neither consensus nor dissension, neither acceptance nor re-
jection of the meaning propounded. Nor does individual happiness play 
a role, or at best only as a topic of communication.120 Only autopoiesis 
itself is conveyed by all these communications; and a fortiori by all com-
munications to be attributed to the subsystems of society. Distinctions 
like those between economy and society, law and society, school and soci-
ety are therefore confusing and, in our theory, not allowed. They give the 
impression that the components of the distinction are mutually exclusive, 
whereas in truth the economy, law, school, and so on, are not outside so-
ciety but can be considered only as societal performance. Attempting to 
distinguish between women and human beings is just as nonsensical; it is 
merely much more widespread nonsense.
“All communications” means communications have an autopoietic 
effect in so far as their difference makes no difference. That communication 
takes place is therefore not a surprise in society, and therefore not infor-
mation (it is naturally different with psychic systems that are addressed 
unexpectedly). On the other hand, communication is the actualization of 
information. Thus, society consists of the linkage between operations that 
make no difference in that they make a difference. This relegates all as-
sumptions about understanding, progress, rationality, or other appealing 
goals to a secondary theoretical position. But precisely this lends particular 
weight to the theory of symbolically generalized communication media.
“All communication” even includes paradoxical communication, 
communication that denies that it says what it says. We can communicate 
paradoxically and do so without communicating “meaninglessly” (in the 
sense of ununderstandably = autopoietically ineffectively).121 As an opera­
tion, paradoxical communication functions even though it bewilders the 
observer, which is well understood to be its intent. Both classical rhetoric 
and modern literature, both the Nietzsche-Heidegger tradition of philoso-
phy and the family therapist make use of open paradox; what is more, it 
has become usual to watch for hidden paradoxes in observing the obser-

Society as a Social System    
vation of others. The function of paradoxical communication is not fully 
clarified and is presumably itself paradoxical, namely, as an attempt to de-
stroy and create in one act, which does not cause difficulty for the auto­
poietic operation, only for its observation.122
6. Operational Closure and Structural Couplings
If we describe society as a system, it follows from the general theory 
of autopoietic systems that it must be an operationally closed one. At the 
level of the system’s own operations there is no ingress to the environment, 
and environmental systems are just as little able take part in the autopoietic 
processes of an operationally closed system.123 This is the case even, indeed 
especially, where such operations are observations or operations whose auto­
poiesis requires self-observation—a difficult thought that runs counter to 
the entire epistemological tradition. Observations can only affect observa-
tions, can only transform distinctions into other distinctions, can, in other 
words, only process information; but they cannot touch things of the envi-
ronment with the important but narrow exception of everything involved 
through structural couplings. Observing systems, too, have no contact with 
the environment at the operational level. All observation of the environ-
ment must be carried out in the system as an internal activity with the aid 
of the system’s own distinctions (for which there is no correspondence in the 
environment. Otherwise, it would make no sense at all to speak of observ-
ing the environment. All observation of the environment presupposes the 
distinction between self-reference and other-reference, which can be made 
only in the system itself (where else?). And this also makes it clear that all 
observation of the environment stimulates self-observation and every gain 
in distance from the environment raises the question of self, of one’s own 
identity. Since we can observe only with distinctions, the one side of the 
distinction makes us, as it were, curious about the other, stimulates us to 
“cross” the boundary (as Spencer-Brown would say) that is marked by the 
form “system and environment.”
At the level of first-order observation, however, this distinction be-
tween contact with the environment and only internally connective other-
reference is not taken into account—in either consciousness systems or 
communication systems. All traces of operational closure are deleted. Con-
sciousness systems know nothing about the operating conditions of their 

 
  Society as a Social System
brains, but they think “within their heads.” Communication systems do 
not know that communications contact nothing else but communications. 
Systems therefore operate under the illusion of having contact with the en-
vironment—at least as long as they only observe what they observe and do 
not observe how they observe. The experience of the resistance and nonar-
bitrariness of operational outcomes are registered externally and therefore 
present a world we have no choice but to accept. Phenomenology is prac-
ticed as ontology. This condition is easily understood. It can be revoked in 
second-order observation, but this happens without the possibility of com-
pletely renouncing first-order observation; even second-order observation 
must still be able to observe an observer. Even the recognized illusion of re-
ality therefore remains a fact in the real world. We see that the sun “comes 
up” and cannot see it otherwise even though we know we are deceiving 
ourselves. In other words, at the level of first-order observation, which can 
never be completely abandoned, no distinction can be drawn between re-
ality and the illusion of reality.
One consequence of operational closure is that the system has to 
rely on self-organization. A system’s own structures can be built up and 
changed only through its own operations; language, for example, only 
through communication and not directly through fire, earthquakes, ra-
diation from space, or the perceptions of the individual consciousness. 
All operations (communications) therefore have a double function: they 
(1) establish the historical state of the system, the point of departure for 
the system in ensuing operations. They determine that the system is the 
way it is and not otherwise. And (2) they form structures as selection 
schemata that make recognition and repetition possible, hence condens-
ing identities (many say with Piaget invariances), which they confirm in 
ever-new situations and thus generalize. This structure formation that per-
mits remembering and forgetting is not possible through external agency; 
we therefore speak of self-organization. Closure, self-determination, and 
self-organization—and this is the evolutionary advantage—make a system 
highly compatible with disorder in the environment, or more precisely 
with only fragmentary, only incomplete environments not organized as a 
unity. Evolution hence leads necessarily to the closure of systems, which in 
turn contributes to overall disorder, against which operational closure and 
self-organization hold their own. In precisely this sense, the operational 
closure of the communication system society is in keeping with the emer-

Society as a Social System    
gence of mobile organisms endowed with nervous systems and finally with 
consciousness. And society, because it tolerates the uncoordinated multi-
plicity of perspectives of these endogenously restless individual systems, 
reinforces this diversity.
Within the tradition of systems theory, the closure of systems must 
appear an extravagant thesis; for, with the law of entropy in mind, it con-
stitutes itself as a theory of open (and therefore negentropic) systems. This 
position in relation to the law of entropy is naturally not to be retracted. 
By “closure,” I do not mean thermodynamic closure but only operational 
closure, which means the recursive enablement of a system’s own opera-
tions through the outcomes of its own operations. For real operations can 
be assumed to be possible only in a simultaneously existing world. This ex-
cludes one operation influencing another. If this is nevertheless to occur, 
it can do so only in direct connection between one operation and another. 
However, such recursive relations, in which the conclusion of an operation 
is the condition for another to take place, leads to differentiation between 
systems whose closure is often realized in a structurally highly complex 
manner and their simultaneously existing environment. I call the outcome 
operational closure.
We can also look at this whole subject in relation to consciousness 
systems and show why and how the modern distance between the indi-
vidual and society induces the individual to reflect, to ask about the “I” 
of I, to search for an identity of his own. What had always been seen and 
what the world was is now “outside.” What, then, is “inside”? An indeter-
minable void? If we apply the theory of autopoietic systems to the case of 
society, we come to the same conclusion, naturally with regard to another 
mode of operation, namely, communication.
Society is a communicatively closed system. It generates commu-
nication through communication. Its dynamics consist in the effect of 
communication on communication in the sense of transforming current 
distinctions and indications but never in the sense of reshaping the ex-
ternal environment.124 We can no less talk things into shape than we can 
think them out of existence or rethink them.
Society is hence a system that is completely and exclusively deter-
mined by itself. Everything that is determined as communication has to be 
determined through communication. Everything that is experienced as re-
ality arises from the resistance of communication to communication,125 and 

 
  Society as a Social System
not from any imposition of an outside world ordered in one way or another. 
This naturally includes communication about dependence on the environ-
ment; but then what is communicated is determined with the aid of the dis-
tinction between self-reference and other-reference intrinsic to the system 
and through recursive recourse to and anticipation of further communica-
tion. This self-determination is a precondition for the toleration, indeed, 
the deliberate placing of indeterminacies, for example, of questions, of am-
biguities, of paradoxical utterances, of irony. The communication itself de-
cides, if necessary after checking or disregarding matters, on the degree of 
determinacy required and on a specific illocutionary meaning of indeter-
minacies. And the final check on self-determination in the determinacy/
indeterminacy dimension is to ask what contributes to the continuation or 
termination of current communications.
As a communication system, society can communicate only within 
itself, neither with itself nor with its environment. It produces its unity 
through the operational performance of communications in recursion to 
and anticipation of other communications. Operating on the basis of the 
observation schema “system and environment,” it can then communicate 
within itself, about itself, or about its environment, but never with itself and 
never with its environment. For neither it nor its environment can reoccur 
in society as partner in, as addressee of communication. Any such attempt 
would be talking into the void, would initiate no autopoiesis and would 
therefore not take place. For society is possible only as an autopoietic system.
This closure has to do with the specific operational manner in which 
the system reproduces, namely, communication; it does not have to do 
with causality as such. The environment is, of course, always involved, and 
without it nothing, absolutely nothing can happen. The term production 
(or simply poiesis) always refers to only part of the causes an observer can 
identify as required, namely, the part obtainable through the internal net-
working of the system’s operations, the part with which the system deter-
mines its own state. And reproduction in the old sense of the term means 
production from products, determination of the state of the system as the 
point of departure for every further determination of the state of the sys-
tem. And since this production/reproduction requires a distinction to be 
drawn between external and internal conditions, the system always repro-
duces its boundaries in the process, that is to say, its unity. Autopoiesis ac-
cordingly means production of the system by itself.

Society as a Social System    
But communication only comes about because a distinction is drawn 
between utterance and information and the distinction is understood. All 
further communication can then relate either to the utterance or to the in-
formation; but it can do so only by means of follow-up communication, 
which in turn reproduces the difference between utterance and informa-
tion. In operational performance (by taking place in fact) communication 
reproduces the closure of the system. Through the mode of observation (how 
it takes place, namely, by distinguishing between utterance and informa-
tion) it reproduces the difference between closure and openness. A system thus 
arises that, owing to its closure, is open to the environment in its operations, 
because its basal operation is geared to observation. For the system, the dif-
ference in form between utterance and information is therefore an inevita-
ble condition for autopoietic reproduction. In other cases, there would be 
only cessation of communication, an end to the system’s operations.
This necessity relative to the form of communication also means 
that, as we have seen, the system always reproduces a double reference: the 
distinction between self-reference and other-reference. Through utterance 
the system refers to itself. Utterance actualizes the possibility of recursively 
relating further communication to the system. Through information, in 
contrast, the system typically refers to its environment.126 The structure 
of the communicative operation therefore has precisely the form needed 
to transfer the difference between system and environment into the sys-
tem and to treat it there as a distinction between self-reference and other-­
reference. Merely operating reproduces only the difference between system 
and environment through always selective recursion. The distinction then 
“reenters” what is distinguished through the distinction between utterance 
and information.127 The difference between system and environment ap-
pears in the system in the form of directions of reference—and only thus. 
The problem of the operationally inaccessible environment is hence trans-
posed from operation to cognition.128 The system reproduces itself in the 
imaginary space of reference by renewing the distinction between self-­
reference and other-reference with every communicative operation as the 
form of its autopoiesis.
The autopoiesis of the communication system society hence always 
and necessarily reproduces the distinction that divides reference into self-
reference and other reference. It can still refer to this distinction by sub-
suming it as a distinction in its own right under “self-reference.” This would 

 
  Society as a Social System
then be the reentry of a distinction into an already completed reentry of 
the distinction between system and environment into the system. At the 
operational level, this distinction is always presupposed as an operationally 
inaccessible condition of reference. All internal transformations, all infor-
mation processing, all transformations of distinctions into distinctions can 
therefore have to do only with communicative reference. It cannot inter-
vene directly in the environment. For the system, “objects” are accordingly 
always references; they are never things that exist in the outside world, but 
structural entities of the system’s autopoiesis, that is to say, conditions for 
the continuation of communication.129 Nor can the system intervene in 
its own unity. If it does so, it merely actualizes self-reference, only the one 
side of the distinction that permits reference. The other side remains un-
mentioned. For this reason, all self-descriptions of society are concerned 
only with the half of the reality that they actualize as a unity of self- and 
other-reference. As an observer, the system operates blindly, because it can 
accommodate the unity of the distinction that permits observation on nei-
ther side of the distinction. And because everything that happens happens 
as an operation within the system, neither the unity of the environment 
nor the unity of the system’s autopoiesis is accessible to the system. There 
are only the abridging indications used in observation.
This account does not yet provide an adequate picture of how the 
system of society relates to its environment. For the real possibility of com-
munication, as an observer can discover, has many factual preconditions, 
which the system can neither produce itself nor guarantee. Being closed is 
always being enclosed in something which, seen from inside, is outside. In 
other words, the establishment and maintenance of system ­boundaries—
including those of living beings—presuppose a continuum of material-
ity that neither knows nor respects these boundaries (which is why Ilya 
Prigogine can speak of “dissipative structures” already in the physical and 
chemical fields). But this raises the question of how a system, here, the sys-
tem of society, organizes its relationship with the environment if it main-
tains no contact with this environment and has only its own referential 
capacity at its disposition. The entire theory of society depends on the an-
swer to this question—and we now see that, and how, humanistic and re-
gionalistic concepts of society have avoided even posing this question.
The answer to a difficult question is a difficult concept. Following 
Humberto Maturana, we speak of “structural coupling.”130 Structural cou-

Society as a Social System    
plings limit the scope of the possible structures with which a system can 
carry out its autopoiesis. They presuppose that every autopoietic system 
operates as a structurally determined system, in other words, a system 
that can determine its own operations only through its own structures. 
Structural couplings hence preclude environmental factors from specify-
ing in accordance with their own structures what happens in the system. 
­Maturana would say that structural coupling is in orthogonal relation to 
the self-determination of the system.131 It does not determine what hap-
pens in the system, but must be presupposed, because autopoiesis would 
otherwise come to a standstill and the system would cease to exist. To 
this extent, every system is adapted to its environment (or else it does not 
exist); but within the given scope, it has every possibility to behave aber-
rantly. The result is particularly apparent in the ecological problems facing 
modern society.
In the terminology of informatics, we could say that structural cou-
plings digitize analog relations.132 Since the environment and the other sys-
tems within it always operate simultaneously with the given reference system 
of observation, we are initially dealing only with analog (parallel) relations. 
The participating systems cannot extract any information, for this requires 
digitization. Structural couplings must therefore first convert analog into 
digital relations if they are to influence a system. In relations between the 
communication system and consciousness systems, this is a function of 
language, which converts a continuous “alongside” into a discontinuous 
succession.
Less attention has been paid to another precondition for structural 
couplings, which must therefore be particularly stressed. Structural cou-
plings presuppose that the system produces surplus possibilities internally 
(e.g., possibilities for movement defined in direction neither by space nor 
the organism). This alone allows the system to accept restrictions on its 
freedom, and to do so in a way that can vary from situation to situation. 
For psychic and for social systems, these surplus possibilities are set through 
the medium of meaning. To resolve these indeterminacies (which has to be 
done internally), the system requires pointers, which can be supplied by its 
own memory or by structural couplings (the body remembers the limits to 
its possibilities for movement and sees them in the terrain).
The concept of structural coupling allows us to take into account 
that the adaptedness of the system cannot be adequately explained as an 

 
  Society as a Social System
outcome of either “natural selection” or the system’s cognitive perfor-
mance. For no system can muster the “requisite variety” (W. Ross Ashby). 
It can only compensate for the unknownness of the environment by the 
internal surplus of possibilities, by matching indeterminacy with indeter-
minacy. This is true a fortiori if, unlike Maturana, we define cognition as 
an indication on the basis of a distinction, thus presupposing a capacity 
for distinguishing for which there is no correlate of any sort in the envi-
ronment of the system. If this is to be achieved, the system must be able, 
first, to close itself operationally and reproduce autopoietically, and, sec-
ond, to rely on extremely limited structural couplings with the environ-
ment. Eyes and ears and the corresponding connective operations in the 
brain are prime examples.
Structural couplings must have a basis in reality independent of the 
coupled autopoietic systems (although this alone naturally does not ex-
plain the function of structural coupling).133 In other words, they presup-
pose a continuum of materiality (or energy) in which the boundaries of the 
system are not marked, and thus above all a physically functioning world. 
They are moreover very stable—precisely because they are compatible with 
all the autopoietically possible structural developments of systems. But of 
course this also means that their endangerment or destruction must have 
catastrophic consequences to which systems cannot react, because all pos-
sibilities for reacting depend on preliminary filtration by structural cou-
plings. Finally, it should be remembered that structural couplings, too, are 
two-sided forms that include something by excluding other things. They 
bundle and intensify certain causalities that affect the coupled system, ir-
ritating it and thus stimulating it to self-determination. And they exclude 
other forms of influence. On the outside, there is also causality that can af-
fect the system (as an observer might be aware), but such causality can be 
only destructive.
In the sense of this already complicated concept, all communica-
tion is structurally coupled with consciousness. Without consciousness, 
communication is impossible. Communication is totally dependent (in 
every operation) on consciousness—if only because only consciousness 
and not communication itself can perceive sensorily, and neither oral nor 
written communication could function without perception.134 Moreover, 
communication, at least in its primary, oral form depends on reciprocity 
being established within the perceptual scope of the participating con-

Society as a Social System    
sciousness systems in the form of perception of being perceived.135 It is 
thus a special capability of the consciousness, which permits the almost 
simultaneous processing of utterance and understanding, and that can 
provide for primary self-correction of communication, for example, in 
stopping an utterance when the sender sees that the receiver is not paying 
attention. Nonetheless, consciousness is neither the “subject” of commu-
nication nor in any other sense a “vehicle” of communication. It con-
tributes no operations of any sort to communication (e.g., in the sense 
of a successive thought-speech-thought-speech sequence). Communica-
tion functions only because no recursions have to be produced between 
such heterogeneous modes of operation and because communication has 
no need to thematize the presupposition of consciousness, but accepts it 
through structural couplings. We must therefore abandon the classical 
metaphor that communication is a “transmission” of semantic content by 
one psychic system that possesses it to another.136
If we abandon this notion of communication as transmission, it must 
have far-reaching consequences for general systems theory and its applica-
tion to social systems, which are difficult to assess. Classical systems theory 
(Wiener, von Bertalanffy, Forrester) posited a concept of transfer or flow 
and had understood systems to be their regulation. This was the case for 
all types of transfer—for biological and economic systems, for organiza-
tions, for consciousness systems, and for machines, and made it possible 
to compare them. Environmental relations were described either with the 
aid of an input/output model or a feedback loop, always on the assump-
tion that the system controlled or even generated this process through reg-
ulation. If, however, we are unable to see communication as transmission, 
this eliminates one of the key premises of this systems theory. We must 
either affirm the old suspicion that social matters are quite unsuitable for 
systems-­theoretical treatment—or we have to rethink systems theory. This 
could be done by asking how the production and reproduction of a differ-
ence between system and environment comes about in the first place. For a 
specific type of system, namely, the social system, the answer to this ques-
tion lies in the concept of communication.
If reproduced autopoietically though recursions, communications 
form an emergent reality sui genesis. Human beings cannot communi-
cate; only communication can communicate. Like communication sys-
tems, consciousness systems (and brains, cells, and so on, on their other 

 
  Society as a Social System
side) are operationally closed systems that can maintain no contact with 
one another. There is no nonsocially mediated communication from con-
sciousness to consciousness and there is no communication between the 
individual and society. Every sufficiently precise understanding of commu-
nication excludes such possibilities (as well as the other possibility that so-
ciety could be conceived of as a collective mind). Only a consciousness can 
think (but not think its way into another consciousness), and only society 
can communicate. And in both cases, we are dealing with self-operations 
of an operationally closed, structurally determined system.
Particular to this instance of structural coupling between conscious-
ness and communication is that autopoietic systems are involved on both 
sides. It is therefore not a matter of coupling an autopoietic system to in-
variant environmental conditions—as the musculature of self-propelled 
organisms is adapted to the gravitational force of the Earth. In the rela-
tionship between consciousness and communication, too, there are some 
structural invariants, for example, the limited speed of changes in states 
of consciousness, which communication must not overtax. More impor-
tant, or at any rate evolutionarily less probable, is that communication pre-
supposes endogenously restless environmental systems that inevitably and 
repeatedly change their state. This means that communication has to be 
prepared to cope with continual irritation by its environment without its 
vocabulary and rules of grammar being allowed to change from moment 
to moment. Indeed, language has the peculiar ability to convey irritations 
to communication without breaking down.
In the case of structural coupling, this works as always incessantly 
and invisibly, it works also and especially when we are not thinking about 
it and not talking about it—as when going for a walk, we can take the next 
step without thinking about the weight that is physically required to do 
so. And just as our weight narrowly limits our scope for walking (in other 
words, the gravitational force of the earth must be neither too strong nor 
too weak), consciousness systems and communication systems are adapted 
to one another to allow them to function in unobtrusive coordination. The 
mutual intransparency of the coupled systems has not only to be accepted 
in practice: it is a necessary condition for structural coupling; for the en-
dogenously determined operations of the systems could otherwise not be 
synchronized. That such highly improbable conditions are to be expected, 
and that so very few of the many possibilities are realized on both sides of 

Society as a Social System    
the coupling, can, like the possibility of going for a walk, be explained only 
in terms of evolution theory.
This unseen, quiet functioning of the structural coupling between 
communication and consciousness does not exclude participants in com-
munication from being identified and even addressed in communication. 
Following an old tradition, I shall refer to them in this context as “per-
sons,”137 and thus say that the communication process is in a position to 
“personify” external references. Every communication must be able to dis-
tinguish between information and utterance (otherwise it would not it-
self be distinguishable). But this means that corresponding objective and 
personal references form. Following Spencer-Brown,138 we could also say 
that the reuse of such references condenses persons (or things), defining 
them as identical while confirming them, that is to say, as enriched with 
new charges of meaning from different sorts of utterance. If this happens, 
a corresponding semantics develops. Persons have names. What personal-
ity means and how it is to be handled may be described in greater detail in 
complicated forms. But all this does not alter the separateness and opera-
tional closure of structurally coupled systems. And the modern semantics 
of life, of subjectivity, of individuality give the impression of being in-
vented to compensate for this irrevocable being-for-itself.139
Through structural couplings, a system can be connected to highly 
complex environmental conditions without having to acquire or recon-
struct their complexity. As we can recognize from the physical constraints 
of eyes and ears, structural couplings always cover a very restricted por-
tion of the environment. Everything that is excluded cannot have an 
irritating and stimulating effect on the system, but only a destructive 
impact. This is the only way to safeguard the autonomy of the system’s 
autopoiesis and the development of the system’s own complexity. This is 
already true of the physical environmental couplings of the nervous sys-
tem and particularly impressively for the coupling of the communica-
tion system with individually dispersed consciousness systems. For the 
system, the complexity of coupled environmental systems remain non-
transparent; it is not taken over by the system’s own mode of operation 
because the “requisite variety,” as W. Ross Ashby puts it, is lacking.140 It 
is mostly reconstructed in the operations of the system only in the form 
of precondition and malfunction, or of normality and irritation. In com-
munication systems, general indications like names or concepts such as 

 
  Society as a Social System
“human being,” “person,” and “consciousness” serve in the system’s pro-
cessing of reference to environmental complexity. It is always a matter of 
utilizing ordered (structured but certainly not predictable) complexity in 
accordance with a system’s own operational possibilities—and in society 
this means using it linguistically. Where such relations develop in mutual 
co-evolution and none of the systems thus structurally coupled could 
exist without them, we can also speak of interpenetration.141 The relation-
ship between nerve cells and brains is a good example; the relationship 
between consciousness systems and society is another, also quantitatively 
more or less comparable.
Plainly, the regular structural coupling of consciousness systems with 
communication systems is made possible by language.142 A topic also much 
discussed in sociology concerning the relationship between society, culture, 
language, and psychic “mentalities”143 is thus expressed in a concept that is 
necessary for theory construction. In subtle analyses, Wilhelm von Hum-
boldt examined both the subjective and objective character of language. 
The speaker has to choose an objective form and surrender ownership of the 
spoken word, with the result that in spoken communication, no participant 
thinks exactly what another thinks. Language frees itself from its creators 
[sic] as form. But he goes on to say: “The true resolution of this contradic-
tion lies in the unity of human nature.”144 A theory of society that took 
communication, not language, as its point of departure was lacking, and 
this gap was initially filled by a philosophical anthropology. Only the pos-
tulate of two different types of autopoietic system makes it possible to re-
place the “unity of human nature” with the concept of structural coupling.
This choice of concept implies that language functions without psy-
chic reflection or social comment, which does not exclude choosing our 
words when the consciousness sees cause to do so, or talking about ways of 
expressing oneself if a problem of understanding arises for the social sys-
tem. But such rather exceptional concerns also presuppose that language 
works unobtrusively; in other words, that it is in “orthogonal” relation to 
the autopoietic processes of the systems participating in it.
In the evolutionary context, language is an extremely improbable 
sort of noise, which, precisely because of its improbability, has high atten-
tion value and highly complex possibilities of specification. A consciousness 
present when speech is proceeding can easily distinguish this noise from 
other noises and finds it difficult to escape the fascination of current com-

Society as a Social System    
munication (whatever it might be thinking within its own inaudible sys-
tem). At the same time, the possibilities language offers for specification 
permit highly complex communication structures to be developed, first, 
through the complexification and subsequent smoothing out of linguistic 
rules themselves, and, second, by developing social semantics for the situ-
ational reactivation of important possibilities for communication. The same 
applies mutatis mutandis for language transferred from an acoustic to a vi-
sual medium, that is to say, for the written word. Chapter 2 will examine the 
enormous, often underestimated effects of this visualization of language.
Whereas language as a structure has to be relatively permanently fixed, 
there is a second coupling mechanism that is both unstable and, as it were, 
capable of learning, for which we may borrow the concept of “schemata” 
from cognitive psychology.145 In a poorly coordinated area of research, it 
goes by many other names, as well: “frames,” “scripts,” “prototypes,” “cog-
nitive maps,” and “implicit theories,” to mention only a few. These terms 
denote meaning combinations that serve society and psychic systems to 
form a memory that can forget almost all their own operations but can 
nevertheless retain and reuse something in schematized form. Examples are 
standardized forms of defining something as something (e.g., a beverage as 
wine), attribution schemata that link causes and effects, possibly vesting 
them with demands for action or blame apportionment (where they are 
called scripts).146 But time schemata, especially past/future or preference 
codes such as good/bad, true/false, and property/nonproperty also perform 
the schematization function. In using schemata, communication presup-
poses that every participating consciousness understands what is meant, 
but also that this does not determine how consciousness systems handle 
the schema, let alone what follow-up communications result from the use 
of schemata. Schemata can be concretized and adapted to every need. For 
example, corporal punishment can be deemed educationally beneficial or 
detrimental. In concrete situations, they help “fill gaps” in the search for 
supplementation and completion.147 In any case, as extracts from memory, 
they cannot be used schematically.148 They serve as reductions of structural 
complexity in the development of operational complexity, and hence in the 
ongoing adjustment of structural coupling between psychic and social sys-
tems to changing conditions. Here, too, the function and mechanisms of 
coupling do not have to take effect in the operations of the systems; they 
can be supposed to act noiselessly.

 
  Society as a Social System
In the context of a theory of the system of society, it is not use-
ful to develop—in the form of a vast excursus, as it were—a theory of 
language and a theory of schematisms based on this function of struc-
tural coupling. I would merely point out that doing so contradicts fun-
damental principles of Saussurian linguistics: language does not have its 
own mode of operation, it has to be realized either as thought or as com-
munication; it consequently does not form a system of its own. Language 
is and remains dependent on the circumstance that consciousness systems, 
on the one hand, and the communication system of society, on the other, 
continue their own autopoiesis with completely closed operations of their 
own. Were this not to happen, speech would immediately cease and think-
ing in language would no longer be possible.
Loosely following Talcott Parsons, we can also call this form of struc-
tural coupling “symbolic generalization.”149 However, the term “symbolic” 
is used differently in this context than with regard to symbol development 
within societal communication, when, for example, genealogies are com-
piled on the principle of descent to explain similarities between persons. 
As a coupling between consciousness systems and communication sys-
tems, the symbol means only that there is a difference that can be treated as 
the same from both standpoints. In this sense, a symbolic use of linguistic 
generalizations (= reuses) presupposes the referentiality of language, that 
is to say, the ability to distinguish signifier (words) from signified (things) 
in consciousness and in communication. Only the signifier is suitable for 
symbolic use, not the signified things themselves. In other words, contrary 
to the assumptions of our tradition, conveying human kind and society 
cannot depend on “nature.”
Just as important as artificiality, condensation, confirmation, and the 
symbolic use of linguistic signs is an element that often attracts less atten-
tion: the binary coding of language. All communication offers two possibil-
ities: acceptance and rejection. All (condensed and confirmed) meaning can 
be expressed in an affirmative version and in a negative version. This sets 
the course for the further treatment of the topic.150 The same arrangement 
is also important as a form of structural coupling and presumably came 
about for this reason. For the bifurcation of the communication code lan-
guage also allows consciousness to opt for one side of the form or the other. 
With this minimum of freedom, it can elude determination by the course 
of communication and give itself over to (for itself nontransparent) self-

Society as a Social System    
determination. For unascertainable reasons, it says yes or no, accepts or re-
jects, supports or blocks the further course of communication; and does so 
in a communicatively comprehensible manner for motives that may remain 
incomprehensible for itself and for others, and that play no thematic role in 
communication (except in exceptional circumstances). This state of affairs 
is imposed universally by the code of language, independently of words, 
topics, motives, and contexts. It is given always and at every moment. In 
this form, it is an indispensable condition for the structural coupling of dif-
ferent instances of autopoiesis.
That communication systems are coupled to consciousness systems 
through language, as are consciousness systems to communication sys-
tems, has far-reaching consequences for the structural development of the 
systems involved, for their morphogenesis, for their evolution. Unlike con-
sciousness systems, which can perceive sensorily, communication can be 
affected only through consciousness. Everything impacting society from 
outside that is not communication must therefore have passed through the 
double filter of consciousness and the possibility of communication. The 
structural coupling of consciousness and communication is hence a form 
that includes and excludes: it increases the possibilities of mutual irritation 
in its channel but can do so only on condition that all influences not cov-
ered by it are excluded or limited to destructive effects.
We must literally keep an eye on what this means: the entire physi-
cal world, including the physical basis of communication itself can affect 
communication only via operationally closed brains, and these brains only 
through operationally closed consciousness systems, and thus only through 
“individuals.” This involves an enormous and, from an evolutionary point 
of view, very improbable process of selection, which at the same time de-
termines the high degree of freedom in societal development. Physical, 
chemical, and biological processes have no direct access to communica-
tion—if not in the sense of destruction. Noise or the withdrawal of air 
or spatial distance can exclude oral communication. Books can burn or 
even be burned. But no fire can write a book or even irritate the author 
strongly enough to cause him write differently while the manuscript burns 
than had there been no fire. Consciousness is hence in a privileged posi-
tion under all the external conditions of autopoiesis. It controls the access 
of the outside world to communication, but it does so, not as the “sub-
ject” of communication, not as an entity “underlying” communication, 

 
  Society as a Social System
but thanks to its capability for (highly filtered, self-generated) perception, 
which, under the conditions of structural coupling, depends in turn on 
the neurophysiological processes of the brain and through these on further 
processes of the autopoiesis of life.
That communication systems are coupled directly only with con-
sciousness systems and accordingly profit from their selectivity without 
being specified by them provides a defense that largely prevents the total 
reality of the world from affecting communication. No system could be 
complex enough to endure this and maintain its autopoiesis. Only thanks 
to this protection has a system been able to develop whose reality consists 
in the processing of mere “signs.” It should be remembered that conscious-
ness systems exist in large numbers, now more than five billion units, all 
operating at the same time. Even if we take into account that conscious-
ness systems on the other side of the world are asleep at the moment and 
others are not engaged in any sort of communication for other reasons, the 
number of simultaneously operating systems is still so great that effective 
coordination (and hence the formation of consensus in an empirically evi-
dent sense) is completely excluded. The communication system is there-
fore necessarily left to its own resources, it has to direct itself; and it can do 
so as long as it succeeds in activating the required consciousness material 
in its environment.
There can thus be no question of any sort of homogeneity between 
the operations and states of structurally coupled systems. The use of lan-
guage and cognitive schemata does not change this. There must be other 
reasons why structural couplings nevertheless come into being. They are 
likely to lie in the temporality of the operations not only of neurophysi-
ological and conscious systems, but of communicative systems.151 Always 
with an eye on their structural couplings, we must take a closer look at this 
temporal structure of autopoietic systems; for, although the world exists 
simultaneously for every system, brains, consciousness systems, and com-
munication systems form differing sequences of events and thus operate at 
different speeds. What consciousness perceives as intensity is developed in 
the nervous system by a sequence of impulses. There are such time differ-
ences in the experience of volition and emotion, too.152 The consciousness 
has accordingly already been in action when communication produces 
events. The consciousness, we could say, interprets what has already hap-
pened in the brain as a decision, a feeling, or an insight. Communication 

Society as a Social System    
actualizes and thus captures in consciousness what has already been de-
cided. For its part, this peculiar belatedness in structural couplings remains 
unnoticed. It is interpreted as simultaneity. It is, as it were, translated into 
the assumption of a reality that exists independently of cognitive opera-
tions. The need to synchronize time to suit the requirements of the given 
system’s own autopoiesis thus explains the emergence of a world that is the 
way it is independently of cognition. Systems convert temporal relations 
into reality without specifically anticipating particular meaning forms.
Following this analysis, we can do without the assumption that there 
is an ontological substratum to the world and at the same time explain 
this assumption itself. We have to assume that the operations of structur-
ally coupled systems are temporal because the basal elements of these sys-
tems are produced in relation to time. As more precise analysis can show, 
all conditions are quite complex. All operations in coupled systems are 
only events that are over as soon as they occur. They must therefore pro-
duce the difference from the environment through a sequence of match-
ing operations. This requires memories specific to systems. Although the 
memory participates only in the system’s own operations, remembering or 
forgetting only its own operations, it presents the outcomes (products) of 
operations on the basis of the distinction between self-reference and other-
reference. Every system therefore projects synchronization with other sys-
tems and similarity of other-referential matters into the world, although 
there are neither checks nor any meta-guarantees for agreement. At the 
same time it knows itself to be different and the outside world to be also 
accessible to others. Therefore, in the field of intentional and thematic 
other-reference, consciousness, like societal communication, develops the 
idea of things that exist externally, although a system is nothing other and 
has nothing else but the history of its own movement.153 This paradox of 
supposing similarity despite separateness explains that consciousness sys-
tems experience continuous irritation when participating in communica-
tion, causing a structural drift, which in turn affects the conditions for 
further participation in communication. In this sense, communication re-
generates conditions for the continuation of communication through the 
way in which it affects its environment. However, what in communication 
is registered as consensus or dissension remains completely open.
The sole alternative to the consciousness/communication structural 
coupling that is emerging—with unpredictable consequences—is the 

 
  Society as a Social System
computer. There are already computers in use whose operations are acces-
sible to neither consciousness nor communication, neither simultaneously 
nor reconstructively. Although they are manufactured and programmed 
machines, such computers function nontransparently for consciousness 
and for communication; their operations nevertheless affect conscious-
ness and communication through structural couplings. Strictly speaking, 
they are invisible machines. If we ask whether computers are machines 
that work analogously to consciousness and can replace or even outdo 
consciousness systems, we are putting the problem wrongly and probably 
playing it down. Nor is it relevant whether the internal operations of the 
computer can be understood as communications. We must presumably 
leave aside all analogies of this sort and ask instead what consequences it 
would have if computers could establish a quite independent structural 
coupling between a reality they were able to construct and consciousness 
or communication systems.
This question deserves greater attention; it is impossible to judge at 
present what consequences it would have for the further evolution of the 
societal system. At any rate, any theory of society should reserve an inde-
terminacy position for the issue, and the structural coupling concept offers 
such a possibility. Although we assume in what follows that communica-
tion systems are coupled to consciousness systems through language and 
only for this reason can afford indifference toward everything else, the 
computer can also be considered likely to make other forms of structural 
coupling possible.
Finally, the concept of structural coupling explains that, although 
systems are completely self-determined, they develop by and large in a di-
rection tolerated by the environment. In structural coupling, the inside of 
the system can be termed irritation (or disturbance or perturbation). Auto-
poietic systems react directly to negative and nontypifiable stimuli. At any 
rate, they are not, as economic theory would suppose, utility maximizers 
per se.154 In their irritability, too, both consciousness systems and the com-
munication system society are completely autonomous. Irritations arise 
from an internal comparison of (initially unspecified) events with the sys-
tem’s own possibilities, especially with established structures, with expecta-
tions. There is hence no irritation in the system’s environment and there is 
no transfer of irritation from the environment into the system. It is always 
a construct of the system itself, always self-irritation—albeit occasioned by 

Society as a Social System    
environmental effects. The system then has the possibility of discovering 
the cause of the irritation within itself and learning from this discovery or 
attributing the irritation to the environment and treating it as “accident” 
or seeking its source in the environment and exploiting or eliminating it. 
These various possibilities, too, are provided for in the systemic distinction 
between self-reference and other-reference, and if the system has the pos-
sibility of drawing distinctions, it can shift perspective and combine reac-
tions, for example, learning while identifying environmental causes.
Continual irritations of a certain type, for example, the repeated ir-
ritation of an infant by the peculiarities of language or the irritation of an 
agricultural society by the perception of climatic conditions, steer struc-
tural developments in certain directions, because these systems are exposed 
to very specific sources of irritation and are therefore constantly concerned 
with similar problems. Of course this does not mean that we could return 
to the climate and culture theories of the eighteenth century; nor does it 
mean that we are prepared to accept a purely sociological theory of social-
ization. In all these questions, a multiplicity of system references have to be 
taken into account and correspondingly complex theory models applied. 
In any case, the environment gains influence over the structural develop-
ment of systems only under the condition of structural couplings and only 
within the framework of the possibilities of self-irritation they channel and 
accumulate.
All this also holds true for modern society. What is more, the envi-
ronment itself is changing more strongly than ever before under the in-
fluence of society. This is true of the physical, chemical, and biological 
conditions of life, in other words for the complex usually termed “ecol-
ogy,” but it is also particularly true for the deformation of psychic systems 
under modern living conditions, for example, for everything covered by 
the concept of modern individualism or the theory of a growing entitle-
ment mentality. As in an ecological hypercycle, structural couplings be-
tween the system of society and the environment are under pressure to 
vary at a speed that raises the question of whether and how society thus ir-
ritated, which has itself to thank for all this, can learn fast enough.
Finally, operational closure provides the key to the theory of sys-
tem differentiation. However society differentiates social systems within 
itself, the occasion is always a bifurcation of its own operations. It is never 
a matter of reflecting distinctions that already exist in the environment. 

 
  Society as a Social System
Only very primitive societies have experimented on the basis of anthropo-
logical parameters like gender and age, but this has proved an evolution-
ary dead end. Even family formation and segmentary differentiation go 
beyond this. If discriminatory significance is later lent to structural dis-
tinctions (e.g., farmers/nomads, city dwellers/country dwellers, or now 
on occasion racial differences), this is clearly a matter of social aspects im-
portant only insofar as they can be linked to forms of system differentia-
tion. From a genetic point of view, it is always a matter of performance 
by the communication system: a deviation is proposed, observed, tested, 
rejected, or intensified and used for more and more connections. Self-ref-
erential and other-referential components contribute. The differentiation 
of a system therefore always brings about its further outdifferentiation in 
the sense of interrupting the point-by-point coincidence of components 
of the system and components of its environment. And precisely this in-
terruption makes it inevitable that society has to cope with an interpreted 
environment.
7. Cognition
When we begin to examine communication systems as sui ­generis 
autopoietic systems, traditional ideas about “cognition” have to be re-
viewed. It is also a question of redescribing the humanistic heritage of the 
European tradition. It had attributed cognitive abilities to humans and de-
fined the particularity of humankind in function of two distinctions, that 
between human and animal and that between human and machine. In 
search of characteristics attributable only to humans and not to animals 
or machines, theories of cognition provided a sort of reserve conceptuality 
defined in terms of reason, intellect, and reflective capacity. The faculties 
of sensory perception that humans share with animals were consequently 
played down. They were counted among the lower (as opposed to higher) 
faculties.155 Machines, in contrast, only supplemented and facilitated the 
human capacity to act, while action itself could be attributed to free will 
and the possibility of reasoned control.
Developments within science and technology have invalidated this 
premise of a specifically human-centric theory of cognition. Modern phys-
ics allows cognition to be described at best as a special case of changes in 
relations between electromagnetic fields. This might give us an answer to 

Society as a Social System    
the question of how the world makes self-observation possible. But this 
provides no access to the phenomenology of the world. Neurophysiologi-
cal research describes the brain as an operationally closed system, and the 
question of how we nevertheless come by the idea of an outside world 
arises for both animals and humans. The answer lies only in the concept 
of sensory perception, which is thus preordinate if not superordinate to all 
reflective processes. In still unfathomable manner, perception externalizes 
the results of neurophysiological processes—in higher species of animals 
and in humans. Electronic data processing technology has changed rela-
tions with machines. This technology can no longer be regarded as supple-
menting bodily activity, hence imposing a redescription of the relationship 
between man and machine.156 Research into “artificial intelligence” shows 
such change—even questioning whether couching the problem in terms 
of the relationship between man and machine is still appropriate for the 
purposes of cognition theory.
In the circumstances, we need to restate and come up with new an-
swers to the question of a “reserve category” of specifically human charac-
teristics.157 Examining the medium of meaning can contribute.158 However, 
this medium is used by both psychic and social systems. We can therefore 
just as well define the specificity of humans as a matter of their participa-
tion in meaningful communication.
But this alone does not produce an adequate concept of cognition 
commensurate with the new conditions. For this purpose, we take the con-
cept of observation as our point of departure, treating observation as an 
indication in the context of a distinction and requiring memory to be de-
fined as the ability to forget and remember. Meaningful cognition is then 
only another special case; the only one, however, that comes into question 
for the theory of society. In other words, cognition is the ability to connect 
new operations to remembered operations. It presupposes that forgetting 
releases capacities in the system; but also that new situations can lead to 
highly selective recourse to condensations of past operations.
These considerations oblige us to abandon a traditionally dominant 
notion, which many still consider self-evident: that a system can adapt to 
its environment through cognition, and that evolution is hence made pos-
sible by improving cognitive capabilities, through more profound, more 
exact, premonitory knowledge of the environment. There is of course no 
denying a link between evolution and changes in the cognitive faculties 

 
  Society as a Social System
of highly developed systems, but the thesis of a conditioning relation be-
tween cognition, better adaptation, and evolution is untenable in this sim-
ple version—not least in biology.159
Even older cybernetic systems theory gives cause for doubt—as in 
W. Ross Ashby’s thesis that systems are energetically open but informa-
tionally closed, and that they lack the “requisite variety.”160 The cybernetic 
control loop is also geared to function without knowledge of the environ-
ment—so to speak without subject and without object. The theory of op-
erational closure and the thesis that autopoietic systems must always be 
adapted in advance if they are to realize their evolutionary potential go be-
yond this. The first question is then always what operations the reproduc-
tion of the system carries out and how the system can already be adapted 
on this precognitive level.161 Only then can we ask how specific obser-
vational operations come about and how cognitive abilities (digitization, 
memory, learning, distance orientation, anticipation, error correction) can 
develop on this basis.
From a functional point of view, cognition is not a copying or rep-
resentation of environmental conditions in the system. Its job is rather to 
produce redundancies that spare the system repetitive information process-
ing.162 Redundancies are marked as knowledge, registered as recognizable, 
and then used “economically” to concentrate and expedite any checking 
of new information. Cognition can accordingly help the system to adjust 
temporarily to situations, a major advantage in a volatile world. But this 
very specialization prevents cognition from guaranteeing the structural ad-
aptation of systems to the world.
Whereas organisms primarily secure the metabolic processes for re-
producing life and have to be adapted at this level before going on to de-
velop specific cognitive abilities, the only basal operation available for the 
formation of social systems is communication. And whereas organisms 
can react only to irritation of their outer surfaces, however they interpret 
these irritations internally, communication systems intensify their irrita-
bility by replacing spatial boundaries by meaningful distinctions. As an 
operational necessity, communication always requires self-observation of 
the operation, in other words the possibility of distinguishing between in-
formation and utterance; and with this distinction it separates off a do-
main, namely, information, to which it can attach cognition. Here, too, 
the basal operation is not cognition. But it guarantees that cognition in-

Society as a Social System    
evitably co-occurs and can be developed. The distinction between utter-
ance and information and the dependence on understanding make it clear 
that communication as an operation, too, must adapt to the environment 
without being able cognitively to control this dependence. No communi-
cation process can monitor step by step (in other words, communicatively 
express) whether participants are still alive, whether there is sufficient air 
to carry sound waves, whether electronic equipment is still in working 
order. Such demands would paralyze the efficiency of the evolutionary ad-
vance of communication; if they had had to be met, communicative sys-
tems would not have developed in the first place.163 In other words, the 
sequence of communicative operations requires what constitutes its envi-
ronment to enable and tolerate its mode of operation. Should failures and 
disturbances occur, they can still be taken into account as events and pro-
cessed in the form of the communication relating to them.
Only thus can communication concentrate on itself. Only thus can 
it perform its operations. Only thus can it digitize the information it pro-
duces (and does not, for example, take from the environment). Only thus 
can it test the connectivity (intelligibility, possibly the consensual capacity) 
of its operations. Only thus is it able to produce vast amounts of informa-
tion, to distribute it in complex systems and to process it both simultane-
ously and sequentially. And only thus can it continually cross the inner 
boundary of its own distinction and treat the utterance of information 
as information about what has been uttered or about the utterer, or, vice 
versa, draw conclusions about the quality of the information on the basis 
of information about the type or motive of utterance.
Communication thus requires no guarantee of congruence with the 
environment to allow it to proceed. It uses cognition instead. In any case, 
the environment contains neither “information” nor “topics.” Nor does it 
contain any equivalents of the forms with which communication operates. 
Instead of a guarantee of congruence, we have only the temporal reference 
of communication: that it consists of operations (events) that pass as they 
occur; that it consequently prefaces an uncertain future; that it can recon-
firm or change all self-formed structures (including those of “knowledge”); 
that it always operates recursively, connecting to itself. But for this very 
reason, it is able to reflect about and correct itself.
These considerations have far-reaching consequences for the theory 
of society. In continuing its own operations, society has to presuppose its 

 
  Society as a Social System
adaptation to the environment without being able to monitor it cogni-
tively. It can recognize disturbances and address them in further communi-
cation; but in so doing, it must again presuppose that communication can 
be achieved through communication and can thus continue to reproduce 
the system. This cannot in principle be changed by developing cognitive 
abilities through sign systems (especially language), generalizations (one-
to-many rules), and dissemination techniques, through well-assorted se-
mantics that make what is worth preserving available for reuse; and through 
the differentiation of a functional system of science specialized in cognitive 
innovation (learning) and reserved for this purpose. Recourse has always to 
be taken to the same basic prerequisites. This means above all that society 
has to come to terms with a world that remains unknown. It must accord-
ingly develop specialized systems of symbols, particularly religion, as well 
as “contingency formulae” in the individual functional systems. Finally, it 
means that, seen over time, society cannot anticipate and cannot plan its 
own future. In morphogenesis and in far-reaching structural change, it has 
to depend on evolution. We can even expect that the development of cog-
nitive abilities, which can be used only self-­referentially, will not improve 
the system’s adaptation to the environment but at best intensify its irrita-
bility, with ongoing self-irritation a source of stress.
If all cognition has to rely on operations made possible in advance, 
this has far-reaching epistemological consequences. Kant’s question about 
the conditions for the possibility of cognition remains. But the answer is 
now operational closure; and research turns from the conditions for possi-
bility to the possibility of conditioning in increasingly complex contexts.164 
The classical idea that reality shows in resistance to cognition or to voli-
tion also remains. Now, however, the resistance is within the system itself: 
in the resistance of operations of the system to operations of the same sys-
tem, and hence of communications to communications.165 We can also 
still say that science has to do with self-generated (and only for this reason 
absolute) uncertainties.166 But if we admit this, we have to accept a much 
farther-reaching premise, namely, that science has to do entirely with self-
generated uncertainties. For certainty is a form we can use only if we also 
accept its other side, uncertainty.
Systems theory does not claim that the certainty of knowledge has its 
fundamentum in re within the system (so to speak as the result of its perfor-
mance), and that uncertainty is to be found outside as the excessive com-

Society as a Social System    
plexity, if not chaos, of the world. It says rather that the certain/uncertain 
schema is a contribution of cognition itself, which it can use as long as its 
autopoiesis functions.
8. Ecological Problems
Classical sociology had treated social systems (social facts, social rela-
tions, social orders, or whatever) as particular objects. What is environment 
for society was considered the object of other disciplines whose province was 
to be respected. The rapid growth of interest in ecological problems over re-
cent decades has therefore come as a surprise to sociology, finding it unpre-
pared and to this day in a state of theoretical helplessness. In accustomed 
critical fashion, sociologists were able only to lament that modern society 
deals so heedlessly with the environment. But what they have had to say is at 
best literary in nature, lending political support to the ecology movements 
that rightly and successfully call general attention to this problem.
If, as I have proposed, we regard the system form as the form of 
the difference between system and environment, we establish a funda-
mentally different theoretical basis. For the moment, however, confusion 
reigns. The mass media have merged the terms “ecology” and “environ-
ment,”167 and everyday speech has adopted this confusion, giving expres-
sion to perplexity and annoyance without clarifying the concepts.
The term “ecology” is no longer understood in the original sense of 
establishing a livable world, even though this wishful notion implicitly 
dominates the discussion. On the other hand, the implication cannot be 
that all the physical, chemical, and biological circumstances of the world 
have become a problem. For ecological circumstances are of interest only 
where they affect society as its environment, either because society causes 
them to change or because they impact society. But we then need a con-
cept of society to clarify what the environment is from this point of view. 
Only then can each advance in theory design contribute directly or indi-
rectly to understanding the evident ecological problems that have always 
accompanied the evolution of society, but that have dramatically intensi-
fied over the past century.
Sociology is accordingly responsible for a certain system reference, 
for the system of society and its environment. It can no longer limit its at-
tention to an intrasocial perspective. Its subject matter is society and every­

 
  Society as a Social System
thing else that is environment from the standpoint of society. Among the 
basic concerns addressed by systems theory is the maintenance of this dif-
ference between system and environment.
The conceptual configuration of operational closure, self-­organization, 
and autopoiesis is particularly important in this connection. As has been 
noted, an operationally closed system cannot reach the environment with 
its own operations. It cannot adapt to the environment through cognition. 
It can operate only within the system, not partly inside and partly outside. 
All structures and all states of the system that function as a condition for 
the possibility of further operation are produced, are brought about by the 
system’s own operations.
This obliges us to distinguish between operation and causality (with-
out denying the causality of system operations). Operations, as classical 
concepts such as poiesis or production indicate, control and vary only part 
of the causes necessary to reproduce the system. The environment is al-
ways involved. Moreover, causal determinations always require specific 
performance by an observer. Certain causes have to be attributed to cer-
tain effects, choosing from infinity of causal factors. Depending on the in-
terests concerned, attribution can vary considerably. This has been such a 
commonplace of legal and economic attribution research, and for some 
decades now of social psychology studies, that no further argument is re-
quired. If we wish to know what causal relations are assumed (selected), 
we therefore have to observe observers, and we must know that every attri-
bution is contingent (which does not mean arbitrary or purely fictitious).
There is hence no denying that system operations depend causally 
on environmental conditions that are either mediated through structural 
couplings or, where they occur, have a destructive effect. Nor can it be de-
nied that system operations causally change environmental states. In other 
words, in no direction do system boundaries block causalities. A commu-
nication causes air to vibrate or marks paper, changes the electromagnetic 
states of devices and the states of the consciousness systems involved. This 
concerns the media used for communication,168 whose loose coupling is 
temporarily converted into fixed couplings. There can be no doubt about 
this, nor can it be disregarded if communication is to take place. The ques-
tion is only how important such environmental causality is for society. 
Does it somehow change the conditions for selecting further operations in 
the system (and if so, within what time horizons)?

Society as a Social System    
We are clearly dealing with minimal effects or defects easy to offset 
in the system when they cause disturbance. We take a different paper—or 
a different consciousness. In the communication system that is society, it 
is easy to communicate about disturbances. The resorption capacity of the 
system generally suffices. This is at any rate how communicative operation 
normally sees its own conditionalities. Materials or motives may become 
scarce if used to excess; scarcity is then the form that communication must 
and can use to continue taking place in the system. Are there then no se-
rious problems?
With this theoretical approach, we open an explanatory gap. How 
from this perspective can we explain that modern society has special, acute 
problems with its environment, even though evolution has been generat-
ing disastrous impacts on itself for billions of years and the societal systems 
of our history have never really been in a position to control the ecological 
conditions of their reproduction? Has anything changed? In other words, 
has society changed itself? What forms, what variables vary?
One useful hypothesis is that changes have to do with the form of 
societal system differentiation and with the increasing complexity it pro-
vokes.169 Functional differentiation means above all the operational closure 
of functional systems, too. This produces subsystems with capabilities that 
the overall networking of society—we could also say on the basis of lan-
guage alone—could not supply. Subsystems assume universal competence 
for their specific function. This has vastly increased the capacity for resolu-
tion and recombination in functional systems’ own operations and in their 
environment within and outside of society. Moreover, organization takes 
on an importance of its own. The characteristic inclusion/exclusion mech-
anism for membership allows members’ behavior to be regulated with 
great precision and directed in very concrete terms, in other words, under 
the influence of communication—relatively independently of members’ 
other obligations in the environment of the given organizational system 
and hence independently of their own, other roles.
These structural changes do not affect the principle of operational 
closure. On the contrary, they are based on this principle, repeating it 
with the autopoiesis of the functional systems within the system of soci-
ety. What does change, however, are the causal interfaces between com-
munication and noncommunication, thus between the system of society 
and its environment; this also changes the observation and thematization 

 
  Society as a Social System
of ­causalities through communication. Since the advent of science, they 
can be formulated with much greater depth of field, but only with much 
greater uncertainty. The types and quantities of production that the mar-
ket can profitably absorb can be calculated and checked against experi-
ence; the market can then be allowed to determine within society what 
raw materials are to be extracted from the environment of society and 
what wastes are to be discharged into this environment. This communi-
cation is converted into causalities that affect the environment essentially 
through organization, but naturally also through the temptations of prof-
fered consumption.
But precisely because functional systems produce these effects with-
out society as a whole controlling and limiting the process, the outcome 
is difficult to assess. Integration and controllability are lacking, as well as 
possibilities for giving expression (be it only normatively) to the order of 
society within society itself through a morality of measure or the notion 
of justum pretium [just price]. If we pay attention to causalities and com-
municate about them, we find more possibilities, hence greater choice, 
but also a complexity that escapes prognosis. We can only experiment, not 
least of all in the field of technologies that are seemingly so controllable.170
This invites two conclusions: systems theory must abandon the cher-
ished idea of inferring the adaptation of the system to the environment 
from the causal relations between system and environment. Evolution the-
ory, too, will have to abandon this notion. Through operational closure, 
systems produce their own degrees of freedom, which they exploit as long 
as possible; in other words, as long as the environment tolerates it. Very 
few, structurally sufficiently amenable forms of autopoiesis can serve this 
purpose, above all the extremely robust biochemistry of life. As far as I can 
see, however, the overall effect is not adaptation but greater deviation.
Second, both the potential for self-endangerment and the capacity 
for recuperation are, for the reasons stated, increasing in modern society. 
The unintended or at any rate unpurposed effects on the environment ap-
pear to be proliferating, and every thought of entering them under “costs” 
in evaluating economic efficiency is illusory in view of the extent and time 
horizons of the problem (and in view of communicable nonknowledge). 
The widespread inclination to evoke “responsibility” in this situation can 
be seen only as a gesture of despair. At the same time, a greater degree 
of freedom in reacting to sufficiently clear situations can be noted. Even 

Society as a Social System    
normative structures are contingent, are subject to change without any 
recourse to a “natural” order of things. This is particularly the case with 
positive law. In the economy, communication about ecological problems 
produces not only costs but also markets. Above all, the mechanism of or-
ganization permits an improbable specification of human behavior under 
rules that can be changed when needed. From this point of view, organiza-
tion, like money, is a societal medium for only temporary forms. On the 
other hand, the possibilities for using organizations are limited by the con-
ditions for reproducing functional systems. Salaries must remain attractive 
and affordable and this cannot be assured without an efficient economic 
system, which in turn puts a strain on the environment.
Maladjustment to the environment is accordingly not infrequent.171 
The theoretical explanation lies in the thesis that operationally closed sys-
tems can orient themselves internally only on internal problems. What is 
unusual and needs explaining is the extent to which this particular prob-
lem occupies communication in today’s system of society.
9. Complexity
The attributes listed so far, namely, meaning, self-reference, auto­
poietic reproduction, and operational closure with monopolization of a 
specific type of operation—communication—cause a system of society to 
develop its own structural complexity and hence to organize its own auto­
poiesis.172 In this connection, we often speak of “emergent” orders in the 
sense of phenomena coming into being that cannot be reduced to the prop-
erties of their components, for example, the intentions of actors. But “emer-
gence” is more a component of a narrative than an explanatory concept.173 
We shall therefore have to make do with the idea that differentiating a sys-
tem and cutting links with the environment are required if the complexity 
of a system is to develop within protective boundaries.
Organized (structural) complexity has long since been a point of in-
tersection for theoretical and methodological considerations.174 According 
to Helmut Willke, it is the key issue in systems theory, and a problem whose 
handling through self-organizational, control, and steering processes gives 
modern society growing cause for concern.175 Many aspects of the phe-
nomenon need to be discussed, including system differentiation, ­medium/
form differences and duplication processes, codification, and the ego/alter 

 
  Society as a Social System
distinction (see especially Chapter 2). Before proceeding, however, certain 
matters need to be looked at in brief.
Our point of departure is the link between the operational closure 
of the system and an evolutionary tendency to develop intrasystem com-
plexity. Only if the system isolates itself sufficiently from the environment, 
only if it thus renounces developing its own internal equivalents for all en-
vironmental states can it be distinguished from the environment through 
its own internal order of interconnecting elements. Only the production 
on this basis of a system’s own elements by its own elements (autopoiesis) 
can lead to the development of system complexity. The extent to which 
this happens and where it stops, how viable even relatively simple systems 
are in a highly complex environment (i.e., whether they can continue their 
autopoiesis) are questions I must leave it to evolution theory to answer. For 
the present, I shall merely note the connection between operational closure 
and the enablement of system complexity development. It is this link that 
determines the “direction” of evolution.
But what is complexity? What does this term denote?176 Complexity 
is not an operation, something that a system does or that happens within 
it. Rather, it is an understanding of observation and description (includ-
ing self-observation and self-description). We must therefore ask what the 
form of this understanding is, what distinction constitutes it. This question 
alone produces a cascade of considerations, for the concept of complexity 
is not simple; it is itself complexly constituted, that is to say, autologically.
It is often said that a system is complex for an observer if it is neither 
completely ordered nor completely unordered but a mixture of redun-
dancy and variety. This is particularly the case for systems with self-gen-
erated indeterminacy. The question why a multiplex state of affairs needs 
to be subsumed under a concept that presupposes its unity is a more pro-
found one. The distinction that constitutes complexity then takes the form 
of a paradox: complexity is the unity of a manifold. A state of affairs is ex-
pressed in two versions, as unity and as manifold, and the concept denies 
that we are dealing with different matters. This blocks the easy way out of 
treating complexity now as a unity, now as a manifold. But this takes us 
only to the next question, namely, how this paradox can be creatively im-
plemented, or “unfolded.”
The usual answer is to decompose complexity with the aid of the 
concepts of element and relation, and thus with the aid of a further dis-

Society as a Social System    
tinction. The more elements a unity has and the more it interconnects 
these elements through relations, the more complex it is. We can map 
this out not only by counting elements but also by taking qualitative dif-
ferences into consideration; and, furthermore, by including the temporal 
dimension and allowing for sequential difference, hence for unstable ele-
ments. This makes the concept more complex and more realistic; but it 
also becomes multidimensional, so that we no longer compare complexity 
in terms of greater or lesser (is a brain more complex than a society because 
there are more nerve cells in a brain than there are people in a society?).
Another distinction is more important for the theory of society. It 
presupposes the distinction between element and relation, but stresses that 
possible relations between elements multiply in geometrical progression 
with the rise in the number of elements and thus the growth of the sys-
tem. Since there are drastic limits to the real connectivity of elements, this 
mathematical law imposes the selective interconnection of elements even 
at very low magnitudes. From this point of view, the “form” of complexity 
is the boundary to orders in which it is still possible to connect every ele-
ment with every other element at any time. Everything that goes beyond 
this is based on selection, thus generating contingent states (states other-
wise possible). All recognizable order is based on a complexity that dem-
onstrates that things could be otherwise.177
If for the purposes of societal theory we assume the individual com-
munication to be an element, connectivity is clearly extremely restricted: 
a sentence can refer to only very few other sentences.178 Over and above 
the improbabilities apparent in mathematical abstraction, highly evolved 
systems have drastically to limit the connectivity of their elements and 
must therefore invent something to compensate the concomitant losses in 
relationization.
For evolution evidently does not halt the growth of systems at the 
point from which it is no longer possible to connect every element with 
every other element at any time and then to monitor every disturbance 
from outside throughout the system.179 It is this analysis that brings us to 
the problem that makes the unfolding of the complexity paradox produc-
tive. The key distinction is now between systems with complete intercon-
nection between elements and those with only selective interconnection; 
and the real systems of the evolved world are obviously to be found on 
the latter side of the distinction. In brief, the form of complexity is hence 

 
  Society as a Social System
the necessity to sustain an only selective connection between elements, in other 
words, the selective organization of the system’s autopoiesis.
The concept of complexity can be used as a tool for observing and 
describing all sorts of things as long as the observer is in a position to 
distinguish between elements and relations in the state of affairs he calls 
complex. They need not be systems. The world, too, is complex. Nor does 
the concept assume that a complex matter is complex in only one way. 
Various descriptions of complexity are possible depending on how the 
observer resolves the unity of a manifold into elements and relations. Fi-
nally, a system can also describe itself as complex in various ways.180 This 
follows alone from the paradoxical nature of the concept; but also from 
the fact that an observer can describe the complexity descriptions of an-
other observer, so that hypercomplex systems can come into being that 
also contain a plurality of complexity descriptions; and it should be clear 
that hypercomplexity is an autological concept. Only if we take formal 
conceptuality to such lengths can we recognize that, and why, the theory 
of society needs the concept of complexity.
Finally, there have been recent developments in the conceptuality 
of complexity, which, limiting attention to systems, emphasize their in-
evitable intransparency. It is a question of how time is taken into ac-
count. Even the classical theory of complex systems had taken the time 
dimension into consideration, describing complexity as, among other 
things, the sequential diversity of system states. We reach beyond this if 
we treat the elements to be connected themselves as point-in-time related 
entities, as events or operations.181 The theory of complexity then re-
quires recursive operations, in other words recursion to and anticipation 
of other, nonactual operations in the same system. It then no longer suf-
fices to represent system development as a decision tree or cascade; recur-
sion itself becomes a form in which the system enables boundaries to be 
drawn and structures to be formed.182 Dealing with complexity is there-
fore often described as a strategy without a fixed beginning and without a 
set goal.183 This means not least that the system sets in with all its own op-
erations at the point of its own historical state, hence operating one-off in 
each case and having artificially to build all repetitions into its own mode 
of operation.184 Certain redundancies can be inserted in proceedings, and 
they help the system to cope within itself. But this does not change the 
principle that what is produced as operation depends on a point in time 

Society as a Social System    
and is unpredictable.185 This means not least of all that communication 
can be registered only in retrospect, while observing that there is a future 
still to be decided.186 Resolved into the temporal dimension, complexity 
appears not only as a temporal sequence of different states but also as a 
simultaneity of already determined and still to be determined states.
Society is clearly an extreme case in the field covered by the concept 
of complexity. Extreme not because it is more complex than other sys-
tems (such as brains) but because the nature of its elementary operations, 
namely, communications, places considerable constraints on it. It is indeed 
astonishing that and how highly complex systems can be formed through 
operations of this type. For communication is extremely narrow-gauged 
and must rely on sequencing for interconnection. It hence requires a great 
deal of time, which always threatens it with deterioration. We shall be 
continually concerned with the structural consequences of this initial situ-
ation, that is, with forms that prove their worth especially in connection 
with the dissemination media of writing and printing, with the problems 
of concatenation and ramification, and the advantages of system differenti-
ation. At present, we are considering only the general form that has devel-
oped because the system of society has to operate under these constraints 
if it is to evolve. We see two closely related solutions to the problem: (1) a 
very high measure of self-reference in operations, and (2) the representa-
tion of complexity in the form of meaning.
The recursivity of societal autopoiesis is organized neither through 
causal results (outputs as inputs) nor in the form of results of mathematical 
operations but reflexively, that is to say, through the application of com-
munication to communication.187 Every communication exposes itself to 
query, to doubt, to acceptance or rejection and anticipates this. Every com-
munication! Without exception. If attempts to communicate try to escape 
this form of reflexive recursivity, they fail as communication; they are not 
recognized as such. This answer to the complexity problem implies the ine-
liminable nonfinality of communication. No one has the last word (there 
are, of course, ways to make people stop talking). It also means that the 
representation of the complexity of the system and its environment within 
the system can remain open as a phenomenon still to be clarified.188 More-
over, it means that communication has to claim authority in the sense of 
an ability to say, explain, and justify more than appears expedient at the 
given time.

 
  Society as a Social System
The reflexive solution to the problem of sequential recursivity con-
verges with the most important evolutionary achievement that makes societal 
communications possible in the first place—we can speak of co-­evolution—
namely, the representation of complexity in the form of meaning.
Here, too, form means distinguishing two sides. We have already dis-
cussed the two sides of the meaning form (§ 3). They are reality and possi­
bility; or, looking ahead to their operational use, actuality and potentiality. 
It is this distinction that makes it possible to represent the selective con-
straints of complexity (the one side; the other being the complete relation-
ization of elements) in meaning-processing systems. Every actualization 
of meaning potentializes other possibilities.189 Whoever experiences some-
thing determinate is referred by this determinacy to other matters that he 
can also either actualize or merely potentialize. This makes the selectivity 
(or, in modal-theoretical terms, the contingency) of all operations an inevi-
table necessity, the necessity of this form of autopoiesis.
The whole world is thus present at every moment; not as plenitudo 
entis [fullness of being], however, but as the difference between actualized 
meaning and the possibilities accessible thence. The world is always pres-
ent simultaneously; at the same time the form in which this occurs is geared 
to sequential processing. All other forms that can guide observation and 
description in such systems participate in this meaning form; for, as we 
have seen, they presuppose the form as a two-sided form in which both 
sides are simultaneously given, but, as we can now assert, the one in actual-
ized, the other in potentialized mode. Time is needed to pass from one side 
of the form to the other (to cross the boundary), just as we always need 
time if we wish to actualize potentialities.
As with distinctions in general, the repetition of an operation also 
has a double effect in the context of the meaning-imparting distinction 
between actuality and potentiality. On the one hand, it creates and con-
denses identity; the repetition recognizes itself as repetition and makes 
what it has repeated available as knowledge. On the other hand, this takes 
place in a somewhat different context (at least later in time).190 Meaning 
is accordingly enriched through suitability for use in various situations. As 
a result, meaning gains surplus reference and, strictly speaking, is indefin-
able. We can only invent new denotations (words, names, “definitions”) 
to ensure operational reuse. Ultimately every meaning refers to the world, 
making it inevitable that operations are generated as selections.

Society as a Social System    
If we speak of “reducing complexity,” following Kenneth Burke or 
Jerome Bruner,191 we cannot mean by this a sort of annihilation.192 It is 
merely a matter of operating in the context of complexity, of a continuous 
shift from actual to potential. And even at a more complex level, this can 
mean that certain complex descriptions (for instance, of the system or its 
environment) can fail to do justice to the complexity of their object, reduc-
ing it to the simplified form of a model, a text, a map.
The conclusion to be drawn from all this for the scientific treatment 
of complexity is that idealization or the simplification of model building 
do not suffice. Such proceedings misunderstand complexity as complica-
tion. Nor do classical anthropomorphisms based on assumptions about the 
“human being” suffice, which understand meaning “subjectively.” These 
approaches can, however, be replaced by a methodology of second-order 
observation. We hence abandon the idea of making complexity transpar-
ent and intelligible, while retaining the option of asking how it is observed. 
The first question is always who the observer is whom we observe (without 
an observer there is no complexity). The observer is defined by the schema 
on which he bases his observations, and thus on the distinctions he uses. 
The concept of observer thus brings together the traditional notions of 
subject and of ideas or concepts. And the autology on which second-order 
observation is based, namely, the insight that this, too, is only observation, 
guarantees the cognitive closure of this treatment of complexity. There is 
neither recourse to external guarantees nor is it needed.
10. World Society
The consequence of defining society as the comprehensive social sys-
tem is that there can be only one system of society for all connective com-
munication. In purely factual terms, a number of societal systems may well 
exist, just as one used to speak of a plurality of worlds; but only in the ab-
sence of communicative links between these societies or, from the point of 
view of the individual society, where communication with others is impos-
sible or without consequence.
In this regard, too, our concept both continues and discontinues 
the old European tradition. The concept of the inclusion of all other so-
cial systems stems from this tradition, as do characteristics such as autar-
chy, self-sufficiency, and autonomy. However, a closer look soon reveals 

 
  Society as a Social System
that the meaning of these concepts in the traditional context differs from 
that in our present context. City systems in antiquity were considered 
­autarchic in that they offered people everything needed to perfect the con-
duct of their lives. As one would later say in Italy, the civitas had to be in 
a position to guarantee, no more no less, the bene e virtuose vivere. There 
had been discussion since the Middle Ages about the extent to which 
larger territories, regna, were necessary—be it for reasons of security or the 
endogamous marriage practices of the nobility.193 In any case, there was 
never any suggestion that all communication had to take place within this 
one civitas sive societas civilis; and the old European tradition naturally did 
not think in terms of economic independence. Indeed, the very concept 
of economy in the modern sense was unknown.
These societies accordingly had a thing-centered concept of the world, 
in which things could be classified by name, type, and kind. The world was 
considered an aggregatio corporum, a huge, visible living being embracing all 
other living beings.194 There were mortal and immortal living beings, hu-
mans and animals, cities and countries; and it was reputed (without any 
direct communicative checks) that in far-off places fabled creatures and mon-
sters existed outside the typology known to society, which in their strange-
ness functioned, so to speak, as wild cards for what lay beyond the frontier.
This world order assumed that as spatial distance increased, commu-
nication became more difficult and uncertain. Although far-ranging trade 
relations had existed even before the advent of advanced civilizations, they 
had little communicative effect. Technology was passed on from society to 
society (e.g., metalworking) and it was also possible to diffuse knowledge 
in accordance with the receptive capacity of second and third recipients.195 
Technologies and forms of knowledge often matured only in the process 
of adjusting to conditions for adoption (e.g., phonetic script). All in all, 
however, these processes took a long time and, although they finally found 
a response in the universalization of individual religions, they failed to pro-
duce a notion of a regionally unbounded world society. Knowledge about 
distant parts of the world remained sporadic; it was spread by people and 
obviously amplified and distorted rumor-like by reports of reports. Armed 
conflicts—and certainly not communicative coordination—appear to 
have been primarily responsible for the world beyond the borders being 
described as a plurality of nations.196 And until well into the modern age, 
political empires built as communication improved faced the problem of 

Society as a Social System    
how to rule over a large territory from the center, in other words, how to 
control it through communication.197 This experience is probably at the 
origin of the tendency we have described to identify societies with political 
territories and hence in regional terms.
The concept of God was a last chance of saving the thing-centered 
concept of the world. He was posited, as it were, as a duplicate of the 
world,198 defined as a person for the functions of second-order observation. 
The attempt could then be made to observe God in the world and on the 
basis of the world, and to observe Him as observer of the world. Although 
this produced the paradox of docta ignorantia, learned ignorance, divine 
revelation offered an escape; and, incidentally, this absorption of paradox 
sufficed to form a world free of paradox in an ontologically logical sense, 
accessible for sin-laden, contracted, finite cognition and action.
As long as the world was understood in terms of things—as the total-
ity of things or as creation—everything that remained unaccountable had 
to be provided for in the world, as an object of admiratio: as a miracle, a 
secret, a mystery, an occasion for terror and dismay or for helpless piety.199 
This changes when the world has only one horizon, only the other side of 
every definition. This conception of the world was attained at the latest in 
the philosophy of transcendental consciousness.200 The mystery can then 
be replaced by the distinction between marked and unmarked in the every-
day usage of observers without the possibility of summing the totality of 
what is marked, let alone of equating it with what is unmarked. The world 
of modern society is a background indeterminacy (“unmarked space”) that 
allows objects to appear and subjects to act.201 But how did this change of 
mind come about? How can it be explained sociologically?
Presumably, the full discovery of the globe as a closed sphere of mean-
ingful communication was the decisive factor. Older societies had had to 
take account of boundaries set by things themselves, while simultaneously 
indulging in observations and communication that could transcend these 
boundaries and address admirabilia in every sense. Since the sixteenth cen-
tury, these conditions have changed gradually and finally irreversibly. Start-
ing from Europe, the entire globe was “discovered” and by stages colonized 
or integrated into regular communicative relations. Since the second half 
of the nineteenth century, there has also been a uniform world time. This 
means that anywhere on Earth, regardless of local time, we can establish si-
multaneity with all other places and communicate worldwide without loss 

 
  Society as a Social System
of time. Like the constancy of the speed of light in physics, world time in 
society guarantees the convertibility of all temporal perspectives: what is 
earlier or later in one place is also earlier or later elsewhere. Society simi-
larly adapted to differentiation into functional ­systems. This eliminated the 
possibility of defining the unity of a societal system in terms of territorial 
borders or members as opposed to nonmembers (e.g., Christians as op-
posed to heathens).202 For functional systems like the economy or science, 
politics or education, medical care or law have their own requirements in 
setting their boundaries, which can no longer be concretely integrated with 
a given space or group of human beings.
The final, irrefutable evidence in favor of world society is the adapta-
tion of time semantics to the past/future schema and, within this schema, the 
shift in primary orientation from past (identity) to future (contingency).203 
With regard to its origins and traditions, world society still appears to be 
regionally strongly differentiated. If we look to the future, however, there 
can be little doubt that world society has to negotiate its fate itself—in eco-
logical and economic respects and as regards technology. The differences 
between functional systems are of interest for their future consequences.
Where all functional systems agree, where they do not differ, is only 
in the fact of communicative operation.204 In abstract terms—to repeat the 
paradoxical formulation—communication is the difference that makes no 
difference in the system. As a communication system, society differs from its 
environment; but the boundary is external, not internal. For all subsystems 
of society, boundaries of communication (as opposed to noncommunica-
tion) constitute the external boundaries of society. In this, and only in this, 
do these systems coincide. All internal differentiation must and can connect 
at this external boundary by establishing different codes and programs for 
individual subsystems. In so far as they communicate, all subsystems partic-
ipate in society. Insofar as they communicate in different ways, they differ.
If we proceed on the assumption that communication is the ele-
mentary operation whose reproduction constitutes society, world society 
is clearly implied in every communication, regardless of the specific topic 
and spatial distance between participants. More and more possibilities for 
communication are taken for granted, and symbolic media are used that 
cannot be contained within regional boundaries.205 This is also true of the 
conditions under which territorial boundaries are spoken about.206 For on 
the other side of every border, there are countries with borders, which in 

Society as a Social System    
turn have another side to them. This is naturally “only” a theoretical argu-
ment, which would not apply in another conceptual field. But the reality 
content of such “map awareness” is nevertheless strong, for there is now 
unlikely to be any successful communication that calls the fact of borders 
behind borders into doubt. World society is the occurrence of world in 
communication.
Apart from minimal uncertainties (e.g., doubts about whether per-
ceivable behavior is meant as an utterance or not), the boundaries of the 
societal system are clearly and unambiguously drawn by the operation of 
communication. Ambivalence continues to be possible and is cultivated 
(e.g., in the forms of rhetorical paradoxization, humor, or irony), but it is 
treated as a discretionary mode of expression liable to be called to account 
and subject to query. The definiteness of the external boundary (= the dis-
tinguishability of communication and noncommunication) enables the op-
erational closure of the world societal system, and thus generates an internal 
indeterminacy of open communication possibilities no longer decided by 
the environment, possibilities that can be given shape only through the sys-
tem’s own resources, only through self-organization. Moreover, since the 
advent of printing, the communication network of society has multiplied 
and intensified enormously—gradually at first and finally with irreversible 
effect. In principle, society today does not depend on the increase or de-
cline of the population. At any rate, sufficient capacities are available to 
continue the autopoiesis of the societal system at the development level 
achieved. And as soon as we become aware of this, we can start describ-
ing demographic growth not as a blessing but as a problem, if not a curse.
Finally, all functional systems were adapted operationally to second-
order observation, to the observation of observers relating to the given 
intrasystemic perspectives of the distinction between system and envi-
ronment. Society thus loses the possibility of a binding representation of 
the world. The concomitant acknowledgement of cultural diversity—for 
which purpose the reflexive concept of culture (culture that reflects cul-
ture) was introduced in the late eighteenth century—requires abandon-
ment of the thing-oriented concept of the world.207 It has been replaced by 
the assumption of an unobservable world. Everything depends on which 
observer we observe, and the recursive reuse of observations in observing 
produces only an unobservable unity—the total world as formula for the 
unity of all distinctions.

 
  Society as a Social System
What is more, new communication technologies, especially tele­
vision, have effects that can scarcely be overestimated. They trivialize, 
we could say, the place from which we see things. What we see on tele­
vision takes place elsewhere and nonetheless almost simultaneously (at any 
rate, independently of the time we would require to reach the place where 
events could be directly experienced). But this trivialization of location 
provokes no doubt about the reality of events, which is guaranteed in 
a purely temporal sense by the real-time correspondence of filming and 
events (nothing can be filmed before it happens or after it has happened), 
notwithstanding scheduled time lapses between filming and transmission 
and the selective combination of simultaneous takes. In other respects, 
too, we can assume that, thanks to greater freedom of movement and 
higher speeds, there has been a shift in reference from place to movement. 
Notions about the world as the framework for the accessibility of percep-
tion and communication adapt accordingly.
This in turn depends on the convertibility of local time. Since the 
nineteenth century, the division of the globe into time zones has made it 
possible to assume the simultaneity of events in the world without them 
being anchored in the physical setting of day and night time, even when 
communication about them reaches a place at night while it is day else-
where. This is followed by the temporalization of the difference between 
present and absent. Across the globe, we can take part in simultaneous 
events and produce simultaneity through communication even where 
what is concerned is out of reach for interaction and perception. In this 
sense, only the past or the future is absent per se.
These structural shifts change the concept of world. The old world 
had debated whether the world was finite or infinite and whether it had 
a beginning and would have an end. This controversy was both inevita-
ble and undecidable, because it is not possible to conceive of a boundary 
without conceiving of another side to the boundary.208 The change is not 
in this dimension. In present-day thinking, the world is neither a beauti-
ful living being nor an aggregatio corporum. Nor is it the universitas rerum, 
the totality of visible and invisible objects, things, and ideas. Nor, finally, 
is it infinity to be filled, absolute space or absolute time. It is not an entity 
that “contains” everything and therefore “lasts.” All these descriptions and 
many more are provided by the world. The world itself is only the overall 
horizon of all meaningful experience, whether directed inward or outward 

Society as a Social System    
and forward in time or backward. It is not closed off by boundaries but by 
the meaning that can be activated within it. The world is to be understood 
not as an aggregate but a correlate of the operations taking place in it.209 
Once again drawing on George Spencer-Brown’s terminology, it is the cor-
relate to the unity of every form; or the “unmarked state” that is violated 
by every interruption, by the boundary line of the form, which can then 
be probed only in relation to difference, only in movement from one side 
of the distinction to the other.210 And for a systems-theoretical concept of 
the world, this means that the world is the totality of what constitutes sys-
tem and environment for each system.
The old world was full of unfathomable “secrets,” indeed, like the 
nature of things and the will of God, it was itself a mystery and made not, 
or only to a very limited extent, to be known but rather for astonished ad-
miration. Even naming had to be considered dangerous because it opened 
up the world to communication; a knowledge of names was accordingly 
associated with the magic that provokes nature to emerge. This, too, was 
in keeping with the spatial limitations to an understanding of society for 
which the unknown and unfamiliar could begin a few yards underground 
or on the summits of the highest mountains or beyond the horizon at sea. 
The modern world is no longer to be honored and feared as a mystery. And 
in this sense, it is no longer sacred. Nevertheless, it remains inaccessible, 
because, although operationally accessible (e.g., amenable in principle to 
investigation), every operation of cognizance and communication is inac-
cessible to itself. Observation is possible in the world. In this operation, 
however, the observer himself functions as the excluded middle. The unity 
of the world is therefore not a mystery but a paradox. It is the paradox of 
the observer of the world who is in the world but who cannot observe him-
self observing.
This appears to have eliminated a premise that had been rashly ac-
cepted in the old world. Namely, that the world was determinable for all 
observers of the same world, and that it was determinable through ob-
servation. The remaining problematic state of affairs was unloaded onto 
religion, which was expected to explain the transformation of indeter-
minability into determinability. As soon as we problematize the relation 
of observation to the world, this meta-unity of unity (sameness for all) 
and determinability dissolves, and the contrary assumption becomes more 
plausible. If the world is the same for all observers (for every choice of a 

 
  Society as a Social System
distinction), it is indeterminable. If it is determinable, it is not the same for 
all observers, because determination requires distinctions to be drawn. For 
this very reason it is essential to ask whether and how the system of society 
connects observation in such a way that the autopoiesis of communication 
remains possible even though the world has to be presupposed—be it as 
indeterminable, be it as variously determinable. Society thus becomes the 
primordial relation of observation to the world.
As a far-reaching debate on “relativism” and “pluralism” has shown, 
it is difficult to draw conclusions from this state of affairs for the theory of 
knowledge. It is even conceded that all societies, cultures, and so on, pro-
duce a “world of their own,” and that the social sciences have to accept this. 
But then the location of the observer who accepts pluralism still needs to 
be clarified. We can hardly describe him, in succession to God, as a world-
less observer or “freely floating” intelligence. A theory of cognition must 
therefore be found that allows him to be localized as the observer of other 
observers in the world although all observers, including him, produce dif­
ferent projections of the world. There can therefore be no pluralistic ­ethics, 
or, if so, then only as the paradox of a demand that allows no alternatives 
to itself.211 We can accordingly not assume that the world is a “whole” that 
is divided into “parts.” It is rather an incomprehensible unity that can be 
observed in various ways, and only in various ways. Its “decomposition” is 
not to be found, it can only be constructed, and this requires distinctions 
to be chosen.212 Radical constructivism takes this into account by assum-
ing that the world cannot be described and by shifting the business of self-
observation of the world to the level of second-order observation.
All this is connoted when we refer to modern society as world so-
ciety. On the one hand, this means that there can be only one society on 
earth and even in the entire communicatively accessible world. This is the 
structural and operational side of the concept. At the same time, however, 
the expression “world society” means that all societies (including, retro-
spectively, societies in the traditional view) construct a world, thus resolv-
ing the paradox of the world observer. The possible semantics must be 
plausible and fit the structures of the societal system. The semantics of the 
world varies with the structural evolution of the societal system; but seeing 
and saying this belongs to the world of our society, is its theory and its con-
struction of history. And we can only observe that the old societies could 
not observe themselves and their world in this manner.

Society as a Social System    
With its particular characteristics, the modern world is an exact cor-
relate of modern society. A society describing itself as nature and consist-
ing of human beings was matched by a world consisting of things (in the 
sense of Latin res). A society describing itself as an operationally closed com-
munication system, and that grows or shrinks depending on how much is 
communicated, is matched by a world with precisely the same characteris-
tics: a world that grows or shrinks depending on what occurs. Older societ-
ies were organized hierarchically and in function of the distinction between 
center and periphery. This was in keeping with their world order, which 
provided for an order of rank (series rerum) and a center. Modern soci-
ety’s form of differentiation requires these structural principles to be aban-
doned, so that this society has a heterarchical world and an acentric world. 
Its world is a correlate to the networking of operations and is equally acces-
sible from every operation. Owing to their form of differentiation, older 
societies provided for the fixed inclusion of human beings in certain social 
positions. They were therefore obliged to understand the world as a totality 
of things. Its functional differentiation has obliged modern society to give 
up this notion of inclusion. The individualism of modern times, and above 
all the freedom discourses of the nineteenth century, hence gave urgent oc-
casion to develop a notion of world society.213 Functional differentiation 
has affected the concept of world even independently of this development. 
Modern society regulates its own extent, the modern world as well. Mod-
ern society can only change itself and is therefore prone to constant self-cri-
tique. It is a self-substitutive order; the modern world, likewise. It, too, can 
change only in the world. The semantics of ­modernity/­modernization is 
one of the most important indicators of this—not as a convergence ­thesis, 
but because it allows the regions of world society to be described as more or 
less modernized (developed), and through this distinction enables a com-
plete description with possibly changing markings. Nothing is not more 
or less modern. And if society consists of the totality of communications, 
the rest of the world is condemned to uncommunicativeness. It withdraws 
into silence. Not even this is a suitable concept, for to remain silent one 
must be capable of communicating.
And where does this leave God? In parallel to the development of 
society, the figure of “communication through or with God” has steadily 
weakened; today, divine communication is represented only as a histori-
cal, textually tangible fact, as revelation given once and for all time. We 

 
  Society as a Social System
can only guess at the degree of adaptability religion forfeits with the loss of 
this figure without any prospect of asking God to comment on modernity.
Despite the incontestable worldwide interconnections in modern so-
ciety, sociology persists in its refusal to recognize this global system as soci-
ety. Sociologists habitually refer, as in everyday speech, to “Italian society,” 
“Spanish society,” and so on, although names such as “Italy” or “Spain” 
should not be used in a theory, if only for methodological reasons. ­Talcott 
Parsons gave the well-considered title The System of Modern Societies to one 
of his publications.214 Although Immanuel Wallerstein uses the term “world-
system,” he means a system of interaction between different regional societ-
ies, also with reference to modernity.215 In particular, authors who attribute a 
central role to the modern state in societal theory (why ever?) refuse on these 
grounds to recognize the global system as society.216 The phenomenon of 
modern society is then relegated to the figure of “response to globalities.”217 I 
have already spoken about this fixation as one of the current epistemological 
obstacles to a theory of society. Political scientists, too, general speak only of 
“inter­national relations” or the “international system,”218 thus focusing pri-
marily on the nation-state; if they exceptionally refer to world society they 
mean a system that is differentiated segmentarily into nation-states and not 
functionally differentiated into various functional systems.219 On the other 
hand, it is difficult to deny that, setting aside all regional specificities and 
all differences in political ideology, what we mean when we speak of “state” 
schools, and so on, is predetermined by modern worldwide “culture.”220
If we ask why a regional concept of society is retained, the response 
is generally to point to the drastic differences between regions in their state 
of development. Neither this fact nor its importance are to be denied. A 
closer look, however, shows that sociology has fallen victim to an artifact 
of its comparative methodology. Comparison at the regional level will un-
derstandably reveal regional differences, which will increase in the course 
of time. If, in contrast, we undertake a historical comparison, congruent 
trends will be discovered such as the worldwide dissolution of family econ-
omies in all strata, the worldwide dependence of lifestyles on technology, 
worldwide, unprecedented imbalances in demographic development. The 
functional differentiation of society also has so strong a hold on world so-
ciety that it cannot be regionally boycotted by even the most drastic of 
political and organizational means. This has been demonstrated most con-
spicuously by the collapse of the Soviet empire.221

Society as a Social System    
Depending on the comparative perspective adopted, we can throw 
light on divergence or similarities in regional development. This discrep-
ancy cannot be resolved methodologically, and we must know that we re-
produce it with our choice of comparative perspective. For this very reason, 
a theory must be sought that is compatible with such differences and that 
can interpret them. Such a theory will not claim that regional differences 
are gradually disappearing (convergence thesis), for there is too little indi-
cation that this is so.222 On the other hand, the assumption of a world so-
ciety is not refuted. The dissimilarity argument speaks not against but for 
world society. The interest in development, like the interest in maintaining 
the cultural diversity of individual countries, is itself shaped by society, and 
this is particularly evident when we consider the typically modern paradox 
of simultaneously striving for change and conservation. Turning again to 
Spencer-Brown’s concept of form, we can also say that development is a 
form whose one side (according to current understanding) consists in in-
dustrialization and whose other side consists in underdevelopment.
It is the differing state of development in the various parts of the globe 
that a theory of society needs to explain, and this explanation cannot follow 
the “plurality of nations” pattern offered for thousands of years. The point of 
departure must be the unity of the system of society that produces these dif-
ferences. For example, if we compare modern society with traditional soci-
eties, we note a trend toward transferring educational and training processes 
to schools and universities and toward using these institutions as centers to 
promote careers and life opportunities.223 However, this new mobility allows 
regional differences to intensify inequalities.224 And museums or museumi-
fied knowledge are now everywhere considered the context within which 
and against which new art has to assert its newness. At the same time, the 
idea of the universal museum has failed, and the contexts that permit nov-
elty to be seen in functional equivalence are reinvented over and over again 
in innumerable, also regional, refractions. Only the opus/context structure 
has become established in the world society perspective, but precisely this 
structure now permits contexts to be differentiated that offer varying pos-
sibilities for expressing various innovations. The extent to which individual 
regions share in the advantages and disadvantages of functional differentia-
tion clearly varies greatly, and where disadvantages are involved, differenti-
ated functional systems such as politics and the economy already appear to 
obstruct one another. But this does not justify positing the existence of dif-

 
  Society as a Social System
ferent regional societies; for it is the very logic of functional differentiation 
and comparison not with other societies but with the advantages of fully re-
alizing functional differentiation that brings these problems to light.
A glance at the methodology of functional comparison also justi-
fies taking the system of world society as our point of departure. If we as-
sume the existence of regional societies, we shall get no further than listing 
and compiling their specificities. We shall be able to show different cul-
tural traditions, geographical peculiarities, natural resources, demographic 
characteristics, and so on, in comparing countries on the basis of these 
rather descriptive categories. If, in contrast, we take world society and its 
functional differentiation as our starting point, we find pointers for the 
problems confronting individual regions. We are better able to see and es-
pecially to explain why certain regional data make a difference and why 
given differences grow or diminish depending on how they interconnect 
with world-societal givens. This will certainly not result in linear causal at-
tributions, which systems theory has long since considered obsolete.225 But 
it will give us a better understanding of surprising, unpredictable, nonlin-
ear causalities, such as “dissipative structures,” “deviation-amplifying ef-
fects,” the disappearance of initially significant differences, and, vice versa, 
the substantial effects of minimal differences, not least the random factor 
of regional “policies.” Problems for comparison can naturally also be for-
mulated in abstract terms, and systems theory is known for taking such 
initiative. In examining a system as complex as modern society, however, 
it is of considerable advantage to work with empirically saturated problem 
concepts even at the level of the overall system, for example, in investigat-
ing how the central machinery of the modern state can be introduced into 
regions divided on ethnic, religious, or tribal lines; or whether and how 
jobs can be saved under global economic conditions in regions with high 
consumption and correspondingly high wage expectations; or what insti-
tutions of the science system promote the internationalization of research 
topics in the absence of global research facilities.226
From the standpoint of this conceptuality and this comparative meth-
odology, to continue arguing in species-theoretical terms, to make the attri-
bution of individual countries to a society conditional on the “similarity” 
of prevailing living conditions is obsolete thinking. It would be useful only 
if the “nature of the thing” offered the corresponding criteria and imposed 
the conceptuality. No one today would accept this precondition. Theory 

Society as a Social System    
must then take account of the consequences. The modernity of society lies 
not in its characteristics but in its forms; that is to say, in the distinctions it 
uses to direct its communicative operations. And typical modern concepts 
of concern such as development or culture draw attention to quite specific 
distinctions (and, as we can say on the basis of the theory of observation, 
without seeing that we then do not see what we cannot see in this way). 
It is not surprising that certain differences are brought to the fore while 
­others remain invisible. At the level of distinguishing between distinctions 
(or observing observations) the process remains contingent. But every soci-
ety conceals its contingencies from itself, and modern society—albeit with 
less self-assurance because with less tradition—conceals the contingencies 
of development and culture from itself. Instead, it observes itself and con-
cerns itself in the context of the preferred distinctions.
In premodern society, far-reaching interregional contacts involved a 
few family households, either from the nobility or from a few major trad-
ing houses. Trade dealt above all in “prestige goods,” which demonstrated 
and intensified stratificatory differentiation. In this fashion, the external 
contact of regional societies was linked to their internal differentiation. 
This differentiation was based, first, on the segmentary differentiation of 
family households, and, second, on their classification, be it in terms of 
stratification, urban/rural differences, or occupations. This made it possible 
to single out certain households for cross-border contacts. In today’s soci-
ety, interregionality is based on the operation of or cooperation between 
organizations, especially in business, the mass media, politics, science, and 
transport. The economy is closely interlinked worldwide not only through 
its markets (financial markets, commodity and product markets, and in-
creasingly even labor markets): it also increasingly creates organizations that 
operate worldwide, seeking to profit from the differences that exist.227 Even 
mass tourism is organized. At first glance, intellectuals could appear to be 
an exception; but what would they be and who would know their names 
without the mass media? Organizations, too, are differentiated social sys-
tems—we shall be coming back to this—but with their intrinsic dynamics 
they permeate the functional systems of society. They evolve in function of 
the need for decisions and the necessity of communicating decisions to set 
points of departure for further decisions. They place themselves between 
society and its functional systems on the one hand and face-to-face inter-
actions on the other. And they make worldwide interlinkage unavoidable 

 
  Society as a Social System
in all sectors of society. Since this occurs within society and against society, 
however, it is hardly possible to hold to a regional concept of society.
Even if no regional societies can exist under modern conditions, we 
could perhaps consider a regional differentiation of the world societal sys-
tem—as if society were divided into subsocieties. This, too, cannot stand 
up to closer examination. Primarily regional differentiation would contra-
dict the modern primacy of functional differentiation. It would come to 
naught because functional systems cannot be contained within uniform 
spatial boundaries applicable to all. Only the political system along with 
the legal system of modern society can be regionally differentiated in the 
form of states. All others operate independently of spatial boundaries. The 
very definiteness of spatial boundaries shows that they are respected by nei-
ther verities nor diseases, neither education nor television, neither love nor 
money (if borrowing requirements are also taken into account). In other 
words, the total phenomenon of the comprehensive system society cannot 
be repeated within spatial bounds as a microcosm in a macrocosm. The 
importance of spatial boundaries lies in the interdependencies between the 
political system and the legal system, on the one hand, and the other func-
tional systems, on the other. They take effect via the influence of differences 
in currency rates and central bank systems on the economy, via educational 
qualifications on education and on occupational regulations. Such differ-
ences can very well be understood in the context of a world society and be 
intensified or weakened by political means. But we would misjudge their 
specificity if we were to see them as differences between regional societies 
or as the result of regional differentiation of the societal system.
Only if we proceed on the assumption of a societal system that em-
braces the entire world can we explain that there are still regional differ-
ences today, and especially today (and much more so than in times of 
archaic tribal societies), but that they do not take the form of system dif-
ferentiation. They are to be explained by differences in the involvement 
in and reaction to the dominant structures of the world system of society. 
They vary greatly from region to region and cannot be dealt with in detail 
in the present context. Nevertheless, certain general points can at least be 
mentioned for future investigation.
(1) As modernization in the sense of the diversification of needs proceeds, 
regions become dependent on the world economic system for production 
and sales, labor and financing.

Society as a Social System    
(2) Under the regime of functional systems, rational modes of selection in 
particular enhance variance (rather than equality). Whoever has money 
or an income can borrow more easily. Small differences in performance 
in the early stages of schooling grow as education proceeds. In centers 
of scientific research, whoever does not work with state-of-the-art infor-
mation facilities is left behind and can at best take belated cognizance 
of what has been done elsewhere. The Nobel prizes in the sciences show 
a marked regional distribution. The result is a center-periphery pattern, 
which, however, need not necessarily remain stable; the focus can shift.228 
This invention or reconstruction of a tradition of one’s own is a world 
societal phenomenon that reacts to modern possibilities of comparison.229
(3) The sharp opposition between traditional and modern societies has 
had to be abandoned. There are various conditions under which tradi-
tion-bound structures have a favorable effect in the transition to modern 
society. World society selects from tradition, so to speak, what benefits 
it in such fields as stratification, organization, work ethics, or religion.230 
Hardly any autochthonous ways of life are still extant; what we do find 
are states that can be explained in terms of differential effects arising from 
the meeting of world-societal structural requirements and operations and 
special regional geographical and cultural conditions.
(4) Adaptation to the development status of world society through politi-
cally driven industrialization and the concomitant urbanization leads to 
the dissolution of old stratification structures based on landed property. 
Similarly, small-business family economies in both the agricultural and 
crafts sectors are dissolving worldwide into mobile money and mobile in-
dividuals. They are (temporarily?) replaced by a sharp inclusion/exclusion 
difference with corresponding impoverishment among large sections of 
the population; the state becomes a mechanism for perpetuating this dif-
ference, especially in pursuit of development policy that seeks to seal a 
country off from the world economy.231
(5) This inclusion/exclusion difference has serious effects, first, because 
it is provoked by the functional differentiation of world society, and, 
second, because it hampers, if not prevents, the regional establishment 
of  conditions for functional differentiation. It presents the develop-
ment of sufficiently big and differentiated regional markets as the precon-

 
  Society as a Social System
dition for ­market-oriented mass production, making peripheral countries 
so dependent on exports that their economies suffer considerable fluc-
tuation. Furthermore, it results in wide sections of the population being 
denied inclusion in the legal system, so that the legal/illegal code of the 
legal system cannot be enforced or can be enforced only to a very lim-
ited extent. We can accordingly not rely on legal programs (legislation, 
including constitutional law) to really regulate the attribution of right 
and wrong, even though they naturally do so to a substantial extent—
but then on the basis of the inclusion/exclusion difference.232 In all, this 
means that money and the law are formative resources in politics only 
in a very limited (and often “corrupt”) sense. People find it correspond-
ingly difficult to prepare for the realities of life in the educational system 
of schools and universities. What they learn remains abstract and legiti-
mated largely by foreign models. This in turn transfers career recruitment 
to other mechanisms specific to certain strata or contact configurations. 
Traditional sociology still explains all this in terms of stratification; but 
stratification is a principle of social order, whereas the division of soci-
ety in terms of inclusion/exclusion, insofar as it is no more than a state 
of transition in political development, can breed turbulence of a nature 
quite different from that produced by efforts merely to achieve social 
advance, leveling, or redistribution.
(6) Differences in involvement in and dependence on the modernization of 
world society give impetus to seemingly anachronistic tendencies, especial-
ly in religion and the ethnic movements developing within nation-states. 
The universalism of functional systems operating in world society does not 
exclude a wide range of particularisms, indeed, it tends to encourage them. 
The ease with which world society changes structures is thus compensated 
for by longer-established and at any rate strongly demarcatory ties.
(7) There are, of course, still problems of intercultural communication, 
linguistic difficulties in understanding, and misunderstanding at the in-
teraction level. But this has nothing to do with the coming into being 
of a world society;233 they are to be expected in all cultural contacts. The 
hypothesis might, however, be defensible that the diversity of cultures to-
gether with the diversity of their ethnocentrisms can today be considered 
known and that problems of understanding are therefore less often attrib-
uted ethnocentrically to others.

Society as a Social System    
These arguments in favor of world society can be well substanti-
ated empirically. All that is lacking is a theory that could take them up 
and process them. The much discussed concept of the capitalist world sys-
tem elaborated by Immanuel Wallerstein assumes the primacy of the cap-
italist economy,234 thus underestimating the contribution made by other 
functional systems, especially science, as well as communication through 
the mass media. This is not adequately corrected if, taking up a stratifi-
cation-oriented distinction from the nineteenth century, we play culture 
off against industry.235 Only in reviewing the widely differing globaliza-
tion tendencies in individual functional systems does the scale of change 
compared with all traditional societies become apparent. In view of such 
heterogeneous sources of “globalization,” a uniform concept of society is 
wanting. The systems-theoretical concept of society as an operationally 
closed, autopoietic social system that includes all other social systems, and 
hence all communication, seeks to fill this gap.
11. Demands on Rationality
The humanistic tradition of Europe gave a very specific form to the 
concept of rationality, and hence to the expectations addressed to it, and at 
the same time concealed the specificity of this form by a self-evidence that 
admitted no other way of thinking. According to this traditional notion, 
ratio was part of human nature. As a natural being, the human being was 
defined in distinction to the animal. Unlike today, the concept of nature 
included a normative component. A normative concept of rationality was 
thus grounded in a normative understanding of nature. In the Aristotelian 
context, nature was understood as a movement directed toward an end 
(telos), which, however, that did not necessarily ensure that this end would 
be attained. Until well into modern times, “history”—as opposed to “po-
etry”—was understood as a collection of facts and experiences that teach 
us what can go wrong. Translated into our conceptual language, telos was 
thus considered a two-sided form, namely, a state of rest, of satisfaction, of 
perfection, which could be attained or not. The opposite of perfection was 
corruption. The positive value of the natural state faced a negative value 
(sterēsis, privatio) that indicated a lack, a failure.
From a sociological point of view, it is no accident that this concept 
found exact correspondence in the nobility theories of the time and above 

 
  Society as a Social System
all in theories about the education of the nobility. People were noble by 
birth into a family of ancient wealth, and one had under all circumstances 
to avoid forfeiting one’s nobility through disgrace. But this alone was im-
perfect nobility. Perfection, the telos of nobility, was achieved only through 
special deserts, through the bene e virtuose vivere made possible by heredi-
tary nobility but not guaranteed.236 Education and moral instruction on 
personal conduct had the task of supporting the noble on his path to ra-
tional perfection and preserving him from the temptations of corruption. 
The noble was expected to invoke his ancestry only when he had proved 
his worth through his own achievements.
With all these aspects—later to be variously refined—elaborated for 
instruction and education, for ethics and rhetoric, the concept of natural 
rationality offered a stable tension. A continuum of rationality was accord-
ingly posited that could span all differences—even those between action 
and occurrence and between thinking and being. In retrospect, we can see 
that the tension between reality and rationality was absorbed and stabi-
lized in the teleological form and in the difference between perfection and 
corruption. The special problems of the nobility, with their double crite-
rion of birth and merit, were countered by distinguishing the differences 
between perfection/corruption and perfection/imperfection. The solution 
found was accompanied by the cantillations of ethics, knowing what to 
praise and what to blame, and leaving rhetoric to cope with the values 
thus lost. This made it possible to communicate paradoxically, so to speak, 
to establish one’s own intentions and attitudes on the good side of the 
world—and accordingly to imply that not everything was as good as it ap-
peared to be. But as always with paradoxical communication, the paradox 
itself was discounted in communication or treated in rhetoric as mere in-
tellectual training. The ambivalence and inconsistency of communication 
was consistently treated as incommunicable or relegated to the field of re-
ligion, where it could be dealt with as a problem of original sin and of the 
presumed degeneracy of this world.
In its structural conditions (noble society) and in its semantics, this 
world has passed away. However much we might admire bygone times, we 
have to accept this; for we live today. But if this is so, can we continue to 
adhere to a normative concept of reasonable rationality, as Jürgen Haber-
mas proposes? And if we can, what distinctions could serve to reformulate 
this concept of rationality?

Society as a Social System    
The unbroken faith in rationality showed first cracks in the seven-
teenth century. The old continuum of rational nature (well-ordered cre-
ation) fractured. The claims of rationality—and in this Descartes is the 
authority—were reduced to mental states, hence to subjects. This made it 
possible to understand purposes as notions of control, as corrections to the 
course of the world and consequently as deviations and no longer as perfect 
states in nature itself. For the first time, this made the choice of purpose 
(and no longer the means for fulfilling evident purposes) an acute prob-
lem. Soon a distinction was drawn between motives and purposes, motives 
(in contrast to interests) came to be regarded as inscrutable, and thought 
was given to the corresponding problems of communicating sincerity and 
of the criteria for authenticity. Not only the continuum of rational nature 
but also the continuum of the rational subject was thus split by a differ-
ence, namely, that between motive and purpose, so that further inquiry 
was concerned only with distinctions that breached the ­continuum of ra-
tionality. This dissolution of purposive rationality led initially to the con-
ception of other, better (more rational?) sorts of rationality—for instance, 
value rationality (disciplined by consequential considerations) or commu-
nicative rationality (disciplined by reasonable grounds). It has now reached 
the point where we have to admit that purposiveness can be judged only in 
relation to a given point in time.
We remain impressed by eighteenth-century efforts to reclaim ratio-
nality and to secure it as a guiding principle for the conduct of life. In the 
face of resistance—which tells us a great deal! The violations of the ratio-
nality continuum persisted. It was the century of the Enlightenment—
and of sentiment. The century of Newton—and of Münchhausen. The 
century of reason—and of history. And it came to an end with Hegel’s 
problem of bifurcation. Everywhere rationality was now the marked side 
of a form that had another side to it.237 More clearly than before, the in-
sistence on rationality became paradoxical communication, but this com-
munication continued to seal itself off, for there were no good arguments 
against rationality. Crossing the boundary to the other side of the form 
was treated as “cynicism.”
Further cracks had already begun to appear in the eighteenth cen-
tury, for example, in attempts at a theory of humor.238 Since the nine-
teenth century, continued reductions have relegated the rationality concept 
to subsystems of society, to either the economic calculation of utility rela-

 
  Society as a Social System
tions between means and ends (optimization) or the application of scien-
tifically established knowledge. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, 
finally, the rationality concept itself began to dissolve, permitting the de-
velopment of general skepticism toward it (Max Weber). This, too, took 
place by means of a differentiation technique. The rationality concept it-
self was divided, for example, along the lines of the old distinction between 
­poiesis and practice, into purposive rationality and value rationality or, be-
latedly echoed by Jürgen Habermas, into the rationality of strategic action 
and that of communicative action (monologistic versus dialogistic ratio-
nality).239 Thanks to the passing of other concepts of rationality, Haber-
mas could, even toward the end of the twentieth century, persist in the 
thesis that the theory of society and the theory of rationality are mutually 
dependent—“that every sociology with a claim to societal theory, if it pro-
ceeds radically enough, faces the problem of rationality both at the meta-­
theoretical, the methodological, and the empirical level.”240 Rationality is thus 
not only a problem of historical semantics but even today makes unreason-
able demands on the concept of society. The question that then fails to be 
raised, typically for nineteenth-century differentiation techniques (Hegel 
excepted), is that of the unity of the difference, the question of what is 
meant by rationality per se. Instead, a distinction is made only between 
rationality and irrationality, between consciousness and subconsciousness, 
between manifest and latent functions, once again without noticing that 
the question of the unity of each of the differences needs to be put.
Another distinction, now more widespread, is that between substan-
tive and procedural rationality.241 In the face of growing complexity and 
criterial uncertainty, we are told, one should switch from substantive to 
procedural rationality. This will not help much if by procedure we under-
stand a chain of means and ends. However, a set procedure has the advan-
tage that, despite an uncertain future, we can begin and as things develop 
orient ourselves retrospectively on the results already achieved.
I shall not, therefore, engage in a discussion of these various fractures 
of the old European rationality continuum but accept the development of 
rationality semantics as outlined to indicate that the societal system has 
changed so radically in the transition to modern times as to affect the 
under­standing of how reality relates to rationality. And just as the modern 
concept of world can be qualified neither as positive nor as negative because 
every qualification is an observable operation in the world, this can well 

Society as a Social System    
be said of modern society, too. This is precisely what the concept of auto­
poietic communication systems propounds for the purposes of science. For 
when applied to society, this concept means that all communication—ra-
tional, irrational, arational, by whatever criteria—continues the autopoiesis 
of society. This need not mean that we have to abandon any expectations of 
rationality and face reality bereft of criteria. The failure of the old European 
concept need not mean that the problem disappears; and the insufficiency 
of reconstructions to date can well be attributed to the transitory situation 
and the lack of an adequate theory of society. Even the natural sciences, 
even physics, no longer see any possibility of providing society with a basis 
for rational judgment in the form of assured knowledge.242
If the criteria for rationality are thus uncertain and this affects the 
concept of rationality, “pluralistic” solutions offer themselves. Setting crite-
ria (and not merely determining preferences in the sense of rational choice 
theory) then depends on the given observer, who describes behavior as ra-
tional or irrational. But this provides no stable solution; it merely dissolves 
the problem. Reestablishing the unity of the plurality of observers would 
require all to proceed rationally in accordance with their own criteria in 
determining their criteria of rationality (in utilitarianism, for example, to 
show the utility of utilitarianism itself). Today, however, we lack the logical 
and theoretical means for such reflexive loops—not to mention the prob-
lem of how they are to be handled in everyday life. At any rate, classical 
bivalent logic does not suffice for a more demanding concept of rationality 
capable of reacting to this situation.243 It would have to be able to include 
the observer who judges rationality, thus reformulating the problem at the 
level of second-order observation.
As always, our reaction in this situation can only be sharp abstraction. 
If we adopt the proposed difference-theoretical approach, the problem of 
rationality is likely to lie in the question of the unity of the distinction 
used. Optimization of the relationship between means and ends or con-
sensus between ego and alter, communicative rationality in Habermas’s 
sense, would then be no more than special cases of a more general prin-
ciple, and systems theory, too, with its form, with its distinction between 
system and environment could lay claim to rationality.
As the congruence of the social structure and semantics of traditional 
society dissolve and the associated plausibilities lose their binding force, a 
freer conceptuality becomes possible. The problem of rationality can be 

 
  Society as a Social System
put in more abstract terms. It can no longer be understood as orientation 
on the ways of life of a center or apex, and thus no longer as approxima-
tion to an idea or, with reference to some normative requirement, as fulfill-
ment or deviation. For the erosion of such ideal conceptuality also affects 
the counterconceptuality of an imperfect, corrupt, deviant, and resistant 
reality. The traditional form of rationality, that is to say, the distinction 
whose one side it marks, dissolves. Instead, the problem of the relation-
ship between reality and rationality becomes acute, because every cogni-
tive and every actional operation as observation requires a distinction in 
order to indicate the one (and not the other) side of the difference. It must 
use the distinction that guides its observation as a difference (and not as a 
unity, not in the undifferentiatedness of what has been differentiated, not 
in what is common to both sides). What it may not do is to proceed dia-
lectically in Hegel’s sense; it must exclude itself as observation from what 
it observes. The observer, regardless of the distinction he uses, becomes the 
excluded middle. But it is the observer, he alone, who with his autopoiesis 
guarantees the reality of his own operations and hence the reality of every-
thing that must be presupposed as world in the mode of simultaneity! The 
practice of indicative differentiation does not occur in the distinction. It 
cannot be indicated except by another distinction. It is the blind spot of 
observation and for this very reason the locus of its rationality.
There is no satisfactory solution to a problem thus posed. Nor does 
it help to draw once again on the distinction between thinking and being 
or that between subject and object. Theory cannot purge itself merely by 
treating its object, in this case, society, as paradoxical and thus, so to speak, 
eliminating the paradox in order to be rid of it. For all concepts with which 
theory analyzes its object (system, observation, blind spot, meaning, com-
munication, and so on) also apply to theory itself. The level of analysis on 
which the above inquiries have been operating imposes autological con-
clusions. But precisely because the problem of rationality is formulated as 
a paradox and because the communication of rationality is possible only 
as paradoxical communication, ways out, remedies can be found that can 
be regarded in this perspective as functionally rational. The problem of ra-
tionality is split by reference to a fundamental paradox. Because paradox 
leads to nothing but itself, it follows that something has to be done about a 
problem not to be mastered in observation and it has to be done operation­
ally. And always has been! For every paradox is paradoxical only for an ob-

Society as a Social System    
server who has already systematized his observations. In other words, the 
paradox cannot “unfold” itself; it finds itself in observation, but only on 
the basis of a distinction, which (renouncing the question of its own unity) 
it has already unfolded. For example, the distinction between system and 
environment. The course of the world can be set in motion only operation-
ally. Or, as Heinz von Foerster has put it: “We can decide only those ques-
tions that can in principle not be decided.”244
The concept of reentry of the form into the form or of the differ-
ence into what has been differentiated offers a way out as resolution of a 
paradox.245 Since the form in the form is both the form and not the form, 
we are dealing with a paradox, but with an unfolded paradox; for we can 
now choose among distinctions (not all are suitable) whose reentry can be 
inter­preted. An observer of this reentry then has a double possibility of de-
scribing a system both from within (“understanding” his self-description) 
and from without, and thus of adopting both an internal and an external 
standpoint.246 Of course, he cannot do both at the same time, for he has 
to use the internal/external distinction. But this impossibility is compen-
sated for by the possibility of observing his own observation from the given 
other position.
In retrospect, we realize that this figure of reentry of the form into 
the form has always underlain the concept of rationality as a covert struc-
ture without becoming an argument.247 A distinction was drawn between 
being and thinking; and thinking as the condition for rationality was also 
expected to be congruent with being. In this official version, rationality was 
congruence itself; and in this regard, I have spoken of the old European 
continuum of rationality. But—before the invention of an extramundane 
subject that exploded the old European tradition—thinking itself had to 
be. Hence, the distinction between being and thinking was based on a re-
entry of the distinction into what it distinguished, into thinking. And was 
not this figure perhaps always the covert reason for pretensions to rational-
ity? The same is true for the distinction between nature and action, which 
could also achieve convergence only on the condition of action being con-
sidered rational if it was in keeping with its own rational nature. However, 
this structure could not be taken into consideration in the description of 
rationality as convergence. The old European tradition therefore produced 
only a parallel ontology of being and thinking, of nature and action. It 
could only assume they were interrelated and thank God for it.

 
  Society as a Social System
What distances us from tradition is thus only the discovery of this 
reentry.248 It requires more abstract conceptual means, which in turn give 
cause to distance ourselves from the anthropological version of rationality 
articulated in terms of thinking and acting and to move on to a more for-
mal, systems-theoretical description.
If purposive rationality is copied into itself as form, this means that 
rationality itself is conceived of as a means. But to what end? The purpose 
itself must clearly be externalized so that rationality can serve it. This had 
been prepared by the distinction between purpose and motive. Further-
more, we could say that rationality serves self-description as rational. Or 
legitimation. Or the justification of action. In all these variations rational-
ity is, as it were, Gödelized. It relies on externally specified meaning to de-
scribe itself internally as closed, as complete distinction.249 Including this 
external specification in the calculus can only repeat the problem (Russell’s 
and ­Tarski’s attempts to solve the problem by drawing a distinction [sic] 
between levels get us no further). With the implementation of its reentry 
rationality is therefore always “ideology” from the outset. It remains depen-
dent on operations it does not itself perform and that it cannot explain. For 
every reentry places the system in a state of “unresolvable indeterminacy.”250
Systems-theoretical analysis can supplement this interpretation of 
the fate of modern rationality and state it with greater precision. Applied 
to the distinction between system and environment, the rule of reentry re-
quires the distinction between system and environment to reoccur in the 
system. In the system! It therefore requires no recourse to an all-embrac-
ing system, no ultimate world guarantee of rationality, and therefore no 
“dominance” as the form of its realization. The system itself produces and 
observes the difference between system and environment. It produces it by 
operating. It observes it in that this operation in the context of the system’s 
autopoiesis requires a distinction to be drawn between self-reference and 
other-reference, which can then be “objectivized” to a distinction between 
system and environment. The system can as always connect its own opera-
tions only to its own operations, but it can obtain directive information 
either from itself or its environment. There can be no doubt that this is ac-
tually possible, even, indeed especially, in operationally closed systems. It 
is a matter of trying out distinctions operationally—trying out in the sense 
that their use produces differences that either continue or do not continue 
in the form of systems.

Society as a Social System    
Very similar views are to be found in the conceptuality of more recent 
semiotics. In this field, the primary difference is set by signs. Efforts to ren-
der the world legible with the aid of relative few signs are considered ratio-
nal; signs for which, however, a practically infinite number of combinations 
is available. Tradition had thought of signs as referring, pointing to some-
thing given, something “present.” Critics of this tradition, such as Jacques 
Derrida, retain only the operational fact of takeoff, of supersession, of the 
generation of différence through différance. The sign is based on its other 
side, which is not available for indication—Spencer-Brown’s “unmarked 
space,” the blank paper, the silence in which sounds make their mark.251 
Keeping silence silent remains the precondition for the combination game 
of signs that uses its own distinctions. As we see, it is a question of produc-
ing difference through indifference. The only functioning distinctions are 
not the final distinction, not even if they add up to the distinction between 
system and environment. Or, as Ranulph Glanville put it: “When the final 
distinction is drawn (i.e. the ultimate) there has already been drawn an-
other, in either intension or extension, namely the distinction that the final 
distinction is NOT the final distinction since it requires in both cases (iden-
tical in form) that there is another distinction drawn; that is, there is a for-
mal identity that adds up to re-entry.”252
If we accept the concept proposed above, system rationality presup-
poses such reentry of the form into the form. But it is not achieved by 
this alone. We must also keep in mind that rationality has to be defined 
and pursued in the context of a distinction of reality. It is therefore due to 
a distinction that is not the final distinction. Autopoiesis must continue 
under the condition of reality. If not, the corresponding reality is lost. 
In operating autopoietically, the system does what it does and nothing 
else. It draws a boundary, forms a form, and leaves everything else aside. 
It can thereupon observe what has been excluded as environment and it-
self as system. It can observe the world on the basis of the distinction be-
tween self-reference and other-reference and in so doing perpetuate its 
own autopoiesis. Self-observation can never reverse what has happened, 
for it uses and continues it itself in the context of autopoiesis. It can never 
overtake what it has produced autopoietically as a difference. In actual 
operation, it divides the world, the unmarked space, into system and en-
vironment; the result eludes observational capture—just as, in traditional 
terminology, no eye is in a position to see the plenitudo entis. After all this 

 
  Society as a Social System
reformulation of the problem, rationality no longer appears paradoxical, 
it appears impossible.
However, this has the advantage of allowing us to consider how to ap-
proach the issue. A system can develop internal complexity and thus irrita-
bility. It can supplement the system/environment distinction on both sides 
through further distinctions and thus extend its observational possibilities. 
It can reuse indications and thus condense references or not reuse them and 
thus delete them. It can remember and forget and hence react to irritation 
frequencies. With all this, the reentry of the distinction into what has been 
distinguished can be enriched and rendered more complexly connective. In 
contrast to traditional concepts, it is not a matter of approximating to an 
ideal, no longer a question of equity, of education, of the self-realization of 
a subjective or objective mind. It is not a matter of attaining unity (for this, 
as we have seen, would be a return to paradox or its substitute, namely, im-
possibility). System rationality means exposing a distinction, that between 
system and environment, to reality and testing it against reality.
We can illustrate this with a look at the ecological problems of mod-
ern society.253 First of all, it must be assumed that, for example, the mar-
ket economy functions as an operationally closed system and can therefore 
not at the same time optimize the “ecological system” (if this is a sys-
tem).254 It would certainly not be rational to ignore these conditions, to 
turn a blind eye to them. Nor can the problems be resolved by refraining 
from intervening in the environment or even eliminating the difference 
between system and environment, thus discontinuing the operation of so-
ciety. This would mean aspiring to rationality as the final catastrophe (it is 
not difficult to imagine the same principle in a smaller format, for exam-
ple, proposals to cease power generation, chemical production, and so on). 
A rational approach to the problems can be sought only in society and only 
under the condition of continued societal autopoiesis; and this always im-
plies maintaining difference. This problem reoccurs within society at the 
level of its individual functional systems. Here, too, the opportunities for 
rationality lie in maintaining and exploiting differences, not in eliminat-
ing them. The irritability of systems must be intensified, which can take 
place only in the context of its self-referentially closed operation. But this 
is precisely what systems theory is after when it treats the distinction be-
tween system and environment as the form of the system. More than in 
any other theory of society, this focuses the theoretical conception on eco-

Society as a Social System    
logical problems and in exactly the same sense on human problems. Cen-
tering thus on difference sharpens the eye for the problems mentioned in 
a way that dashes all hopes that they could be resolved and thus disappear. 
Only if we accept this can we deal with problems as work programs and 
seek to improve the position of the societal system relative to its human 
and nonhuman environment in accordance with criteria that have to be 
constructed and varied in society itself.
These considerations also show how much the rationality problem of 
modernity has to do with the differentiation form of the societal system. If 
in the transition to predominantly functional differentiation, modern soci-
ety has to renounce a guidance system, an apex, or a center, it will no lon-
ger be able to generate a uniform claim to rationality for itself. This does 
not prevent functional systems, each for itself, from pondering the unity 
of the difference between system and environment. In the process, the 
natural environment and the human environment can also come under 
scrutiny, and both ecological and humanistic sensibilities show these pos-
sibilities and their limits. However, in this question, too, system references 
must be kept apart: no functional system can reflect on society in itself be-
cause this would require the operational limitations of all other functional 
systems to be taken into account in each and every one.255 Under modern 
conditions, societal rationality literally means a utopia. It no longer has a 
locus in society. But this at least we can still know, and, of course, there is 
nothing to be said against (indeed, this argument strongly favors) giving 
greater consideration to the macrosocietal environment in the functional 
systems of society. For no one else can do it.
A system rationality based on the paradox of observation makes 
no claim to “reason.” For a competence concept of this sort, the subject 
is lacking. “Reason” was a title attributed to nescience where means and 
ends were in contradiction. In this sense, reason was taken to be inno-
cent. It claims to be “critical.” However the emotive term “critique” hides 
a weakness that we can no longer ignore. Reason has to rely on world 
states, in practical terms texts, being submitted to it for assessment. How-
ever, the problem is that criticism of states does not bring us to a rational 
concept for changes. This is apparent wherever we look today—in corpo-
rate production planning and in ecological policy, in the design of works 
of art and that of theories differing from the usual. Routines are always 
required that allow the need for change to be recognized and thus guide 

 
  Society as a Social System
intervention. However, this provides no indication for the rationality of 
change let alone a concept for rational adaptation to change. Criticism 
of routines tends rather to dismantle the cognitive basis for the percep-
tion of a need for change. This is likely to be one reason why evolution 
theories always prove fascinating where the claims of rationality cannot 
be upheld.
Nor can reason be understood as a set of criteria (or an institution for 
determining criteria) for deciding manifestly before and after communica-
tion whether this communication is to be accepted or not. Acceptance or 
rejection is always a new, discrete communication. Reason can therefore 
at best be retrospectively cited to symbolize successful agreement; and it is 
needed above all where interests are to be disregarded.
If we consider the basic paradox of observation and the reentry of 
distinctions into themselves, the problem of the blind spot remains, the 
need to render the paradox invisible. Every observation must unfold its 
own paradox; in other words, it must replace it with an adequately func-
tioning distinction. Every theory that claims to describe the world, and in 
this sense aspires to universal application, has to take account of this ne-
cessity for invisibilization. It must take it into account at least in others (as 
their “ideology,” their “subconscious,” their “latent need”). It must there-
fore be formulated on the level of second-order observation. But then the 
“autological” recourse to one’s own observation cannot be avoided.
Looking back, we can now better understand why the rationality 
continuum of the old European tradition had to be abandoned. Every 
observation (including cognition and action) is tied to the selection of a 
distinction, and selection necessarily means leaving something out of ac-
count. The labels “pragmatism,” “historicism,” “relativism,” and “plural-
ism” were applied to this in the twentieth century. They were, however, 
formulated as restrictions on universalistic rationality claims. But if every 
observation is obliged to resolve its own paradox and can give no reason-
able (innocent) grounds for doing so, incompleteness theorems of all types 
lose the smack of falling too short, which would in itself be desirable. We 
now have to assume the universality of selection constraints, the univer-
sality of differentiation and boundary drawing. Reason that refuses to ac-
knowledge this is not far from totalitarian, if not terrorist, logic. And it, 
too, has its (well-concealed) invisibility theorem. For it cannot say what is 
to happen with those who refuse to accept what reason proposes.

Society as a Social System    
Rationality appears to have been the vanishing point at which, in 
view of society’s growing complexity, one could still believe in an ultimate 
harmony (business still benefits from this in legitimizing its self-description 
on the basis of assumptions about the rationality of its decision-making 
practices). On this assumption, however, we also see that the perspective of 
rationality registers the dissolution of this notion of ultimate harmony—
first, through the assumption of an “invisible hand” that guarantees good 
results, then, through evolution theory up to and including reduction to 
subjective preferences that can be assumed to be socially interdependent 
but not stable. Finally, we must even question whether relating the prob-
lem of rationality to the individual is tenable—be it in the sense of rational 
choice or of communicative understanding. For this, too, is perhaps only 
a traditional element; we would expect rationality from members of an 
organization or professions, but hardly from people in their private lives. 
Sociology can offer no hold on this decreasing order, and quite certainly 
not by means of concepts such as ethics, culture, or institution. Systems 
theory can at least make use of the reduction to system references to dis-
cover for which system the question of rationality weighs most heavily. The 
answer is likely to be clear: for the comprehensive social system of society 
and its forms of respecifying overly general criteria, namely, organizations 
and professions.
However, this is not to assert that, through norms, rules, or direc-
tives, society can provide guidelines for what would earn subsystems of so-
ciety the epithet of rational. As we shall repeatedly see, society steers itself 
by means of fluctuations that force functional or regional systems to pro-
cess dissipative structures and thus to organize themselves. Quite different 
paradoxes and quite different distinctions, at any rate, other distinctions, 
between self-reference and other-reference are likely to play a role. This 
must be left to more concrete investigation. However, this does not change 
the fact that we must apply the concept of rationality primarily to the sys-
tem of world society if we wish to understand how the context is repro-
duced for other system rationalities.
But whatever we decide about the concept of rationality and its con-
ditions, the appeal to rationality serves in ongoing communication to 
mark the nonnegotiability of a position. There is a need for it. At the same 
time, we speculate in such a procedure with the inertia of the communi-
cation process. It will not abandon its topic and turn to the conditions for 

 
  Society as a Social System
rationality merely because someone claims that something is rational or 
not rational. Even if conceptual clarification leads nowhere, this need not 
discourage an appeal to rationality in ongoing communication. It is, so to 
speak, the ever-fertile breeding ground for the need to clarify the condi-
tions of rationality.

Communication Media
1. Medium and Form
Setting aside for the moment the fact that a system of society actu-
ally exists and reproduces communication through communication, such 
a state of affairs is extremely improbable. Only communication makes it-
self probable. It cannot occur as an isolated event. Every communication 
presupposes other operations of the same type to which it can react and 
which it can stimulate. Without recursive reference of this sort, it would 
have no occasion whatsoever to take place.
This means above all that communication cannot be connected to 
communications arbitrarily, for otherwise communication would not rec-
ognize communication as such. There must be probabilities to guide ex-
pectations if the autopoiesis of communication is to be possible. However, 
this merely shifts our problem to the question of how communication it-
self can overcome the improbability of its own occurrence.
The improbability of a communicative operation is shown by the re-
quirements that have to be fulfilled for it to come about. Communication 
is a synthesis of three selections, as we have seen.1 It comprises informa-
tion, utterance, and understanding. Each of these components is in itself 
a contingent occurrence. Information is a difference that changes the state 
of a system, thus generating another difference. But why should one par-
ticular piece of information and no other impress a system? Because it is 
uttered? But the selection of a particular item of information for utterance 
is also improbable. Why, given the many possibilities for meaningful activ-
2

 
  Communication Media
ity, should anyone turn to someone at all, and why with this particular ut-
terance? Finally, why should anyone concentrate his attention on another’s 
utterance, seek to understand it, and adapt his behavior to the information 
uttered when he is free to refrain from doing so? All these improbabilities 
are then multiplied in the time dimension. How can it be that communi-
cation attains its goal rapidly enough? And, above all, how can it be that 
one communication is succeeded by another (not the same!) with expect-
able regularity?
If the individual components of communication are in themselves 
improbable, their synthesis is all the more so. What gives anyone the idea 
not merely of perceiving another person, whose behavior may be dangerous 
or perhaps odd, but also of observing him with regard to the distinction 
between utterance and information? How does the other come to expect 
observation and adapt to this expectation? And how is anyone to feel en-
couraged to venture an utterance (and what one?) if understanding the 
meaning of the utterance enables the understander to reject it? If we con-
sider what is probable for the participating psychic systems, it is thus hardly 
possible to explain that communication takes place at all.
Questions of this sort are in principle to be addressed to evolution 
theory and systems theory. This will be dealt with in detail subsequently. 
But communication itself also has to cope with its immanent improbability. 
How communication is possible and what is suitable for communication 
is determined by the resolution or rather transformation of this problem.
It is hardly ever posed so drastically. It is usually deemed sufficient to 
explain the occurrence of communication through its function and to see 
its function in relieving and expanding the cognitive faculties of living beings. 
For compelling biological reasons, living beings exist as individuals. But 
they not live independently of one another. The more highly developed 
species are endowed with independent mobility and the faculty of distal 
perception. Where this is the case, it can bring evolutionary success not 
only to increase the reach of one’s own perception,2 but also to exchange 
additional information instead of procuring all information alone. The lit-
erature has a number of terms for this state of affairs, including “vicarious 
learning”3 and “economy of cognition.”4 The view is taken that we can ob-
tain much more information more rapidly with the aid of others than if 
we rely only on our own senses. Recent theories on “hominization” corre-
spondingly stress that the evolutionary branching off of “Homo sapiens” 

Communication Media    
is to be attributed not directly to superior abilities in dealing with external 
nature but to the special cognitive requirements of the social field in which 
the primates evolving toward humans existed.5 The resulting challenge was 
met by the simultaneous development of extreme social dependence and 
a high degree of individualization achieved by building up a complex order 
of meaningful communication, which then determined the further evolu-
tion of humanity.
The argument is helpful but not a sufficient explanation. It offers us 
particulars about the environment of the communication system that is 
society (or of corresponding systems of animal communication). If living 
beings did not have to exist as individuals, if there were no advantages in 
distal information, and if it were not helpful to expand the range of one’s 
own sensory apparatus—even if adapted to distal perception—through 
distal perception of the distal perception of other living beings, no com-
munications systems could have developed. The environment that makes 
this possible explains a great deal. But it does not explain the autopoiesis 
of communication, the operational closure of communicative systems, any 
more successfully than chemistry can explain the autopoiesis of life. Even 
in general terms, stating the function of something cannot explain its ex-
istence or the structures by means of which it makes itself possible. In par-
ticular, a functional explanation that points to needs or advantages in the 
environment does not suffice to explain how the system functions. As soon 
as we realize the extreme improbability of something coming about and 
functioning, we must, while accepting the need for a conducive environ-
ment, seek the explanation in the system itself.
If we want somewhat greater conceptual precision, we soon see that 
the advantages of socially expanding the cognitive faculties of living ­beings 
cannot be achieved by making them dependent on one another. The long 
tradition of talking about “relations” between living beings (including hu-
mans) obscures this state of affairs. Living beings exist individually; they 
exist as structurally determined systems. From this point of view, it is a 
constellationally determined accident if the one, although it does what it 
does, can benefit the other. Dependency means multiplying improbabili-
ties by each other. Advantages are therefore only to be gained by living 
­beings becoming dependent on a higher-order system under whose condi-
tions they can choose contact with one another and thus escape depen-
dence on one other. For humans, this higher-order system, which is not 

 
  Communication Media
itself a living being, is the communication system society.6 In other words, 
at the level of the emergent system, there had to be an intrinsic mode of 
operation (in this case, communication), an intrinsic autopoiesis, a self-
produced continuability of operations; otherwise the evolution of “vicari-
ous learning” possibilities would never have succeeded.
This also means that a “transmission” of information from one living 
being to another (or from one consciousness system to another) is impos-
sible.7 Communication can therefore not be understood as a transmission 
process. Items of information are always time differences constituted within 
the system, that is, differences with respect to states of the system, which 
are the result of interaction between self-referential and other-referential, 
but always internally processed indications. This is true of neurophysiolog-
ical system formations and even more so of communication systems.
Communication systems constitute themselves with the aid of the dis-
tinction between medium and form.8 This distinction replaces the concept 
of transmission, which proves implausible for systems theory.9 Moreover, 
it spares us the search for “ultimate elements,” which nuclear meta­physics 
à la Heisenberg tells us do not exist anyway. Ontological points of ref-
erence, the subject of controversy between reductionism and holism, are 
replaced by a distinction dependent on the observer. When we speak of 
“communication media,” we always mean the operational use of the differ­
ence between medial substratum and form.10 Communication is possible 
only—and this is the answer to the improbability problem—as the pro-
cessing of this difference.
Like the information concept, the (closely associated) distinction be-
tween medium and form is always an intrasystemic matter. And as with 
information, there is nothing in the environment corresponding to the 
medium/form difference (although there are naturally conditions of pos-
sibility in the environment and corresponding structural couplings). Thus, 
communication presupposes no ultimate identities (atoms, particles) that 
it does not itself constitute through its own distinctions. Above all, nei-
ther “information” nor “medium/form” “represent” physical states of af-
fairs of the environment in the system. This is true of perceptual media 
(“light” is not a physical concept) and all the more so of all communica-
tion media, as we shall see. It also means that complexity adequacy always 
has to take account of how the information processing system structures 
its own autopoiesis.

Communication Media    
The distinction between medial substratum and form decomposes 
the general problem of structured complexity with the help of the distinc-
tion between loosely and strictly coupled elements.11 This latter distinction 
assumes that not every element can be connected to every other; but it re-
formulates the selection problem this poses before tackling it, once again 
by means of a further, prior distinction, in order to describe forms (in this 
narrower sense strict coupling) as a selection in the field of a medium.
Such a distinction already underlies the perceptual processes of organ­
isms.12 They require specific perceptual media such as light or air or electro-
magnetic fields that can be tied to certain forms by the perceiving organism 
and can then appear and be exploited as certain things, certain noises, spe-
cific signals, and so forth, on the basis of complex neurophysiological pro-
cesses. Already at this point, the medium can become form: light is let into 
the cathedrals and becomes form to play on pillars and arches. The physical 
structure of the world must make this possible, but the difference between 
medium and form is an achievement of the perceiving organism itself.
On a quite different basis, we find the same distinction underlying 
the operation of communicative systems. As I have pointed out in explicat-
ing the meaning concept and in analyzing language,13 there is a medium 
specific to the system here, too, and related forms that make their mark in 
the medium. Loosely couple words are joined to become sentences, thus 
gaining a form that is temporary in communication, a form that does not 
consume but reproduces the word material.14 The distinction between me-
dium and form translates the improbability of the system’s operational con-
tinuity into a difference that can be handled within the system, transforming 
it into a framework condition for the autopoiesis of the system. The system 
operates in tying its own medium to its own forms without consuming this 
medium (just as our seeing things does not consume light). The actualized 
forms, the things seen, the sentences spoken, couple the elements of the sys-
tem for momentary use but do not destroy them. The difference between 
medium and form is maintained in operational use and thus reproduced. 
What counts is the difference itself and not only the form condensed in the 
operation. For the possibility of seeing colors or pronouncing words pre-
supposes that these entities are not consumed in the operation but are re-
produced in their availability for use in the context of other forms.
At this point we need to recall that by “form,” we understand the 
marking of a distinction. The distinction between medium and form is 

 
  Communication Media
hence also a form. The distinction implies itself, it makes every theory that 
works with it autological. To explain what we understand by medium and 
form, we have to use language; we accordingly use the distinction between 
medium and form. From the point of view of traditional epistemology, 
this would be an error rendering everything that follows from it unusable. 
We shall encounter the same problem in the discussion in the chapters to 
come of the distinctions between variation and selection (evolution the-
ory) and between system and environment (theory of system differentia-
tion). For theories taking a universalistic approach, autologies of this sort 
are unavoidable, and if we come across them, this is no objection: on the 
contrary, it is evidence for the theoretical standing of the conceptuality.
It is all the more important to describe the distinction between me-
dium and form as precisely as possible so that in each case we can estab-
lish what difference an operation uses and where its blind spot, which it 
cannot itself observe, is to be found. We do this with the aid of the dis-
tinction between loose and strict coupling of elements. A medium consists 
of loosely coupled elements, whereas a form joins the same elements in 
strict coupling. Let us take the example of action as a medium and imag-
ine society as the totality of its actions. Freedom is then based on the 
strict coupling of actions in their attribution to individual persons who 
are to be recognized by the form of their actions; and loose coupling 
would offer the possibility of recruiting actions for purposes as they arise, 
because they are not bound to persons. Societies that guarantee a high 
measure of freedom end up with action becoming unavailable for collec-
tive purposes.15 It is only seemingly a paradox that this leads to gigantic 
government, needing a great deal of money to carry out its programs in 
the face of freedom.
Coupling is a concept that implies time. We should speak of coupling 
and uncoupling, of an only momentary integration, which gives form but 
can be reversed. The medium is bound—and released. Without medium, 
there is no form, and without form, no medium. Over time, it is possible 
to reproduce this difference repeatedly. In whatever objective shape, on 
whatever perceptual basis, the difference between loose and strict coupling 
enables the temporal processing of operations in dynamically stabilized 
systems, thus making autopoietic systems of this type possible. With re-
gard to this repeated binding and releasing of the medium, we can also say 
that the medium “circulates” in the system. It has its unity in movement.

Communication Media    
This temporal process of repeated coupling and uncoupling serves 
both to continue autopoiesis and to form and modify the structures it re-
quires—as with a von Neumann machine. It therefore circumvents the 
classical distinction of structure and process. This means not least that 
the unity of the system can no longer be defined in terms of (relative) 
structural stability, although system maintenance remains the issue, but in 
terms of the specific conditions for a medium to form forms.
The same temporal reference is also apparent in the general medium 
of meaning, which serves to produce both psychic and social forms. Since 
meaning can always be actualized only as event and this takes place in ho-
rizons that appresent many further actualization possibilities, every mean-
ing experienced or communicated at the moment is a form, that is to 
say, the marking of a difference and hence a determination. At the same 
time, however, following references to an “and-so-on” of further possibili-
ties manifests a relationship of loose coupling, which can be bound only 
by further actualizations. Strict coupling is what is realized at present (even 
if as concrete memory or anticipation). Loose coupling is to be found in 
the possibilities of transition from one to the other not thus determined.
Circulation arises where the form is stronger that the medial substra-
tum. It imposes itself in the field of loosely coupled elements—and regard-
less of selection criteria, rationality considerations, normative directives, or 
other value preferences—in fact it does so simply as strict coupling. Unlike 
Jürgen Habermas in his theory of communicative action, I avoid building 
pretensions to rationality into the concept of communication,16 postulating 
only that there is a connection between the assertive force and temporal tran­
sience of the form. Communication media entail no bias in the direction of 
rationality—any more than do the concept of system or that of evolution. 
At this elementary level, all that can be said is that what happens happens. 
On the other hand, forms are less permanent that the medial substratum. 
They endure only through special arrangements such as memory, writing, 
and printing. But even when a form is preserved because of its impor-
tance—and here the concept of semantics comes into play—the free ca-
pacity of the medial substratum remains available for ever-new couplings. 
Unbound (or scarcely bound) elements are innumerable; words, for ex-
ample, can be used at will without depleting a limited fund of possibilities 
for use. However, frequent use also “condenses” the meaning of words, so 
that the combinatorial capacity, the type and reach of possibilities for use 

 
  Communication Media
are subject to variation in the course of processing the difference between 
medial substratum and form, and hence in the course of the history of a 
language.
Finally, it must be noted that it is not the medial substratum but only 
forms that are operationally connective in the system. The system cannot 
handle formless, loosely coupled elements. This can also be said of the per-
ceptual media. We do not see light but things, and when we see light, it is 
by the form of things.17 We do not hear the air but noises; and the air it-
self has to make a noise if it is to be audible. The same is true of commu-
nication media. In the case of language, it is not words but sentences that 
make sense that can be processed in communication.18 In the distinction 
between loose and strict coupling, there is not only temporal but also sub-
stantive asymmetry; and this asymmetry is one of the conditions for the 
autopoiesis of the communication system society.
Communication systems process communication on the basis of this 
in itself asymmetrical form of the distinction between medial substratum 
and form. They focus attention on the meaning of what is happening and 
seeking connection. Thus society emerges, and thus society reproduces it-
self in the medium of its communication. This more complexly structured 
concept replaces the usual notion of a transmission medium whose func-
tion it is to “mediate” between organisms existing independently of one 
another. The old sense of “communicatio,” the establishment of “common-
ality” of experience, is therefore abandoned or reduced to the status of a 
side effect. This is the consequence of the view that it does not suffice to see 
the function of communication in expanding and relieving living beings’ 
cognitive faculties. Indeed, it is difficult to see how living beings, includ-
ing humans, can have anything at all in common in the dark inwardness 
of their consciousness.19 Instead, the concept of communication media is 
intended to explain that and how the improbable is nevertheless possible 
on the basis of communication: the autopoiesis of the communication sys-
tem society.
2. Dissemination Media and Success Media
The inquiries that follow are based on a distinction that needs an in-
troductory explanation. Societal communication produces various media/
forms depending on what problem is to be solved. I speak of “dissemination 

Communication Media    
media” [Verbreitungsmedien] with reference to the scope of social redundancy. 
Dissemination media determine and extend the circle of those receiving in-
formation. To the extent that the same information is disseminated, infor-
mation is transformed into redundancy. Redundancy makes information 
superfluous. It can be used to confirm social belongingness: people relate 
what is already known to show their solidarity. But this does not involve any 
gain in information. We can ask anyone who has received the information. 
If we ask repeatedly, no new information arises.20
Dissemination can take place in face-to-face interaction. Writing in-
creased the circle of recipients in an initially still controllable manner. But 
with the spread of literacy, it was soon impossible to know who had read 
what and remembered what texts contained. The invention of the printing 
press and then the advent of modern mass media compounded the anony-
mization of social redundancy. When in doubt, we must now reckon with 
disseminated information being known and cannot once again communi-
cate it. New information is continually needed to satisfy the mass media 
system, which has its own autopoiesis to thank for the self-generated loss 
of information.21
Not only does time pass faster as the dissemination media generate 
social redundancy, it also becomes uncertain and finally impossible to as-
certain whether uttered information is accepted or rejected as the premise 
for further behavior. Too many, immeasurably many, are involved, and we 
can no longer determine whether a communication has had a motivating 
effect and to what end. There is controversial discussion on the subject in 
the mass media, and their system loves conflict. But this can at most simu-
late but not elucidate which communications are accepted throughout so-
ciety and which are rejected or simply forgotten.
In this situation, evolution can stagnate or it can come up with so-
lutions to the new problems. Consequent on the invention of writing, it 
seemed politic to tauten religion for more intensive deployment as a ho-
mogenized motivation tool. However, this demanded too much of the 
cosmology of this instrument. Society finally found a quite different solu-
tion, only superficially integrable with religions, in a new type of media, 
which we call success media, namely, symbolically generalized communica­
tion media.
Symbolically generalized communication media establish a novel 
kind of link between conditioning and motivation. They gear communi-

 
  Communication Media
cation in a given media area, for example, in the money economy or the 
exercise of power in political office, to certain conditions that enhance the 
chances of acceptance even in the case of “uncomfortable” communication. 
For example, goods are supplied or services rendered if (and only if ) they 
are paid for. Government authorities are obeyed under the threat of physi-
cal force and because it must be assumed that society regards this threat as 
legitimate (e.g., as lawful). The institutionalization of symbolically general-
ized communication media thus raises the threshold for the nonacceptance 
of communication, which is very low when communication extends beyond 
face-to-face interaction. In the cultural self-description of society, too, these 
success media play such a prominent role that no information at all is gath-
ered about how much communication is afterward ignored or how much 
information is simply forgotten. Society then describes itself as if general 
consensus secured by principles, codes, and programs can be relied upon. 
As if there were a “public opinion.” The rest is left in the dark in the form of 
“pluralistic ignorance.”22
Language alone does not decide whether the reaction to communica-
tion is acceptance or rejection. As long as language is used only orally, that 
is to say, only in face-to-face interaction, there is enough social pressure to 
say pleasant rather than unpleasant things and to inhibit the communica-
tion of rejection. If communication is only oral, language also acts as an 
“intrinsic persuader” (Talcott Parsons). Symbolically generalized commu-
nication media develop only when societal evolution has overcome this 
threshold to allow complexity to develop in greater spatial and temporal 
dimensions, even though in the same society. Communication must then 
be increasingly geared to still unknown situations. Society helps itself if 
evolution helps it, first, with system differentiation,23 and, second, with the 
formation of special media for restricting contingency by linking condi-
tioning and motivation, namely, symbolically generalized communication 
media. The differentiation of these media also drives system differentia-
tion, providing occasion for the outdifferentiation of important societal 
functional systems.
In this brief overview of the hypotheses that will be guiding our in-
quiries, I note solely that they draw theoretically on the assumption that 
society is an operationally closed social system based on communication, and 
that its evolution therefore follows the problems of the autopoiesis of com­
munication, the conditions for which evolution is constantly changing. 

Communication Media    
A complex research program is hence envisaged, which is pursued in the 
coming sections and chapters with all the necessary detours across a wide 
range of issues.
3. Language
The fundamental communication medium that guarantees the regular 
autopoiesis of society in its promise of continuation is language. Although 
there is communication without language—by means of gestures or the in-
terpretation of basic behavior, for example, of how a person handles things 
whether or not communication is intended—we can well ask whether such 
communication could exist, whether we could observe a distinction be-
tween utterance behavior and information, if there were no language and 
hence no experience with language. Furthermore, interpretable behavior is 
always so specific to the situation that there is hardly any scope for differen-
tiating between medium and form; and this is precisely what language does. 
In any case, the autopoiesis of a communication system, which requires the 
regular prospect of further communication, is impossible without language, 
even though it permits, where enabled, nonlinguistic communication.
A pre-linguistic communication medium that did not yet constitute 
meaning can have lain only in the totality of the behavioral options of in-
dividuals in each other’s presence. Movement in space will have played a 
considerable role. Following George Herbert Mead, we could also speak of 
a recursive sequence of gestures, in which not the single act but recursivity 
(connection with what has preceded) prompts emergent effects.24 In such 
episodic contexts, we also find species-specific signals, which are, however, 
of very limited use. Signals are not yet signs, do not yet point to something 
else; they are only a factor activating “anticipatory reactions” owing to typi-
cal, repeated complexes of present and future events, which are, however, 
not recognized as complexes.25 Such conditions can enable the morpho-
genesis of relatively complex social orders if reactive patterns of behavior 
are reapplied to their own outcomes. Participants do not need to be able 
to recognize the structures that consequently emerge and to react to them. 
The potential for form building must therefore have been correspondingly 
limited, but apparently sufficient to establish hierarchies and individual 
partner preferences.26 In the pre-linguistic field, indeed, even in relations 
between humans and animals, we find what is probably the most impor-

 
  Communication Media
tant preparation for the evolution of language: the perception of perception 
and, in particular, the perception of being perceived. Even in developed so-
cieties, even today, these are still indispensable forms of sociality, especially 
in relations between the sexes. At this level, sociality uses the complexity 
and focusability of perception and generates a present—almost without a 
future. Even if we can assume this as, so to speak, a pre-­prehistorical given, 
and accordingly that life in society adapted to this possibility, this social 
state of affairs would have allowed of no metacommunication, no com-
munication relating to communication; no, for example, confirmation of 
the receipt of an utterance, no repetition of the same utterance, no devel-
opment of sequential, “punctuated” complexity in which communication 
presupposes that it has already operated successfully with other content.27 
It remains to be seen whether, under these circumstances, we can already 
speak of autopoietic closure of a social system independent of the course of 
life—for example, enduring beyond the death of whole generations—and 
whether and to what extent we can already speak of “language” in Hum-
berto Maturana’s sense, of coordinating the coordination of living beings’ 
behavior in their individual existences.28 In any case, language in the usual 
meaning of the term with its clear preference for acoustic media and the 
optical media deriving from them is a singular historical construction of 
evolution based on a stringent selection of resources.29
However, this is not the place to launch into a study of the evolu-
tion of language; I merely assume that, as in all evolution of autopoietic 
systems, a sort of auxiliary construction made takeoff possible.30 The use 
of gestures and sounds as signs presumably played a role. Signs are also 
forms, that is to say, marked distinctions. According to Saussure, they dis-
tinguish the signifier (signifiant) from the signified (signifié). In the form 
of the sign, that is to say, in the relation of signifier to signified, there are 
references: the signifier signifies the signified. The form itself (and only the 
form should be called a sign)31 has no reference; it functions only as a dis-
tinction and only when it is in fact used as such.
Signs are therefore structures for (repetitive) operations that require 
no contact with the outside world. They do not, as so often assumed, serve 
within the system to “represent” states of affairs in the outside world. The 
distinction between signifier and signified is rather an internal difference 
that does not require what is signified to exist in the outside world. Its 
specific nature lies rather in the isolation of this distinction, which has the 

Communication Media    
effect of stabilizing the relationship between signifier and signified regard-
less of the context in which it is used.32 The involvement of other mean-
ing references, other contexts (mediated, for example, by the materiality of 
the sign vehicle) are left out of account. What is decisive for the cultural 
invention of the sign, as for technology, is a relationship with the world 
characterized by differentiation, isolation, and consequent repeatability. 
This also explains why errors are possible. The smallest deviation or con-
fusion can put signs out of action (it suffices to say line or site or seen in-
stead of sign to make what we mean incomprehensible). The generation of 
redundancies, of limitations to the surprise effect in the use of signs thus 
depends on the accuracy with which known patterns are copied. But this 
can be achieved, like isolation itself, only through the arbitrary determina-
tion of signs.
The evolution of a stereotyped use of signs is, however, only one pre-
condition for the evolution of language. It fails to explain important prop-
erties of language, above all, the most important: the operational closure 
of the communication system that uses language. The recursivity of ges-
ture sequences, which can be realized only episodically, develops into the 
recursive use of signs, producing a world that can be referred to over and 
again even after substantial interruptions. The preconditions and oppor-
tunities that lie in the evolution of the form “sign” must therefore be care-
fully distinguished from the coming into being of the operational closure 
of a communication system that has language at its disposition.33 Lan-
guage generalizes self-reference, and does so with the aid of signs, which 
themselves are this generalization; they do not consist in reference to some-
thing else.
Giving a sign in particular situations that make this comprehensi-
ble may have given occasion and opportunity for frequent repetition, but 
something quite different has resulted. We see the improbability thresh-
old in the question of how anyone comes to observe another from the 
standpoint of a difference between information and utterance behavior.34 
Our point of departure is accordingly not the speech act, which occurs 
only when one can expect the act to be expected and understood, but the 
situation of the utterance recipient, of the person who observes the ut-
terer and attributes the utterance, but not the information, to him. The re-
cipient of the utterance must observe the utterance as indicating a piece 
of information, thus the two together (as form of the distinction between 

 
  Communication Media
indicator and what is indicated) as sign (even though other, for example, 
purely perceptual, possibilities of observation are available to him). This 
does not necessarily presuppose language. The housewife, for example, 
bravely swallows the burnt fare to indicate (or so one presumes) that it is 
edible. However, the facts of communication remain vague and ambigu-
ous, and the utterer can, if questioned, deny having intended to make an 
utterance; and for this very reason he chooses nonverbal communication. 
But this also means that it is difficult to add another utterance to the first 
and thus form a communication system.
Language changes this. Whereas before the development of language, 
living beings lived in structural coupling, and were therefore subject to co-
evolution, language also enables operational coupling, which can be reflex-
ively monitored by participants. This increases the possibilities of exposing 
oneself to certain environments or withdrawing from them, and enables 
participants’ self-organization to dissociate from what is communicated. 
One remains perceivable but comprehensible only in what one wittingly 
contributes to linguistic communication. With the normalization and re-
cursive stabilization of these coupling operations, a special autopoietic sys-
tem of linguistic communication takes shape that is self-determined in 
its operations and fully compatible with the deliberate participation of 
individuals. Co-evolution between individuals and society now develops, 
which overdetermines any co-evolutive relationships between individuals 
(e.g., between mother and child).
Far-reaching changes also take place at the level of the perceptual 
media. Speech is a behavior specialized in communication, differentiated out 
for this function and consequently highly perceivable. In the acoustic (and, 
in the case of the written word, the optical) perceptual medium, language is 
so distinctive in form that when used, there can be no doubt about it, nor 
can the relevant perceptions be imputed to others. Every participant knows 
of himself and of his interlocutor that linguistic specifications of meaning 
are chosen contingently (which repeatedly confirms that “only” signs are 
involved). A second mode of selection is imposed on what can be acousti-
cally or optically perceived and thus distinguished. The “material” of lan-
guage, too, is formed and perceivable only because this is so; but it is also 
invested with references that function independently of the setting and thus 
make repeated use possible. Linguistic signs are always possible in various 
guises. At the same time, however, they take on a form that enables queries 

Communication Media    
and, if writing is used, text interpretation. The conclusion of communica-
tive episodes can hence be delayed and the succession of elementary state-
ment sequences can be directed back on itself.35 This makes the language 
process in its self-determination independent of participants’ perceptions, 
which it presupposes. The system shields itself from the noise of percep-
tions through its own recursions, admitting only irritations that it can han-
dle in its own language. In linguistic guise, communication reproduces what 
it needs for auto­catalysis, namely, double contingency, thus continually re-
newing its own prerequisites, whatever had made it possible to start. Neither 
the speaker nor the listener can deny the fact of communication as such. The 
receiver can at most misunderstand or have difficulty in understanding or in-
terpret, or subsequently communicate in some other way about the commu-
nication. The problems of communication feed back into communication. 
The system closes itself. A normally entropic development of approaches to 
communication in the direction of noncommunication is reversed by lan-
guage and directed toward building up complicated, interpretable ways of 
communicating on the basis of what has already been said. The autopoiesis 
of a communication system, in itself improbable, thus becomes probable. At 
the same time, however, it retains its improbability in that, given the host 
of other possibilities, every statement made is extremely improbable. The 
clear external boundary of the system leads to the development of structured 
complexity, which in turn makes every single event in the system improba-
ble. But this is precisely where the system can help itself by processing recur-
sively and ensuring that the choices actually available are limited.
Speech is tied to audition, which, unlike vision, imposes the tempo-
ral sequencing of communication, the establishment of order in ­temporal 
progression. The distinctions evoked must lend each other meaning in 
succession; recursion requires time and cannot result from the world we 
see at the same time—not even if we see someone speaking. Language 
accordingly requires flexible organization that does not already predeter-
mine possible sequences at the structural level: in other words, grammar. 
Even sign language is adapted to this temporal flow, not to mention the 
written word. The acoustic medium therefore demands a higher level of 
abstraction from the outset and hence requires the meaning of individual 
components to be fixed more definitely. This alone makes repeatability 
possible, and this alone, despite nonsimultaneity, despite a nonsimulta-
neity that differs from that of movements in the world outside, allows a 

 
  Communication Media
context of meaning to be produced, a second world of communication to 
be super­imposed on the first, visual world.
Language therefore has a quite peculiar form. As a form with two 
sides, it consists in the difference between sound and meaning. Whoever 
cannot handle this difference cannot speak. As always with forms in my 
definition, we find a condensed referential complex of the two sides: the 
sound is not the meaning, but with this not-being, as it were, it determines 
what meaning is spoken about in each case. Vice versa, the meaning is not 
the sound but determines what sound is to be selected if this meaning and 
no other is to be spoken about. In Hegelian terms, language is determined 
by a “difference-in-itself” and, we can say, differentiated out by the specif-
ics of this very difference.
In the first place, linguistic communication is hence the processing 
of meaning in the phonic medium. We speak of medium in this regard not 
because sounds are forms in the perceptual medium of the consciousness 
but because they are condensed into words that can be used repeatedly and 
as such are then available in loose coupling. This in turn presupposes gram-
mar and perhaps Chomsky’s deep structures,36 which ensure that there is 
sufficient scope for building sentences and that the process is nevertheless 
not arbitrary, but that sufficient redundancy is available for recursion, for 
rapid understanding, and, above all, for rapid language acquisition.
If a difference between medium and form specific to language is to 
be established, the medial substratum of language, the difference between 
sound and meaning must be underspecified.37 Without underspecification, 
there would be nothing more to say, because everything would always have 
already been said. This problem is resolved by differentiating between words 
and sentences. Although words, too, are constellations of sounds with 
meaning, they do not yet determine what sentences they will be combined 
to form. Only through this difference does language lend communication 
the capacity for temporary adjustment to temporary situations; and the ca-
pacity for temporary meaning constructions, which can later be confirmed 
or withdrawn. Only then can we expect that communication will connect 
with communication and that there will always be something to say.
Mere perceptual media are bound by the simultaneity of perception 
and what is perceived. This is also the case when we perceive others’ percep-
tion; and it is also the case for simple forms of perceiving indexical signs. 
The operationally determined simultaneity of observation and the world 

Communication Media    
that is observed cannot be overcome, and this is also true where meaning 
(as in hearing) arises only through sequencing. The future reference of per-
ception depends on the environment sufficiently guaranteeing through its 
constants that a now-reaction adequately prepares the future. Only lan-
guage permits this simultaneity premise to be overcome and enables the 
preparatory synchronization of temporally distant events—­independently 
of whether language has forms at its disposition with which the difference 
between past, present, and future can be expressed (e.g., through the inflec-
tion of verbs). For language makes it possible to look ahead or to restrict 
what can later be said. In the first place, it is simply a matter of temporally 
decoupling the recursive course of language from the temporal sequences 
of the environment, of differentiating an eigentime of the communication 
system that makes it possible to distinguish the communication process 
taking place in the system from sequences of environmental events. Only 
when this is ensured can linguistic forms arise that express temporal rela-
tions, for example in the simple form of if-then conditionalization. Lan-
guage can, in more or less elaborate form, also refer to something that can 
no longer or not yet be perceived. And it is this that allows synchronization 
to be problematized, making learning by trial and error possible.
Only this outdifferentiation of an eigentime of linguistic communi-
cation achieves what must be regarded as the most important evolutionary 
accomplishment of linguistic communication. With the aid of language, 
things can be said that have never been said before. “Elvira is an angel.” We 
understand a sentence, unlike gestures and unlike simple behavior or the 
use of things, even if it is completely new to us.38 Strictly speaking, it is not 
even important whether the sentence is original in the history of the world 
and has never been uttered before. What is decisive is that the meaning and 
context of earlier use do not need to be remembered. In other words, lan-
guage facilitates forgetting. It relieves the social memory and therefore con-
stantly frees capacity for new communication.
This capacity for new, never used meaning is naturally not boundless. 
It generates contexts on which it becomes dependent. But however little 
possibility there may have been in the early stages of evolution of saying 
something never before heard, it provides an evolutionary potential that 
can be increasingly exploited as society becomes more complex and dif-
ferentiated, hence creating special conditions for recognizing and under-
standing novelty.

 
  Communication Media
This was already fully developed when language was only spoken 
(oral). In today’s written cultures, it is hard to imagine situations where 
language was only oral. For sounds are extremely unstable elements. More-
over, their reach is limited, requiring speaker and hearer to be present. 
Space and time must be present in compact, situational forms to make 
spoken language possible. The moment sentences are pronounced, they 
vanish into inaudibility. System formation on the basis of communication 
therefore needs provision for reuse, in other words, memory.
This suggests, and in a certain sense correctly, that societies that have 
to rely on oral communication remain dependent on purely mental mem-
ory. But this does not explain enough and, incidentally, applies even more 
so in written cultures, which function only if all members can constantly 
remember how to read and write. A social memory must therefore be de-
veloped beyond (which does not mean independently of ) mental memory. 
It consists solely in the delayed reuse of words and the expressed meaning 
formed with their aid.39 Psychic systems are used, as it were, only for in-
termediate storage. What is decisive for social memory is the retrieval of 
memories in later social situations; and over extended periods of time, the 
psychic substratum can change.40 If we want to comprehend what advan-
tages the invention of writing has brought, we must first of all understand 
the preceding mechanism that all recall has to perform through the tem-
poral form of delay.
However, if distinct phonic perception and its reactivation in the 
course of later communication are ensured, this does not yet explain how 
language organizes its recursive use, how it can enable communication. 
Old European sign theory had argued in terms of external relations. It had 
reckoned with a world holding the language community of humanity and 
had attributed a representational function to language. Recognizing names 
and giving names accordingly presupposed a knowledge of nature.41 If this 
is abandoned—and recent linguistics has done so—what, if not the world, 
guarantees the sustainability of language?
The solution to this problem might lie in the concept of “eigen­
behavior” taken from mathematical logic.42 It refers to a stability arising 
in the recursive procedure of applying the procedure to the results of the 
procedure.43
Language comes about through the reuse of sounds and groups of 
sounds. To be more precise, in the course of reuse it first generates the iden-

Communication Media    
tity of words, condenses language-specific identities; in the same move, it 
also confirms these condensates in ever-new situations, generalizing them. 
This process of language formation therefore differentiates an eigen­behavior 
of the communication system and in second place produces a language-­
dependent order of perceptual tasks for the individual consciousness.
This reuse succeeds only if words are not confused with things—
however much one had initially operated with the auxiliary assumption of 
a mysterious relationship between words and things and a corresponding 
influence of language on things. It is, after all, obvious that language func-
tions only if we become aware—and become aware that others have be-
come aware—of the fact that words are not the objects of the factual world 
but only indicate them. This gives rise to a new, an emergent difference, 
namely that between real reality and semiotic reality.44 Only then can there 
be a real world at all, because only then is there a position from where re-
ality can be indicated as reality, that is to say, distinguished. This does not 
mean that reality is a mere fiction and that, as some have felt, it “does not 
exist in reality.” But it does mean that we must introduce this distinction 
between real reality and semiotic reality if anything at all—even semiotic 
reality—is to be indicated as real.
However, this distinction, which alone lends the world its severity, its 
fatefulness, its inadequacy, must itself be generated. It is not given simply 
because it is called on as a transcendental condition of possibility. To this 
extent, we follow the “linguistic turn,” which replaces the transcendental 
subject by language—now we say by society.45 The eigenbehavior of the 
communication system society stabilizes the imaginary space of meanings, 
which the recursive application of communication to communication 
does not destroy but establish—thanks precisely to its eigenvalue, hence 
through the experience that it is one’s awareness of others’ awareness of the 
nature of language that produces the results that enable recursive commu-
nication to continue, that make the autopoiesis of society possible. This 
does not necessarily succeed. But systems of this type arise and evolve only 
if it does succeed. We could also say that language arises in a sort of self-
fulfilling prophecy—not in the classical sense of the term propounded by 
Robert K. Merton and thus not as a mere methodological problem of em-
pirical social research but as constitutive for society as such.46
With the aid of what is already form, that is to say, with words, a new 
medial substratum can be generated—a very large, only loosely coupled set 

 
  Communication Media
of such words, which are then linked into strictly coupled forms, that is to 
say, sentences, with the medial substratum in the given coupling not being 
consumed but renewed by use. Every sentence therefore consists of compo-
nents that can be reused at will, ongoing sentence building regenerating the 
lexical inventory of a language, condensing and confirming and thus enrich-
ing the meaning of words, but also relegating never reused words to obliv-
ion. Only sentences are connective in the recursive network of linguistic 
communication; they can be anticipated with a vague idea of word structure 
and recalled as fixed meaning. They can be quoted, their gist can be passed 
on, they can be confirmed or withdrawn; and in this sense they transport 
the autopoiesis of the system through the coupling/decoupling of the lexical 
inventory. They form the emergent level of the communicative constitution 
of meaning, and this emergence is nothing other than the autopoiesis of the 
linguistic communication that it creates in its own medial substratum.
It is for this function that the peculiar structures of language are cre-
ated whose details occupy the linguists, but which function as latent struc-
tures and are not themselves objects of communication. If we ask about 
these linguistic structures, we are normally referred to restrictions on the 
use of words, to syntax, to grammar, and the like.47 The corresponding 
deep structures, too, result from the urgency involved in the use of lan-
guage, including the urgency of social language acquisition by succeed-
ing generations.48 It is easy to see that this condensed complexity serves to 
generate improbable probabilities. For it makes every specific sentence ex-
tremely improbable, but also quite normal that this is so in every commu-
nication. However, this paradox unfolds only in communication; it does 
so through the autopoiesis of the communication system, hence through 
the restrictions imposed on what can meaningfully be said by recursion to 
previous communication and the prospect of later communication.
If we assume that language structures the autopoiesis of communica-
tion, a radical and much simpler structure comes into focus. I shall call it 
the (binary) code of language.49 Language offers a positive and a negative 
version of everything that is said.
This duplication serves as a structure concerned exclusively with lin-
guistic communication and which can be learned mentally only by partici-
pating in communication.50 Moreover, coding presupposes that language 
has already constituted identities, hence that it can distinguish and in-
dicate, so that what is affirmed and negated can be established. Coding 

Communication Media    
changes and expands the need for identities; it must be able to presuppose 
negation-proof identities. It is no longer only a matter of enabling recog-
nizability (including the recognizability of words) for perception and its 
memory. Identities must now be required to remain the same when com-
munication shifts from affirmation to negation or from negation to affir-
mation. This allows the repertoire of possible communication to extend 
beyond the perceivable that can be pointed to; and only thus can commu-
nication generate controversy (and hence sociocultural evolution). In con-
trast to classical logic and the corresponding ontology, there is therefore no 
primordial distinction between being and nonbeing or between positive or 
negative referring operations. The world itself cannot be qualified in terms 
of positive and negative. For this very reason we must distinguish if we 
wish to indicate something; in other words, a distinction does not negate 
what it does not indicate. It presupposes it as “unmarked space.”51
To understand this achievement it is also important to realize that 
the use of negations does not yet lead to logical inconsistency.52 It merely 
opens a contingency space; it is to be assumed in communication that 
every­thing that is affirmed can also be negated and vice versa. Only on the 
basis of this assumption can positive and negative propositions be tested 
for their truth value, and only for this purpose can a “logic” be developed 
in addition to other tools. This presupposes, as an added invention, the law 
of the excluded middle (tertium non datur).
We do not know whether this is an evolutionary condition for the 
genesis of negation or only a successfully used side effect: in any case, nega-
tion permits the domestication of the determinate/indeterminate schema, 
one of the fundamental distinctions enabling us to deal with meaning.53 
Through negation we can indicate something in such a way that it remains 
uncertain what is actually going on. “No one in the desert” does not tell us 
what else there is in the desert, or where people really are, or who is meant 
at all. The communication is nonetheless immediately comprehensible and 
ready to be dealt with further—for example, as a warning. Even the sim-
plest of societies are apparently quite essentially concerned with normaliz-
ing the unusual and stabilizing their own pathologies through repetition. 
For this purpose, negative reference builds bridges to normality.
However, all this remains an internal problem of the communication 
system society. Since nothing negative exists in the outside world, and hence 
nothing indeterminate, the coding of language amounts to the doubling of 

 
  Communication Media
propositional possibilities. The first question would thus be: What is this all 
about? Why does language afford itself this luxury?
In this structure, we see a compensation for problems resulting from the 
outdifferentiation of the communication system of society, hence a condition 
and consequent arrangement of autopoietic autonomy.
An autopoietic, self-referential system requires such a code to sym-
bolize its own self-reference and to ensure the interruption of its constitu-
tive circularity. The two values can be translated into each other to negate 
calls for a positive operation of the system, and the position is logically 
equivalent to the negation of its negation. At the same time, however, this 
tautological structure implies a latent propensity for interruption. It makes 
the system sensitive first to chance, then to self-organization, offering an 
indication of whether yesses or noes are appropriate. Society thus comes 
into being through this breach of symmetry intrinsic to language, to which 
conditionings can then connect. The mere relation of the values would not 
yet constitute a system, but it is generated only with regard to its capacity 
to prompt system formation.54
This state of affairs, in itself complex, but clearly capable of evolv-
ing, also regulates the coming into being of time.55 The system needs time 
alone to cross the boundary between the two values (for the negating of 
something that remains identical). And this holds all the more for the un-
folding of the tautology, for the asymmetricizing conditioning, because 
the given starting situation has to be kept in sight while projecting the bi-
stability of the system into the future. In order to continue its autopoiesis, 
such a system needs (to use Spencer-Brown’s terminology) “memory” and 
“oscillation,” and to distinguish (observe) these two conditions, it forms 
the difference between the time horizons past and future, which can be ob-
served simultaneously from the operationally current present as its past or 
future. On the one hand, it must know in each case whether a yes version 
or a no version of communication is to be assumed and what this means in 
the current context. On the other, it is not yet certain whether the meaning 
communicated will subsequently be accepted or rejected. And even if, by 
and large, we can expect the world to continue as it is, the future of com-
munication itself can be presented only through an oscillation function 
realized in dependence on what is involved at the time. These are histori-
cal universals given with the coding of language, which can assume widely 
varying semantic forms depending on the social structures realized.56

Communication Media    
It is no exaggeration to say that linguistic coding is the muse of so-
ciety. Without doubling all signs that fix identities, evolution would never 
have been able to form society, and we hence find no society without this 
requirement.
The outdifferentiation of a society that uses language and employs 
signs gives rise to the problem of error and deception, of the unintentional 
and intentional abuse of signs. It is not only that communication occasion-
ally miscarries, goes astray, or takes the wrong track. The problem, since 
it can occur at any time, is always present57—a sort of universal problem 
of the type discovered by Hobbes with his example of violence. With this 
in mind, it is understandable that society morally appreciates sincerity, 
truthfulness, and the like, and in the communication process has to rely 
on trust.58 But this only confirms that what nevertheless remains possible 
should not occur. If we ask how the communication process itself reacts to 
this problem, we realize the advantage of coding, for it makes it possible 
to doubt what has been uttered, to refrain from accepting it, to explicitly 
reject it, and to express this reaction understandably, thus reintroducing 
it into the communication process. Reference to psychological and moral 
qualities such as uprightness and trust retains its sense, but because no 
communication process can test psychic premises of this sort (the test it-
self would destroy what it seeks), the conditions have to be psychologically 
deconditioned and treated as topics of communication itself. This requires 
the yes/no coding of language.
Since the problem is a general one affecting all use of language, solv-
ing it through coding must also be a general solution. The entire language 
is coded; this means that every sentence can be negated. Coding trans-
forms the general uncertainty about the misuse of linguistic signs into a 
bifurcation of connective options. Further communication can be based 
on either acceptance or rejection. There are only these two possibilities; 
but for this very reason we can also express indecisiveness or defer the de-
cision, leaving it up to further communication. Without binary coding, 
not even deferral would be possible, for we would be unable to recognize 
what is deferred.
The coding of linguistic communication has such far-reaching con-
sequences that it is worth while considering some of its characteristics. 
Above all, it affects the entire system of linguistic communication. What-
ever is contributed faces the alternative of acceptance or rejection. “Every 

 
  Communication Media
word pronounced evokes its opposite.”59 If we wish to avoid this risk, we 
have to eschew communication.
This generality and inevitability of coding also means that it does not 
serve to sort good news from bad. Bad news can very well be formulated 
positively (“the faucet is leaking”) and thus, as communication, left to face 
the alternatives of acceptance or rejection. The precondition is that what is 
to be accepted or rejected is kept identical (this shows once again that the 
code is a duplication rule). In accepting or rejecting something, modifica-
tions can, of course, be made, especially if we wish to tone down rejection 
(“the faucet isn’t leaking, it just wasn’t turned off properly”). But commu-
nication always proceeds along thematic identities, and this, too, is an ef-
fect of coding. It has a thematically disciplinary effect, because it requires 
us to ensure that the same thing is being talked about.60
Coding as such contains no preference for yes-versions or no-­versions, 
just as language as such is not there to favor the acceptance of communica-
tion over rejection. In principle, yesses and noes must therefore be equally 
easy to understand. It could be that the production and understanding of 
sentences containing negation take somewhat longer for the information 
to be processed and require somewhat more mental effort,61 but in prac-
tical terms, this is hardly likely to count if there are reasons for a negative 
statement. More important are the social conditionings for the use of nega-
tion; and any difficulties psychic systems may have are only one more in-
dication that they are operations of systems in the environment of society.
That coding relates to communication and not to the views and at-
titudes of participants can also be formulated as a self-correction proviso of 
the communication process. Correction (negation of preceding communica-
tion) is not necessarily incumbent on the recipient of the utterance. The ut-
terer, too, can correct what he has himself said in further communication. 
Furthermore, correction need not concern explicitly and precisely remem-
bered communications. It can also concern expectations resulting from ear-
lier communication, so that negation is already expressed in the initiative 
taken to communicate and take the form of negating an external state of af-
fairs (“the faucet wasn’t properly turned off”). We presume that all negations 
directly referring to states of affairs in the world are occasioned by earlier 
communication and by the assumption that the communication process 
takes place under the influence of remembered communication and there-
fore has to be corrected through negation.

Communication Media    
Two other peculiarities of linguistic communication follow from its 
coding. The first is that all use of negation at least implicitly presupposes 
distinctions to allow the options available if something is negated to be es-
tablished. If something is referred to as “not red,” other colors come into 
question; and, conversely, a positive statement such as “the car traveled 
slowly” has its prescribed negatives (one cannot, e.g., negate this by saying 
it traveled on four wheels).62
The prospect of yes/no bifurcation can also be directed by marking.63 
We mark the components of a communication that we assume offers infor-
mational value and the possibility of objecting and leave others unmarked. 
In particular, value attitudes assumed as a matter of course to be shared are 
generally communicated without being marked.64 Erroneous markings are 
typical of speakers insufficiently familiar with the cultural or situational 
context of communication and therefore unable to assess probabilities cor-
rectly. But the problem of this intensification arises only because commu-
nication is coded and therefore seeks to control where it has to reckon with 
acceptance or rejection, surprise, and resistance.
However, the most important effect of coding is probably that the el-
ementary operation of a communication is concluded with understanding 
and that the message of acceptance, rejection, or indecision requires further 
communication. For the understanding of a communication is the precon-
dition for its being accepted or rejected; and which path communication 
chooses at this point can be made clear only by further communication. 
In understanding, interests converge, for one normally has no particular 
interest in speaking incomprehensibly or in failing to understand.65 Thus 
only the yes/no bifurcation offers the opportunity to bring interests into 
the communication process, and the common interest in comprehensi-
bility is acceptable only because it immediately precedes this bifurcation.
In sum, linguistic communication has its unity in the yes/no coding. 
When taken seriously, this excludes derivation of an ideal norm for the en-
deavor to reach agreement from language itself.66 Only the autopoiesis of 
communication is necessary, and this autopoiesis is guaranteed not by a telos 
of agreement but by the binary code. For a coded communication there is 
no end but only the option reproduced in all understanding to continue via 
acceptance or via rejection. In other words, coding excludes every meta-rule, 
since the communication of such a rule could be received affirmatively or 
negatively.67 The coding of language overcomes the evolutionary improb-

 
  Communication Media
ability of an operationally conclusive communication system. As far as this 
is possible in the system itself, it guarantees the autopoiesis of societal com-
munication by transforming it into the freedom to say yes or no, with far-
reaching consequences, to everything that has been determined. In complex 
societies, what therefore evolves are not obligations for consensus but sym-
bolically generalized communication media.
4. Morality and the Secrets of Religion
Coding closes the system. It leaves everything else open. But the de-
cision whether to accept or reject communicated offers of meaning cannot 
be left open. The bifurcation the code imposes leads the system to develop 
conditions pointing to when acceptance or rejection is more appropriate. 
As systems theory knows,68 conditionings are among the most general re-
quirements of all system formation. They establish nonarbitrary relation-
ships in the sense that determining certain characteristics limits the scope 
for determining others. In other terms, considering how we obtain infor-
mation about a system, we speak of redundancies limiting the variety of 
the system: where a certain characteristic occurs, others are either more or 
less probable.
In this theoretical framework, we can also say that the linguistic code 
is the form through which a system exposes itself to self-conditioning. 
The coding of language therefore means that the self-conditioning of so-
ciety develops structures that enable expectations to be formed about the 
acceptability and rejectability of communications. Only such structures 
allow the improbability of communication to be transformed into prob-
ability. Only such structures permit the closed system to be opened up to 
influences from the environment. There is still nothing in the environment 
of the system corresponding to the operation of linguistic communica-
tion or to the binary code of the system; but self-conditioning by forming 
structuring expectations allows the system to take account of success and 
failure and thus to react to irritation from the environment.
Even the simplest societies appear to make provision for developing 
the linguistic code in two different directions. The one consists in apply-
ing the code to communication itself, hence in the prohibition of commu­
nication deemed necessary for secrecy,69 which we assign to religion. Here, 
the other side of communication is placed under a taboo and hence made 

Communication Media    
accessible for communication again. Such a taboo makes it possible to 
include exclusion. This does not exclude communication with gods, but 
it typically takes the form of offerings and sacrifices explained through 
prayer.70 The other solution to the same problem, initially scarcely dis-
tinguishable but increasingly superseding the first, lies in a further coding, 
namely a moral code that sets forth what is to be accepted and what is to 
be rejected. The taboo is displaced by a distinction that offers broader so-
cietal connectivity.
Religion has to do directly with peculiarities of observing. All ob-
servation must draw distinctions if it is to indicate something, and in so 
doing it, separates off an “unmarked space” into which the ultimate hori-
zon of the world withdraws. The transcendence accompanying all that can 
be comprehended thus shifts with every attempt to cross the boundary 
with new distinctions and indications. Never within reach, it is always pres-
ent as the opposite side to everything determined. And this very unreach-
ability “binds” the observer, who also escapes observation, to what he can 
indicate. In whatever cultural guise, the reconnection of what cannot be in-
dicated to what can be indicated is religio in the broadest sense of the term.
In its origins, religion can best be understood as semantics and praxis 
concerned with the distinction between the known and the unknown. This 
distinction classifies the world without considering that this classification 
differs for every observer, every settlement, every tribe. By allowing the un-
known to appear in the known, giving access to the inaccessible, religion 
formulates and practices the situation in the world of a societal system 
aware of being surrounded in space and time by the unknown. Reaching 
beyond everyday life, it can process self-reference and other-­reference in 
society for society. It is accordingly “decisive” for how the operationally 
closed societal system in its dependence on communication sets itself up 
in relation to the world.71
Even before the mediatory figure of the “symbol” had been in-
vented, the figure of the “secret” was able to represent the unknown in the 
known. The semantic form of “being-in-something,” easy to render plau-
sible, served this purpose: the divinity was not the phenomenon as such, it 
was in it.72 This mysterious figure was protected by bans on communica-
tion and by corresponding rites and sanctions. The Baktaman offer a good 
example of a society structured almost exclusively by the communication 
ban—one of the rare cases in which communication has been studied in a 

 
  Communication Media
society still unaffected by contact with civilization.73 The result is simple: 
communication problems are resolved or at least structured by suppress-
ing communication. The essential knowledge considered worthy of preser-
vation, knowledge of sacred matters, is made accessible only to men, and 
then only after they have passed through a seven-stage initiation rite, so 
that, given the high mortality rate, only a small section of the population 
who can separate themselves off and control one another in the men’s house 
gain possession of this knowledge.74 Only in this protected domain does 
socially structured complexity arise. Other fields, including illness and em-
pathy with fellow humans, remain semantically undeveloped. The result is 
organized mistrust along this main cleavage between knowledge and igno-
rance that differentiates society. Community life must assert itself against 
this structure, families are not formed, there is no segmentary structuring 
and hardly any means for expressing commonalities. “The striking fact of 
Baktaman life is the absence of such common premises and shared knowl-
edge between persons in intimate interaction.”75
The sacred is not to be found in nature, it is constituted as a secret 
(later it will be said that it cannot be adequately described in words).76 Se-
crecy keeps arbitrariness and irresponsibility in dealing with nonempirical 
knowledge—a variant of the deception risk—within limits. In this fash-
ion, the knowledge to be kept secret is produced. In other words, knowl-
edge must be protected against communication because it is generated in 
the first place only through this protection. Otherwise, it would soon be 
discovered that holy bones are only bones (high religions explain that a 
mystery cannot be profaned by revelation because what the curious have 
before them is a triviality, not the mystery itself ).
We are well justified in assuming this to have been an evolutionary 
dead end, offering hardly any further scope for development. The pack-
age of improbability, propitiousness, and risk of communication is handled 
all too directly. The problem is at least attenuated by limiting potency and 
by exclusion. At the same time, however, we see certain lines of develop-
ment branching off in refined form. A very common reaction, indeed, a 
complementary institution to the recognition of unfathomable secrets, is to 
be found in the widespread techniques of divination. They typically keep 
to the surface of phenomena, to lines drawn in space or time from which 
they attempt to infer about the depths, about the past or future, about dis-
tant things, about things inaccessible to the senses. Divination techniques 

Communication Media    
presuppose the difference between surface and depth, between visible and 
invisible; at the same time, however, they sabotage this difference through 
knowledge about how to cross the boundary. Only against this normal 
backdrop of older religiousness, incidentally, can we grasp how dramatically 
religion has been recast by the self-revelation of God. This dogma of revela-
tion can be understood only if we take account of what it is directed against.
Another solution to the same fundamental problem, a functional 
equivalent of the communication ban upheld by awe and fear, lies in the 
invention of the symbolic presentation of the unity of visible and invisible, 
present and absent. A symbol is not only a sign (like, e.g., a word). It not 
only indicates unity, it effects unity.77 The underlying paradox is precisely 
concealed. Symbols can therefore not be replaced by concepts, because this 
would result in a contradiction in the concept. But for this very reason, the 
form of the symbol (and not the form of the concept) is appropriate when 
it comes to dealing rationally with what cannot be expressed in words.
The cultic form of ritual has the same origin. Rituals enable com-
munication-avoidance communication. The literature stresses that forms 
are stereotyped and other possibilities are excluded, thus reducing contin-
gency to necessity.78 The opening for a yes or no to the meaning offered 
is replaced by the directive to avoid errors with grave consequences. Even 
more important is that ritual is not performed as communication at all. 
It takes effect as an object—as a quasi-object in Michel Serres’s sense.79 It 
does not differentiate between utterance and information but provides in-
formation only about itself and correctness of performance. It presents it-
self in a well-chosen, striking form of perception (like language). But this 
takes place not just anywhere but only where it is believed that no com-
munication can be risked.
The practice of secrecy and the restriction of communication to the 
statement that this or that is a secret have found ample emulation. The 
name of God is kept secret, even if only to uphold the monopoly of access. 
For the same reason, formulas for enforcing rights are subject to secrecy 
wherever disclosure would lead to open conflict about the law. Lifting con-
trols on important communication is always a risk. However, the dense, 
“political” communicative relations in the cities of the ancient Mediterra-
nean basin appear to suggest an increase in the field of public communi-
cation and its separation from the practice of the mysteries by recognized 
cults.80 This co-existence spared society the notion of a radical break, a 

 
  Communication Media
substitution of religion with politics and law. The evolution of Roman 
civil law began with enactment of the Twelve Tables and publication of the 
promising legis actiones. Even in early modern times, the technique of se-
crecy was used to protect the infant sovereign state. But now there was the 
printing press. Secrecy now had itself to be kept secret and could no longer 
serve to mark the big things.81 Only in religion has the secret preserved its 
original meaning; for religion presupposes that exposure does not destroy 
the secret but punishes the curious with incomprehension.
Still under the dominance of the schema known/unknown (occult, 
secret), wisdom teachings developed with the aid of writing into highly 
complex structures in the transition from archaic to highly cultivated 
societies—above all, in Mesopotamia and China.82 They were based on 
divination practices used partly for political and partly for (hardly to be 
distinguished) ritual purposes, and partly for everyday situations in the 
normal conduct of life. Divination and writing were closely linked, because 
no distinction was drawn between the nature of the thing and the written 
character, the latter being considered the form of this nature; nor could 
such a distinction be drawn before the advent of purely phonetic script.83 
Divinatory signs, like writing and early ornamental forms of art, were con-
sidered visible line-work pointing to something invisible. In China, openly 
displayed “objects” (the bones or entrails of sacrificial animals, bird flight, 
dreams) of sufficient complexity served as signs of other, hidden states of 
affairs. The latent function of divination was to neutralize other influences 
on decision-making, for instance, the accidents of personal memory or the 
pressure of social influences. We could also speak of a random mechanism 
intrinsically capable of learning.84 The result was the development of a 
fully rationalized system of behavior toward the unknown, of “divination,” 
with multiple safeguards against the probability of deception and error—
for example, the vast number of specific conditional programs (if/then) 
that left selection and combination choices open (Mesopotamia); the grad-
ual trend toward abstracting divination, toward restricting the assessment 
of signs to either favorable or unfavorable; built-in self-fulfilling prophe-
cies, which are fulfilled precisely through the failure of those involved to 
believe them or their efforts to evade them (Oedipus); or incorporated am-
biguities (Greece) that make misunderstanding almost normal and con-
firm the oracle only post factum. However, the guiding schema of surface/
depth (open/secret, known/unknown, clear/unclear) was duplicated, was 

Communication Media    
repeated in the signs for states of affairs, and always involved a doubled re-
lation to the object85—and not observation of observations.
What is most striking about the text corpus of wisdom teachings and 
what determined the expectations they raised about the wise is that knowl-
edge was now understood as self-referential, although it remained at the 
level of first-order observation in the immediate view taken of the world.86 
Despite the use of writing there was still no “holy scripture” that confined 
further evolution to the interpretation of canonized texts. The world of the 
gods was disciplined by copying societal structures into it—especially in 
the form of the family, political rule by a principal god,87 and the notion 
of heavenly bookkeeping.88 These analogies to societal structures, not the 
specific meaning of a text, made it possible to pass on religious knowledge. 
The wise man could (it was his art) ask questions and interpret answers; he 
was not moved, not “de-ranged” (ver-rückt) by a spontaneously active god.
Since education was still oral, and texts could be understood only 
with the aid of the wise, wisdom was, despite the existence of texts, not 
generally accessible; nor, however, was it strictly secret. It was grounded 
in particular qualities of the wise, in the way in which they knew what 
they knew, and how they brought life and teaching into line with it. Wis-
dom presented knowledge against the backdrop of ignorance and hence 
self-­referentially. Its relation to the world, however general, could be han-
dled only situationally and hence in similar fashion to the popular wis-
dom expressed in proverbs. The many pronouncements were not related, 
contra­dictions were not monitored, not systematized. Wisdom was not the 
outcome of logical analysis, of a methodology for avoiding inconsisten-
cies. Inconsistencies in the use of wisdom either went unnoticed or were 
not considered disturbing—because one knew anyway that one did not 
know and that all knowledge could do was transfer something from the 
domain of the unknown to that of the known. Precisely this acknowledged 
insufficiency was compensated for by living by wisdom, guaranteeing it 
through purity,89 and presenting it and attesting to it in given situations 
as the rule of the wise for the conduct of life—with the difference that 
without wisdom, one would behave differently. Reference to the conduct 
of life also ensured that the wise man maintained a certain distance from 
the normal conduct of the upper stratum, indeed, lived in a certain sense 
outside the class system, for example. as prophet or monk, as admonisher 
and warner;90 and it must naturally be assumed that the authenticity of his 

 
  Communication Media
statements was not called into doubt but inferred from his wisdom itself. 
Second-order observation was precluded, both for coordinating views with 
those of others and for controlling for differences between views of one’s 
own. Wisdom was a cultic form of naïveté. Outpourings were direct and 
for this very reason, as the written culture of the eighteenth century would 
say,91 made a “sublime” impression.
Among the most important evolutionary effects of the practice of 
divination was its circular relationship with writing. Sometimes writing 
developed in the first place only because divinatory signs could already be 
“read” and had only to be separated from their objects (heated bones, tor-
toise shells) in the form of ideograms.92 Sometimes writing, invented ini-
tially for registration purposes, found so complex a field of application in 
divination and its need for records that phonetization was introduced, but 
also blocked—as in Mesopotamia. In any case, the symbiosis of divination 
and writing is among the characteristics that distinguish advanced civiliza-
tions markedly from late archaic societies, although oral communication 
long remained dominant.
We can well ask ourselves how the wisdom culture that developed in 
this form related to the differentiation techniques of all meaningful com-
munication. On the one hand, it is inconceivable without differentiation of 
what is hidden, and also tended itself to develop a code of favorable/unfa-
vorable signs. On the other, it clearly lacked the relation to binary schema-
tisms that characterized the prudentia of the Greco-Roman tradition, which 
had determined old European semantics until well into modern times. For 
prudentia are concerned with rationality in a quite different sense, namely, 
with advice on modes of behavior that found themselves confronted by a 
difference—that between past and future or by moral difference, namely, 
the possibility that others can act both well and badly. ­Prudentia can then 
relate to the time dimension and the social dimension in a quite different 
sense than wisdom, and in an evolutionary sense can therefore be regarded 
as a “preadaptive advance” for new types of rationality.
Another, less direct sort of reaction to linguistic coding not doomed 
to esotericism has generally proved more successful: morality. Contrary to 
the everyday understanding we bring home from church, the symbiosis of 
religion and morality must be understood as a cultural artifact that is and 
remains precarious and contingent. When it comes to imagining a high 
god, for example, in the African religious circles influenced by monotheis-

Communication Media    
tic religions, the moral ambivalence of the sacred is preserved and imput-
ing bad will to the high god is avoided even though he allows bad things to 
happen.93 In high religions, the tension between religious and moral cod-
ing is suppressed. On their fringes, however, the independence of the two 
semantics is repeatedly manifest—for example, in forms of cult widespread 
in Central and South America that work with states of trance, which make 
no distinction between black and white magic, generate possession as a 
morally ambivalent state, and are fully geared to procedure and effect.94 
The congruence of religion and morality with which we are familiar is 
presumably useful only to solve a communication problem caused by lan-
guage offering both a yes- and a no-version of everything that can be said. 
There can therefore be no justification without negatability, and morality 
must accordingly shift its basis to the incommunicable secrets of religion 
(and those who disregard this necessity, like Kant or Bentham or the value 
ethicists of our times, are punished with the unproductive maxims).
Morality is always symmetrized meaning. It operates under the prohi-
bition of self-exemption. Whoever calls for morality must accept its appli-
cation to his own behavior. As always, the exception is God. The religious 
justification of moral rules does not know this constitutive rule. It preserves 
its secret by not subordinating itself in turn to morality. It proceeds on the 
assumption of asymmetry. Jesus modifies the law that adulteresses are to be 
stoned in a scripture invisible to others; and by the new rule: “He that is 
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.”95 The rule stands—
and is beyond communication. It does not read: “He that is without sin 
among us . . .” For then Jesus would himself have had to cast the first stone.
The problem with all secrets is that they cannot be constructed but 
only deconstructed. They cannot feed into communication without rais-
ing the temptation to open what is closed to have a look. Prohibitions may 
well be imposed, but they can point to the possibility of contravention. 
The asymmetry of construction and deconstruction exposes the great se-
crets of society to a ruinous evolution, necessitating ever-new substitutes. 
Among the most important mitigating devices is the figure of the paradox, 
which is secret and no longer secret in that it blocks and does not reveal 
what can be done with it.
From a historical point of view, the most important solution is prob-
ably to shift the secret of religion into the (unacknowledgable) paradox 
of morality.96 Morality itself can, indeed must, largely forgo secrets (and 

 
  Communication Media
hence religion). If it is to fulfill its own function, it cannot be secret, it 
must be known. Only for morality’s own paradoxicality, for suppression of 
the question why it is good itself even though it provides for good and bad 
behavior, does morality initially require religious foundations in the will of 
God, who for His part is constrained to do only good.97 Religion itself is 
moralized so that it can justify morality; and why wickedness exists at all 
when God could make the whole world good with a word remains the ul-
timate secret of religion. At the same time, this alliance between morality 
and religion has the advantage of compatibility with the written word and 
with the objectification of the world.98 Mystifications can thus be largely 
replaced by structured complexity, at least at the more concrete levels of 
meaning in communication.
Above all, we are dealing with a novel code in relation to language, 
namely, the distinction between good and bad behavior. Like the linguis-
tic code itself, this code has only two values, positive and negative. But 
the moral code is in orthogonal relation to the language code, with the re-
sult that both the acceptance and the rejection of a communication can 
be both good and bad. Therein lies the improbability of morality when 
compared with the restriction of communication discussed above, and 
specifically the improbability that the risks arising from language can be 
controlled in this manner.
I shall speak of morality wherever individuals treat one another as 
individuals, that is to say, as distinguishable persons, and make their reac-
tions to one another dependent on a judgment about the person and not 
about the situation. In this sense, morality is a societal universal, since 
there is no society in which individuals do not distinguish one another 
as individuals.99 Variable is, of course, how personality is interpreted and 
what is attributed and not attributed to the individual, and in this regard 
the evolution of society brings about evolution in morality. As always, mo-
rality is not a special sort of norm, indeed, it does not even depend com-
pletely on normativization (there are primarily meritorious moralities); it 
is a coding based on the difference between respect and disrespect and 
which regulates the corresponding practices.
A fully developed morality is already a quite complicated mecha-
nism of social coordination and not, as present-day ethics would have us 
believe, merely the application of rules that can be justified by reason. 
Like the coding of language, the moral code of good and bad, when used 

Communication Media    
in communicative practice, generates a quite complex structure of condi-
tionings, specifically, moral complexity.100 Several distinctions have to be 
practiced at the same time and in relation to one another. First, there is 
the social dimension, that is to say, the difference between ego and alter. 
On both sides of this form another two-sided form is used, namely, that of 
respect and disrespect. This gives expression to the actual moral quality 
of the communication. Both ego and alter can be both approved of and 
disapproved of owing to their behavior. This generates an artificial range 
of combinatory possibilities,101 which urgently needs to be narrowed. 
Morality (in the usual sense of the word) accordingly comes about by re-
ducing the complexity of morality.
To achieve such reduction, conditions for respect or disrespect are 
formulated—in the form of descriptions of behavior, in the form of vir-
tues and vices, in the form of purposes or of rules.102 The rule also applies, 
as a principle of morality, that such conditions also apply to whoever sets 
them. Anyone who informs others of the conditions under which they are 
respected or disrespected is himself bound by them. Therefore the sym­
bolically generalized form good/bad suffices for the code of morality with-
out reference to the inner attitudes of the person whose behavior is being 
judged.103 The moral failings of the heroes of antiquity (matricide, patri-
cide, and so on) were presented as fate, not guilt. They proved the power, 
not the morality of otherworldly powers. Interpersonal self-reference and 
symbolic generalization of the moral code have dramatic effects—first, on 
the disciplining of moral demands, but also on the insistence and obtru-
siveness with which they are upheld when once installed, and on the inevi-
tability of their conflict.
Further refinements are decidedly culture-dependent and serve to 
adapt the moral regime to the given stage of societal development. The 
moral symmetry of ego and alter can thus be re-asymmetrized in adapta-
tion to societal stratification. What applies for the nobility does not apply 
for the commons. Heroes and ascetics, knights and the monks had pos-
sibilities to distinguish themselves that could elicit the admiration of the 
common man, but which could no longer bind him. Morality then takes 
on meritorious traits. Or, in adapting to the division of labor in society, 
it separates off an area with the aid of a distinction between respect and 
regard in which achievements expected only of specialists are recognized 
and judged. One does not need to be as good at math as a mathematician. 

 
  Communication Media
Finally, in the Middle Ages (and probably under the influence of regular 
confession), morality comes under the control of consciousness. After all, 
it now only dealt with the “inner” side of behavior, hence presupposing 
that people knew the rules and, even as far as their own behavior was con-
cerned (note this extravagance!), had to consider inwardly if they wished 
to respect or violate morality. This finally even made it possible under the 
combined pressure of theology and morality to demand the inconsistency of 
contrition (contritio) in relation to a person’s own behavior and to develop 
a priestly advisory apparatus solely in order to achieve this.
Since the High Middle Ages and certainly in modernity, the specifi­
cation of accountability has been held up as a condition for qualifying an 
action as moral. It must supposedly be borne by inner consent.104 This con-
siderably restricts morality’s area of application and detaches it from social 
status. The heroes of the old world were entirely responsible for how they 
behaved—not least because their social status guaranteed them indepen-
dence in their conduct. Since the Middle Ages, this link to social inclusion 
has been progressively abandoned, to be replaced by a novel combination 
of universality and specification—a typically modern syndrome.
After the introduction of printing, the link between religion and mo-
rality also weakened. The religious civil wars, conducted with moral fervor 
on both sides, demonstrated this to the whole world. In the seventeenth 
century, morality came to be problematized psychologically, and in the 
eighteenth century, in terms of justification theory. In parallel, religion 
was no longer thought of as organization of the world to be understood 
communicatively in appropriate fashion, but as a special type of commu-
nication conveying special meaning and performing special functions. The 
perspective shifted from first- to second-order observation. Religion was 
now seen as a particular sort of reductive structure, and thus as contingent. 
People were no longer bound by it because the alternative was to live in 
error and sin. One could believe in it—or not.
As a result, we have now attained a state of society where moralizing 
continues to be widespread, where, indeed, the “genteel” discretion the 
upper classes had acquired with such difficulty has been abandoned. But 
this moralizing no longer generates societal integration, any more than re-
ligion itself does. The good/bad code is in use; but it is, so to speak, run-
ning idle. Consensus is lacking on the criteria for assigning the values good 
and bad. The bistability of the code, excluding all other values, guarantees 

Communication Media    
abstractness, accessibility, invariance. But religion no longer prescribes the 
programs, necessary for this very reason, that regulate what behavior is to 
be judged positive or negative; and no substitute has been forthcoming. 
Moral communication still claims to speak for society. But in a polycon-
textural world, it can no longer do so in unanimity. It is not as if immo-
rality were spreading at the cost of morality. There are always good moral 
reasons for rejecting the forms for which morality has opted.
This precarious situation of morality in today’s society is matched 
at the semantic level by the individualization of moral reference, its in-
sistence on inner conviction (as opposed to external coercion), hence on 
self-­motivation. This individual ethic is detached from religion and distin-
guished from law. This leaves us with the question of how moral perspec-
tives are to be coordinated at all in society. If “ethics” are now everywhere 
in demand, in business, in politics, in ecological issues, for doctors, for 
journalists—we miss any in-depth specification of what social mechanisms 
could provide such amoral coordination of morality. And for this very rea-
son, institutions that appear to do so, such as television, must keep their 
function latent.
But we are jumping ahead to very late conditions. Morality appears 
to be a universal with which society reacts to the improbability of com-
municatively propounded meaning being accepted. Very simple forms for 
moralizing communication can be expected even in simple societies that 
are not yet rule-oriented, let alone acquainted with “internal” accountabil-
ity, but that are content to concretely categorize people and behavior with 
little consistency. Even then, judgment of a behavior will have had the sur-
plus effect of tying both actor and speaker down to certain expectations. 
The function of such morality in society may well be minor (at any rate, we 
are not obliged to accept Durkheim’s views), but we shall have to reckon 
with a generative mechanism that, connected to the yes/no coding of lan-
guage, ensures that conditionings develop to indicate which communica-
tions are to be accepted and complied with and which not.
Only in historical retrospect do we call the functional cycle operat-
ing with communication bans “religion” and that which codes behavior as 
good and bad “morality.” The theoretical reconstruction I have proposed 
should, however, keep us from projecting too much modern-day meaning 
via these terms into societies whose way of communicating was organized 
quite differently from ours.

 
  Communication Media
5. Writing
Language developed to be spoken, as a medium of oral communica-
tion. Communication was therefore tied to systems of face-to-face inter­
action, but as a society grows, the social relevance of physical presence 
diminishes. Having to rely on oral communication also had far-reaching 
consequences for the social structures and differentiation forms that could 
be attained under these conditions.
In the case of oral communication, sociality is, as it were, automati-
cally ensured. Speakers and listeners hear the same, and in hearing what 
he says, the speaker includes himself among his listeners. This is also true, 
and particularly so, for staged and stylized communication: for storytell-
ing (terms such as “oral texts,” “oral literature” are inappropriate and com-
prehensible only in retrospect) and for the reading aloud of texts that have 
already been written down. Communication extracts the narrative from 
the performer, as it were; we recognize this from the forms it requires, 
such as rhythm, music, set phrases, and, above all, an audience, without 
which even a personal memory of the singer would not function. A very 
limited and standardized vocabulary appears to suffice for normal com-
munication, too.
Another characteristic of oral communication is that metacommuni-
cation necessarily co-occurs. We had already postulated that metacommu-
nication is not possible in a pre-linguistic exchange of signals. However, as 
language evolves, it becomes the focus of communication, at any rate, the 
focus of face-to-face communication. We cannot speak without conveying 
that we are speaking and wish to be heard and understood. Now provision 
can be also made for disturbances, interruptions, repetitions, for special ac-
centuation. Whenever communication takes place, the stress is thus on the 
fact that communication is taking place. Noncommunication would be 
paradoxical communication, namely, the communication of noncommu-
nication; and the paradox would typically be interpreted as a refusal, and 
thus taken to be intentional communication—with serious consequences 
for those who really only want to be left in peace. Translated into our con-
ceptuality: the autopoiesis of communication, namely, that it takes place 
at all, is at the same time the subject of metacommunication and usually 
also a communal norm that is difficult to evade—unless by the very simple 
means of being absent. But whoever is present has to take part in commu-

Communication Media    
nication even if he has nothing to say. Then it is not so much information 
that matters but rather keeping communication going at all.
Furthermore, the voice, to put it in extreme terms, contradicts the 
recognizability of meaning. It can be heard only at the moment of speak-
ing, after which it falls silent. Oral communication therefore obtains the 
necessary redundancies from the personal identity of speaker and hearer, 
from assumptions of consistency gauged from people and further pro-
cessed in the schema of conformity and deviation. Only written commu-
nication comes under pressure to provide for the necessary redundancies 
itself, and this requires a quite different sign and word culture. At the same 
time, however, this releases individuals in great measure from having to an-
swer for recognizability, while enabling special communication contexts to 
be differentiated out for very personal communication.
Having to rely on oral communication also limits the possibilities 
for conserving and remembering, and thus what the narrative tradition of 
such societies can develop in the way of semantics. The spatial bounded­
ness of communication and its dependence on presence has important 
consequences. What counts in possible (useful or dangerous) interaction 
is proximity. Greater distance means declining utility and increasing dan-
gerousness, and finally a boundary to the unknown. One knows or sus-
pects that other people live beyond the mountains, but they do not belong 
to one’s own society and their language is often difficult or impossible to 
understand. There can be no ties with them, no religio, no morality in 
their regard.105
Under these conditions, notions of space and time are difficult to 
keep apart and ultimately merge. The world is “concentrated” in space 
and time around an inhabited center. Time can be experienced in con-
crete events, like space in concrete places, and is also ordered in terms 
of ­proximity/­distance.106 As in space, there is a countable, conditionable 
near time and an unreachable, dark remote time in which past and future 
cannot be distinguished. The near past goes back as far as the individual 
memory (i.e., the memory we can presuppose and activate in others in 
communication), and the near future reaches as far as present behavior 
manifestly conditions future states of affairs.107
Orally communicating societies can presentiate their religion through 
ecstasy, through states of trance, whose non-everydayness impresses those 
present.108 They dispatch shamans on journeys to unknown worlds. Nor 

 
  Communication Media
are they slow with sacralizations.109 Initially, this means only that there are 
limits to the comprehensible everyday world at which questioning is dis-
continued or compensated for by a sort of defensive meaning. Such mean-
ing has to be accepted; no recourse is possible to the assumption that there 
are texts (or people versed in texts) and hence authorities who could ex-
plain what it is about. Further oral communication would merely meet 
with resistance against a hopeless undertaking (what can one say?) or with 
more or less circular confirmation of the accepted meaning. This is also 
particularly the case where no elaborated religion is yet available that ­covers 
the sacred with myths, symbols, and explications. A very pragmatic ap-
proach to the sacred when it is no longer appropriate is by no means ex-
cluded; it forms part of the picture. Orality is characterized by the capacity 
to forget, to devalue, to adapt. The sacred therefore has no inherent guar-
antee of endurance, of veneration, of tradition; and if it does become tradi-
tion, this is the first step toward dissolution of its sacrality.
Also characteristic of orally communicating society is that a great 
deal of communication takes place simultaneously (occurs and passes) and 
can therefore not be coordinated. “One must think of many different in-
formants passing on information simultaneously.”110 The intelligibility of 
communication depends on the given situation. There can therefore be few 
consistency constraints and hardly any postulates of consistency monitoring 
and consistency assurance. The framework of knowledge about the world is 
restricted anyway, so that agreement in substance can be assumed without 
further ado; there are few occasions and possibilities for making a personal 
effort in this direction. Even esoteric knowledge, even mythologies, even 
divination teachings, even genealogies are passed on from generation to 
generation without inconsistencies posing a problem. The notion of a uni-
form collective memory is therefore unlikely to fit in with the reality of such 
societies; it is rather to be explained by the assumption that societies with-
out writing must have had some functional equivalent to the written word.
This state of affairs changed gradually but fundamentally with the in-
vention and dissemination of writing. Writing also increased the number 
of differences that a society could use, conserve, and recall. This also mul-
tiplied the things or aspects of the world that could be indicated. Never-
theless, the increase was not only quantitative. The change is so profound 
that it is not possible to give oral communication the form of written text 
(in analogy to a text in one language being translated into another).111 Of 

Communication Media    
course, the meaning of an oral communication can be written down, and 
now even electronically recorded. But not the communication of the mean-
ing. Indispensable elements of oral presentation, especially the simulta-
neous involvement of speaker and listener, the simultaneous utilization 
of several perceptual media, above all audition and vision, and the use of 
changes in the tone of voice, gestures, pauses, and the constant possibility 
of the audience intervening, of “turn-taking,” cannot be translated into the 
form of a written text. What is essential is that the simultaneity of speaking 
and listening consists, not simply in a chronometrically measured process, 
in regular progression from second to second, minute to minute, but in a 
structured process with accelerations and decelerations, with acoustically 
filled stretches and with breaks, with periods of waiting and points in time 
that build up and release tension. It is this joint experience of a structured 
sequence that gives speakers and listeners the impression of experiencing 
the same thing. Reading, too, does not take place evenly, but with meticu-
lously varying speed; but these differences have no social relevance.
Nor is there any one-to-one equivalence between oral and written 
communication. Even in the case of phonetic script, phonic units cannot 
be represented as optical units. It is not a question of representing units 
but of reconstructing differences. It is not the sounds that are fixed in writ-
ing but the differences between sounds. Writing is therefore possible only 
as a system that can represent all possible or at least the usual differences 
between sounds. Only thus, and not in the form of one-to-one representa-
tion, can the difference of perceptual media be used for hearing and seeing. 
Furthermore, written texts, as we know, require an independent analysis 
of the phonetics of speech that takes account of the circumstance that dif-
ferences cannot be exactly copied when translating into another medium.
Only if this is taken into account can one grasp that and how the 
difference between sound and meaning, which is at stake, can be trans-
lated into another medium. Whereas language in general takes form as 
the difference between sound and meaning, writing makes it possible to 
symbolize precisely this difference in another perceptual medium, that of 
vision. By “symbol” in this context, I mean neither a sign nor the repre-
sentation of something by something else on the basis of natural similarity. 
Symbols mark a form. An i is not an r—which in speech we often can-
not hear and therefore cannot know. This means that written characters 
express the unity of a difference in such a way that that we can continue 

 
  Communication Media
to operate with this unity and hence make other distinctions. The intro-
duction of written language allows quite novel operations, namely, read-
ing and writing, precisely because in these operations a distinction has to be 
made, not between sound and meaning, but only between combinations of let­
ters and meaning. Before writing was invented the form of language could 
not be symbolized. The realization that sound and meaning were not iden-
tical had to suffice; and this means that the distinction itself was a difficult 
one to make. There was always a tendency to take the word itself for the 
meaning, to consider names lucky—or unlucky, and to attempt to influ-
ence things themselves through speech. Once writing had been invented, 
only the gods could still directly change things with words:112 And God 
said, Let there be light: and there was light.113
The translation of language into an optical medium reinforces an ele-
ment that, with retrospective reference to Saussure, we can also attribute to 
the spoken word: namely, that language lives from the difference between 
its signs and not from conformity with nonlinguistic reality. Oral cultures 
could, indeed had to, ignore this because they could not reflect on their 
medium. With the introduction of writing, the nature of written language 
as sign and word, the spaces between words, their combination (grammar), 
in short, the remoteness from the world become a problem that was ad-
dressed in communication—to begin with as criticism of the innovation, 
but finally as restriction of form underlying all improvements to the effi-
ciency of the communication system.
With the written word, telecommunication begins, the communica-
tive accessibility of those present in space and time. Now the distinction 
between words and things was given an additional dimension. Telecom-
munication made it possible to transport signs instead of things. It works 
more rapidly, and with less effort, and the energy needed for transmission, 
initially only force times the time needed to learn to write and to write, 
does not have to be produced where transmission takes place. Writing had 
already offered these advantages, but the printing press and modern elec-
tronic communication were to enhance them immensely—albeit it with 
the critical consequence that societal communication now comes to de-
pend in broad areas on industrial energy production.
Writing thus achieves a great deal more than we imagine offhand. 
In particular, it achieves more than is conveyed by writing. First and fore-
most, written communication makes metacommunication optional. Meta­

Communication Media    
communication no longer necessarily accompanies communication (if not 
in the trite form of inference that a written text is written to be read). ­Textual 
and contextual references (e.g., author, sender, addressees) have to be intro-
duced explicitly; and there is no social expectation of direct transition to 
active participation, to response, or to intimation that the text has been un-
derstood. The assumption that the real meaning of communication lies in 
metacommunication, namely, in participation in communication, is accord-
ingly abandoned. Instead, we expect information and stop reading if our ex-
pectation fails to be met for too long.
The reader confronts the utterance process in reduced form: as text. 
The composition of a text often takes place at a remote place and time. 
Concrete motives for communicating therefore become less interesting (who 
wants to know why Thomas Aquinas wrote his Summas, and what use would 
it be if we knew?). Instead, new scope for interpretation opens up, which can 
be exploited in very different ways. Where questions about the motivation 
and context of communication play a role (e.g., when we ask whom or what 
the text was actually written to attack), they serve to interpret the text.
That we can have differing opinions about identical texts hence makes 
it possible to differentiate texts and inhibit immediate reactions. For al-
though the written form leaves the link between the two selections infor-
mation and utterance intact and is therefore suitable for communication, it 
makes it possible to postpone understanding and allows it to be realized at 
any time, anywhere, by anyone without interaction. As a dissemination me-
dium, written language extends the reach of social redundancy; it enlarges 
the circle of recipients while limiting what can still be spoken about infor-
matively (i.e., surprisingly). In using writing, society thus waives the tem­
poral and interactional guarantee of the unity of the communicative ­operation, 
and this waiver requires compensation for what has been abandoned. This 
leads to an immense, unpredictable expansion of connectivity potential. 
Greater demands are made on the textualization of utterances that have to 
be comprehensible even under hardly foreseeable conditions, but that are 
nevertheless not suitable for monitoring the reactions of the reader. Finally, 
where writing is used not only for recording purposes but also for commu-
nication, problems arise with the self-authorization of the written text that 
represents an absent source.114
In oral communication it was possible to assume that information, 
utterance, and understanding were generated operationally at the same 

 
  Communication Media
time, even where information concerned something that was no longer 
immediate but had to do with the distant past. Myths, too, which were set 
in times immemorial, were present as narratives and it therefore did not 
matter that the story could presuppose, indeed, had to presuppose, that it 
was known. The sense of communicating myths lay not in surprise but in 
participation. This is different in the case of written communication, be-
cause temporal distances between utterance and understanding occur and 
have to be reflected on. Utterances must be geared to be understood not 
immediately but later, not in the course of their own flow but in accor-
dance with a later reader’s interest. For understanding, too, it can be im-
portant to remember that the utterer had a future in mind that was already 
past for the understander. This double reflection disciplines not only the 
textual version of communication (it must remain understandable, for ex-
ample, abstracted from time); it also enhances the surprise quality of the 
information. Above all, it abstracts the notion of the world as what is to 
be assumed simultaneous with communication, for example, as being, na-
ture, the omnipresence of an observer god.
It must hence have been difficult and is now even more difficult to 
understand written communication as communication. Since the world is 
still only actual in terms of points in time, we are now theoretically obliged 
to decide when written communication really takes place. We could say: 
whenever writing and reading take place. But they can no longer occur 
simultaneously. Communication is realized only when understanding 
brings it to a conclusion. If this is so, it may seem important or unimport-
ant to reconstruct when an utterance has been written, by whom and why. 
In any case, written communication works only in retrospection on itself. 
It must therefore accept an inevitable belatedness. It has to cope with re-
cursions that are no longer self-evident. It has to construct redundancies, 
take note of what has been “pre-scribed” [Vor-geschriebenes] and keep it on 
hand as a prerequisite for further writing.115 All this makes communica-
tion independent of spatial integration (physical presence), while having 
to cope all the more with time problems. Not only the medium of writing 
is stable; the forms given shape in this medium, namely, texts, are also still 
relatively stable. Texts thus serve as a secondary medium for actual form 
formation, which is realized only through interpretation.
Using writing thus presupposes a double utilization of the distinc-
tion between medium and form: first, in connection with language, a set 

Communication Media    
of written characters for still undetermined but regulated coupling op-
tions, which serves as a medium for text production. At this first stage, 
writing must function physically and is susceptible to destruction; all the 
more so because the recognition value of signs depends on the precision 
of their reproduction. In the second stage, meaningfully comprehensible 
texts have to be produced that can be read differently, interpreted in vari-
ous ways. Here, too, there can be errors of reproduction, which interpreta-
tion can correct or not, as the case may be. And interpretation can generate 
new texts, which give rise in turn to a tradition in need of interpretation. 
But final form formation in individual understanding is just as transient a 
process as communication itself; and it regenerates communication only 
through the continuous use of the medium of writing.
Of course, writing did not develop as a means of communication, for 
this would have presupposed readers. As so often, a provisional function 
intervened to sustain the innovation until it had developed sufficiently to 
assume its final function.116
The oldest extant, albeit controversial “writing” from a Balkan cul-
ture of the late sixth millennium (almost two thousand years before the 
first writings in Mesopotamia) appears to have served purely sacred pur-
poses, namely, commerce between priests and gods.117 It may have in-
volved some sort of management of religious secrets. There is no indication 
that such writing was involved in the communication problems of every-
day life—hence offering evidence for the evolution of new achievements 
that attained their final function only at a later date through a shift in 
function. Probably the best known reason for the development of written 
language already directed toward societal communication was the need of 
large, complex economic households to keep records; and subsequently 
to aid memory in other matters—for example, to back up messages that 
themselves still had to be delivered orally.118 In the beginning, this presup-
posed no direct relation to language, but only the marking of objects.119 
In China, the point of departure appears to have lain in divination prac-
tices, which had developed into a highly complex decipherment of signs 
(on appropriately prepared bones, tortoise shells, and so on). People could 
therefore read before they could write, and the practice of divination had 
a very concrete and differentiated relationship with the problems of every-
day life, and a corresponding need for a wealth of signs. Increasing artifi-
ciality may have developed in elaborating the meaning of the lines, then 

 
  Communication Media
also in the representation of question and answer on the magic corpus. 
The signs then had only to be detached from their substratum and adapted 
for artificial use, an evolutionary mutation that apparently took place in a 
very brief space of time.120 In Mesopotamia, too, the use of writing for re-
cording divination programs (wisdom teachings) contributed crucially to 
its development, in this case to the beginnings of phonetization and then 
to the blocking of transition to a fully phonetic script.121 All this was pos-
sible without having to consider communicative uses for the written word.
The communicative use of writing presupposes readers, and hence 
the spread of literacy. Long before this can be attained, we must therefore 
reckon with a politically and religiously expressive use of writing, where 
written language, certainly closely associated with notions of magic, im-
presses an illiterate population. This was the case in the Egypt of the Old 
Empire, but in many other places, too, especially with the diffusion of 
writing to hitherto uncivilized or little civilized areas.122 Writing was then 
established on a functional level where pomp, images, and buildings were 
also designed to impress.
Nor was the conversion of the Phoenician syllabic script into an al-
phabet inspired by the wish to produce literature or the need to jog the 
memory of singers but, as we now believe, by economic conditions, which 
were developing rapidly in the eighth and ninth centuries bce.123 The wish 
for a written record of orally performed epics presumably did not come 
from the singers themselves.124 After all, it was hardly in their professional 
interest, and there could be no question of reading aloud. Here, too, there 
was a shift in context, and literary production, not economic convenience, 
determined the historically significant impact of the alphabet. It was now 
possible to do without the rhythmically bound form, without dependence 
on the links between music, memory, and communication.
However, since at least the second millennium before Christ, writ-
ing had also been used communicatively, for example, in the form of letters 
(which initially presupposed a messenger and served as mnemonics) and in 
the form of texts that explicitly addressed a reader with the intention of tell-
ing him something. Communicative use developed parasitically, benefitting 
from a universal script that had already been developed, adding a further 
function to it, and, above all, new occasions for writing and reading.
The development and dissemination of writing thus shows typi-
cal characteristics of an evolutionary process in the course of which 

Communication Media    
functions were complemented, substituted, or even exchanged. Unlike 
speech, however, writing did not rely on the co-evolution of the human 
organism; it could thus become established relatively rapidly in only a 
few thousand years. Over this period, it led to a far-reaching transforma-
tion of communication options, and thus to a fundamental reorganiza-
tion of the societal system, which now had to be grounded in oral and in 
written communication. The implications of this historical turning point 
have been discussed from many perspectives in recent decades.125 How-
ever, its theoretical ramifications become apparent only if we consider so-
ciety as a communication system.
The importance of writing lies in a completely new sort of temporal-
ity in the communicative operation. What is achieved can only very super-
ficially be described in such terms as permanence, stability, and memory 
(I naturally do not deny that this was the perspective from which oral cul-
tures had to experience the benefits of writing). Writing does not alter the 
fact that everything that happens, happens in the present and simultane-
ously. No system can act outside its present and in a nonsimultaneous 
world. But precisely these shackles of the present lend writing its impor-
tance. For different presents, which are for each other future or past, can 
now be combined in every present through writing (and only through 
writing). What was future when the text was written or what is future in 
the narrative of the text can already be past when it is read; and we can 
know that the writer or the hero could not know what has meanwhile 
happened.126
Nevertheless, this does not provoke doubts about the unity of time. 
But writing generates a novel presence of time, namely, the illusion of the si­
multaneity of the nonsimultaneous. The merely virtual time of past and future 
is present in every present, although something quite different is simultaneous 
for it than for the present. And precisely this illusion of the written culture 
to which we are accustomed makes it difficult to return to the basic insight 
that everything that happens happens in the present and simultaneously.
Writing imposes a fixing of time—which passes nevertheless—in 
texts, which survive the passing of time; which hence remain the same at 
a point in time in which something that was previously future is past. A 
written culture must therefore break with any direct living-with-time. It 
must offer descriptions of time that resolve the paradox of constant refer-
ence to the transitory. It must be able to refer to time as if we had it before 

 
  Communication Media
us like a thing or movement. It must adopt a perspective, and integrate 
it in its time semantics, which lies both within and outside time. Among 
other things, this requires the original congruence of space and time to 
be dissolved. When guided by texts, the observer, although still in the 
world—that is, at a particular point in space and time, “here and now”—
relates to space and to time in a quite different sense and is personally af-
fected in various ways.127
This concerns the observational not the operational aspect of com-
munication. Communication is and remains an event bound to a point in 
time; nothing changes this. A communication system can attain dynamic 
stability, that is, stability due to continuation, only through ever more and 
different communication. Here, too, nothing can change. Unlike a mere 
record, communication is completed only through understanding. This, 
too, remains; and for this reason it must initially have been far from self-
evident to use writing not only for recording but also for communicating. 
The effect of writing lies in the spatial and temporal uncoupling of utter-
ance and understanding and in the dramatic increase in connectivity op-
tions that it engenders.
The direct consequences are (1) to waive the beneficent immediate 
disappearance of the spoken word, and thus the ease of forgetting; and 
(2) to gain scope for reorganizing sequences. For all communication runs 
on very narrow-gauge lines and is strictly sequential. One speaks after the 
other, otherwise no communication process could be organized. In prin-
ciple, this also applies to written language. But writing conserves what has 
been uttered for sequences that cannot be foreseen at the moment of ut-
terance, for parallel continuations, and, above all, for indirect connections. 
The systems that reproduce themselves in this manner thus operate more 
“connectionistically” (to use the current term) than sequentially. As I have 
indicated, the preconditions for this are to be found in reorganization of 
the difference between medial substratum and form.
I have defined the concept of communication medium in terms of 
the difference between medial substratum and form, the difference be-
tween loose and strict coupling. In the case of oral communication, this 
difference can refer only to single communicative events—to this or that 
which is said. Writing, in contrast uncouples the communicative event it-
self. This produces a new sort of medial substratum, which makes quite 
new demands on strict coupling through sentence forms. The elemen-

Communication Media    
tary unity of communication is dissolved and can become communica-
tion again only through recombination. To put it more simply: where the 
material substratum suffices, written sentences can be read at any time by 
any number of unknown readers; but these sentences must themselves es-
tablish the context needed to understand them, they must be understand-
able in themselves. They must put the reader “in the picture” about many 
things that can, indeed must, be taken for granted in oral communication, 
where stating what is visible and known to everyone would have no infor-
mation value (it would, for example, make no sense to describe the scenery 
for those standing in it anyway, whereas written forms, even where they 
simulate oral communication, for instance, in dialogues, must at least in-
dicate who is speaking at a given moment).
In oral communication, including long recitations for ritual pur-
poses or on solemn occasions, it will have been assumed that the world 
in which communication takes place and the world about which commu-
nication takes place are not in principle different but constitute a contin-
uum of reality. Long after the introduction of writing (and even printing) 
a concern with purely fictional texts was considered reprehensible. How-
ever improbable narratives might be, they were concerned with the world 
everyone had before them, with the communicatively extended situation 
that was presupposed and shaped in narration. Only when topics were 
given written form did purely textual problems of composition arise.128 In 
the factual dimension, the adoption of the written form prompted efforts 
to eliminate the inconsistencies that only now came to light. Situational 
forms of imparting meaning become cosmologies, gods entered into fam-
ily relations with one another, genealogies were reconstructed,129 and in 
the High Middle Ages, all theology found itself committed to theoretical 
consistency, with far-reaching consequences for controversies, school for-
mation, ecclesiastical intervention, and finally for schisms. The incentives 
for more abstract content in communication that this produced can hardly 
be overestimated.
Probably the most important tool for assuring consistency is (para-
doxically) the introduction of distinctions. And thus a reduction in unrea-
sonable consistencies.130 Writing is highly effective in drawing distinctions. 
This is the basis for its semantic effectiveness. And this is the basis for the 
conceptual typification of single words, and also for a tradition that re-
duces demarcations, divisions, categories, sorts, and types—namely, the 

 
  Communication Media
tradition of ontological metaphysics; and this provides the basis for also 
passing down what has been excluded, controversy, and dissent as re-
sources for redefining problems.
From a social point of view, many more people can thus be reached 
with one communication than would be possible if it were restricted to 
physical presence. In order to stress this, I have called writing (and hence 
the printing press) a dissemination medium. However, this should not take 
us back to the idea that the medial aspect consists in the transmission of 
information from one person to others. The effects of writing cannot be 
explained in terms of the mere multiplication of addressees, however im-
portant this aspect might be. It lies in the reordering of time and culture. 
Above all, writing increases uncertainty about understanding intended 
meaning.131 “Whenever one has the potential to read one has the potential 
to be uncertain,”132 and this applies not only for the reader but a fortiori 
for the author’s anticipation of understanding. The semantics induced by 
writing then has to do with the reduction of this uncertainty.
Finally, if we wish to assess the semantic effects of writing and attri-
bute them to written language, we must analyze the particularities of writ-
ten communication much more precisely. We must limit ourselves to only 
a few points.
Since writing is always also a technical mnemonic, it modifies the 
importance of memory.133 If we are to grasp this, we must understand that 
the memory of psychic and social systems can not simply be seen as stor-
ing past states or events and keeping them available.134 What is past is and 
remains operationally unavailable. The memory, too, can be used only in 
given, actual operations, and thus only in the present. The real function of 
memory lies not in preserving the past but in regulating the relationship 
between remembering and forgetting; or, as Heinz von Foerster puts it, in 
the constant selective re-impregnation of one’s own states.135
It is memory that makes the eventness of communication possible 
at all—in both oral and written communication. For as an event, com-
munication refers to itself, but can do so only by understanding present 
as different from past and future and reaching back or forward into these 
nonactual time horizons.136 This in turn is possible only if there is a mate-
rial basis in neurophysiology or the substrata of writing that is not remem­
bered as such. For written communication, too, does not recall writing,137 
but only the texts that are used as communication.

Communication Media    
From this perspective we can better understand what the invention 
of writing means for the differentiation of a specifically social memory and 
for the re-equilibration of the relationship between remembering and for-
getting this made necessary. Whereas pre-writing cultures had to preserve 
their memories in objects and officiations (quasi-objects) of all sorts and 
were only in this fashion able to become independent of mortal human 
memories, the use of writing makes discriminating between remembering 
and forgetting a matter of decisions to be made. For writing something 
down always means that something else is not written down. Writing is 
self-made memory. It can remember more and leave more to be forgot-
ten than before. Writing aids the memory but it burdens it, too. It enables 
communication to be constantly reimpregnated by rereading texts or re-
ferring orally to texts presumed available (even if difficult of access). The 
prevention of forgetting is also a process that accelerates learning. This in 
turn imposes the development of semantic schematisms that resolve more 
inconsistencies, and that can at the same time cope with more redundancy 
and more variety. This produces a more abstract conceptuality, which oral 
communication would never have been able to develop alone.
Time, for example, is treated chronometrically in order to accom-
modate various events at various points in time. What is decisive is that 
all movements, regardless of their speed and regardless of their beginning 
and end can be related to the same temporal measure, even if this is itself a 
movement, for example, of the sun or a clock. It follows that no move-
ment can move time itself.138 The being of time is a metaconstruct beyond 
all movements.
As soon as the keeping of records began to solve problems of mem-
ory, it is hardly possible to understand time any longer as a power of for-
getfulness (lēthē) to be escaped only with the aid of the muses. The old 
(and necessary) link between oral performance and music is replaced—
and destroyed—by writing.139 The rhythmically supported time of recall-
ing other times is replaced by the notion of a measurable movement, that 
of a describable dimension in which this simultaneity of the nonsimul-
taneous is ensured. On the other hand, where oral modes of passing on 
knowledge (especially in teaching) prevail, a psychic memory is indispens-
able. The sacred nature of memory enters into a complicated relationship 
with the techniques of the art of remembering. The solemn, formulaic 
mode of expression typical of oral cultures wanes or is reserved for poetry 

 
  Communication Media
(as opposed to prose).140 Formulation can thus adapt better to expressive 
requirements. On the other hand, the veneration of memory cannot be 
abandoned. The sacred quality of memory assumes a new form as remem-
brance of a founding past,141 so that highly developed memory training 
can become established alongside an artificial recording practice.
At the same time, the past gains unprecedented power over the pres-
ent as recorded history and as existing text. With reference to the China 
of the tenth to thirteenth centuries, Jacques Gernet writes of a “retour du 
passé,” inevitably calling to mind the recording of the Homeric epics.142 
The same can be said of Mesopotamia.143 In the old European tradition, 
symbolizing what is absent by means of writing enables the past to be pres-
ent, origins (e.g., of noble families) to be actual, and hence the legitimating 
force of archē, origo, Grund to take effect. The consequences are notori-
ously ambivalent: one is oriented on the past, which draws attention to 
what is different in the present. History becomes a drama of the presence 
of the past, the simultaneity of the nonsimultaneous. Among the losers is 
the segmentary system of the family clan, whose influence on the imperial 
bureaucracy declines in the face of writing-oriented and therefore verifi-
able knowledge.144
In the social dimension, writing came to prevail over the possibility 
and necessity of roles continuously switching between speakers and listen-
ers (“turn-taking”). This has far-reaching consequences. Communication 
was de-reciprocated; it was linearized and thus became capable of organiz-
ing very long but diverging sequences (which has to happen and requires 
competence). A new sort of authority arose. Self-confidently assuming the 
role of speaker time after time no longer counted for so much.145 Authority 
instead now developed in the form of pretension to and assumption of the 
ability to know more and to say more than could enter into the necessar-
ily sequential structure of communication. Authority was now the “capac-
ity for reasoned elaboration,”146 which, like a shadow, long accompanied 
the still relatively rare written utterance. At the same time, problems de-
veloped in linking this form of authority with the status positions that had 
developed in society through societal differentiation for the representation 
of society.
Liberation from having to switch roles in speaking and listening also 
made the corresponding roles of writing and reading into unsocial activi-
ties. Writing as such became a special type of skill, and thus a problem, as 

Communication Media    
the difficulties various scriptoriums in the Early Middle Ages experienced 
in coordinating their different ways of writing show.147 Only communica-
tion itself is social. A person necessarily has to write and read on his own, 
and even when others are there watching, observing him too intensely is 
pointless, indiscreet, and suspicious.148 The writer or reader, acting alone 
and without social pressure, also has more time and opportunity to exer-
cise care in doing justice to the formal exigencies of the text. Expanding 
the medial scope for combination means greater selectivity in the forms 
to be included, and this needs monitoring. In general, the problem now 
is that a full understanding requires grasping the context, understanding 
what the selection was made from. As we know, shortcomings in this re-
gard are now quite normal.
Writing thus makes it possible to shift the focus from communi-
cation to information. In oral communication, the talented distinguish 
themselves by an ability to talk even when there is nothing to say. And in 
simple societies, there is not enough information to keep communication 
going. Communication serves essentially to activate and confirm social 
convictions and mutually positive attitudes. People chatter, and anyone 
who persistently remains silent is regarded as dangerous because he re-
fuses to betray his intentions.149 With writing, this primary dependence 
on communication declines along with the certainty engendered by the 
physical presence of interlocutors that everyone already knows everything 
or is at least acquainted with the nature of things. Only now is information 
conveyed with increasing intensity, producing the artificial redundancies 
that make it possible to obtain information from someone or other who 
happens to have read it.
Compared with the close merging of reciprocity and time in oral 
communication, the factual dimension accordingly becomes more im-
portant. Written texts have a more objective relationship with their sub-
ject matter, which makes it possible to take note of the subjective way 
in which the topic is handled and to attribute it to the author. The “ob-
ject”—and only now are there “objects”—stays put and lets itself be tack-
led from all sides. Greater demands are made of persuasion than in the 
rhapsodic flow of speech. The written text must reckon with more critical 
attitudes, with knowledge of other texts, and with time for criticism. It 
must reckon with readers who know better. The word remains authentic, 
and does so in a new sense directed against falsification; but it can no lon-

 
  Communication Media
ger guarantee itself. It must refer in the text to other sources of reliability. 
Writing generates concepts for cognition and for right thinking.150
Compared with oral communication, which is articulated by a voice 
filling a space, writing occupies only a tiny section of reality. In the me-
dium of its perception it is more clearly differentiated and can therefore 
also be more easily laid aside or disregarded for the moment, and post-
poned as communication. The spoken word intrudes, imposes itself, de-
mands and receives precedence. It is far more identical with the situation 
than the written text, but for this very reason, it can also not outlast the 
situation. For written utterances, it is not even necessary for the writer to 
be still alive, and one of the earliest, specifically communicative uses of 
writing was to allow the dead to speak to the living. The Egyptians, in par-
ticular, made intensive use of this possibility of self-perpetuation beyond 
death in their funerary inscriptions.
Yves Barel refers to another, long-term effect of writing as “potential-
ization.”151 The textual fixation of meaning solidifies what has once been 
formulated even if it is rejected or not used. Whereas practically only what 
rapidly impresses the communication process survives in oral communica-
tion, writing can delay the decision to accept or reject, can socially diver-
sify and also record what does not convince. It takes the form of a mere 
possibility of meaning. And it is quite possible to rediscover this possi-
bility at a later date, to take it up again, to rethink it when its time has 
come. To the extent that communication produces and records such po-
tentializations, semantics as a whole is “modalized.” Reality is seen on the 
basis of its potentiality: partly as necessity, partly as contingent realiza-
tion, partly also as mere possibility. To begin with, one is satisfied with 
rejected or extremely remote (“monstrous”) possibilities. Antiquity had, 
however, already reacted to writing with a theory of modalities.152 It seems 
that only with the advent of printing did explicit “nowheres,” fictions, fan-
tasies, such as those of Sir Thomas More, Giordano Bruno, the modern 
novel, the utopias of the late eighteenth century, and the “poetry” of the 
­Romantics, come to be considered publishable and to justify their exis-
tence as unrealizable, mere possibility.153 And then it finally made sense to 
use the question about the conditions of possibility as a lever to uproot the 
ontological view of the world and its metaphysical description.
Finally, we should recall that written language no more doubles the 
world than spoken language does. Despite all system differentiation, there 

Communication Media    
is not one world that we perceive mentally and another that is a correlate 
of the spoken word and yet another that is a correlate of the written word. 
New autopoietic modes of operation and observation evolve in one and the 
same world. The new accomplishments are registered, not as multiplication 
of objects, but as differentiation and refinement of observation. This is why 
the evolution of writing gradually prompts the evolution of higher-order 
modes of observation; in particular the observation of other observers who 
are not as wise as Socrates and write down what they observe. An aware-
ness of the usefulness and necessity of writing down one’s own observations 
developed very early on, especially in the medical writings of antiquity—
precisely because what was important in this field more than elsewhere was 
to make one’s own observations available for other observers.154 Over the 
long term, systems thus developed on the basis of writing that converted 
their own autopoiesis entirely to second-order observation: the functional 
systems of modern society.
These complex characteristics of written communication were natu-
rally not realized in one fell swoop. Even the transition from written re-
cord to written communication must have been a problem that took time 
to resolve. To begin with, being able to write and read was no more that 
a sort of craft, a matter of special roles, and not everything that could be 
said could also be written, because the need to keep records and the need 
to aid communication were also specific needs. Only the development of 
phonetic script produced an exact and full parallel between oral and writ-
ten communication. It duplicated not the world of objects spoken about 
but the communication itself, so that we can speak of a secondary cod-
ing of language in terms of oral/written.155 After an intermediate stage 
of syllabic scripts, which, depending on the nature of the language, still 
had to accept ambiguities and reading problems, and (as in the case of 
the Cretan-­Mycenaean linear B script) were often supplemented by ideo-
grams, the final form was achieved in Europe with the letters of alphabetic 
script.156 Letters not only make the distinction language requires between 
sign and meaning. In relation to the phonetics of language, they are still 
artificial, but for this very reason they enable phonetic script to be com-
pletely standardized. The advantages were immediate: the alphabet was 
easy to learn, so that the ability to read and write could spread without 
presupposing role-specific skills; and, above all, it allowed new words to be 
formed (e.g., making adjectives and verbs into nouns, combining words 

 
  Communication Media
into compounds). Language could thus immediately adapt to all the ex-
pressive requirements that arose in cultural development and was much 
less of an obstacle than ever before to conveying what one wished to say.
In retrospect, the special achievement of the alphabet as perfect pho-
netic script has perhaps been overestimated. A universally untypical evo-
lutionary development branched off to make history. But why did this 
happen in the light of so many cultures producing systems of writing they 
found functional? It is difficult to give a satisfactory answer. What is strik-
ing, however, is that alphabetized writing soon went beyond the narrow, 
functional contexts of long-distance trade and temple and palace admin-
istration in political centers of government to become a system of writing 
used by the public.157 Not only the alphabet but also the limitation of the 
horizon to perceivable cities with their specific laws of life (nomoi) is likely 
to have contributed. In any case, a society accustomed to the written word 
develops, which can use the general medium of writing to differentiate 
special areas—above all, a city government organized on the basis of of-
fices with changing incumbents, and that finds continuity in its locus and 
its written laws. But the written word is then no longer a special resource 
of political rule: the same system of writing can be used for many other 
purposes—above all, as a medium for a culture of debate in many fields, 
from medicine and geometry to poetry, theater, rhetoric, and philosophy.
Naturally this does not mean that the whole population learned to 
read and write. These skills spread only long after the introduction of the 
printing press and only in the mid-nineteenth century did they become 
universal in a few countries of the world. However, what counted was not 
complete coverage, and, even in the Athens of the classical period, literacy 
was widespread enough for literary texts with a far-reaching impact to be 
written for unknown readers and unforeseeable situations and for contro-
versies, even in such specialized fields as medicine, to be conducted in writ-
ing.158 The direct consequences included training in criticism on the basis 
of second-order observation, observation of other observers.
The consequences, in both the short and long terms, were immense. 
Writing, too, could after all also be understood as communication—and 
no longer only as a form of recording and an aid to oral communication.159 
Communication as written text—and not only as ongoing oral communi-
cation—could then become the subject of communication. Translation and 
monitoring became possible. Novel sorts of consistency constraints devel-

Communication Media    
oped, since texts could be read over and over again and could be compared. 
For example, genealogies—a tried and tested means of symbolizing unity 
and difference in a structure160—had to be freed from contradictions.161
But writing is suitable not only for communication: it also enables 
oral communication to be represented in written texts. This had been rec-
ognized and exploited at an early date, for example, in the old Egyptian 
tomb inscriptions by means of which the dead “speak” to the living; and 
above all in the philosophical and literary form of the dialogue, which in 
the written version is represented as if it were being conducted orally, with 
all the advantages of multiple perspectives without any obligation to reach 
agreement. Finally, the special literary form of the novel develops, in which 
the characters themselves act communicatively. We thus find communica-
tion in communication, real communication as a copy of fictional commu-
nication and fictional communication in real communication, which at the 
same time allows us to forget that the fictional communication is fabricated 
by the real communication.162 This makes it possible to communicate, not 
only the advantages, but precisely also the failures of oral communication.163
All this does not call the predominance of oral communication in 
society into question. The oral recitation of written texts is common if for 
no other reason than because the capacity for routinized, effortless reading 
cannot be expected of the public. But oral communication is enriched in 
the so-called literate cultures by the possibility of reference to written texts, 
even if the texts are not on hand. The boundary between the communica-
tion system and the environment is drawn all the more distinctly; for if one 
were still able to assume that extrahuman forces communicate with one an-
other and address humans, they are unlikely to write books or leave notes.164
From a formal point of view, written texts change in comparison 
with the texts of the solemn oral address and naturally even more in com-
parison with everyday speech. They can do without formulaic modes of 
expression (needing completion), they are worded more concisely (and 
consequently more carefully), they waive redundancies, but they have to 
replace situational self-evidence by explicit statement. In semantics, too, 
the effects are hard to overestimate. Everything becomes different when 
conveyed in writing. We have already noted that time becomes a dimen-
sion. It enables heterogeneous situations to be joined in sequence, thus en-
abling greater complexity in myths that can still be presented as a unity. 
The return to unity becomes a problem; the God concept is only one pos-

 
  Communication Media
sible solution. We cannot go into all this in anything like adequate depth 
at this point. It can be said, however, that the most momentous innovation 
was the wedding of religion and morality.165
Advanced civilizations are societies with moralized (and moralizing) 
religion. They formulate the unity of the world as a good principle, as a 
good spirit, and a good god—and “good” is always understood as contrast-
ing with bad. It will be difficult to prove that this merging of previously 
separate semantics of the secret, the holy (in the double meaning of the 
enthralling and the awesome) and the supernatural with the moral code 
can be attributed directly to writing. The need to legitimate differentiated 
palace economy and/or military systems of dominance offers a more likely 
explanation. But if this was the inducement, the elaboration into religious-
moral cosmologies required the production of appropriate texts, and hence 
presupposed writing. Heaven itself was assumed to engage in moral book-
keeping, so that nothing, either good or bad, was forgotten.166 On this basis, 
moralizing religion was then able to gain stability and endurance even where 
critical of the powers that were and “prophetic,” and quite independently 
of specific political interests, of the rise and fall of empires. In response to 
its own problems, including what later came to be called theodicy—how 
a good and omnipotent God could permit evil in the world and allow the 
righteous to suffer—it increasingly developed in the evolution of ideas.167 
And it was this problem that brought religion and morality together; for 
the answer is: we cannot understand it, it is a mystery, we have to accept it.
As we have mentioned, the first religious reaction to writing had 
been the development in the Near East of an elaborate culture of divina-
tion, which, assuming that fate was written down, specialized in the read-
ing of signs. Prophets, in contrast, had a quite different relationship with 
their god: he inspired them concretely with instructions and warnings, in 
brief with acts of will, which they learned in dreams and visions and re-
ported orally.168 In opposition to the elitist culture of divinatory sign read-
ing, a new form of communication developed on the spontaneous basis of 
an old familiarity with dreams and states of trance, and thus on the basis 
of an oral culture, in which the initiative no longer lay in questions and 
answers but in acts of will by the divinity himself. However, this sort of 
communication was very rapidly reabsorbed by writing, through written 
reports of such events (including the reactions of those involved), so that 
for those who had not been present, a tradition of faith developed in which 

Communication Media    
the unbelievable was to be believed—now, however, with a quite different, 
communicatively active, caring, intervening God, an observer God.
It gradually became more difficult to imagine God as a speaker, even 
when scripture preserved His words. For what would happen if He sud-
denly said something that contradicted scripture? And who would be legit-
imated to hear it and inform others? Sacred writings must then themselves 
be legitimated as the word of God, as dictated or delivered scripture. In the 
end, doubts even arise about whether He had ever really spoken.169
The revolutionary importance of the new dissemination medium 
writing should not, however, lead us to imagine that communication im-
portant for society was immediately transferred from oral to written lan-
guage. The opposite is true. Communication continued to be understood 
as oral communication, and the discovery of the uses to which writing 
could be put was to take centuries, even after the introduction of the al-
phabet.170 Writing was not seen as serving to record new thoughts or new 
knowledge or even what occurred to the writer only when writing. De-
spite a well-developed written culture in the monasteries and universities, 
no one in the Middle Ages thought yet of a creative use of writing; one 
thought primarily of commentary, analysis, and explication.
In the light of texts recorded in writing, the importance of oral com-
munication was also enhanced. As interpreted by the Talmud, the revela-
tion on Mount Sinai was to be seen as a double one: revelation of a text 
to be handed down in writing and to be interpreted orally.171 Both faith-
fulness to the text and interpretative flexibility could appeal to the same 
revelation; and it also legitimized the difference. Where this religious mys-
tification of the unity of difference is not used, the written word attracts a 
great deal of criticism: it is claimed to undermine the cultivation of mem-
ory; to replace Mnemosyne as the mother of the Muses;172 to be sterile, 
unable to add anything to the truth and certainty of an opinion; to have 
nothing to say when one has questions: one cannot turn to a text, for it does 
not respond.173 Higher knowledge, it was said, remained necessarily unwrit-
ten, in law (nomoi agraphoi) as in philosophy.174 For this reason, the devel-
opment of writing skills initially stimulated the parallel development of oral 
communication.175 Precisely when the public could be expected to have tex-
tual knowledge, the techniques of persuasion and rhetoric were particularly 
strongly cultivated—although logographoi [speech writers] were then em-
ployed to set out in writing the texts to be presented orally. Thus the tech-

 
  Communication Media
nique I have mentioned for training the memory developed, along with 
the concomitant topos that imagines “places” where words, phrases, sayings, 
and arguments that might be useful can be “found.” The shift of important 
communication from rhapsodic speech to dialogue, and thus to a social 
model of establishing the truth, is to be seen in this context.176 This shift can 
be considered the point of departure for the development of a logical ter-
minology, which in turn abstracts from the social situation of dialogue. The 
sophists competed with the philosophers, the speakers with fact-oriented 
thinkers, for the upper hand in educating the nobility. The controversy was 
concerned with oral teaching and with its use in oral communication, but 
it is recorded in textual form and has left behind a semantics that occu-
pies those who call themselves “philosophers” to this day. Even the printing 
press did not make rhetoric obsolete, but in the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries provided it with new motifs—for example, that the truth cannot 
impose itself by its own force, but must rely on appearance and on dissimu-
lation.177 Until well into the eighteenth century, eloquence was held to be 
more important than detailed factual knowledge and book learning in the 
education of the nobility, and the view was taken (especially in religious 
matters) that there were important communications that should be reserved 
for oral delivery.178 Written and oral communication were available as al-
ternatives, and this very functional equivalence made it possible to develop 
and refine each mode of communication in its specific potential.
These thoughts about the evolutionary gain built into society by the 
new medium of writing also mark the threshold from which discrepancies 
between textually fixed semantics and social circumstances have to be ex-
pected. After the invention of writing, it can no longer be assumed that 
social structure and semantics are in constantly synchronized agreement. 
Especially when stimulated by internal problems and inconsistencies, se-
mantics can change more rapidly and possibly anticipate or even initiate 
potentials for development in society. But they can also conserve obsolete 
traditions and thus prevent the production of historically and factually ap-
propriate descriptions.179 The difference itself then stimulates the observa-
tion and description of societal states in both directions. The discrepancy 
is reproduced in the evolution of society. This has to be imputed to writ-
ing having desynchronized the old temporal rhythm in the autopoiesis of 
societal communication, which is addressed inter alia under the heading 
“Evolution of Ideas” below.180

Communication Media    
We can summarize the effects of writing as follows:
(1) Writing intensifies the differentiation of the societal system by process-
ing communicative signs in a manner possible only in society and by the 
resulting expansion and self-determined restriction of scope for selection.
(2) Writing changes the possibilities for establishing a social memory inde-
pendent of the neurophysiological and psychological mechanisms of the 
individual human. The recording of memories and repeatability in objects 
and officiations (rites, celebrations) is not immediately given up; but the 
constant selection of what is written down now produces remembering 
and forgetting in the form of decisions that are subject to criteria and 
monitoring.
(3) Because interactional control is eliminated, writing increases the risk of 
self-deception and deception by others and the risk of communications ­being 
rejected. More information normally means less acceptance, and only rem-
edies internal to society can counteract this.
(4) Writing leads to greater differentiation and elaboration of the various 
dimensions of meaning with the aid of specific distinctions; it objectifies the 
time dimension, objectivizes the topics of communication regardless of 
who is being spoken about and when, and separates off a social dimension 
where the views and opinions of participants in a communication process 
can be reflected upon.
(5) Writing uses abstracted signs and thus enables signs to be applied to 
signs, hence a special sort of double (operational and reflexive) closure of 
communication.
(6) Writing “modalizes” the understanding of reality, vastly expanding and 
correspondingly restricting what is treated in communication as necessary 
or contingent reality.
(7) Writing symbolizes what is absent, and in this context “symbolize” 
means that both what is absent and what is present is accessible for op-
erations of the system. This provides a basis for second-order observation 
that is free of restrictive face-to-face social control and permits criticism to 
an extent that exposes social structure and the semantics of society to far-
reaching transformation.

 
  Communication Media
6. Printing
Two thousand years after the alphabet had come into use, the print-
ing press gave an immense boost to the dissemination of the written lan-
guage. We still have no clear picture of the significance of this turning 
point in the practice of societal communication.181 At any rate there was 
more to it than an increase in the mere number of books and readers, 
which had already set in in the High Middle Ages.182 We can rightly speak 
here of a shift from quantity to quality.
Communication, one should remember, is to be understood in terms 
not of the action of uttering but of understanding. Written language ac-
cordingly presupposes readers if it is to be used not only to record but 
also to communicate.183 This makes it clear that the immense increase in 
what would come to be called the reading public revolutionized societal 
communication.
And in a relatively brief space of time. To realize the direct effects 
of printing, it suffices to observe the first century following the invention 
of the printing press. Printing made it possible to reproduce in volumes that 
enabled market mechanisms to be used for distribution; in other words, the 
production of texts was guided by demand and thus detached from the per-
sonal interests of the writer or his client. This was, however, not a neces-
sary effect of the technology as such. In contrast to China and Korea, where 
printing was in the hands of the ruling bureaucracy, and was thus limited 
to disseminating material produced centrally,184 in Europe distribution was 
organized on a decentralized basis via the market and price. Under these 
conditions, it was possible to translate the Bible, have it printed, and set 
up schools to teach as many people as possible to read it. The problem was 
only that readers who could read the Bible could also read other texts, so 
that it became necessary and possible to make framework decisions on pre-
ferred reading, which as distinctions could no longer be made only in reli-
gious terms. The dissemination technology could no longer be controlled 
through preferred content, and consequently no longer by “authority.”
That in Europe it was the economy that did the selecting means that 
everything that sold could be printed and that the religious and political 
censors had to impose market controls, which very soon proved unsuccess-
ful. Not all territories had such a market. In Russia, printed books became 
cheaper than manuscripts, and thus competitive, only in the eighteenth 

Communication Media    
century.185 But this remained an exception. On the whole, the speed of in-
novation was impressive, even for contemporary observers, who took note 
of changes in their lifetimes and therefore tended to exaggerate.186
Nevertheless, it is not easy to discern what was really new and what 
had a far-reaching impact on how society communicated. The rationaliza-
tion of book production had already begun in the big copying workshops 
of the late Middle Ages. Only in this context (and not as a singular event) 
is the invention of the printing press to be understood at all. It saved time 
and expense and avoided the mishearings and slips of the pen that occur 
in dictation. The relationship with the text probably changed because the 
tactile element, the movement of the hand, the personal, bodily effort and 
formative action were relegated to the background by the typographical 
end product. The hand continued to play a role at best in preparatory 
work, but this, too, was now concerned with printing. The reader was 
no longer present with a manuscript. The almost physical presence of the 
writer was limited to the production of the setting copy.
Above all, however, the technical advantages had economic conse-
quences. Lower prices created a market that in turn created a need; for only 
when texts were available was it worthwhile learning to read or maintain-
ing one’s reading skills through practice. The technology of the printing 
press generated the supplementary technology of reading, that is, a tech-
nology of the minimal motor function of perception, which is not con-
stantly interrupted by decisions. It could be relied upon without further 
examination. One now hoped (and the books themselves recommended 
their use to this end) to learn without the aid of others whenever conve-
nient. Reference in books to books and the quoting of specific passages 
were facilitated and encouraged by the fact that the books could be as-
sumed to be available.187 The ponderous apparatus of glosses, post-glosses, 
and comments that were added page for page could be abandoned. Indeed, 
browsing more extensively through new reading matter for information 
and entertainment gradually superseded the intensive, repeated reading of 
the same texts that vested them, as if automatically, with authority.188 In-
stead of repeating reading, it seemed more useful to compare different, now 
easily accessible texts. Texts now had to be “interesting.”
Since books were distributed via the market, claiming that they con-
tained something new became an important selling point—at first, mainly 
for small, cheap texts such as pamphlets, ballads, and accounts of crimes 

 
  Communication Media
on the occasion of executions. The buyer clearly did not want something 
he already knew. And this was true not only for scientific and technical in-
novations but notably for fictional literature chosen for its entertainment 
value, which people did not buy if they had already read it. The book mar-
ket favored alleged novelty, regardless of whether originality and novelty 
were endorsed by the arts and sciences.189 The self-advertising of printed 
products under their own names is likely to have contributed not incon-
siderably to the corresponding “change of values.” As early as the seven-
teenth century, it was becoming difficult to understand the pleasure taken 
in the repeated narration or performance of familiar stories, in the enjoy-
ment of recognition.190
Printing and school instruction on the basis of printed texts required 
the language to be standardized.191 Since the sixteenth century, national 
languages had been developing, which were soon to become tools of po-
litical nationalization and increasingly replaced Latin as the language of 
knowledge transfer.192 Moreover, printing now made it appear worthwhile 
to record texts transmitting knowledge that had formerly been passed on 
orally. This was particularly the case with craft technologies. In print, this 
knowledge was now presented as the state of the art and as encouragement 
to improvement. But the literature existing in manuscript form was also 
gradually published in print, and this, too, was to have far-reaching con-
sequences. First, the complexity of existing material became apparent, for 
example, in jurisprudence. The material could be reviewed, sorted, com-
pared, improved. Typical lower-class jargon could be indicated and class 
differences confirmed.193 Regional legal customs were recorded for print-
ing and thus withdrawn more and more from the hands of local (manorial) 
jurisdiction. Arrangements could now be made centrally. Only now did it 
become apparent how confused, contradictory, and almost unlearnable ex-
isting arrangements were, and an urgent need developed for an overall pic-
ture and simplification, for new methods, for systematization, for sorting 
out what was obsolete and of no use. This led to new demands for intel-
lectual mastery of the material, but also to pedantry. Gradually, the con-
viction spread beyond the entertainment sector that new knowledge was 
better than old. When copying texts by hand, each successive copy was 
worse, because old errors were overlooked and new ones were added. New 
editions of printed material, in contrast, could be expected to eliminate the 
errors of preceding ones; what is more, printed knowledge was an induce-

Communication Media    
ment to increase and improve existing knowledge. In other regards, too, 
printing affected temporal orientation. For example, it now made sense to 
address communication to many people living at the same time. The prefaces 
of printed books clearly indicate that this possibility was felt to be a new 
one. The process of increasing and improving knowledge made it indepen-
dent of the physical presence of people at the place where the knowledge 
was gained and thus independent of the social prestige of these people.194 
Finally, it can be assumed that printing (and especially the inexpensive 
printing of tracts) contributed considerably to the rapid spread of religious 
heresies.195 It led to the public articulation of radical demands, which, once 
known, could hardly be withdrawn.196 At any rate, the traditional, practi-
cally exclusive channels for the exercise of political influence—whether by 
corporations, such as guilds or municipalities, or by local magnates and 
patron/client systems—were undermined. Printed pamphlets were clearly 
no longer intended for specific addressees but for the public as a whole. 
And even the practice of petitions, which was retained and developed, 
made use of printing from the seventeenth century on and thus helped 
prevent decisions being made on recommendation and in secret.
With all this, printing covertly furthered the trend toward individu-
alization of participation in societal communication, and did so in two re-
gards. If something was known, but there was someone who did not know 
it, he had himself to blame. He had not read enough. He lacked education. 
On the other hand, when something was known, this was an incitement to 
draw attention to oneself as an individual with dissenting opinions or new 
interpretations. Only in the eighteenth century were these consequences 
of printing, namely, education and criticism, now also formulated in posi-
tive terms, to produce an independent semantics of enlightenment and in-
dividualism, because this gave hope of “natural” safeguards for the already 
irreversible structural transformation of society then taking place.197
One effect of printing, already mentioned, was the standardization 
of national languages employed over wide areas. Strongly varying local dia-
lects making mutual oral understanding difficult, if not impossible, are still 
to be found even in the twentieth century, but people can read the same 
books. Only now do rules (and a sense of rules) for the “correct” use of lan-
guage develop, up to and including the absurdities of complete academic 
governance of the written word [Dudenisierung], whose modification can 
then be decided only by experts and authorities.

 
  Communication Media
More than a culture based on manuscripts and oral tradition, print-
ing reveals inconsistencies in tradition and thus leads indirectly to arrange-
ments for the semantic resolution of contradictions. This can be achieved, 
for example, by linearizing chronologized time, making it possible to sepa-
rate things by situating them in time and thus making them “historically” 
compatible. In the longer term, this destroyed myths of origin, which had 
assumed the presence of origin and a past existing simultaneously with 
presence, without sequential (or with only briefly remembered sequen-
tial) order. This affected the justification and motivation of the nobility by 
dynastic origins and ultimately transformed tradition into an ideological 
option that had, so to speak, to be explained against the advance of time.
The numerous evident effects of printing are difficult to assess in their 
totality. In many regards they were still outcomes of the adoption of writ-
ing that had failed to come to bear only because of insufficient dissemi-
nation, and that now, with the lifting of this limitation, were suddenly 
triggered, as it were, by delayed reaction. This is likely to have been the 
case with every­thing that we might describe as descriptive and explanatory 
texts, which have to supply everything that is necessary for understanding 
them within the text itself. Until the advent of printing, the primacy of oral 
communication had been assumed, and writing had been seen above all as 
a means of registering and recording matters that were then to be commu-
nicated; or at least no clear distinction had been made between recording 
medium and communication medium.198 Communicatio meant establish-
ing agreement, making known—and after the invention of the printing 
press, it could also be claimed that the machine itself “communicated.” Fi-
nally, printing made it impossible to understand writing as mere recording. 
The self-­recommendation of books (which, as in the past, initially “spoke” 
on their own behalf, addressing the reader as books) showed the differ-
ence. Although more precise research on this question is lacking, we may 
assume that the understanding of communication changed, and if this was 
the case, it could well have been the most momentous effect of the printing 
press. For how communication is understood is how society is understood.
It took well over two hundred years after the invention of printing 
for its function to become apparent as a technical infrastructure for the 
maintenance and updating of a societal memory199—separate from what 
individuals more or less accidentally recall and that dies with them. In 
order to make this memory generally available, “public” libraries were set 

Communication Media    
up. The associated guarantee of stability, independent of the succession of 
generations of individuals, is renewable and open for a future it does not 
itself determine. It replaced the guarantees of stability that older, orally 
communicating societies had found in the family and spatial structures of 
the community; and it replaced it by forms that could be used by the var-
ious functional systems, by science and by literature, by the legal system 
with its increasingly legislative activities, and, finally, by the economy, 
through the printing of bank notes. It was the technical grounding of 
this form of distributing and conserving knowledge that made it possible 
to uncouple it from already structured forms of societal differentiation; 
and it could therefore be left up to the given functional system whether 
to use it and how.
Further developments followed step by step. Negative effects of read-
ing books were noted—for instance from women’s delight in love stories 
or knights’ pleasure in tales of chivalry (Don Quixote). Production began to 
be oriented to the reader.200 But for the time being, the belief persisted that 
communication was interaction. Interaction remained the model for social 
rationality, however insular this might appear in a society that was already 
acquainted with a carefully calculated money economy, reasons of state, 
and theory-guided scientific research. The Enlightenment still espoused 
the interaction model, and thus ultimately that of oral communication; 
but for the mutual disciplining of those physically present it substituted 
the assumption of a rational interest ascribed to the individual members 
of the reading classes. The concept of the human being was accordingly 
generalized. This was then outbidden by the theory of transcendental con-
sciousness, the paradoxical assumption that self-reference is generalizable. 
It was only the Romantics, who—seeking to include infinity, incommuni-
cability, and deviant views of reality in communication—adapted to writ-
ten and printed language; only then was the failure to communicate to 
become a favorite theme in literature.
When the entire population might be expected to have attained lit-
eracy, this development would be taken a stage further. Only in the mid-
nineteenth century did an inexpensive, daily mass press begin to publish, 
requiring a deliberate lowering of the understanding threshold, which in 
Japan also required a (not always observed) limitation to the written char-
acters that could be assumed to be generally known.201 I have discussed 
some of the consequences elsewhere apropos of public opinion.202

 
  Communication Media
Finally, we can assume that the concept of action had to be modified 
if it was to include the writing of books for the printing press. Activities 
could no longer be easily regarded as following the pattern of interaction 
between physically present interlocutors, who could draw on numerous 
implicit pointers to understanding. In the course of the eighteenth cen-
tury, it also became clear that the author could not appear in his own text, 
because he already knew the end of the story and by referring back to him-
self would repeatedly interrupt the course of events. He therefore had to 
limit himself to the role of “author” external to the text (just as an artist 
had to sign a work). If the concept of action was to include this case (and 
how could it avoid doing so?) it had to be decontexted and freed of all nar-
rative restrictions. But what then is the unit of action? Where does it start, 
where does it end? In effect, action could no longer be anything else but 
the embodiment of a subjective intention—with the result that the legiti-
macy of action could now be called into question.
7. Electronic Media
In our century, the use of electricity that technology offers has 
broadened options for communication and, above all, reduced the ob-
stacles to natural communication based on the human organism. The 
energy needed for communication can now be produced and supplied 
quite independently (e.g., in quite different places) of the operational im-
plementation of communication. The technical network of energy flow 
is completely neutral to communication; in other words, information 
is produced outside the network and can only be disturbed by “noise.” 
Causal relations between technological physics and communicated infor-
mation are freed of overlap and take the form of structural coupling. In 
the first place, this means that the communication system society is be-
coming more and more dependent on technologically determined struc-
tural coupling with its environment. Susceptibility to failure is increasing, 
and with it the technical and economic cost of safeguards against break-
down. On the other hand, this has led to the technically induced but 
use-­determined, endogenously dynamic proliferation of communication 
options, and has done so almost simultaneously in several regards. It is still 
too early to judge the consequences, but we can at least describe the struc-
tures of these innovations.

Communication Media    
Telecommunication—from telephone to fax and e-mail—reduces 
the remaining spatial (and therefore temporal) restrictions on communi-
cation to more or less zero. The technical possibilities are supplemented 
by recording facilities, which also permit utterance and reception to be 
separated, permitting different temporal arrangements on the two sides 
and hence facilitating communication. Electronics calls neither oral 
nor written communication into question, merely providing more po-
tential applications, albeit at the cost of the restrictions imposed by the 
technology.
The really momentous change, however, appears to lie in the inven-
tion and development of electronic machines for information processing. 
Under the spell of a long humanistic tradition, the issue had first been 
defined in terms of whether the computer and its “artificial intelligence” 
achieved anything comparable or superior to human consciousness and 
how superiorities and inferiorities were distributed across the various areas 
of performance. The human subject has always been the vanishing point 
for the humanities. The question is whether this is the right definition of 
the problem and whether the computer will not sooner or later emerge 
victorious from this competition if society grants it “equal opportunities.” 
Quite another question is whether and how computers can replace or out-
bid communication, an achievement constitutive of society. They would 
have to treat knowledge as form, and thus know what other computers do 
not. At the cybernetics conferences of the 1950s, claims had already been 
made that human consciousness could be constructed as a machine if only 
it were possible to say precisely enough what the machine was to do. But 
this means that the area of research that came to be called “artificial intel-
ligence” is concerned only with programming. This shifts the problem to 
linguistic communication, which has the advantage of also operating with 
fuzzy expressions, as long as self-correcting operations can be undertaken 
should the need arise. Communication is the ongoing processing of the 
difference between knowledge and nonknowledge, with no need to estab-
lish what stocks of knowledge/nonknowledge the individuals or machines 
involved have. They are both outcome and precondition of communica-
tion. There are good arguments, at least at present, for the indispensability 
and superiority of oral and written communication, which can, however, 
use the computer to enhance their own capabilities and concentrate on es-
sentials that cannot be delegated to technology.

 
  Communication Media
But comparing computer performance with consciousness or com-
munication is probably a secondary issue. I leave aside the question of 
whether working or playing with computers can be understood as com-
munication; whether, for example, there is double contingency on both 
sides. Nor do I consider whether and how we have to change the con-
cept of communication if we wish to include this case. More interesting 
is how societal communication is affected if influenced by computer-­
mediated knowledge. What we actually observe are worldwide, connec-
tionist networks for collecting, assessing, and accessing data, for example, 
in medicine, which address specific topics but are not spatially limited in 
operation. This offers a further argument for the fact of a world society, 
which intensifies and accelerates communication in a fashion impossible 
without these new dissemination media.
Compared with what tradition had defined through religion and 
through art, the computer changes above all the relationship between (ac-
cessible) surface and depth. It is no longer a matter of craquelure that al-
lows divination or of ornaments that emphasize meanings. The surface is 
now the monitor, which makes extremely limited demands on the human 
senses, whereas depth is the invisible machine, capable of reorganizing it-
self from one moment to the next, for example, in response to use. The 
link between surface and depth can be established by commands instruct-
ing the machine to make something visible on the monitor or as printout. 
The machine itself remains invisible.
We can only assume that this structure considerably influences both 
the possibilities of and restrictions on communication. On the one hand, 
it requires specific skills in coupling surface and depth. Only for this rea-
son can we describe the invisible machine as “virtual reality” (only presup-
posed ability [virtus] distinguishes virtuality from mere possibility). On the 
other hand, the structure can be used only if it sets off changes (informa-
tion) in psychic or social systems. Mediation appears to require forms to be 
temporalized. Fixed forms are no longer taken as given, to be judged true 
or false, useful and useless, and so on, by the codes of functional systems. 
Every determination produces an unmarked space and hence another side 
that can be determined only through further operations (with the same 
consequences). Although they can be understood and used as such in ap-
plied contexts, these “transclassical” [transklassischen] machines are more 
than just powerful tools.203 What is involved is the marking of forms that 

Communication Media    
enrich distinction and indication with unforeseeable consequences for the 
communication system society. At any rate, as ability increases, so does in-
ability (as measured against it). The possibilities of arguing by accessing the 
invisible machine are clearly diminishing and the susceptibility to failure 
is increasing.
Further technical inventions, namely, cinema and, in the telecom-
munication field, television, enable moving pictures to be communicated. 
Sound can also be synchronized with pictures so that the whole reality can 
be multiplied and reproduced for secondary experience with guaranteed 
faithfulness to the original. Optical and acoustic reproduction, so strictly 
separated by writing, now merge. The guarantee of reality, which language 
had had to forgo because everything that is said can be contradicted, shifts 
to moving, optically/acoustically synchronized pictures.204 Although we 
still have to watch the replay and understand that there is no sense in 
contradicting the pictures or destroying them—the screen quite obviously 
presents an alibi reality—photography also guarantees correspondence be-
tween the photographed reality and the reality that appears in the picture. 
The whole of communication thus mediated once again becomes depen-
dent on real time. A film can only be shot when what is to be filmed actu-
ally happens—neither beforehand nor afterward. And we can view it only 
when it is screened or broadcast. This “relapse” into quasi-oral temporal 
relations can rapidly be compensated for by cutting and recording tech-
niques. The problems caused by technology can be resolved by technol-
ogy. But this dependence on real time produces a certain credibility bonus: 
there is no time for complex manipulation or to check for such manipu-
lation either during shooting or viewing. This does not exclude a general 
suspicion of manipulation, but such a suspicion must remain distant and 
abstract, and therefore lacks evidence in communication.
The result of these inventions is that the entire world has become 
communicable.205 The phenomenology of being is replaced by the phe-
nomenology of communication. We see the world as visual communica-
tion suggests it to us—even if not so dramatic, not in such high contrast, 
not so flawless, not so colorful, and, above all, not so select. The world we 
perceive, both the normally perceived world and the television world, pales 
under the constant drive to outbid.206 What is more, the very aspect that 
had been fascinating in language now declines, namely, the possibility and 
necessity of distinguishing between information and utterance. Although 

 
  Communication Media
we still see people talking on television, indeed, even viewers again play 
a part in the medium, be it only as ridiculous background laughter indi-
cating that there is something to laugh about,207 the entire arrangement 
evades the controls that had been developed over thousands of years on 
the basis of distinguishability between utterance and information. For this 
reason, the yes/no coding of linguistic communication also fails. We can 
be positively or negatively affected by a film, we can find it good or bad, 
but, in the overall complex of what is perceived, the intensification is lack-
ing that would allow a clear distinction to be drawn between acceptance 
and rejection. Although we know that it is communication, we do not see 
it. This can raise suspicions of manipulation, which cannot, however, be 
substantiated. We know it, we live with it. Television produces a produced 
form that binds all everyday means of persuasion. And the other side of the 
form is precisely the suspicion of manipulation.
Since audiovisual transmission can convey perception completely, 
the possibilities and necessities of individual imagination do not come to 
bear.208 At the same time, individual-mass reception obviates communi-
cative efforts to persuade. Similarity of purpose is established before the 
screen but naturally does not exclude differences of opinion any more than 
does the natural perceptual world. There is therefore little sign of culture 
and worldviews homogenizing, but shifts in attunement are perhaps tak-
ing place in more rapid rhythm.
What then is communication if everything can be communicated, 
and if in important, impressive fields, the difference between information 
and utterance that is constitutive of communication becomes unrecogniz-
able? Does the totalization of communication lead, as Baudrillard claims, 
to the disappearance of communication? Or does the blind closure of the 
system of societal communication only now become full reality? Is commu-
nication then only invisible assistance in the self-observation of the world, 
and is society the boundary per se across which the world observes itself?
Let us leave these speculative questions aside and consider how under 
these conditions the selectivity of communication reorganizes itself. In 
many cases (with the exception of telephony), technology imposes uni-
lateral communication. This is partly inevitable due to the interposition 
of technical apparatus, but also partly a necessity of mass communication 
that printing had also had to accept.209 This changes the process of selec-
tion, and does so on both sides of the apparatus. One no longer selects in 

Communication Media    
communication but for communication. The sender chooses topics and 
forms, productions, and above all the time and duration of transmission as 
he sees fit. The receiver chooses what he wants to see and hear. Communi-
cation then takes place as in a hypercycle of mutual selection; but, where it 
occurs, it can no longer correct itself.
While this shows how far we have moved away from oral communi-
cation (without, it should be repeatedly stressed, replacing or eliminating 
it), the latest invention goes a step further. We are talking about commu-
nication mediated by computers. It makes it possible to separate the input 
of data into the computer and the retrieval of information so strongly that 
no identity of any sort remains. As far as communication is concerned,210 
this means that the unity of utterance and understanding is abandoned. 
Whoever feeds something in does not know (and if he did, he would not 
need the computer) what will be taken out on the other side. The data have 
meanwhile been “processed.” The receiver, too, needs just as little to know 
whether something is intended for his attention and what. This means that 
the authority of the source with all the required sociostructural safeguards 
(stratification, reputation) becomes superfluous, is indeed annulled by the 
technology and replaced by the unknownness of the source. The possibility 
is also lost of recognizing the intention of an utterance and of nurturing 
suspicions or drawing other conclusions that could lead to the communi-
cation being accepted or rejected.211 What we have is the absorption of un-
certainty subject to limited self-monitoring. What is more, human bodies 
(at least in the current state of the art) are tied to connection points even 
where they are portable devices. As with television, this could lead to a re-
duction in chance contacts between freely roaming bodies.212 All this has 
driven the social decoupling of the medial substratum of communication 
to an extreme. In our conceptual terms, this means that a new medium 
is emerging whose forms depend on computer programs. Although these 
programs do not decide how the medium concentrates the communica-
tion itself into forms, for this involves the events of information input and 
retrieval, like the grammatical rules of language, the programs are forms 
that restrict the possibilities of strict coupling and can thus extend them 
into the unforeseeable.
Whereas writing achieved the spatial (and hence also temporal) de-
coupling of the communication components utterance and understand-
ing, albeit under the strict condition that the factually same information 

 
  Communication Media
is concerned (however this might then be “hermeneutically” modified), 
the computer can include the factual dimension of the meaning of com-
munication in the decoupling. What this can lead to currently eludes the 
boldest speculation. Nevertheless, new trends in the cognitive treatment 
of such matters are already apparent, which are beginning to influence 
the form of ordering knowledge. The point of departure is a basically op-
erational and then procedural understanding of reality 213—with or with-
out “autopoiesis.” This leads to the notion of a no longer comprehensible 
complexity and subsequently to work on cognitive structures that abstract 
from time and, for example, in the form of calculi, postulate reusability at 
other points in time. Such temporally abstract models of fundamentally 
time-dependent (historical) operational sequences explode the classical 
concept of movement, which is to be recognized only in the difference to 
what is fixed, thus the distinction between moving/unmoving, dynamic/
static, and so on. What takes its place, if we can indeed understand the 
conversion of knowledge in terms of such a substitution process, cannot be 
established with any certainty, despite the progress made in such fields as 
the cognitive sciences, artificial intelligence, computer linguistics, and the 
new mathematics of the unexpectable—at any rate, not for a sociologist, 
who can only respond to societal facts that are already in evidence. From 
the point of view of a theory of society, we can at best formulate the prob-
lem of this new ordering of knowledge as radically as necessary.
The new media of this century have considerably expanded the 
worldwide possibilities for communication. They have therefore intensi-
fied the discrepancy between possible and actual communication. Hence 
they intensify the selection problem to which society reacts by both orga-
nizing and individualizing selection.214 They dissolve the cogent unity of 
communication in a way that would not have been considered possible 
only a few decades ago. This increases the importance of the difference be-
tween medium and form (i.e. the form of the difference between medium 
and form). Modern society accordingly appears to have reached a limit be-
yond which nothing can be communicated any more—with one old ex-
ception: sincerity.
For if we cannot say that we do not mean what we say because we 
then cannot know that others cannot know what is meant when we say 
that we do not mean what we say, we can also not say that we mean what 
we say because this is either a superfluous and suspicious tautology or the 

Communication Media    
negation of a negation that is incommunicable anyway. This paradox of 
communication cannot be avoided. But it can be circumvented, dissolved, 
replaced by an apposite distinction. This is achieved by institutions that we 
choose to call symbolically generalized communication media.
8. Dissemination Media: Summary
If there are sustained trends in the evolution of dissemination media 
that begin with the invention of writing and culminate in modern elec-
tronic media, they can in brief be identified as the trend from hierarchical 
to heterarchical organization and the waiving of the spatial integration of 
societal operations.
While reliance was placed on hierarchical order in developing soci-
etal differentiation, in empire building, urban ascendancy, and stratifica-
tion, the dissemination media were already working on delegitimizing it, 
or more precisely, on an alternative project. With hierarchies, it suffices to 
watch and influence the apex, because, more or less rightly, it can be as-
sumed capable of asserting its will. Heterarchies, in contrast, are based on 
the interconnection of direct contacts discriminating (observing) on the 
spot. The invention of the printing press still left uncertainty about this 
opposition between hierarchy and heterarchy. In China and Korea, the 
printing press was a dissemination tool in ruling bureaucracies. In ­Europe, 
which had from the outset set its sights on the economic exploitation and 
market distribution of printed material, the authorities sought to resolve 
the conflict by means of censorship. Their failure, inevitable with the multi-
plicity of printing centers in various territories and with the rapidly increas-
ing complexity of printed communication, finally obliged all hierarchies, 
including those of politics and the law, to come to terms with a fundamen-
tally heter­archically communicating society. Since the eighteenth century, 
this state of affairs has been celebrated as the primacy of “public opinion.” 
As far as differentiation forms are concerned, this corresponds with the 
transition to functional differentiation.
Modern computer technology takes us an important step further. 
It also attacks the authority of the experts. In principle, everyone will in 
future be able to check the statements of experts such as physicians and 
lawyers on his own computer. They may very well claim there is no sci-
entific evidence for the efficacy of certain medications—and we find it 

 
  Communication Media
­nonetheless. Or that there are no court rulings on certain legal issues—and 
we find them nonetheless. Although it is difficult to check how knowledge 
finds its way into the computer, it can at any rate not be turned into au-
thority. Naturally, this does not change the fact that everyone who relies on 
communication in one way or another has to depend on trust. But in the 
age of electronic data processing, this trust can no longer be personalized, 
no longer implemented in social status; it is now only trust in the system.
In the decentralized order of a heterarchy, too, there is no lack of far-
reaching and above all highly consequential events. A single selection can 
permit or obstruct many others. An item of news—such as the dropping of 
the atom bomb—can change the world. There are also places under obser-
vation, like the stock exchange, that are more worth observing than others. 
Important things can also gain prominence here, but only in the context of 
simultaneous nonknowledge, only in contexts that cannot be monitored. 
There are indeed constants, repetitions, intensifications; and, above all, if 
we may describe the single event as observation, a shift in the functioning 
of the system to the level of observing observations.215 If we now have only 
observers to observe, this is in the first place a drastic reduction; but at the 
same time a reduction that in any case gives us the option of whether we 
wish to attribute what is observed to the observer and his distinction, or to 
what he observes. Is what is transmitted “right,” or is it selected, stylized, 
falsified, invented by a special sense of mission. Here, too, the only help is 
in observing observations, including one’s own observations.
As a result, this situation has profoundly unsettled the semantics 
with which society reproduces meaning worth conserving. The confidence 
in established forms has dissolved, resuscitation efforts have proved vain. 
Society appears to be trying out new eigenvalues that promise stability 
under the conditions of heterarchy and second-order observation. And a 
decisive role in this is likely to fall to the selections of the dissemination 
media, for they at any rate are compatible with a heterarchical order.
A second, just as far-reaching consequence of the evolution of dissem-
ination technologies and the corresponding media lies in the waning need 
for societal operations to be spatially integrated. By integration, I mean re-
striction of the degree of freedom of systems.216 Writing had already made 
the understanding of and response to communication independent of the 
physical presence of the utterer. However, in the Middle Ages, semantic 
evolution still depended on which libraries housed what manuscripts and 

Communication Media    
what chance led readers to the rare texts to gain inspiration from the ideas 
they conveyed. The bodies of individuals and thus their presence in partic-
ular places did indeed play an important role. This changed gradually with 
the spread of printed writings. When in the eighteenth century, the inte-
gration of society was left to “public opinion,” this amounted ultimately 
to waiving spatial integration, if not integration itself. For “public” means 
nothing other than giving access to anyone, relinquishing control of access, 
with consequent structural uncertainty of spatial integration.
Spatial integration means that the degree of freedom of systems, that 
is, the set of possibilities they can realize, depends on the locus in space 
where each operates and hence on specific local conditions. Every change 
in these conditions, every movement costs time and draws on scarce re-
sources. One sends messengers, in the sense of the ancient Greek theōroi, 
to learn what is communicated elsewhere (e.g., at Delphi). Until well into 
modern times, with its world of states, spatial complexes and demarca-
tions also served to define experimental fields for structural innovation, 
and hence to reduce risks should their diffusion become possible.217 How-
ever, with the advent of writing and printing, and then with increasing 
travel and external studies by members of the upper classes, spatial distance 
and spatial boundaries lost their restrictive character. Landscape become 
an object of “subjective” pleasure, home becomes a topic of “nostalgic” 
plaint. As spatial integration dwindled, so did the certainties that built on 
it. Sojourn in certain places became the contingently experienced result of 
journeys, changes of residence, migratory movements, and the special spa-
tial conditions that one can find anywhere and everywhere require an ad-
aptation of behavior that the individual can evade through mobility and 
by substituting other conditions.
Where this has become a normal condition in society, sociological the-
ory must also adapt to it. System boundaries can no longer be understood 
as edges of the system, as skins or membranes by which the system fortifies 
itself, so to speak. Boundaries are not parts—subdivisions, one might al-
most say—of the system, as if there were also “inner” parts that benefit from 
having no contact with the environment. Rather, a social system is noth-
ing other than the one side, the inner side, the operating side of the form of 
the system, and with every operation of the system, the distinctness of the 
system as opposed to the environment is reproduced. The autopoiesis of a 
meaning system is nothing other than the reproduction of this difference.

 
  Communication Media
9. Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 1: 
Function
Classical social theories have answered the question of what makes 
social order possible by reference to normative conditions: to natural law, 
the social contract, or consensual morality. This has also been true for so-
ciology, for Durkheim, and for Talcott Parsons. However, Parsons pointed 
the way to an alternative, which is not, however, unchecked but assigned 
to the still normative meaning of codes and shared symbolic values. It lies 
in the theory of symbolically generalized media. As soon as we reformulate 
the problem underlying this segment of theory, we can recognize that it is 
in fact an alternative, a functional equivalent to the usual normative safe-
guard of social cohesion (which naturally cannot mean that norms can be 
replaced by media).
Symbolically generalized communication media do not (like law, 
above all) serve primarily to safeguard expectations against disappointment. 
They are independent media relating directly to the problem of the improb-
ability of communication. However, they presuppose the yes/no coding of 
language and assume the function of rendering expectable the acceptance 
of a communication in cases where rejection is probable. They come into 
being only when there is writing and when the rejection of communicated 
meaning proposals therefore becomes even more probable. They react to 
the problem that more information normally means less acceptance.218
Even if the linguistic code gives a proposed meaning an equal chance 
of being accepted or rejected, an accepted meaning can be expected to have 
a better chance of being repeated than a rejected one. Communication reg-
isters a success and, if repetition is sufficiently tenable, will remember it.219 
Moreover, an accepted meaning proposal has a better chance of general-
ization because the accepting communication and all subsequent commu-
nications take it over in another context and have to adapt it accordingly. 
Acceptance and rejection therefore set off different recursions. This ex-
plains that either rejection prompts the development of, at best, conflict 
management institutions, which have to be geared to unpredictable indi-
vidual differences of opinion and disputes, or a positive semantics of ac-
cepted meaning develops that matures, as it were, in a process of reuse, 
concentration, abstraction. This does not mean that the development path 
produces “reasonable” results, for, as always, evolution depends on start-

Communication Media    
ing points and bifurcations; but it does seem likely that society itself gives 
good marks to positive results such as “nature,” “reason,” and “reality,” and 
can then at best take a “critical” view of them.
Symbolically generalized media are one of the results of this process. 
In a very abstract sense, they are a functional equivalent of morality, con-
ditioning the likelihood of acceptance or rejection. Whereas, owing to its 
conflictuality and dangerousness, morality presupposes prepared terrain 
with a high degree of plausibility, symbolically generalized media are differ-
entiated in order to motivate against plausibility. This explains why moral-
ity tends toward standardization, whereas symbolically generalized media 
develop from the outset in the plural and for problem-specific constella-
tions. To achieve the probability of highly improbable meaning selection, 
a multiplicity of specialized codes has to be developed. Borrowing a term 
from biology, we might also speak of “adaptive polymorphism.”
The formula “symbolically generalized,” coined by Parsons, is not ap-
posite in every respect. Parsons applies “symbolic” to the difference between 
ego and alter, and thus to the social dimension, and “generalized” to the dif-
ference between situations, and thus to the factual dimension of the mean-
ing being processed. The idea (similar to Wittgenstein’s concept of rule) is 
that social agreement can be attained only if the underlying commonalities 
last for more than a single situation. To this extent, I concur. Incidentally, 
however, the theory of symbolically generalized communication media pre-
sented here does not follow on from Parsons’s theory of interaction media 
(or media of interchange), which is committed to the theoretical architec-
ture of his AGIL paradigm.220 Instead, I proceed on the assumption that 
linguistic coding only structures, and does not solve, the general problem of 
the improbability of successful communication, which is rather exacerbated 
by the clear opposition between acceptance and rejection. The general con-
cept of communication medium is also applicable to this case. Symbolically 
generalized media are also media insofar as they require the difference be-
tween loose and strict coupling and enable forms to be formed on the basis 
of a loosely coupled medial substratum. However, we are dealing neither 
with special languages nor dissemination media, but with a different type of 
medium: a different form, a different sort of distinction, other sorts of code. 
Before I go into detail, these differences must therefore be clarified.
Especially since the nineteenth century, “symbol” and “symbolic” 
have been used in a very general and diffuse sense, often almost synony-

 
  Communication Media
mously with “sign.” This makes the concept superfluous. In order to re-
store its precise meaning, I shall limit it to cases where a sign connotes its 
own function, and hence becomes reflexive. Its own function is to rep-
resent the unity of what indicates and what is indicated. Symbolization 
therefore expresses—and hence makes amenable to communication—that 
unity lies in difference, and what is separated belongs together, so that 
what indicates can stand for (and not only point to) what is indicated, 
standing in the grand tradition for the sacred.
In the context of the “symbolically generalized communication 
media” concept, I therefore (like Parsons) mean by “symbolic” that these 
media bridge a difference and supply communication with opportuni-
ties for acceptance. Unlike language, they are not satisfied with securing 
sufficient understanding under highly complex conditions and commu-
nication selected only ad hoc. They presuppose this. In many cases un-
derstanding makes it extremely improbable that communication will be 
accepted—for example, in the case of improbable assertions, of requests 
for handouts, of arbitrary instructions for conduct. If we had to rely only 
on language in such situations, failure could be expected and the corre-
sponding communication would not take place. In other words, language 
itself can realize only a small part of what is linguistically possible with 
its own resources. Everything else would fall victim to discouragement if 
there were not additional arrangements of a different sort. Symbolically 
generalized media transform no-probabilities into yes-probabilities in mi-
raculous ways—for example, by enabling us to offer payment for goods 
or services we would like to obtain. They are symbolic insofar as they use 
communication to effect a match that is per se improbable. At the same 
time, however, they are diabolic, because, in achieving this, they generate 
new differences. A specific communication problem is solved by rearrang-
ing unity and difference: whoever can pay gets what he wants; whoever 
cannot pay does not.
In other words, symbolically generalized communication media co-
ordinate selections that cannot be linked without difficulty and therefore 
initially exist as a loosely coupled set of elements—selections of informa-
tion items, utterances, and understanding content. They achieve strict 
coupling only through the form specific to the given medium—for ex-
ample, theories, proofs of love, laws, prices. They must not only function 
symbolically but (as the above examples show) also be generalized, since 

Communication Media    
in anticipation of further autopoiesis, the corresponding expectations can 
be formed only if the form covers a range of situations. Even a proof of 
love does not count only for the immediate present, and certainly not if it 
is always offered in the same form. What is ultimately at stake is always to 
encourage, indeed, enable, communication through added opportunities 
for acceptance; and thus to gain terrain for society that would otherwise 
remain unworked owing to natural infertility.
The achievement of these media and the forms typical of them can 
therefore be described as the ongoing enablement of a highly improbably 
combination of selection and motivation. But these terms do not describe 
psychic states (what the payer feels when handing over money is irrelevant 
to the success of communication) but social constructions, which man-
age on the assumption of corresponding states of consciousness.221 They 
are realized in communication itself through recursion. That communica-
tions are accepted therefore means only that their acceptance is taken as 
the premise for further communication, whatever might go on in the in-
dividual consciousness.
The combinatorial problem is solved by resolving the circular rela-
tionship between selection and motivation (each determines the other) by 
making the conditioning of selection into a motivational factor. We can ac-
cept a demand for communication if we know that its selection obeys cer-
tain conditions; at the same time, the person who utters this demand can 
enhance the probability of acceptance by conforming to these conditions 
and thus encouraging himself to communicate. The double problem of 
deceit and acceptance is thus resolved at the same time, or at least normal-
ized. We enhance the certainty that these conditions will be respected, al-
though they are themselves highly selective and are far from covering every 
desired constellation; we signal this self-determination by using symbols 
that attest to use of the medium, and thus earn the prospect of communi-
cation being accepted. For example, we appeal to truth. Or we manipulate 
symbols of power (now chiefly the subjection of power itself to the law) 
in a way that demonstrates superior, effectual power. Measured against 
the vast number of possible linguistic communications, conditions that 
couple selection and motivation are the exception. Nevertheless, they are 
unlikely to be too rare, for otherwise there would be no expectations, no 
socialization, no related system formation. Symbolically generalized com-
munication media can therefore differentiate only in sufficiently large, 

 
  Communication Media
complex societies. They accordingly require, not only the linguistic code as 
the structure of their referential problem, but also writing to set off differ-
entiation and, as we shall see, printing to develop to the full.
In the classical age of Greece, the alphabetization of writing and the 
consequent spread of literacy had provoked two responses without ad-
dressing the difference between them. The question had become acute of 
how to motivate the acceptance of communication where its selectivity is 
manifest and can no longer be disputed. As I have indicated, the sole so-
lution lay in strengthening oral communication’s resources for persuad-
ing and convincing. In the course of time, mediated for the Middle Ages 
primarily by Cicero and Quintilian, this led to an alliance between rheto­
ric, topic, and morality. The viewpoints to be used in speech (topoi, “com-
monplaces”) had to be found and amplified, and this had to be taught and 
learned.222 Since these terms referred initially to advances of the speaker, an 
artistic approach had imposed itself. If we take a closer look at their mean-
ing and function, we see that a unity of cognition and motivation was still 
in mind—hence a solution to the problem of motivation through selec-
tion.223 For implementation (contrary to sophistic teaching), the structure 
of truth and morality was decisive. It could succeed only in the context of 
good, since truths (as well as virtues) support each other, whereas errors 
(like vices) contend with one another. The expertise and personal virtue of 
the speaker were thus considered more important than any tricks. More 
important, that is, for amplification.
Printing put an end to this syndrome of rhetoric, topic, and morality, 
and hence to amplification, since it made too much complexity apparent at 
the same time.224 But this took another good two hundred years. Initially, 
the printed book revived the old form.225 As in the past, amplification de-
pended on the general being considered more valuable than the particular. 
As in the past, topoi steered motivation in the direction of factually, tem-
porally, and socially congruent generalization. As in the past, important 
communication was morally dichotomized, placed in a scheme easy to deal 
with orally. As in the past, this admonition and teaching confirmed itself 
in the endeavor to praise virtues, blame vices, and treat passions as dis-
turbance. The amplification of communication served to amplify moral-
ity and vice versa. In the far-reaching debates of the sixteenth century on 
the understanding of history and poetry, an epideictic, amplifying func-
tion still presupposed both modes of description. The “heroes” of litera-

Communication Media    
ture had to function as commonplaces, for their individualization would 
have disturbed their amplifying function. There was no anticipation at all 
of the individual confronted by the platitudes of the topoi becoming stub-
born and recoiling into their own ego. Gradually, however, opposing trends 
also made themselves felt (e.g., Montaigne’s Essays). Amplifications “which 
are in effect nothing else but either exaggerations, or cumulations of rea-
sons”226 now appear in an ambiguous light, and printing begins its sabo-
tage by reproducing the once so popular set (copia) of topoi as surplus and 
surfeit, finally lending the semantics of copia/copie/copy the negative slant 
it has today.227
But what if it no longer works?
We see the alternative in the development and differentiation of sym-
bolically generalized communication media. This, too, can be traced back 
to impulses given by alphabetic script. We therefore return to the Greek 
sources.
Obviously, the spread of written culture had both offered the pos-
sibility of artificial word formation and accordingly made it advisable to 
differentiate terminologies in terms of different problems to allow novel 
means of persuasion to be described.228 To show how this fits together, let’s 
take a brief look at the most important innovations.
As far as knowledge [Wissen] is concerned, the Greek language had 
had an invented word even in Homeric times—alētheia—which negated 
the condition of being covert, concealed, forgotten [lēthē = forgetful-
ness].229 It was thus not a state but the result of an effort. In the oral tradi-
tion, truth was tied to rhythm and to the memory rhythm facilitated, and 
this alone allowed it to be saved from oblivion, to be truth. In written cul-
ture, this association with feasibility (technē, poiesis, sophia) was retained 
in the classical period’s “consciousness of ability” [Könnens-Bewußtsein].230 
But if truth itself was already a negation, how was it to be negated again to 
arrive at a coding in terms of true/false?
Opposing concepts—especially pseudos [falsehood]—were initially 
meant interactionally and dialogistically. It was a matter of truthfulness 
or mendacity, of the correct or false presentation of knowledge. In other 
words, there was originally only this behavioral orientation with no notion 
of a relation between statement and reality independent of behavior. The 
correct presentation of reality is a duty of conduct, and the opposite behav-
ior violates this duty, is an ill-considered utterance, if not a lie.231

 
  Communication Media
Only with the aid of writing can topics be so objectivized that con-
troversial discussion about them is possible. It is presumably because of 
such dialogues that one becomes accustomed to second-order observation, 
which reserves to itself the right to check whether knowledge held to be 
true is correctly or wrongly accepted as knowledge.232 This then differenti-
ates a communication problem that uses distinctions of its own, between 
strict knowledge (epistēmē) and opinion (doxa), for example, which occur 
in no other field of meaning.233
The semantics that develops around the also newly coined word philia 
takes us into a quite different problem field.234 It is generally translated as 
“friendship,” but in broader contexts, we might also think of solidarity. 
Unlike the Romans, the Athenians had early broken with the archaic seg-
mentary structures of nobility.235 The archaic ethos had required a person 
to summon up sympathy and engagement for what was close to him, in-
cluding weapons, animals, women, gods (and philos had originally meant 
just this), whereas remoter entities could be treated indifferently and arbi-
trarily. To this must be added the urban polity rule that one had to treat 
the friends of one’s friends as friends and the enemies of one’s enemies as 
enemies—a rule that was still in effect in Rome when Cicero wrote De 
amicitia.236 Friendship was differentiated out of these archaic structures 
based on birth and descent and at the same time generalized as a general 
notion of belonging together relating to society.237 The counterconcept of 
enmity receded (i.e., a code forms: friend or not) and the problem of the 
criteria for choosing friends came to the fore. Being close to someone was 
then no longer a condition for friendship but the consequence of choosing a 
friend. General societal sociality remained a precondition, but friendship 
was built into it as an intensive form. The concept could then no longer be 
extended to animals or gods. From Aristotle onward, a specialized, tradi-
tion-setting distinction restricted and structured application, that between 
friendships of utility, friendships of pleasure, and friendships of virtue. 
And demands for the ruthless primary orientation of this code arose—for 
example, in the question of whether friendship was juster than justice; or 
whether one could expect help from a friend in breaking the law, in des-
ecrating a temple, or in similar misdeeds.
Communication specializing in the economy had always been con-
cerned with property and had practiced the transfer of property in the 
form of barter. A new situation developed with the invention and spread of 

Communication Media    
coinage, initially in Lydia, then in Greece from the seventh century bce.238 
Minting gave money an easily recognizable, special form and made it inde-
pendent of the meaning of a relatively generally usable commodity.239 For 
the first time, coinage connected long-distance with local trade and was 
temporarily able to combine politics and economics in a commercial loop 
in the form of tyrannis [despotic rule].240 Backing by precious metal re-
mained indispensable for another twenty-five centuries, but it became un-
necessary for the issuer of the money to guarantee its redemption. Money’s 
acceptance as tender in the marketplace, facilitating transfer of goods and 
rendering of services that would not otherwise have occurred, developed 
from its initial use in palace and trading-house transactions.
It is somewhat more difficult to judge the differentiation of a special 
medium for political power with a specialized semantics, precisely because 
of the superabundant terminology. In this field institutional, role-related, 
legally constituted differentiation was most advanced, but the attention 
value gained led to these structures being identified with the city itself. 
There were offices and assemblies capable of making decisions. The con-
cepts needed only to follow. Elaborate consideration was paid to the guid-
ing aspects of the urban order, namely, isonomia and homonoia, and to 
their importance for law and democracy. This discussion was marked by 
the replacement of themis by nomos, which for its part enabled a distinc-
tion (not yet understood as being hierarchical) to be drawn between physis 
and nomos.241 The differentiation of political legal principles, which then, 
however, required the establishment of a corresponding order, is apparent 
above all in the turn against influences stemming from stratification and 
(as we may well be permitted to add) from networks of friendship. Despite 
stratification, equality before the law was to apply.242 All this held only 
for the exercise of political power and not as a maxim explaining knowl-
edge or the choice of friends. But since it was formulated with reference 
to urban life, the terminology was much more differentiated than in other 
cases and also more strongly tied to the self-description of society, to the 
“political identity” of the Greeks.243
If a sufficiently sharp distinction was not made from self-description 
of the (urban) societal system in political semantics, too great a distinc-
tion was drawn in the fields of property and making money. The differ-
ence between oikos and polis prompted this skewing. It excluded any talk 
about “political economy,” which would at best have sounded paradoxi-

 
  Communication Media
cal to Greek ears.244 On the other hand, as typical in aristocratic societ-
ies, trade was underrated and, not least, political sources of funding were 
available, for example, tribute. This was certainly not in keeping with the 
structural differentiation of the societal system, which in Athens was very 
advanced,245 and a terminology relating to the money economy was ac-
cordingly in use that still reflected the prevailing understanding of soci-
ety not in assessment of the autonomy of the money economy but only in 
evaluation of the corresponding activities.
In retrospect, these differentiations can be understood. It is easy to un-
derstand, for example, that truth and love had to be distinguished, for love 
would disturb truth, just as truth would disturb love. However, before such 
a semantics evolved, the very opposite had been plausible. Did a person not 
have to trust what someone close to him said more than what anyone else 
might say? It therefore remains for evolution theory to say how such a radical 
change in plausibilities could take place. We can do no more than speculate.
The spread of the alphabetic script may have been what led to such 
far-reaching, issue-focused diversification of semantic forms, but this does 
not suffice to explain it. What must also be considered is that the powerful 
alliance between religion and morality that ruled in other advanced civiliza-
tions had not developed in Greek cities.246 Nor was there any organization of 
the clergy (such as churches) extending beyond the individual city. Whether 
religion in Greece can be described as a private matter is a moot point.247 
At any rate, no religion focused on scripture had developed. Written culture 
had simply developed alongside what there was in the way of religion, and 
only in the Hellenistic empires of late antiquity did new mystic forms of cult 
arise that sought to be resistant to the written word, and finally Christianity, 
a new religion of faith that spread with the aid of canonical texts.
Nevertheless, it cannot be claimed that symbolically generalized 
communication media were already fully developed in antiquity. To judge 
this, however, we must first outline what was required, not least that these 
media introduce the autocatalysis of functional systems. At any rate, to an-
ticipate a concept from evolution theory,248 significant predevelopments 
had been achieved. And I would note that referential problems had been 
singled out that were later to prove key issues in media development: truth, 
love, power/law, and property/money.
To begin with, however, the forms chosen for this purpose had to ac-
cept major restrictions, because they were developed for a specific society 

Communication Media    
in history and had to harmonize with its descriptions of the world and it-
self. This explains, first, why the political was overrated (remarkable when 
considering the structural givens), with society being defined as political 
and the economic being reduced to household and commerce. But in the 
field of philia, too, forms were similarly adapted: the “highest” variant of 
friendship was the friendship of virtue, directed toward satisfying the de-
mands of living together in the urban polity. And what could be accepted 
as truth was determined by bivalent logic and the corresponding ontology, 
an arrangement of relatively low structural diversity, allowing account to 
be taken of the communicative restrictions of observing observations in 
this society, without the logic permitting this to be known and articulated.
10. Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 2: 
Differentiation
I interrupt this historical account to return to my systematic exposi-
tion, for we still lack any explanation for the diversity and differentiation 
of symbolically generalized communication media.
If we wish to analyze the forms of differentiation for symbolically 
generalized communication media, we must remember that we are dealing 
with the special problem of a connection between selection and motiva-
tion that has become improbable. From this point of view, all symbolically 
generalized communication media are functionally equivalent. However, pre-
cisely this viewpoint requires that the problem not merely be described by 
enumerating the components of each communication, namely, informa-
tion, utterance, and understanding. Other, connecting forms are needed, 
and it is these forms that generate the specification and differentiation of 
symbolically generalized communication media.
Forms of self-observation of the communication process are used 
for this purpose. To begin with, the improbability problem has to be put 
in the social form of “double contingency,” which has been described in 
terms of the positional concepts ego and alter. Why? The normal answer is 
that ego and alter already exist anyway, that they are different persons who 
communicate with each other from time to time. Whoever means no more 
than this should avoid the ego/alter terminology, which conveys precisely 
that every person is always both when (and only when) he engages in com-
munication. But why, to be more exact, do we have this doubling up? The 

 
  Communication Media
answer is that the self-reference of social systems requires an immanent 
duality to allow a circle to form whose interruption can permit structures 
to develop. Inspired by the thermostat, which can only control because it 
allows itself to be controlled, Ranulph Glanville postulates this principle 
for objects per se.249 We can leave this open. Social systems clearly need 
self-constituted twoness if they are to be structurally determined;250 and this 
cannot be an essentially predetermined twoness (qua human being) im-
ported from outside. For the problem at issue, the improbable acceptance 
of selections, this means that every selection has to take into account that 
it has to reckon with other (conforming or adverse) selections. Otherwise, 
a specifically social solution to the problem cannot be reached.
It must also be established where responsibility lies for the selection 
whose conditioning is to motivate. This means that selection has to be at­
tributed. Attributions never involve the inner activity (the autopoiesis) of 
systems, but only their behavior as seen by an observer and relating to the 
environment.251 They are always artificial activity, which, although it finds 
suggestive conditions in real qualities, is never fully determined by them. 
The process of attribution itself is hence socially conditioned, and the at-
tribution of attribution is one of those endless questions that are not ad-
mitted but hidden and made invisible by “reasons.”252
The complicated structure of preconditions for symbolically gener-
alized communication media alone shows that they must be a late devel-
opment, and that theoretical reconstruction cannot feed into the media 
semantics themselves. They require immediately convincing symboliza-
tion, whereas we are seeking to observe what cannot be observed with the 
semantics of the media.
Differentiation of the media follows from binarization based on the 
two possibilities of attribution: internal and external.253 Since communica-
tion can observe itself only if a distinction is drawn between information 
and utterance, the accent of attribution can be placed either on informa-
tion (experience) or on utterance (action); and this is true for both sides: 
for those who initiate a communication and for those who have to decide 
on (the communication of) its acceptance or rejection. If a selection (by 
whomsoever) is attributed to the system itself, I speak of action,254 if it is at-
tributed to the environment, of experience. Symbolically generalized com-
munication media are then categorized according to whether they assume 
the two social positions ego and alter to be experiencing or acting. The 

Communication Media    
two distinctions present no everyday knowledge. It is not a matter of com-
pletely classifying phenomena. Attribution is tied to experience or action 
and participation marked as ego or alter (with reference to persons who are 
always both) only when needed. It takes place only in contexts of use, that 
is, only when necessary for the autopoiesis of the communication system. 
Bringing communication problems to a point in constellations that come 
into question for media formation thus activates distinctions of attribution 
as experience or action and of marking as ego or alter that would other-
wise not occur and could also not be explained by the “nature of things.”
The resulting constellation can be compiled in the form of a table.
Ego
Alter
Experience
Action
Experience
Ae  —>  Ee
Truth
Values
Ae  —>  Ea
Love 
Action
Aa  —>  Ee
Property/Money
Art
Aa  —>  Ea
Power/Law 
With the aid of attributions, the communication process can be cap-
tured and the problem of double contingency asymmetricized and thus 
de-tautologized. Communication runs from alter to ego.255 Alter must first 
utter something, only then can ego understand and accept or reject. This 
basal unity is abstracted out, although double contingency is always con-
structed as a circle,256 and communication as the unity of information, ut-
terance, and understanding is generated in recursive interconnection with 
other communications.
Only where attributions place causality is conditioning possible. In 
this respect, the attribution scheme directs (not determines!) the condi-
tioning of selection and, through selection, the motivation that can be 
expected. It therefore makes a difference whether alter and ego are condi-
tioned as acting or experiencing (both are naturally always both). As the 
table shows, we must therefore in principle take four constellations into 
account: (1) alter sets off corresponding experience in ego through com-

 
  Communication Media
munication of his experience; (2) alter’s experience leads to corresponding 
action by ego; (3) alter’s action is only experienced by ego; and (4) alter’s 
action occasions corresponding action by ego. By “correspondence,” I do 
not mean similarity, let alone repetition, but only complementarity. For a 
communication is successful if its meaning is taken over as the premise of 
further behavior, and in this sense communication is continued by other 
communications.
The attribution-theoretical basis of this typology already implies that 
it is not a matter of classifying all situations that occur in reality. In fact, 
attribution questions rarely arise and only in recursive contexts in which 
other decisions depend on them.257 In the special situation in which an 
improbable operational coupling of selection and motivation has to be 
made, this is a precondition for relevance. But it is always a question of 
specific problems for which conditioning of selection is important for mo-
tivational purposes, and it then depends on these problems what attribution 
constellations are activated in each case.
In the long term, the most important consequences of this specifi-
cation of attribution constellations are likely to lie in the dissolution of old 
multifunctionalities. Older societies ground the authority to attain unusual 
aims in role accumulation, in access to other roles. A person is respected, 
has many friends or such as aspire to be friends, can help with resources or 
contacts or refuse to do so. Social statuses of this sort are broken up and 
other roles decoupled when achieving unusual aims depends on the con-
ditioning of selections and in particular on whether alter and ego are con-
ditioned with respect to experience or to action. For the appropriation of 
other roles is then felt to be out of place, and eventually explicitly discred-
ited as corruption.
The differentiation of symbolically generalized communication media 
thus requires a reference problem and an attribution constellation.258 Among 
other things, this explains the historicality of the context in which symboli-
cally generalized communication media develop, and its dependence on 
society. At the same time, it shows that no media can develop if reference 
problems and attribution constellations do not converge—for whatever 
reason. We presume that this has hindered the development of a religious 
communication medium—despite all the extravagant demands made of 
specifically religious communication and in spite of all differentiation (e.g., 
through asceticism and “rejection of the world”).259

Communication Media    
In anticipation, I have already named and classified the symbolically 
generalized communication media identifiable in the above table (p. 201). 
I now present them in order. Comprehensive treatment with the necessary 
substantive and historical details is beyond the scope of a theory of society 
and must be left to specialized monographs.260
A medium for truth does not only form because every communica-
tion presupposes knowledge, utters knowledge, generates knowledge. We 
can communicate about news when it matches types already known. In 
such event, problems arise at best of truthfulness, of error, and of interest in 
deception. The special semantic apparatus of a truth medium has to be de-
veloped and deployed only if new, unheard-of knowledge is to be asserted; 
or if we wish to deviate from or criticize extant knowledge. We then shift 
to a level of second-order observation and sort observers’ knowledge into 
true and untrue. Statements must then be modalized by reference to the 
medium—for example, we say it is true, can be proved, and so on, that as-
bestos is harmful to health. The question of what the case is must then be 
supplemented (not replaced!) by a statement on how we can reliably estab-
lish what the case is. Reference to the medium points to possibilities of re-
specification through methods and theories. If we no longer expect doubts, 
we can again use the short form of statement (asbestos is harmful to health), 
but we can nevertheless return at any time to the level of second-order ob-
servation. Where a truth medium has been differentiated, it is available for 
all statements and it is only a question of specific occasion whether it is used 
or not. Truth (like every symbolically generalized medium) is a medium 
that constructs a world and not a means limited to certain purposes alone.
We speak of truth only when the selection of information is attrib-
uted to none of the participants. Truth presupposes external selection (and 
it should be noted that all autopoietic systems that are operationally in-
volved nevertheless function as operationally closed systems). Reduction 
to external selection shows that the medium of truth tolerates no differing 
opinions.261 The truth content of a statement can therefore not be derived 
from the will or interest of one of the participants, for this would mean 
that it is not binding for others. The return to the level of second-order 
observation is also determined by waiving the actional deforming of mat-
ters (which naturally does not exclude thematizing actions as the object of 
experience any more than it does action specialized in research). The im-
mense apparatus of theoretical generalizations and methodological rules 

 
  Communication Media
is intended to neutralize the influence of action on the result of investiga-
tions; for only then can results be presented as truth. In other words, if we 
allowed surprising, unaccustomed, puzzling knowledge to be introduced 
by action and made subject to compulsory acceptance, arbitrariness would 
have free rein. In this case, we would have to do without medium-specific 
conditioning. Surprising as it may seem at first, reduction to experience 
therefore considerably limits permitted possibilities and in this manner pro-
vides the point of departure for wide-ranging conditioning.
In the case of values, it is doubtful in the first place whether a sym-
bolically generalized communication medium exists,262 or even if such a 
medium can be seen to be developing; suitable terminology dates back 
only two hundred years or so.263 The problem referred to is clear: the oper-
ational closure of psychic systems. In this respect, the experience of double 
contingency in social encounters makes it extremely unlikely that a com-
mon basis can be found and contacts continued. Nor can this be achieved 
through negotiation, as some now believe, but only through recursive con-
solidation of corresponding assumptions in the communication process 
itself. The same problem occurs where the medium separates off a value se-
mantics of its own from assumed common values. There must, one feels, be 
“inviolate levels,”264 beyond all contingencies, which shift when contingen-
cies are discovered here, too. This implies that values cannot be conceived 
of as independent of action, but, vice verse, actions must be conceived of 
as dependent on values. Among attribution constellations, only reference 
to experience is therefore to be considered. The pragmatic context of value 
theory, one might say, leads us astray. Also harmless is the assertion that 
values have normative meaning; that they are not mere preferences but pre-
scribed preferences. There can be no question of values being in a position 
to select actions. They are far too abstract and, from the standpoint of ac-
tion situations, always take the form of a conflict of values.265 Their func-
tion is only to provide orientation that no one calls into question for action 
in communicative situations. Values are therefore nothing other than a 
highly mobile set of viewpoints. They do not, as ideas once did, resemble 
fixed stars, but rather balloons kept on hand to be inflated when called for, 
especially on festive occasions. We therefore cannot speak of “uncondi-
tional preferences.”266 Although they do not explain the conditions of ap-
plication, they are subject to deliberation, so that how they can be realized 
has to be determined from case to case.

Communication Media    
Not everything that is needed in the way of congruence to keep com-
munication going can be provided through the medium of truth. But the 
difference between truths and values was clarified only in the course of the 
nineteenth century. Only then was a semantics of validity universalized,267 
parallel to that of being, and one of the reasons is likely to have been the 
differentiation of science. The forms for the respecification of science are 
to be found in theories and methods. There is no use for them in the field 
of values. This respecification takes place through ideologies and argumen-
tation;268 in contrast to theories and methods, ideology commits the big 
crimes and argumentation engages in the petty stratagems. This imposes 
differentiation of the media and at the same time excludes taking truth it-
self as a yardstick in the field of values (ideologies, arguments). For this 
would have to mean placing the value of all values in their truth.
Unlike truths, values are introduced into the communication process 
not by assertions, which can then be questioned and tested, but by supposi-
tion. Communication avoids “marking” values,269 because this would con-
vey the possibility of contradiction. No one asserts that health, peace, or 
justice are values in order to generate the yes/no bifurcation of acceptance 
or rejection. One does not provoke, one suggests.270 If health is a value, we 
may still consider washing regularly to be harmful and discuss the question. 
In other words, values are actualized by allusion and their indisputability 
consists in this. If this no longer works, they have to be abandoned. Val-
ues therefore convince because objections are lacking in communication, 
not because we can justify them. They make it possible to waive justifica-
tion. Where necessary, they rely on “gag rules,” that is, on tacit agreement 
that certain conflicts of values are not spoken about and the correspond-
ing values are used only in separate contexts.271 Values are the medium for 
assuming common ground, which limits what can be said and demanded 
without determining what should be done.
As always with symbolically generalized communication media, what 
matters is social not psychic ordering. Values are socially stable because they 
are psychically unstable.272 However, they lack important qualities that char-
acterize other media, for example, a central coding (such as true/untrue) 
and, associated with this, the ability to form media-specific functional sys-
tems (such as science). Their directive value is low because no value can de-
termine an act or even, as we might say with Pascal, excuse an act.273 All this 
shows that indications of value demonstrate that even an important refer-

 
  Communication Media
ence problem in combination with an appropriate attribution constellation 
does not suffice to generate a fully functioning communication medium.
While values bind too weakly, love binds too strongly. In our mod-
ern understanding, which differs markedly from the philia/amicitia tradi-
tion,274 love requires a loving ego to adapt action to what alter experiences; 
and, above all, of course, to how alter experiences ego.
To adapt our own action to what others experience is a matter of 
course, especially when we know we are being observed. The schooled eye 
anticipates the expectations of others. We do not wait until they manifest 
themselves in action, we anticipate them. This makes fast coordination 
possible, skipping communication, as it were, for example, when work-
ing with others or in road traffic. Lovers, too, can be recognized where 
such communicationless coordination also works in nonstandardized situ-
ations. A brief glance suffices.
This may be based on familiarity. The specific reference problem of 
love goes far beyond this. It postulates that one can find agreement and 
support for a personal worldview over and beyond the anonymous world 
of truths and values. The problem becomes acute with the growing indi-
vidualization of personal views and motives for action, and this becomes 
not only a psychic matter (which it always is) but also a social one. One is 
then expected to take account of all possible idiosyncrasies in communi-
cation and thus to accept them in experience, too. Furthermore, love de-
mands visible commitment through his/her own action from at least one 
other (ego). In this case, it is not the specific but the special, the particular 
that is vested with universal relevance. This can happen only in the form 
of a couple relationship. In its form and the substance of its expectations, 
this is a highly improbable structure,275 and for this very reason it requires 
a strong, extravagant medium. It was introduced into culture under the 
heading “passion” and is nowadays called “romantic.”276
Appropriate semantics was developed, first for the nobility, then for 
the upper middle classes.277 However, as love became a requirement of 
marriage, this semantics had to be made accessible to all, in other words, 
trivialized. This has ended with mass-produced illusions more or less at 
variance with people’s experience of life.278 The improbability of love—
that every gesture, bodily and verbal, has to serve to observe, even to ob-
serve the observation of love—becomes pathological in marriage. This 
brings to light the improbability of this solution to the problem of mak-

Communication Media    
ing personal idiosyncrasies acceptable. In present-day parlance, one might 
say that it is a matter of concerning oneself with the otherness of the other 
and, if not “enjoying” it, at least confirming it with no intention of adapta-
tion, reeducation, improvement. But even if this succeeds, it would merely 
shift the problem to another question: how we are to deal with someone 
who is dissatisfied with himself, is unhappy and seeks confirmation of this. 
From this point of view, it is certainly no accident that paradox has become 
a key problem of therapy, because in trying to solve this problem, love fails.
This clarifies the differentiation of the medium. It has nothing to do 
with truth,279 and certainly nothing to do with money. Whatever the real 
motives might be, if they deviate, they cannot be named; otherwise, it is 
simply not love. This very differentiation makes love a universal medium, a 
medium for constructing a world seen through the unique eyes of the other.
Love, because asymmetrically constructed, is one-sided love and there-
fore often (should we say normally?) unhappy love. But everyone knows the 
semantics in its more concrete demands, and everyone knows the word. To 
this extent, declarations of love are binding on communication. And since 
the sincerity/insincerity of such declarations is incommunicable anyway, a 
modus vivendi can establish itself—albeit depending on the consensus not 
being tested too insistently.280
The opposite case, that the action of alter is experienced by ego, is to 
begin with trivial and unproblematic. We see that the neighbor is mow-
ing his lawn. So what? Although, in contrast to the media discussed so far, 
it is not the world of the other that is involved but the arbitrariness of the 
other. But why should we not be able to observe and accept that others act 
as they do? It would be unfortunate if every act we witnessed were to cause 
us consternation. We would have to close our eyes.
However, this changes immediately where action consists in appro-
priating scarce goods that the bystander might be interested in himself. 
And this problem intensifies to the extent that both take a long-term in-
terest in their future and, in the face of scarcity, wish to secure now what 
could be possibly be needed later. If one or more take their share, the 
bystanders are always in the majority. If they have the upper hand, why 
should they hold back? Whether they can later reach agreement among 
themselves is a problem for later.281
For this reference problem, societal evolution has created the me-
dium of property, which it later transformed into the medium of money 

 
  Communication Media
to make it more available and easier to coordinate. Even property is there-
fore a communication medium and cannot be adequately understood if 
seen only as a means to satisfy the needs of the owner.282 The medium of 
money then ensures acceptance of others’ acquiring what they wish with 
their money, or simply making money with money without knowing why. 
Anti-monetary emotions from Luther to Marx, and their social success, 
teach us how improbable any expectation of such acceptance is. But it 
works nevertheless.
Money probably developed not for its function in mediated ex-
change, but as a sign for performance imbalances, to begin with, proba-
bly in household economies. Public debt was already the primary tool for 
money creation in the eighteenth century, and “bank” notes were initially 
designed as (transferable) promissory notes. But then one increasingly had 
to know who the debtor was, and whether his solvency was to be trusted. 
Only in very recent times has this restriction been abandoned. The debtor, 
if we can still use this term at all, is the economy itself, which owes itself 
the money it has circulating. Solvency can no longer be ensured other than 
in the form of a guarantee of the usability of money, hence in the form of 
the auto­poiesis of the economic system. The function of the symbolically 
generalized communication medium money is so improbable that it could 
never have served as an enabling factor in evolution, but became manifest 
only in an already functioning money economy.
Whereas property could still be uninteresting—why do I need an or-
chard with twenty apple trees?—the medium of money universalizes both 
scarcity and interest. That one can always use more money was known as 
early as Aristotle. It was only the monetarization of property, which puts 
a monetary value on all property, even one’s own labor, that enables the 
scarcity medium property/money to expand into the form to which we are 
accustomed today. Money serves as a medium for observing scarcity, and 
payments are forms that operationalize the medium.283 In this sense, much 
more is scarce in today’s “affluent society” than in the past,284 and money 
has assumed the form of a world construction, is a “God-term,” as Ken-
neth Burke puts it.285
In contrast to the usual economics perspective, we accordingly do 
not see the social function of property in the immediacy of access to ma-
terial goods or services, or the social function of money in the mediation 
of transactions. There is naturally no disputing this as factual situation 

Communication Media    
and historical genetic motive. But the function of the corresponding gen-
eralized symbolic medium lies elsewhere, as always in overcoming an 
improbability threshold. Everyone must be motivated to accept the experi­
ence of extremely specific selections by someone or other—from furnishing 
the living room and buying a certain screw to an international company 
being taken over by another. Otherwise, the economy would not have 
been able to function in the past and would certainly be unable to satisfy 
today’s demands.286
Whereas property as a medium is still tied to the natural divisibility 
of things and can therefore not be very widely dispersed, the medial sub-
stratum of money is the given smallest monetary unit, which can, more-
over, be determined arbitrarily as required. This permits standardization 
that abstracts from individual preferences. Thus the functioning of the me-
dium is based on a difference between social and psychic valuation: pre-
cisely because the social valuation of money is quantitatively standardized 
and fluctuates in accordance with its own conditions, money can individu-
ally be variously valued, which means it can relate to variously felt require-
ments. The medium can thereupon be coupled to specific forms according 
to the prices that are to be paid in transactions. It should be noted that 
trans­actions are monetarily calculated by both sides when it comes to the 
exchange of goods for money. This is shown by the universality of the me-
dium and its clear specification. Finally, it should be noted that the form in 
which a transaction is set is dissolved immediately afterward; for once in the 
hands of the recipient, the money is free for other combinations at will.287 
No other medium attains this extension and this speed of dissolution and 
recombination, of loose and strict coupling.288 And it is hence understand-
able that money is often seen (notably by Parsons) as a model for an effec-
tive symbolically generalized medium.
For the constellation in which alter acts and ego correspondingly ex-
periences, there is another medium that, perhaps because of this closeness 
to the attribution form of money, places great value on not appearing to 
be “useful,” namely, art. The constellation is clear: the artist acts, bringing 
the viewer a certain experience. But what is the problem?
The old European answer was that the purpose of the work of art was 
to arouse astonishment and admiration, and to do so in the sense of pas-
sions that allow of no reference to their opposite. However, this presup-
poses that society is established in a world in which there are astonishing 

 
  Communication Media
and admirable things, especially in the fields of religion and politics. In the 
Middle Ages, there was accordingly a special sort of truth provided for res 
artificiales (in relation to forms in the imagination of the producer/artist), 
but not a special medium.289 Since the seventeenth century, this solution 
has been criticized, without the aesthetic reflection that then transpired 
being able to offer a convincing alternative.290 A figure immanent in aes-
thetics, for instance, the representation of the general in the particular, can-
not yet tell us why art is differentiated for communication, and in this case 
for the generation of improbable willingness to accept. And it is a fortiori 
insufficient to follow the thesis current in the art world itself, and above all 
in literature, that “modern” art has to do in a specific manner with the in-
dividual in modern society.291
It perhaps helps to take a far more radical approach, going back to 
the circumstance that every experienced meaning offers an abundance of 
possibilities for further experience, only a few of which are or can be real-
ized. What we perceive is already the way it is and not otherwise. What we 
do is directed by purposes, and why not by others, or even by none? What 
art aspires to could therefore be described as the reactivation of eliminated 
possibilities.292 Its function is to allow the world to appear in the world, 
to portray unity in unity, be it improved or (as now preferred) worsened. 
­Although this happens through every thing, every captured meaning, it 
happens only in such a way that the one points to the other and the world 
remains invisible to itself. The work of art lays claim to this illuminating 
and concealing function of meaning, but heightens it so that the invisible 
also becomes visible and, if it succeeds, that the world is portrayed in the 
world. For this very reason, the normal references of daily life, the purposes 
and utilities have to be breached to distract attention from these distrac-
tions. The portrayal of the world in the world modifies the world itself in 
the sense of what is “not necessary as such.” The work of art supplies its 
own proof of necessity—and thus withholds it from the world.
This requires such strict forms that we see more and differently than 
usual. Art points out that the scope of the possible is not exhausted and 
it therefore generates a liberating distance from reality. We might call this 
“fictionality,” but the term does not convey enough. Art does not remain 
fiction: it generates a reality with a right to its own objectivity. Once again, 
it is a matter of constructing a world, of a specific universalism that con-
fronts total reality.

Communication Media    
In contrast to other symbolically generalized communication media, art 
uses perceptual media or, in the case of narrative literature, visualization. But 
in these perceptual media, it generates its own forms through its own disso-
lution techniques, or more precisely, its own forms of distinguishing between 
medial substratum and form.293 As a result, widely differing types of art de-
velop: music, painting, lyric poetry, dance, sculpture, architecture, and so on. 
But they are all based on a common principle, namely, the incorporation of 
media in media, and the consequent new possibilities for strict coupling, new 
possibilities of form. Whether art can motivate people to accept the selections 
it offers then depends on the individual work of art, making it plausible that it 
itself (as opposed to the world) has to be the way it is, even though it is made 
and no model for it exists anywhere. In this sense “originality” has been de-
manded of a work of art since the seventeenth century; originality now being 
decided not in comparison with nature, not in the quality of imitation, but in 
comparison with other works of art.294 In the form of a demand made of the 
individual work, art is differentiated as autonomous and self-­referential. And 
in the form of a demand made of the individual work, because this is the only 
way to unfold the paradox of the necessity of the only possible.
To ask about the truth of the work of art is therefore just as inap-
propriate as asking about its use. Both questions would direct attention to 
conditioning completely alien to art. The work of art imitates nothing, ac-
complishes nothing, proves nothing. It demonstrates that and how the ar-
bitrariness of beginning captures and cancels itself, makes itself necessary. 
However one begins, with production or examination—once one begins, 
what follows is no longer unrestricted. It becomes necessità cercata [will-
ing necessity].295 For this very reason, a work of art has to be conceived 
as the self-conditioning of the arbitrary, as action whose communication 
binds experience.
Art must, of course, pay for rendering transparent with intranspar-
encies of its own. Its function, too, unfolds a paradox. It makes something 
visible by making something else invisible—something else, which is to say, 
the unity of the distinctions that it uses itself as form. As art articulates what 
it articulates, distinguishing something from something else in the process, 
brightness from darkness, fates from trivialities, dissonance from conso-
nance, the world withdraws behind what has been distinguished into the 
unity of the difference—and remains invisible. Art, too, can only observe, 
can only injure the world through its own cuts.

 
  Communication Media
The last attribution constellation, that of the medium power is also at 
first trivial, but it, too, holds the seed for unfolding improbable possibili-
ties, which can, however, be realized only if a symbolically generalized com-
munication medium is available. First of all, it is quite normal that actions 
follow on from actions, for example, when we hand over an object, work 
or play together, eat what is served, or act in traffic in accordance with how 
others are driving. It often helps to recognize the immediately subsequent 
acts of others, and rhythmic coordination typically develops. We extrapo-
late ongoing movement and place our own act at the suitable moment. This 
is how the famous “turn-taking” in oral communication is organized. We 
might occasionally exceed the demand threshold, but then ad hoc positive 
or negative adjustments are always possible. The reference problem of power 
arises only in the special case where the action of alter consists in a decision 
about the action of ego that is required to be obeyed: in an order, an instruction, 
perhaps in a suggestion backed by the threat of sanctions.296 This does not 
alter the fact that action on both sides is attributable; the instruction should 
not be only experienced or replace the action of the recipient. It should, al-
though obviously a contingent selection, be adopted as premise for one’s 
own conduct; and on the additional condition that arbitrariness lies not in 
alter’s decision but specifically in the determination of ego’s action.
Power generates itself as a medium by doubling the possibilities of 
action. The course of action desired by alter is confronted by another, 
namely, the imposition of sanctions, which neither alter nor ego can want, 
but that is less disadvantageous for alter than for ego. But the form of 
power is nothing other than this difference, the difference between carry-
ing out instructions and the alternative to be avoided. If the sanctions are 
sufficiently generalized (e.g., the use of physical force or dismissal from 
employment), the medium consists in a relationship of loose coupling be-
tween a multiplicity of power goals and sanctions, and the use of power 
then determines the form in which the medium is temporarily strictly cou-
pled. The limits of power therefore lie where ego begins to prefer the avoid-
ance alternative and itself asserts power to force alter to renounce or to 
impose sanctions. Once again, we see, on the one hand, a loose coupling 
of elements that as threats are not consumed in use but renewed, and, on 
the other, tight temporary coupling; that is, forms of combining (explicit 
or guessed) instructions and compliance with them. What is improbable 
in such an arrangement is that it normally works, even though the parties 

Communication Media    
have completely different interests and although the action of instructing 
occurs as a decision, hence as contingent; although it pursues no other goal 
than to specify ego’s action, and finally even without the exercise of power 
requiring investigation in the individual case as to whether, in the light of 
the type of instruction, compliance can be expected or not.
Both truth and money neutralize dangerous, conflictual power com-
munication by demanding only experience of ego,297 and social utopias 
therefore favor the notion that society can be steered only by truths or only 
by the market. However, this would mean waiving important possibili-
ties of ordering, namely, everything that can be organized through condi-
tioned arbitrariness in the way of long chains of action. For neither truth 
nor money can determine what the recipient does with what is received—
and precisely this is the function of power.
As in the case of property/money, a secondary coding has proved its 
worth, namely, the legal coding of power. The central institutions of politi-
cally organized coercive power have to be made available to private parties 
where they are in the right, even if (note the improbability of this con-
struction!) the legal content has not been politically monitored at all but 
has come about in contract form. What is more, political power itself can 
be subject to the law, so that it can assert its own means of coercion only if 
it is in the right, and can amend the law itself only if this takes place under 
conditions that are provided for in the legal system. The prevailing term 
for these achievements is the “rule of law,” the Rechtsstaat. Only through 
this self-referential juridification of power does the political medium of 
power become a self-inclusive medium of world construction—quite in-
dependently of the liberal ideology that had initially launched the concept 
as a condition of freedom, earning snide comments in the process.
Although there are highly generalized means of power (threats) that 
can be used for many purposes, clear limits to their application are appar-
ent. Perhaps the most important is the dependence of the power holder 
on information. Even if he can do what he wants, it is far from certain 
what he can want to want. All political systems that set out to control the 
economy politically through production plans and price fixing face the 
problem, for example, that they can obtain no information on economic 
efficiency independent of their own decisions, and therefore develop into 
a vast network of internal manipulations whose economic failures become 
political problems. In other words, power—at the political level but also at 

 
  Communication Media
the organizational level—has to rely on differentiations and on informa-
tion sources independent of power, because all information would other-
wise change into power.298 It is not sufficient for power to be informed only 
self-referentially, only on the basis of the schema success/failure of its own 
plans or that of compliance/noncompliance with its instructions. The me-
dium of power therefore has immanent reasons for not setting itself up as a 
universal medium for controlling society, but for insisting on specification 
of its own universal competence.
All symbolically generalized communication media accordingly arise 
from trivial, everyday situations, initially performing only relatively unde-
manding special services ad hoc, and are thus not yet really media. This 
starting position is particularly important for evolution-theoretical consid-
erations. It integrates media theory with evolution theory. For it explains 
that the possibilities for a more improbable combination of selection and 
motivation lie fallow, as it were, in the general redundancy of meaningful 
communication, but can be used as soon as the need arises, as soon as the 
reference problems mentioned become acute, as soon as, for whatever rea-
son, one discovers the combinatorial possibilities that can be realized with 
medium-specific dissolution and form-building. In my view—at this junc-
ture no more than a subject for future research—such a development and 
differentiation of symbolically generalized communication media require 
both the dissemination media to have achieved the development status 
of writing and printing and the prevailing form of system differentiation 
to set them off. Symbolically generalized communication media develop 
to the full only where the system of society is functionally differentiated; 
for only then can the media serve as catalysts for the differentiation of the 
functional systems of society. Only then does what is condensed as seman-
tics in the use of media occupy the place that had previously been taken 
by morality for the description of society. And only then do we find moral 
critique of this very state of affairs.
11. Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 3: 
Structures
For modern society, for a society with fully developed symbolically 
generalized media, there is no super-medium that could relate all commu-
nication to an underlying unity. Morality (some say ethics) might come 

Communication Media    
to mind. But any attempt to cure all the moral weaknesses of society with 
ethics (thus with reflection on morality) borders on the ridiculous. At any 
rate, proof of suitability has yet to be established and, what is more, we do 
not typically think about morally coded behavior, that is, good and bad, 
but only about good conduct, which is naturally welcome but unfortu-
nately does not come alone.
As far as communication media are concerned, the unity of society 
manifests itself, not in morality, not in concrete morals, but in the non-
arbitrariness of the structural arrangements that translate the function of 
symbolically generalized communication media into possibilities for auto-
poietic systems. From a methodological point of view, this means that we 
find viewpoints for comparing the various media and with the aid of these 
viewpoints have to test the forms in which modern society realizes itself 
as a communication enterprise. We do not assume that, owing to logical 
or theoretical constraints, all characteristics have to be realized equally in 
all media. The theory remains open for evolutionary distinctions. But for 
this very reason, it offers a framework for inquiry if one notes that (and 
asks why) certain media have not realized certain structural characteristics 
or have done so less successfully. We have already seen that only extrava-
gant cases of extremely improbable communication can be involved. But 
at the given level of evolution, society as a whole depends on the problems 
of transforming improbabilities into probabilities being solved in one way 
or another. The following points may be made here:
(1) Symbolically generalized communication media require a uniform code 
(central code) for the entire media field.299 A code consists of two opposing 
values, and at this level (naturally not “in life”) excludes third and further 
values. This converts the possibility—indefinite but tending to increase—
of the communicated meaning proposal being rejected into a hard either/
or, that is, transforms an “analog” situation into a “digital” one; what is 
gained is a clear choice to be made, the same for both alter and ego. It is 
not their opinions that are coded but the communication itself; and this 
is done in a fashion that has to rely on learning ability, namely, on the 
specification of criteria for the correct attribution of positive and negative 
values (whereas the uncoded starting situation could bring only increasing 
disappointment, resentment, and conflict).
Unlike many other codings, this is a preference code. In contrast to the 
general yes/no code of language, the positive value is expressed as a prefer-

 
  Communication Media
ence for this value (and not for the opposing value). This expresses the fact 
that communication is directed against probability. The initial improbabil-
ity of communication being accepted is not also communicated and there-
fore remains latent.
Like other distinctions, codes function as two-sided forms, which an 
observer can use or not use. They also have the character of a distinction, 
in that they can be indicated on only one side and not at the same time on 
the other, and only thus can they serve as connecting and starting point for 
a further operation. By equating what is distinguished, the observer would 
generate a paradox (namely, the paradox of the sameness of the different) 
and point out to himself that this cannot be. The particularity of codes as 
compared with other distinctions is that the transition from one side to the 
other, the crossing of boundaries, is facilitated. If a positive value such as 
true is accepted, there is no difficulty in determining by another operation 
what is consequently untrue, namely, the opposing statement. In other 
words, we need no additional conditioning to move from the value to the 
opposing value and back. Logic can consequently treat this to-and-fro as 
not having taken place.300
What mainly facilitates crossing the inner boundary of the codes is 
that no moral consequences ensue. The result is not that one passes from 
good to bad, let alone that one becomes wicked.301 However, learning this 
is a protracted evolutionary process. As long as society is still stratifica-
tionally differentiated, thus presupposing integration at the apex to which 
moral qualities are attributed, the moral neutralization of media codes can-
not be achieved.302 And the facility of crossing to the opposing value will 
be lacking, which imposes insistence on systemic control criteria.
In this facilitation of crossing from one side to the other, we see a vari-
able of decisive importance for the semantic evolution of media codes. The 
facilitation of crossing from a value to an opposing value and back (without 
the base value changing in the meantime) makes the code itself an invari-
ant structure. At the same time, gluing together positive values or negative 
values of different codes becomes more difficult (i.e., more contingent). 
Whether someone who is beautiful also tells the truth, whether someone 
who is rich is also powerful, also good, also healthy is a question that de-
pends on further conditions that are not systemically guaranteed and that 
observers have to treat as an accident, which they cannot assume to be sta-
ble. To this extent, the evolution of media codes toward schematized cross-

Communication Media    
ing (I shall also be referring to this as “technicization” with regard to the 
context-independence of the operation) also explodes a premise important 
for all hierarchically stratified societies, namely, the assumption that all pos-
itive values come together at the apex (in the nobility, the ruler, God).
Facilitation of crossing to the other value makes the operation 
­context-free, giving it too much leeway, which then has to be restricted. 
In the course of evolution, codings therefore develop a supplementary se-
mantics of criteria determining the conditions under which positive and 
negative values are correctly attributed. I shall be calling this conditioning 
“programs.”303 They attach themselves as a vast semantic apparatus to the 
respective codes; and while codes achieve simplicity and invariance, their 
program area, in supplementation, so to speak, becomes charged with 
complexity and changeability. In this sense, the semantic “stocks” of law or 
science, for example, consist of programs.
Codes indicate the medium responsible for their functional areas and 
thus a limited but loose coupling of possibilities. They take part in every op-
eration, which could otherwise not be attributed to the medium and possi-
bly not to the relevant functional system. They can hence not be forgotten, 
whereas on the program level both remembering and forgetting are possi-
ble, depending on how often the programs are called up or, if not, deleted 
from memory. Only codes are necessarily regenerated. Only they define the 
unity of the medium and perhaps that of the functional system through a 
specific difference, whereas programs can change.
Fixing the preference or “dispreference” [Dispräferenz] that distin-
guishes the code can disregard psychic realities. However, it must proceed 
on the assumption, for example, in the case of the money code, that there 
is interest in utility, or in the case of love, that there is interest in self-real-
ization. But as long as such motivational assumptions do not become im-
probable in communication, medium-oriented communication functions. 
Precisely because of this preference orientation, symbolically generalized 
media are suitable guidance media. They perform their guidance function 
by fixing preferences and by exposing them to variable conditioning. By 
varying conditioning, we can ascertain whether a communication makes a 
difference in relation to a specific preference or not, and can readjust if need 
be—show more commitment to demonstrate love, offer more arguments to 
prove a truth or more money to obtain a desired object, or vary the content 
of an instruction or threat to assert power in achieving our ends. Structurally 

 
  Communication Media
decisive for all this is the difference between fixed preference code and variable 
conditioning (programs).
The more abstractly the code is formulated, the more weakly the 
preference is likely to be developed (consider, for example, the falsification 
principle in science, which admits as truth only what remains when enough 
has been falsified). But the positive value always symbolizes the connectivity 
of medium-specific operations, whereas the negative value symbolizes only 
the contingency of conditions for connectivity. With ­Gotthard Günther,304 
we can therefore also say that media preference codes consist in a designa-
tion value and a reflection value to the exclusion of third possibilities. Some-
thing can be done with truths, love, property, power. The corresponding 
negative values are available only for control purposes and provide the con-
text through which the connection practice of the positive side can become 
rational selection (what would be the use of money if we had to pay at any 
price and could not not pay?).305
As with all codes, this is a duplication rule that doubles what is or 
happens in a positive and a negative version. However, that it is mere du-
plication cannot be taken into consideration, for the user of the code has 
to use it as a twoness and not as a unity.306 This duplication (also a reflec-
tion that has to be deleted) provides the basis for developing a medial sub-
stratum with loosely coupled elements (e.g., sums of money that can be 
paid or not paid), which tolerates only certain forms of strict coupling 
(and not others); in the case of money, for example, transactions at certain 
prices. The unity of the code consists here, too, in its form: the other side 
is always connoted when the first is indicated; and this requires binarity, 
for even three-way constellations are confusing.
Binarity enables the opposing value to be included in the value, and 
the value to be included in the opposing value. The value is then both iden-
tity and difference, namely, itself and not the opposing value (as is also the 
case on the other side). This leads to a self-iterative, self-referential relation, 
and thus to a form that dissolves the difference between identity and dif-
ference in difference, in a certain distinction between positive and negative 
value that can be distinguished from other distinctions of the same sort, from 
other codes. This in turn differs radically from all attempts to reduce differ-
ence to unity, be it to a religious formula, be it “mind” [Geist] as a formula 
for what is differentiated in itself. As a result, the media (distinguished from 
one another) lead to a semantics that can no longer be controlled by religion.

Communication Media    
Despite this formal symmetry of positive and negative values, there is 
an important (but difficult to discover) distinction from the general yes/no 
coding of language. It manifests itself in the first place as preference for the 
positive value. Important, but hidden by this, is a confusion of two levels 
that a logical thinker should keep separate. The positive value functions as 
a preference, and hence as a symbol for connectivity, and at the same time, 
it functions as legitimation for the use of the code itself. It symbolizes what is 
distinguished from the opposing value and also legitimizes the distinction 
itself. Preference codes—and this makes their strictly logical treatment dif-
ficult—frustrate a logically necessary differentiation of types.307 But this is 
still too superficial a description. In radical terms, codes unfold a funda-
mental paradox, that of the unity of a distinction, by prescribing the form 
of a binary schematism, from which third values are excluded, in which 
the value and the opposing value can be identified and their simultaneous 
application to the same object is forbidden as contradictory.308 But this 
presupposes that the unity of the distinction itself is not questioned, but 
its use legitimized, along with the preference value. In effect, the observer 
who uses the distinction remains unobservable to himself; he must only 
commit himself to the positive value. The underlying paradox is both un-
folded (binarized, digitized) and concealed. But then it constitutes one of 
the main incentives for reflection theories such as become necessary when 
correspondingly differentiated functional systems have to show how they 
understand and solve their communication problems. And this becomes 
necessary in modern societies, which can no longer rely on macrosocietal 
givens (stratification, morality) but find themselves confronted in their 
functional systems by problems of self-legitimation, of autonomy, of ap-
plying the code to itself.309
The more strictly codes are formed, the more strongly they differ from 
normal evaluation in society. Consider the code of the medium ­property/
money. What counts economically is only who is owner and who not. And 
since for every item of property everyone else is a nonowner, the code of-
fers immense redundancy in possibilities for change. In the societal and po-
litical view of the economy, in contrast, the distinction between rich and 
poor—a quite different form—appears to be important; and the economy 
has been observed since the eighteenth century primarily with regard to a 
growing gap between rich and poor, which now (unlike in a stratified so-
ciety) has lost its function. The Marxian critique of the political economy 

 
  Communication Media
can therefore also be read as a critique of the outdifferentiated economy 
from a macrosocietal point of view.
The final stage of this differentiation, in which only few media are in-
volved, is reached when a negation suffices to cross the boundary, to con-
vert the value into the opposing value.310 Within the code, crossing to the 
opposing value is facilitated—but subject to renouncing any implication 
for the values of other codes. The values of codes are not interconvertible. 
Monetary wealth cannot be converted into love, nor power into truth or 
vice versa.311 I call facilitation of crossing from value to opposing value and 
back as technicization of the medium—in the sense of easing information 
processing in accepting and taking account of all the concrete meaning re-
lations that are implicated.312
We might think of logic primarily as a form for scientific calculus. 
But this is a special case of technicity. Other methods attain a substantial 
level of technicization through a structure that I call secondary coding; 
the foremost cases are the secondary coding of property through money 
and the secondary coding of power through law. In both cases, the posi-
tive value is again duplicated, in that we can use property in money to pay 
or not to pay, and can exercise power lawfully or unlawfully—but not, of 
course, if we have no property at all or no power at all. Secondary cod-
ing goes along with abstraction. Since the monetarization of property, the 
economy has been interested only in the abstract difference between prop-
erty and nonproperty in relation to specific things or rights. This differ-
ence keeps the economy running, because even the wealthiest person is 
a nonowner in relation to most things. The difference between rich and 
poor, where it does not serve to motivate work, is a problem left to poli-
tics to resolve. Instead, the “critique of political economy” addresses the 
monetary technology of “capitalism,” which allows it to offset material 
and labor costs in operational accounts, disregarding the fact that the con-
tributions made by material and labor to the production process differ in 
significant ways. It is important to keep an eye on these secondary codings 
as extensions of technicization, for while they cannot be understood as ap-
plications of logic they are nevertheless indispensable for the modern ratio-
nality and distinctness of the corresponding media codes.
Other media take pride in being not technicizable, and they see this 
not as a deficit but as a particular quality. This is the case with love and 
with art. It is not by chance that in these two cases, the general is stressed 
in the particular—in love in the special subject, in art in the special object. 

Communication Media    
From a historical point of view, this contrast intensified from the eigh-
teenth century on in response to the development of technicized media. 
One of the consequences is that the counterstructurally formed media of 
love and art have to do without some of the characteristics of the other 
media, above all, the assured capacity to form systems.
With all these particularities, codes also realize the general properties 
of every form: drawing a boundary, the crossing of which is possible but 
requires time. Coded media are therefore always temporalized media. We 
must start from a value or from the opposing value, we must, for example 
know whether we own a thing or not; but then we can cross over with a 
further operation to the opposing value, can sell or buy to find ourselves in 
a later situation, which in turn offers time for further operations. The di-
versification of media therefore always generates a diversification of time, 
and hence eigentimes in the various media fields that do not have to be co-
ordinated among themselves, even though everything that happens in fact 
happens at the same time.
(2) I treat another characteristic of preference codes separately, for they 
not only serve to compare symbolically generalized communication media 
among themselves but also provide insight into the effects of their differ-
entiation. I mention the self-placing of the code in one of its values, which 
for the sake of this function is described as the positive value.
The unity of the code (as of every distinction) consists in a form that 
separates two sides. It can therefore, to be exact, not be represented on 
only one side. Preferences do this nonetheless and by doing so block the 
question of the unity of the code and the problem of applying coded op-
erations to the code itself.313 Instead, they postulate that the communica-
tion of a truth is a true communication. Whoever loves cannot and may 
not avoid declaring his love. To assert what is lawfully right is legitimate. 
Exchangeability (availability) is a quality of property, so that even giving 
property away is still covered by property. The same trick is played for op-
posing values: proof of an untruth is itself a true operation, and so on. The 
code, so to speak, gives itself permission to operate without having to take 
recourse to higher values.
Self-placement is not thematized; it remains latent. It eludes the risk 
of provoking a yes or a no as utterance. In this very sense, the positive and 
negative sides of the code are “values.” Self-placement uses and intensi-
fies the asymmetry of the code, the difference between positive and nega-

 
  Communication Media
tive values.314 A little cheating—and the code can assert its autonomy, can 
avoid looking back on its paradox and with all this can count on a high 
degree of plausibility. Where would it get us if we were to deny that we do 
not have the right to distinguish between right and wrong?
But we are not interested in this form because of its ingenuity. Its 
main achievement, from a symbolic point of view, is that it uncouples the 
code from strict dependence on social structural asymmetries. The differ-
ences between town and country, nobility and commons, patron and client, 
man and woman, parents and children cannot be preference-coded in this 
fashion. Although, in dependence on given societal structures, they assert 
asymmetry and the superiority of the one side, they have to rely directly on 
societal structures or, as seventeenth-century nobility theories would have 
put it, on imagination. We could hardly say that a communication by a 
gentlewoman to her coachman (and vice versa) is a noble communication. 
Instead of this simple self-placement, elaborate verbal forms, ceremonial, 
and so on, repeatedly reintroduce the difference of status into communica-
tion. It works; many examples demonstrate it. But this solution depends on 
concrete face-to-face interaction. It cannot be translated into writing, and 
printing relegates it fully to the periphery of societally important communi-
cation. The preference-coded communication media now prove to be clearly 
superior evolutionary advances, and it is understandable that after the intro-
duction of printing, they contributed more and more to converting the dif-
ferentiation form of society to preference-coded functional systems.
Not only symbolically generalized communication media but also 
morality developed a preference code. Communication that indicates that 
something is good or bad is a good communication. This is an important 
element in the engagement technique of morality, for the person who de-
scribes something as good or bad has difficulty, if the communication is 
good, in correcting himself. Since Aristotle, this problem has been resolved 
via a cognitive detour: one always wants what is good, but one may err. 
This, too, is an elegant solution, and we soon recognize that it lends inde-
pendence from asymmetries in societal structures. Nobility and commons, 
townsfolk and peasants, rich and poor, men and women, however the ex-
pectations they have to meet might differ, are all subject to moral judgment.
This similarity between morality and symbolically generalized com-
munication media explains a competitive situation that persisted until well 
into the eighteenth century or, if we take laggards seriously, has continued 
to this day. The differentiation of media that had begun in classical Greek 

Communication Media    
urban culture was, at least in the Aristotelian texts, but also in the presuppo-
sitions of rhetoric, held together by an ethic of the urban way of life. Since 
it was a matter of societal criticism, critiques of the estates in the eighteenth 
century still primarily cite morality. Nevertheless, the functional differentia-
tion of the societal system clearly uses the codes of the media, not the code 
of morality; and obviously does so because not unity but difference is con-
cerned. In other words, the media have to rely on the neutral­ization of moral 
propositions because fusioning would otherwise occur and the onus of moti-
vation would pass (in this regard rather unreliable) to morality.315 If commu-
nication nonetheless takes place that opts morally for or against the values of 
the communication media, we learn nothing about these values but some-
thing about the moral convictions of the person communicating in this 
fashion. A not unpernicious syndrome appears to establish itself, in which 
society uses the codes of symbolically generalized communication media at 
a demanding level for its reproduction and activates morality for criticizing 
precisely this state of affairs (e.g., criticism of the orientation on money).316
(3) Through coding alone, symbolically generalized communication me-
dia are self-referentially structured and differentiated as closed operational 
contexts. This is to be distinguished from processual reflexivity, which is in 
evidence in all fully developed media. Normal communication is already 
reflexive, in that it can apply to itself and its own outcomes at any time.317 
In other words, it orients itself in the self-produced network of its own 
reproduction. In the domain of symbolically generalized communication 
media, special conditions apply that lend this possibility greater scope by 
limitation to single media. Processes in the communication field of a me-
dium can also be applied to themselves; they can be their own object. In 
the medium of truth, there are research on research and true (or untrue) 
statements about the truth (or untruth) of statements. Value relations can 
themselves be evaluated, for example, from the point of view of their ideo-
logical function. From the ideal, we deduce who needs it.318 That one loves 
love for the sake of love, loves oneself and one’s lover as lovers (and even 
only as such!) is a well-known postulate of the love semantic. That we can 
procure money for money is just as current as the application of power to 
power, for example, in the form of political choice or the internal organi-
zational phenomenon of the power of pressure exercised by subordinates.
The examples also show that such forms of reflexivity amount to in-
directness. They therefore found little acceptance in the course of history, 

 
  Communication Media
becoming fully established only in modern society. This is understandable 
when we consider that this reflexivity is not one case of application among 
others but the form in which the medium acquires distinctness and au-
tonomy and asserts itself against the demands of family and class systems. 
We cannot engage in serious research without methods and theories at our 
disposition that are themselves the outcome of research. Real love requires 
loving to be loved, and so forth. The medium must first be applied to it-
self before it is ready for operational deployment. To put it in another way, 
media generate a self-substitutive order. Results in a media field can be 
changed only through operations of the same medium. We cannot invali-
date truths against payment but only through research. To this extent, too, 
the medium is responsible for itself, for its own results.
Media can only be handled reflexively, that is, applied only to their 
own processes and results, if the necessary apparatus of distinctions and in-
dications is available. Confusion with the objects of other media must be 
obviated. We must be able to love loving and not only to think loving. But 
if media are differentiated by their own coding, they generate the special 
semantics they require in the process.319
In such cases, the observer sees an unfolded paradox, and thus an ul-
timate undecidability. All power comes about by submitting to power, and 
supreme power comes about through submission to the lowest power. We 
call this democracy. The truth code itself, by reason of the fact that we are 
considering it, is the object of true or perhaps untrue statements. In order 
to generate goods in abundance, money must be kept scarce, whereas in re-
ality the opposite is the case. Value relations demonstrate their untenabil-
ity if we attempt to act in accordance with them only to realize that this 
cannot be done unless we violate other values. But the paradox on which 
media are based does not lead to their operations being blocked. On the 
contrary, it is the condition for creative unfolding, for media-specific dis-
tinctions, or for temporal sequencing that transfers what cannot be at the 
same time into a succession. First a law applies, then no longer; and no one 
objects that what is right is wrong and what is wrong is right. It is only a 
matter of lost opportunities.
(4) One of the most important resolutions of paradox lies in the differen-
tiation of first- and second-order observation.320 One of the most notable 
characteristics of symbolically generalized media is that they make such a 
differentiation possible. One researcher observes what other researchers 

Communication Media    
observe. Whoever loves has a prime interest in finding out whether his/her 
lover (still) loves. Prices offer the possibility of observing how others ob-
serve the market and whether they buy or do not buy at a certain price.321 
Modern art can be understood only if we recognize how artists use their 
means, that is, how they observe what they do.322 And power relations 
are fully dependent on the mutual observation of observations; otherwise, 
one would have to threaten or provoke threats in order to find out which 
communications are covered by power. What is at issue in all these cases is 
not that participants in media-mediated communications are observed like 
objects with regard to their own characteristics in order to foresee how they 
will act. Interest focuses only on observing what they observe; and in many 
instances, this includes observing what they do not observe.
As soon as there is second-order observation, all observation in the 
given media field relates to this level. The first-order observer, too, knows 
that he is observed by a second-order observer (who may be himself ).323 For 
the truth medium, this requirement is subsumed under the heading “em-
pirical knowledge.” All conditioning of the medium must therefore come 
to bear at the second-order level. This unblocks first-order observation and 
gears it to surprise, with immense consequences.
Under all these conditions of self-referential circularity, the medium 
remains a distinctive unity determined by coding. Elementary operation, 
structure formation, structural change, crossing in the code and change of 
level are carried out in the same medium.324 In this sense, media lay claim to 
universal competence for all communications that fall within their field of 
application. They do so in the sense of “provided that” abstractions: where 
problems and attribution constellations of the truth medium are concerned, 
this medium alone is competent. Put in terms of Talcott Parsons’s pattern 
variables,325 the media therefore combine “universalism” and “specificity,” 
and Parsons rightly considers this a typically modern constellation, which 
older societies could not attain.326 Universalism is concerned with worldwide 
application, not limited by external circumstances; specificity is concerned 
with the distinction (in this instance, the code) underlying observation.
(5) Media codes are open to all information and utterances that fall within 
their particular domain. They rely on and are geared to random stimulus. 
Moreover, they must be able to guarantee that both values in the system 
are usable, both right and wrong, and that in the process of specifying ac-
ceptance demands, there is repeated crossing between code values. The un-

 
  Communication Media
truth of certain statements is thus among the most important arguments 
in the search for truth; their rejection alone cannot fulfill the function of 
the medium. This also means that a positive value cannot in itself have the 
function of a criterion (in the classical sense of kritērion, kanōn, regula) 
that guides the selection of this same value. It will generally be acknowl-
edged today that truth is therefore not a criterion of truth.327 But having 
property is also no sufficient reason for economic activity. More typical 
today is for whoever seeks to keep his property to lose assets and whoever 
wishes to keep or increase his assets to have continually to change his plans 
in property matters. The medium is considered a transaction medium, 
property is not a blanket term for various types of goods. Nor is power 
superiority itself, or the mere lawfulness of exercising power, a criterion 
for the use of power. In analogy to money, Parsons speaks of the need to 
“spend” power, and the reason for doing so cannot lie only in the positive 
value of the code.
There must accordingly be further conditions that determine the cir-
cumstances under which assignment of the positive value is right or wrong 
and the circumstances under which assignment of the negative value is right 
or wrong. I shall call such conditions programs and correspondingly distin-
guish between coding and programming for all symbolically generalized 
communication media. This distinction solves many problems that would 
be insoluble from a more simple teleological, goal-directed, value-­pragmatic 
perspective. It is also the condition for media to generate complexity.
It is easy to see that it is a distinction of distinctions, thus a form for 
forms. Coding ensures the differentiation and specification of a medium 
in distinction to others, and programming can therefore only be code-
specific. For the truth medium, for example, programs take the form of 
theories and methods; for legally coded power, the form of laws, court 
rulings establishing precedents, and contracts; the medium of money is 
respecified in the form of investment programs and consumption pro-
grams, monitored by means of balance sheets and budgets. For the me-
dium love, memories of a common history appear to assume the function 
of limiting possibilities. All this requires further research. What is impor-
tant to note at this point is only that such programs have to be assigned 
to one and only one code and cannot shift from medium to medium. A 
theory is not yet a law, and whoever invests in a love affair does not act 
entrepreneurially.

Communication Media    
Coding and programming, as we have seen, also differ from the 
point of view of invariance and variability. We cannot change a code. Any 
attempt to do so would only mean that we are basing communication on 
another symbolically generalized medium, or on none at all. At the pro-
gram level, in contrast, variability can be organized. The examples men-
tioned above will have sufficiently demonstrated this.
Finally, it should be noted that all the values that are excluded by the 
binarity of the code at this level can be reintroduced as aspects of program 
selection. A work of art must satisfy its own code as coherent/incoherent 
or, in traditional terms, as beautiful/ugly. But in choosing the subject, one 
can “politicize” or keep an eye on marketing potential.
(6) Symbolically generalized media, like all communication, operate in 
structural coupling with the consciousness of the psychic systems that par-
ticipate in communication. This structural coupling also involves the liv-
ing bodies of participants. In interaction systems, for example, they must 
be physically present in order to contribute to communication.328 Com-
munication therefore continually refers to persons and presupposes that 
this reference is covered by the reality of highly complex but opaque auto­
poietic systems. Since this also applies vice versa for psychic systems, we 
can, to borrow a term from Parsons’s theory of the general action system, 
speak of interpenetration.
We can call the need to take account of corporeality in communi-
cation symbiosis, and the corresponding means of expression, symbiotic 
symbols. Symbiotic symbols organize how communication allows itself to 
be irritated by corporeality; hence, how the effects of structural coupling 
are processed in the communication system without this breaching the 
closure of the system and requiring a noncommunicative mode of op-
eration. Differentiation of symbolically generalized media suggests corre-
sponding differentiation of the symbiotic symbols used in the media field; 
for reference to corporeality is required in the given highly specified sense, 
whereas the physical involvement of people can be disregarded.329
As far as truth is concerned, the symbiotic symbol refers to perception 
that is physically possible, or, more precisely, to the possibility of perceiv-
ing perceptions. This is, of course, no ultimate decision-making authority, 
as was assumed by older empiricist theories; for even if it is established that 
perception has taken place, there can always be controversy over what was 
perceived.330 Nor does what research achieves correlate with the set and 

 
  Communication Media
unambiguity of scientifically established perceptions.331 But the percep-
tion of the perception of others is a source of irritation and cannot simply 
be ignored.
In the field of the love medium, we find an exact analogy in the sym-
biotic use of sexual references. In the case of love, as in the case of truth, 
we find symbiotic symbols not securing communication on a deeper mo-
tivational basis but acting as a source of irritation that has to be built into 
the semantics. In perception as in sexuality, the modern differentiation of 
these media therefore enhances the value of their symbiotic symbols.332 
They are no longer assigned in the context of a hierarchical world archi-
tecture to the “lower” (because shared with animals) domain of sensuality, 
but included in the conditioning of the media. For sexuality, the lead dis-
tinction is then: with or without love. In the first case, this can end up in 
marriage; in the second, in a counterculture of obscenity.333
As far as symbiosis is concerned, property and money relate to 
needs. Even in earlier times, it was recognized that no property system 
can simply ignore the acute physical needs of others. Life at the subsis-
tence level gave certain rights, and where necessity demanded, there was 
the doctrine that theft in need [Notdiebstahl ] should not be punished.334 
The transition to the money economy changed this line of reasoning; it 
was now assumed, first, that everyone could satisfy his needs by working 
for wages if he chose, and, second, that a generalized concept of need had 
been established covering everything that could be produced for what-
ever purpose. Symbiosis with people dying of hunger is not taken into 
account in the conditioning of the economy medium and thus becomes 
a political problem.
In the case of power, the symbiotic symbol is physical force. In every 
society, there are many other sources of power, for example, the regular 
advantages that one can threaten to withdraw, but there is nothing that 
can be done against superior physical force. The political system, which 
power uses as a medium, must therefore concentrate decision-making 
on the deployment of physical force; today, this is done with the aid of 
law. With Parsons, one may regard control over physical force to be the 
basis of security (real assets) for the power medium.335 At the same time, 
however, it is a source of irritation, for whoever wishes to use physical 
force as a symbiotic symbol and not as a personal form of conduct can-
not ignore the occurrence of violence whose conditioning he does not 

Communication Media    
control. The demonstrations of recent times, with their propensity for 
violence (or merely the mass presentation of physical presence), illustrate 
this problem.
The various symbiotic symbols of the different media have much in 
common. In all cases there is a close link between usability and disturbabil-
ity that follows from the systemic activation of structural couplings. In all 
cases, the symbol, because it is a symbol, is an object of cultural interpreta-
tion. Thus a cheeky look can be interpreted as the onset of physical force, 
or a day without beer and tobacco as a state of emergency. Much depends 
on trained sensitivity. Whoever wishes to “see” inscriptions or murals in 
the gloom of Egyptian tombs needs some experience, and this means that 
the medium depends more strongly on the specific nature of structural 
couplings. Above all, however, symbiotic symbols require a ban on self-
gratification. They have to rely on the body being used in accordance with 
social conditionings and not directly for what the consciousness suggests. 
This explains why the positive sexology of the eighteenth century also pro-
voked an almost neurotic attitude toward masturbation; that only few de-
cades previously, science, which depends on controlled perception, had to 
reject all reference to intuition in the sense of a self-gratifying approach as 
a variant of “fanaticism”;336 and, of course, that the political power of the 
“sovereign” state could tolerate no unauthorized use of force in its own 
territory and allow only international wars. It is striking that bans on self-
gratification relate to the coding of media. For Pascal, this meant that, 
because science lacks intuitive-direct access to truth such as claimed by re-
ligion, it has to take the arduous path of refuting opposing assumptions.337 
And it is also clear in the case of power that a generally stabilized difference 
between superiority and inferiority can be maintained only if not everyone 
has the means of physical force at their disposal, and the power question 
always first has to be settled in combat.
Finally, we note something surprising: through symbiotic symbols, 
media become dependent on organization. This is obvious where control 
over physical force requires decisions to be made, as well as military or po-
lice organization. But the preparation of perceptions relevant to truth also 
now requires organization if we do not want to be at the mercy of chance. 
The same applies for the market-mediated satisfaction of needs. And very 
recently even sexuality has made itself dependent on organization, namely, 
on the services of the pharmaceutical industry. Behind the external refer-

 
  Communication Media
ence and irritation given by structural coupling to consciousness and body, 
society itself once again emerges. Ultimate security lies not in controlling 
the body, as the old theory of the passions and reason teaches, but in the 
functioning of organizations.
(7) The function of symbolically generalized communication is to con-
dition selections in such a way that communications are accepted, even 
though this is improbable as an exigency. With respect to actual motiva-
tional success, however, a symbolic medium can be used too much or too 
little. In the first case, we speak of inflation; in the second, of deflation.
Parsons proposed generalizing this distinction, originally usual only 
with reference to money but conceptually not very well developed.338 In 
the context of the general theory of the action system, embodiment in the 
“realia,” the “things” that make action possible,339 suffices, and, inciden-
tally, the analogy with monetary inflation and deflation. However, we find 
ourselves in a theoretically more difficult situation. What does “too much” 
or “too little” successful motivation mean?
We see the problem not in the extent of “backing” for the medium 
by “things” (this would not suffice even for money theory), but in trust in 
relation to the further use of the meaning reduced by communication (cir-
culation).340 This may, but need not, depend on such “backing”; above all, 
the various media differ considerably on what can provide such backing.
Inflation occurs when communication overdraws its line of trust, 
when it assumes it has more trust at its disposal than it can generate. De-
flation occurs in the reverse case, when the possibilities of gaining trust 
are not exploited. In the case of inflation, the medium reacts by devaluing 
symbols (in the economy, measured against price increases). In the case 
of deflation, the medium reacts with too strongly restrictive condition-
ing, which means reducing circulation. Calculating with the reusability 
(= ­liquidity) of media symbols requires that others’ calculations be cal-
culated. Inflation and deflation can therefore be expected if the medium 
is geared to second-order observation. Borderline cases of inflation are 
reached where inflationary correction (devaluation) can no longer be ex-
pected to suffice and the acceptance of the symbols is refused. Borderline 
cases of deflation are reached where conditioning intervenes so strictly that 
no more communication is permitted. Then, too, we refuse acceptance, 
because under such conditions, we know that the results will be no use to 
us. In cases of hyperinflation or hyperdeflation, the original improbability 

Communication Media    
of communications with particularly substantial demands reemerges—but 
now in developed societies, which can no longer bear with it. Only these 
borderline cases of correction failure can be described as mistrust, whereas 
in other cases it is a matter of maintaining trust with increasing effort.
Truth is inflated where it proposes more possibilities for use than can 
be realized.341 For value relations, we find an impressive example even be-
fore their differentiation, namely, in the devotional movements of the sev-
enteenth century,342 and another in the contemporary invention of the 
“fashion” concept. For present-day conditions, values can be considered 
inflation-proof, since they suffer no harm and we cannot devalue them 
if we see they are no use to us. We follow the advice of fashion and move 
on to other values. Love is inflated where it proposes more regard for the 
world of the other than can be put into practice in real life. This is where 
the novel, and today pulp fiction and films of that ilk ensure permanent 
inflation—without provoking any deflationary countertrends in literature. 
We have inflation of the money medium where money cannot be reused at 
the value at which it had been accepted.343 Inflation in art occurs especially 
where the artist renounces “difficulty” in producing works and the scarcity 
this entails, where art is accordingly abstracted from skill. Inflation might 
then be accompanied by deflation where fashion, reputation, and the gal-
lery business overestimate some artists and underestimate others. In the 
case of power, finally, inflation consists in promising political action that 
cannot be taken.344 The modern technique in political communication of 
only radiating good intentions in itself reflects permanent inflation, and 
symbols are devalued by what politicians say being discounted from the 
outset. From time to time, it is then good to remind politicians that only 
gods can change things through words.
This overview shows that the media’s function of offering a prospect 
of improbable motivation tends to inflate. Established media impose trust 
and trust in the trust of others, and for this very reason, they have high in-
flation tolerance. This is why it is not much use to look for states of equi-
librium in which there is neither inflation nor deflation and to consider 
such states optimal. Inflation and deflation can also occur at the same 
time, and only highly centralized media such as money render this im-
probable (“stagflation” has, however, been discussed in this connection). 
Deflation tends rather to take the form of corrective movements—for in-
stance, insistence on empiricism over “grand theory” in American sociol-

 
  Communication Media
ogy, regionalization movements in politics, fundamentalism in religion. At 
any rate, inflation/deflation is also a form with two sides and a dividing 
line that is to be understood only as a boundary to be crossed and not as a 
perfect state of affairs.
(8) If symbolically generalized media claim to be universally applicable and 
in this sense to be operationally closed, they must offer the possibility of 
symbolizing the inclusion of exclusion, just as arithmetic has the zero sym-
bol at its disposal, so that the nonnumber can be symbolized as a number. 
This zero method is applied particularly strikingly in the case of money. If 
money serves to observe scarcity, that is, to transform scarcity into opera-
tions, there must also be nonscarce money in a money system. Today, this 
is no longer realized through external references, with scarce commodities 
such as gold restricting the amount of money available. Instead of such com-
modity money, the credit of the central bank serves to regulate the money 
supply within the system based on nothing, as it were, by either expanding 
the money supply or reducing it (making it more expensive). What is deci-
sive is that this zero method is not understood as a license for arbitrariness 
or as admitting external (in this instance, political) influence, but is tied to 
the self-reflection of the system in its concrete, historical situation.345 This 
does not work automatically, but only when it is communicated.
If we recognize the principle, we find the same state of affairs in the 
case of power. Power depends decisively on the possibility of imposing 
negative sanctions, especially physical coercion. In the actual use of these 
sanctions, however, power fails because one cannot achieve what one re-
ally wants to achieve with them. The practice of power therefore requires 
constant reflection on the nonuse of the means of power, a continuous bal-
ancing act between showing strength and avoiding the imposition of sanc-
tions. And this, too, is a communication problem. One has to threaten 
without threatening; one has to attempt to manage with a reference to 
structures and conditions without being definite about what one would do 
if instructions are not followed.
In the case of truth, we have a similar problem: that we have to be 
able to forget in order to be able to remember. The truth medium stylizes 
this necessity as a selection problem and advances reasons for the preferred 
selection. But there can be no grounds for forgetting that would not pre-
vent forgetting itself. For the medium love, historical semantics have found 
paradoxical formulas that indicate the improbability of the medium, while 

Communication Media    
making it clear that the improbability of love assumes pathological forms 
in marriage. Love demands that every (verbal and bodily) gesture serve the 
observation of love, indeed the observation of the observation of love. But 
no long-term relationship can sustain such an endurance test. Modes of 
dealing with one another must therefore be found that make the nonproof 
of love possible, with the communicated understanding for this conduct 
counting as proof of love.
(9) Universalization and closure through a zero method is at the same 
time a semantic and communicative precondition for the differentiation 
of medium-specific, operationally closed functional systems. A final aspect 
in comparing media is therefore whether and to what extent they can serve 
as catalysts in system formation. There are obvious links between the dif-
ferentiation of media and that of the functional systems of modern society. 
It is obvious that the modern economy requires the secondary coding of 
property by money and modern politics the secondary coding of power by 
law. On the other hand, these two examples alone show differences that 
suggest system formation obeys its own laws. The political system and the 
legal system are thus differentiated as different autopoietic systems with 
differing codes;346 not so property and money. There is therefore no auto-
matic congruence between medium formation and system formation, but 
instances in which a system is characterized by the use of a medium are 
much to the fore.
Probably the most important condition for such a link is that the 
code of a medium be suitable for defining the unity of a system in distinc-
tion to other systems of its environment. Media without central coding, 
especially value relations, have no prospect of forming distinguishable sys-
tems. For whether an operation assigns itself to politics or the economy, to 
law or to an intimate relationship is decided in accordance with the code 
on which it orients itself.
However, this alone does not suffice. The operations that the medium 
makes possible (despite the improbability of combining selection and mo-
tivation) must be suitable for initiating and closing an autopoietic repro-
duction context. They must be able to organize recursive anticipation and 
recursion, and thus occur not only now and again and in isolation. In other 
words, media must be able to concatenate communications. They must do 
so independently of the sameness of the communication partners and their 
memory. Moreover, it is useful if the concatenation is not strictly linear in 

 
  Communication Media
a one-to-one sequence but open to ramification and unpredictable constel-
lations. The engagement that is generated in communication must be rel-
evant for others, and in such a way that the decision on what it is for has 
to be taken only later. Art has difficulty satisfying this requirement, and its 
potential for system formation is therefore meager. Money, in contrast, sat-
isfies the condition optimally. It retains its value even though each payment 
deletes memory of the structures (prices, transaction conditions) that had 
motivated it,347 and it nevertheless remains ready for use and in quite dif-
ferent denominations without the slightest doubt that a payment is always 
an operation of the economic system.
Also important in this context is the technicity of the code we have 
dealt with above, that is, the independence of the crossing between posi-
tive and negative values in innumerable concrete meaning constellations, 
its psychological and moral deconditioning—all without loss of definite-
ness of the option between positive and negative value, without evasion in 
vague generalizations that need interpreting. In this regard, too, money is 
an optimal case, for when we pay there can be no doubt about the fact and 
amount of payment.
True knowledge and law are given in qualitative units but they, too, 
guarantee bifurcation capacity and reusability. But they require authorities 
(publications, organizations) to which they can refer when the distribution 
of code values is unclear. Whoever regularly takes aspirin to guard against 
heart attacks can justify his action to his astonished fellows by citing med-
ical research. And if we are denied parking space on the lot of an office 
building even though we are stockholders (in other words, so we thought, 
owners) of the company in question, this is a matter to be settled before 
the courts and not on the stock exchange. When it comes to highly tech-
nicized codes and corresponding programs of this sort, laymen typically 
find that what matters is not what they had first thought. This means not 
least that moral evaluation, too, has to step back because the assignment 
of positive and negative code values cannot be coordinated with the dis-
tinction between respect and disrespect.348 But it depends on this technical 
efficiency whether and to what extent media can form highly complex, op-
erationally closed, self-defining and self-reproducing systems.
The reuse of a selection once made has also been called circulation of 
the medium. The expression is understandable only in a historical context, 
for there is no question of a “circle.”349 Ultimately it is a matter of the dy-

Communication Media    
namic aspect of the medium/form difference. Although each coupling of 
the medial substratum to forms releases the medium itself for new forms, 
more than mere pulsation must be achieved in autopoietic systems; and 
precisely the symbolically generalized media are geared to do something 
with what has been previously achieved. They serve as already reduced 
complexity, as absorption of uncertainty, as premises for further opera-
tions. Every sum of money received is available for further payments. If 
truths are established, we can rely on them without have to test them 
again, and in the case of effectual power everyone can expect not to be the 
only fool to do what he is told.
On the other hand, and to this extent the concept of circulation is 
deceptive, this does not mean that connective operations are foreseeable. 
Circulation is not a concept that offers prospects of calculation and plan-
ning. Whoever pays cannot foresee what the recipient will do with the 
money, and if under certain circumstances, this is nonetheless factually or 
legally under control, what at the latest the following recipient does can-
not be predicted. Even the conditional programs of law hardly extend our 
field of vision.350 Consider only the difficulty of estimating how a change 
in divorce law will affect power relations in marriages. Although the cir-
culation of media symbols serves system formation, for symbols can cir-
culate only in systems, it would be wrong to conclude that the system can 
be controlled. The technical efficiency of the medium in the structure of 
its codes and in the dispersal of binding effects speaks against rather than 
for controllability.
These differences in the capability of various symbolically generalized 
communication media to form systems shape modern society. Together 
with other factors, they lead to uneven growth among functional systems 
and hence to the uneven operation of functions as regards communication 
effort and visibility without any covert rationality or hierarchy of functions 
being responsible. Society does not rise like dough; it does not grow evenly, 
become evenly more differentiated, more complex, as nineteenth-century 
theoreticians of progress believed (and were able to believe because they 
saw society only as the economic system). Rather, it complexifies certain 
functional areas and allows others to wither. This imbalance has repeat-
edly given rise to critiques of civilization—whether in terms of religion, 
like [post-Napoleonic Hegelian] “Restoration philosophy” [Restaurations­
philosophie], or in terms of reason, like Jürgen Habermas. Recent cyber-

 
  Communication Media
netic and systems-theoretical research has, however, shown that this is a 
quite normal phenomenon, which can be corrected only by evolution.351
From an evolution-theoretical standpoint, too, it is important to dis-
tinguish between symbolically generalized communication media and the 
system formed through them. Media can come into being and be dif-
ferentiated before there are any corresponding functional systems. The 
programming and specialized terminology of the coding needed to build 
systems can be provisionally prepared. We can trace the beginnings of this 
back to antiquity. Such predevelopments are particularly evident in the ex-
tent of the money economy in antiquity and again since the High Middle 
Ages, but also in the beginnings of conceptual systematization in juristi-
cally elaborated Roman and English case law. Without such preliminary 
work, the transition from a stratified society to a functionally differenti-
ated society would scarcely have been possible, and—as always with such 
“preadaptive advances”352—it is essential that a provisional context be 
available to stabilize achievements without systems already having been 
formed, which will then finally lead to the operational closure and auto-
poietic autonomy of the corresponding functional cycles. For if system for-
mation takes place, we can assume that there have always been operations 
of the type necessary for this to occur, and we can set out gradually to dis-
mantle the restrictions that an older order has imposed—for example, the 
fragmentation of the manorial and clerical systems of jurisdiction, or the 
dual currency systems of the Middle Ages, or serfdom and the aristocratic 
prerogative of landownership.
12. Symbolically Generalized Communication Media, 4: 
Self-Validation
Since the beginning of their development, symbolically generalized 
communication media have reacted differently to different problems. In 
this they are not only unlike religion but also differ from one another. As 
society has evolved, the corresponding demarcations have emerged more 
clearly; especially as media have tended to form focal points for the differ-
entiation of functional systems. This put an end to the religious (or cos-
mological or nature-related) grounding of the media and their semantics. 
Their codes could also no longer be aggregated into a single societal code 
of morality. This ultimately raises the question of the basis for willingness 

Communication Media    
to accept media symbols and to assume the corresponding restrictions as 
premises for further communication. The issue of generalized acceptance 
has been discussed particularly with regard to the medium of money.353 
But it concerns all other media as well.
All communication is an operation that takes place concretely under 
the direction of specific meaning intentions. It is concerned with the truth 
of certain statements, compliance with certain instructions, the purchase 
of certain objects, certain signs of love—or indifference. Individual com-
munications of this type are, however, never self-motivating, they draw on 
a recursive network of reusability of the same medium. In each and every 
case, the medium therefore has to be both condensed and confirmed in a 
paradoxical because contrary operation of generalization through specifi-
cation. Media symbols thus generate, we could say, the eigenvalues of their 
own recursivity. When they are reused, such medium-specific eigenvalues 
develop—for example, as the value of per se valueless money symbols. Ei-
genvalue formation is the result of reuse, the application of operations to 
the result of previous operations of the same medium. But are eigenvalues 
also the condition for the possibility of such reuse?
It is difficult to accept such a circular argument. If we consult the the-
ories developed for individual media, we learn that external references are 
typically used. A power holder must actually be in a position to send troops. 
A lover must actually be in a position to mobilize the appropriate feel-
ings. For truth theories, despite all skirmishing with “constructivism,” some 
sort of backing by external reality appears to be indispensable. Only in the 
case of money have theories of this type become increasingly questionable 
once backing by precious metal had been recognized as superfluous and the 
backing of certain currencies by foreign exchange had proved to amount al-
most to self-validation owing to the volatility of international money.
An additional argument appeals to necessary trust. What goes by this 
name is expected to build bridges between external reference and internal 
usability and between generalization and specification. Trust in external 
safeguards makes it possible to rely on the medium for not yet specified sit-
uations. This is a complicated argument concealed by psychological plausi-
bility. It is still a question of dissolving the difference between specification 
and generalization by means of externalization, be it by trusting in the 
trust of others and consequently operating under the protection of “plu-
ralistic ignorance.”354

 
  Communication Media
These considerations can be considerably simplified if we con-
cede that a medium can use the future of its own operations as a focus for 
­externalizations. Future is and remains external in that it can never be-
come reality but is always only held in abeyance.355 As far as realized real-
ity is concerned, every system always finds itself at the end of its history.356 
At the same time we can test at every moment, in every present, whether 
the future still holds what it promised. Whether others are still willing to 
accept money can, however, be tried out only in the present, but in every 
present. Lovers swear to be eternally faithful—at the moment for the mo-
ment. But here, too, one situation follows another, and we can (however 
self-destructive this might be) check over and again whether the oath is 
still valid. Truths can already be revised tomorrow; but if new truths are 
to be convincing, they must be able to offer an explanation for what, as 
one now knows, the old truths had wrongly explained, for otherwise there 
would be not competition for substitutes.
We can accordingly very well assume that media validate themselves 
and even derive certain form requirements from this self-validation. We 
need only a sufficiently subtle theory of time that determines the present as 
the boundary between past and future. Whenever discontinuities between 
past and future become relevant (and only thus can future acceptability 
become a problem), the present is the breaking point and the locus for ex-
amining and renewing expectations; and also the only locus in time where 
real action can occur simultaneously with the world. Symbolically general-
ized communication media, like all communication, use only the present 
to bridge the difference between specification and generalization (conden-
sation and confirmation). And this can happen only under the guidance of 
expectations that the medium produces and reproduces itself. We can ac-
cordingly speak of self-validation.
The problem therefore lies, not in the tautological-paradoxical for-
mulation, which can be resolved temporally, but rather in whether so-
cial experience blocks generalized media-specific expectations of the future 
from being reproduced in all circumstances. There is no lack of indications 
to this effect: see the stability of mafia-like positions in opposition to state 
power or the frantic speculation resulting from the negotiability of all in-
vestments. The self-validation of media eigenvalues must therefore be seen 
as a risky evolutionary achievement, whose capacity to satisfy expectations 
in all media fields in all circumstances must be considered uncertain.

Communication Media    
13. Moral Communication
Insomuch as society manages its most important functional areas 
through symbolically generalized communication media, which are re-
sponsible only for special problems, the importance of moral communi-
cation in society changes. This is easy to understand. But a convincing 
concept has yet to be developed. This, too, can happen only from the per-
spective of an external observer, and hence not in morally convincing let 
alone binding fashion. In what follows, the author is therefore not to be 
understood as wanting to risk his self-esteem.
Moral communication does not differ from other modes of com-
munication by referring to a certain sort of rule, maxim, or principle to 
be distinguished as moral from other sorts such as legal rules. Such a mu-
tually exclusive demarcation cannot be made, especially for law. In other 
words, morality is not, for example, applied ethics. It establishes its me-
dium by reference to conditions under which people respect or disrespect 
themselves and others.357
The possibility of calling on or expressing respect and disrespect is 
highly diffuse. The form of the medium is defined by its concern not with 
recognizing the particular skills or achievements of specialists but with in-
cluding people per se in societal communication. This at least belongs to 
the expressive style of morality, regardless of whether moral offenses are 
actually sanctioned by exclusion or by breaking off or reducing contact 
or not.358 It is also indispensable to take double contingency into account 
and, for bridging purposes, to proclaim the same respect/disrespect con-
ditions for both ego and alter—from whatever side. These requirements 
are united in the form of binary coding, distinguishing (equally for both 
sides) good and bad behavior or, where inner attitudes toward one’s own 
behavior are also taken into consideration, good and evil behavior. Even 
if society provides plentifully for morally neutral behavior, morality itself 
contains no third value and therefore allows substantial fluctuation in the 
field of moralization. Wearing jeans to the theater is no longer regarded as 
a breach of morality, whereas what detergent and what sort of paper we use 
can be moralized about from an ecological standpoint.
Both printing and the differentiation of specially coded symbolically 
coded communication media have confronted this field of moral commu-
nication with new constellations. Morality is now no more than morality. 

 
  Communication Media
Its cosmological and therefore magical underpinning has been lost, as has 
the intimacy of negative moral judgment with the impure, disgusting, de-
spicable. Offenses become explicable and their evaluation can therefore be 
derived from the circumstances.359 The magical forms of effectiveness and 
of combating evil have disappeared.360 We can obviously no longer assume 
that someone’s behavior is inspired by evil spirits or is in some other way 
simply damnable or that it belongs on the dark side of the world like the 
devil or witches. We can and must inquire into the motives of behavior, and 
this attenuates censure by further considerations.
In the seventeenth century, there were increasing signs that the moral 
code was being de-ontologized and coming to be seen as a unity. Without 
vice, there can be no virtues. Moral judgments were themselves judged.361 
The cosmic struggle in Paradise Lost in which God attempts to make some-
thing good of all evil, and the devil, threatened as a principle, seeks in re-
sponse to discover something evil in good, in fact takes place in the human 
soul—and ends in a draw. At approximately the same time, morality was 
released from the custody of religion, thus losing both heteronomous re-
strictions and security. This began to emerge in the science de moeurs and 
the courtesy theories of the seventeenth century, becoming fully appar-
ent in the shift in leadership from religion to morality in the semantic 
priorities of the eighteenth century. Morality was now appealed to when 
religious tolerance needed to be achieved, and religions themselves were 
left to cultural comparison if not summoned before the judgment seat of 
morality. Detached from the old ties to (good) manners, such as one still 
finds in Montesquieu or his admirer Lord Kames, the concept of moral-
ity changed in meaning in the eighteenth century. It was no longer used 
almost synonymously with “social” (in expressions such as certitude morale 
[moral certitude], personne morale, for legal personality, or “ius est facultas 
moralis agendi” [law is the moral capacity to act]) but developed a profile 
of specific requirements. It even assumed politically subversive and gener-
ally “emancipatory” functions.362 Morality consequently found itself in a 
justificatory crisis, which was initially addressed by a theory of the nature 
of man and his social = moral sensibilities (Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, Adam 
Smith) and finally by novel ethical theories aiming to provide reasonable 
standpoints for justifying moral judgments. Old doubts passed down in 
the apocryphal or speculative literature of theology about whether good 
and evil can be distinguished at all as principles now surfaced: Mandeville, 

Communication Media    
Sade. But precisely now, when the absence of a religious safety net made 
it so important, such doubts were unable to impose themselves against a 
morality that held itself to be good.
This can be dealt with only in outline here.363 If we wish to trace the 
consequences that changes in the communication system society have had 
for morality, we cannot rely solely on analysis in the context of the his-
tory of ideas. However important such indicators might be, we require a 
more formal conceptuality, since we are concerned to assess the relation-
ship between dissemination technologies and the symbolically generalized 
but problem-specific communication media and morality. We therefore 
take recourse to the distinction between medium and form (see § 1 above). 
The both specific and universal medium of morality is provided by the 
coded distinction between respect and disrespect. Its elements are commu-
nications that express whether certain persons are to be respected or disre-
spected. The form of the medium’s elements (i.e., the form of the medial 
substratum as opposed to the forms developed in the medium) differs only 
through the specific coding respect/disrespect, good/bad, and through dis-
tinction from mere recognition of skills or achievements. Both reference 
to individual persons (one cannot respect or disrespect humankind) and 
the formality of the code difference guarantee the loose coupling of me-
dium elements. The highly individualized reference to persons in modern 
society strengthens this loose coupling. We cannot disrespect a whole fam-
ily because one member is in prison or the daughter has had a child out of 
wedlock. Owing to this loose coupling, the medium itself is highly stable. 
It would therefore be a mistake to claim that the importance of morality 
is diminishing in modern society. The medium of morality is and remains 
available, both in face-to-face interaction and in communication by the 
mass media. Television, in particular, has led to the conspicuous everyday 
topicality of moral communication.
Decisive changes are to be found in the relationship between the 
medial substratum and the forms developed with the aid of the medium 
and that regenerate it. Whereas the medium is stable and available for all 
possible communications, the conditions for respect and disrespect—the 
rules for the forms developed in the medium—tend to be unstable and 
are in any case no longer fully amenable to consensus. The police have dif-
ferent ideas than drug takers, students than the top management of big 
corporations, members of a profession than their clients. There are also 

 
  Communication Media
stark differences, for example, in ethnic and religious viewpoints, and not 
least differences in the moral acceptance of the relativity of all moral judg-
ments and the consequent normativization of restraint and tolerance. The 
difference between medial substratum (loose coupling) and medial forms 
(strict coupling) is thus fully exploited, and this leads in moral communi-
cation to the simultaneity of consensus and dissent, stability and instabil-
ity, necessity and contingency.
In older societies it would have made little sense and met with lit-
tle understanding to distinguish in this fashion between medial substra-
tum and temporary medial forms. Instead, the problem was articulated in 
the shape of a hierarchy in which upper norms were seen as invariant and 
lower norms as varying with time and situation. The problem was built 
into the norm system itself, and law, as we shall see,364 was conceived of 
as natural law, compliance with which converged with morality. The col-
lapse of such a hierarchy of leges cannot, however, be taken to mean that 
everything had now become variable and contingent. For the very reason 
that contingency observations spread, compatible “values” are reformu-
lated. The short-circuited collapse of difference between top and bottom 
in a hierarchy raises the question of what external reference points sur-
vive. “Supertangling creates a new inviolate level,” according to Douglas R. 
Hofstadter.365 And logical undecidabilities have to be “Gödelized,” in other 
words, cured by externalization.
As far as morality is concerned, we now typically find unarticulated 
(assumed) consensus in value relations. no one says he is against peace, 
against justice, against honesty, against health, and so on. But this makes 
no provision at all for conflicts between values. Decisions on value con-
flicts—and only in the event of conflict are values relevant at all—must 
depend on the given situation; they are made ad hoc, only in subsystems 
of society or by individuals. In this regard, moral dissent typically arises 
about the forms of morality, about the conditions for approval and dis-
approval. Inequalities (for example, in granting loans) are justified on the 
grounds that they are required by the functional logic of the economic sys-
tem and for the optimal exploitation of economic resources to cover de-
mand (wealth); others are opposed to inequalities because they mean that 
the people who most need loans are not granted them.
Be that as it may, it cannot be said that the moralization of com-
munications in modern society is arbitrary. On the one hand, there are 

Communication Media    
structurally determined occasions for moralization—for example, where 
the coding of communication media is threatened, as in “fair play” in re-
lations between government and opposition (Watergate, Barschel [the al-
leged murder in 1987 of a former minister-president of the German state of 
Schleswig-Holstein]) or in sport (doping). Most striking, however, is the re-
lation of consensus to dissent, of necessity to contingency, of stability to in-
stability. It seems that both sides of these distinctions have to be capable of 
morality. Morality actualizes itself in the unity of the difference between the 
two sides of these distinctions, while the unity itself (and thus the paradox 
of the distinctions) eludes communication. The fact that values amenable 
to consensus become relevant only in a conflict between values for which 
a consensual solution is then no longer available cannot itself be evaluated. 
We cannot make a principle out of the fact that principles are practicable 
only within limits whose admission cannot be specified on the same level of 
abstraction. The representation of this problem with the aid of the distinc-
tion between stable medial substrata and temporary, hence unstable forms, 
which actualize themselves in this medium, is a theoretical representation 
of the problem that is not itself capable of morality. But this very presen-
tation shows how the hypercomplexity of modern society affects morality.
Moreover, it also shows what morality and symbolically general-
ized communication media have in common. For money, too, the medial 
substratum of the means of payment, the acceptability of money in the 
autopoiesis of the economic system, must and can be much more endur-
ingly guaranteed than the forms that develop with the aid of this medium, 
namely, the prices paid. Only inflation and deflation can possibly cause 
the collapse of this difference if they short-circuit the value of money and 
prices in circular interdependence. Similarly, one can imagine morality in-
flating or deflating with the immediate risk of a transition to violence be-
cause the simultaneous actualization of stable media and unstable forms 
can no longer be maintained.
This being the case, the most important change in the function of 
moral communication is likely to have been that morality can no longer 
serve to integrate society with regard to its optimum state. This is excluded 
alone by the fact that special symbolically generalized communication 
media obey their own binary codes, whose positive/negative values can-
not be equated with morality. In relation to their respective codes, power 
holders, property owners, lovers, and successful researchers are not also es-

 
  Communication Media
tablished as morally better; and society would not accept treating people 
without power, without property, incapable of love, and so on, with moral 
contempt for this reason. Where the incongruence of all codes among 
themselves and in relation to the moral code becomes apparent, society 
has to renounce considering itself a moral institution.
But this does not exclude moralizing communication. There is much 
to suggest that morality now assumes a sort of alarm function. It emerges 
where urgent societal problems come to notice that cannot obviously be 
solved by means of symbolically generalized communication media and in 
the corresponding functional systems. Society clearly recruits moral com-
munication for serious problems caused by its own structures and above 
all by its differentiation form. As long as this served to justify center/­
periphery differentiations or stratification, the impression could be upheld 
and cultivated that society was morally integrated at its center or its apex. 
This notion can no longer be maintained in modern society. Moral com-
munication now has free rein and is directed to where disquieting reali-
ties are apparent: the social question in the nineteenth century, the stark 
worldwide differences in prosperity, and the ecological problems of this 
century, which seemingly cannot be overcome either economically or po-
litically. This leads to an inflation of moral communication, albeit highly 
selective. Its code is easily actualizable without clear directives; its criteria 
(rules, programs), however, are no longer amenable to consensus. Moral-
ity takes on “polemogenous,” war-generating traits: it arises from conflicts 
and encourages conflicts.
Among the most important problems to attract morally charged at-
tention today are practices that sabotage the separation of code values and 
thus the codings of symbolically generalized communication media. This 
holds for undermining the right/wrong distinction through corruption 
and for corresponding phenomena in the field of party politics (Water-
gate). It holds true for the use of insider knowledge in stock-exchange 
transactions and for the widespread practice of doping in competitive 
sport.366 In all these cases, the problem is transformed into a scandal by 
reporting in the mass media and is thus morally upgraded. On the other 
hand, the spread of these phenomena (scandal feeds on other cases not 
being discovered) leads to helplessness in practical terms. Easy to arouse 
indignation does not yet provide practical advice on what to do. The im-
probability of the coding has its correlate in the probability of sabotage. 

Communication Media    
Against insider scandals of this type it helps little to draw the net of ethi-
cal regulation ever tighter in response to experience of such cases. Only the 
law can help, which threatens offenders with serious sanctions (if it can be 
applied without corruption).
One now speaks of “ethics” to cultivate the illusion that there are 
reasoned and practicable rules for making decisions in cases of this sort. 
In reality, however, ethics performs the function of a utopia in the exact, 
paradoxical sense of Thomas More’s Utopia. It indicates a topos that is not 
to be found, a place that does not exist. Under the name of ethics, society 
creates the possibility for itself of introducing the negation of the system 
into the system and of talking about it respectably. That such an opposi-
tional if not outright negative ethics exists is proved by the autonomy and 
operational closure of the system, which is also in a position to deal with 
the negation of the system in the system. For society cannot be negated 
from without, only destroyed.
14. Effects on the Evolution of the Societal System
If we want to know to what extent and with what consequences 
symbolically generalized media determine modern society and condition 
its further evolution, we must consider not only imbalances in their own 
growth. In other respects, too, their workings are limited, for in their very 
limitation lie the opportunities they offer. Society is not a zero-sum game. 
It develops complexity with the help of appropriate complexity reduction.
We have already dealt with the most important aspects; they need 
only to be sifted out and presented. Above all, however normalized the use 
of media may be (e.g., in handling money), they never order all of every­day 
behavior. Love has to prove itself in everyday life, not as everyday life. If we 
wish to enjoy art, we first have to know where to find it. The power holder 
also needs a room, a desk, a telephone.367 Where media organize the auto-
poiesis of systems, there is always far more communication in these systems 
than the autopoietic minimum (just as a cell contains far more chemical 
molecules than those that carry out autopoiesis in the strict sense). The 
value added by system formation consists in this assignment of everyday 
behavior to an autopoietic process. The autopoiesis of the economy con-
sists in the reproduction of payments through payments;368 but there is 
naturally no economic system that provides for this and nothing else.

 
  Communication Media
I have repeatedly stressed that none of the media codes can achieve 
congruence with the moral code, that property owners do not deserve 
greater approval than nonowners (not least because everyone is nonowner 
of almost all goods, however wealthy he might be). Inasmuch as the sys-
temic differentiation of society relies on symbolically generalized media, 
this distance from morality is functionally necessary, while morality itself 
becomes a free-floating, disturbing and supportive orientation; at any rate, 
it does not become a final principle of reasonable justification.
In view of this situation, the congruence of morality and religion 
with its heaven/hell theology passed down from the high cultures can-
not endure. One cannot and need not prevent preachers from moralizing. 
It is always good to stand up for the good. The predicaments of religion 
in a “secularized” society are often bridged by morality. But religion it-
self would be well advised to keep aloof from morality. It is to be doubted 
whether the old mechanism of demanding inconsistent behavior, namely, 
sin and remorse, suffices, and whether it suffices to hold out the pros-
pect of the Last Judgment as a surprise for the righteous and the sinners. 
In any case, religion has long had a code of its own in the immanence/­
transcendence duplication rule (which it naturally cannot think of as a 
duplication rule) standing orthogonally to morality, as do the preference 
codes of the media.369 Even with this code, religion cannot achieve control 
over symbolically generalized media. In other words, it is also unable to 
offer a supercode, but only a way of its own to describe the world.
Finally, it should be noted that symbolically generalized communi-
cation media are suitable only for functional areas in which the problem 
and the success aspired to lie in communication itself. The function is ful-
filled if the selection of a communication is taken as the premise for further 
communications. Such media are therefore unsuitable for areas of commu-
nication whose function it is to change the environment—whether alter-
ing the physical, chemical, and biological circumstances, changing human 
bodies, or modifying consciousness structures. There are therefore no sym-
bolically generalized communication media for technology, for medical 
care, or for education. In these cases, the problem that sets off the auto­
catalysis of symbolically generalized media, namely, a very high probability 
of rejection, does not occur at all. At least for medical care and for educa-
tion, special societal functional systems have differentiated, which have to 
manage without their own communication media and are above all heavily 

Communication Media    
dependent on organized interaction. None of these three problem areas is 
governed by a single communication medium, by either truth or money, 
although the current state of development would be inconceivable without 
differentiated science and without a money economy.370 We must therefore 
assume that, however important symbolically generalized communication 
media are, the functional differentiation of the societal system cannot sim-
ply comply with the media paradigm but has to be guided by the problems 
that society has to resolve at its given level of development.
These thoughts on the societal context of symbolically generalized 
communication media can finally help us to solve the puzzle of the value 
medium. As we have seen, it is not a fully developed symbolically gener-
alized communication medium. It lacks a central code and thus the clear 
distinction between coding and programming; it lacks symbiotic symbols 
(which does not exclude calling life a value), and it lacks potential for sys-
tem formation. What nevertheless justifies us in speaking of a medium is 
the loose coupling of innumerable possibilities for action in accordance 
with value positions that then take shape in the individual case by weigh-
ing up values. There is also no doubting the independence, differentia-
tion, and specific universalism of the medium. In the value medium, all 
the ­values of other media such as truth or wealth, love, beauty, or power 
are only values among other values, and the specific contingency manage-
ment of the other media is inapplicable when it comes to values as values. 
On the other hand, the motivation of acceptance in the case of values is 
not generated but presupposed.
In these value relations, we see a connecting medium between the fully 
operational communication media and the rest of society. Hence the possi-
bilities for their direct implementation in everyday behavior through incon-
spicuously obvious reference to values; hence the possibility of reference to 
morality and religion, as recently shown in a discussion of “civil religion”;371 
hence their far-reaching relevance, which also condemns education, medical 
care, and lately even technologies to put values into the balance. It is there-
fore necessary to do without central coding. The specific modernity of val-
ues lies ultimately in the fact that as form and in all applications, they lead 
not to unity but to difference. Finally, we note that “strange loop” (Hof-
stadter) that consists in the highest values having to be secured at the lowest 
levels of societal communication, and not through justification, not through 
nonmarking, but through mere suggestion.

 
  Communication Media
The combined effect of all communication media—language, dis-
semination media, and the symbolically generalized media—is to con-
dense what we might overall call “culture.” Condensation in this context 
means that the meaning used remains the same through reuse in various 
situations (otherwise there would be no reuse), but is also confirmed and 
enriched with implications that can no longer be reduced to a simple for-
mula. This suggests that the overflow of meaning is itself the result of the 
condensation and confirmation of meaning, and that communication is 
the operation that thus creates its own medium.
These considerations leave us with a certain skepticism about the 
possibilities of a theory of culture. The surplus reference actualized in all 
meaning and precisely the concreteness of the condensations involved 
allow only selective processing. Something has to be said—and this means 
something else has to remain unsaid. We can imagine interpretative or 
“hermeneutic” procedures that condense their own meaning in dealing 
with meaning and in going through their own results. But this merely re-
states the initial problem, albeit in a more ingenious manner.
Structural analysis of the possible forms of culture could start with 
the problems of comparison and controlling. The expansion of possibili-
ties for comparison and control began with writing and continued with 
the printing press and modern machine information processing. Always 
involved is the comparison of input with memory (both being internal 
units). Comparative “control” does not imply governing causality. On the 
contrary, it tends to raise awareness that such dominance is wanting.
If we consider the semantic forms with which society reacts to the 
increase in possibilities for monitoring, we first of all come across purpose-
oriented semantics. After the alphabet had been introduced, teleology was 
invented as a means for ordering more complex materials over time from a 
uniform perspective. The thought was that natural movements have a nat-
ural end when they come to rest in a state of perfection, and one can then 
compare information to see what it has to say about the attainment of this 
end or the failure to do so (perfection must be conceived of as corrupt-
ible and nature as normative). We know this theory pattern from Aristotle.
The intensification of possibilities for comparing and control brought 
by printing sabotaged this teleology of nature. To some extent, orientation 
on a temporal end (and then also on a temporal beginning) was completely 
abandoned and knowledge of nature restructured with the aid of laws of 

Communication Media    
nature and/or notions of equilibrium.372 And to some extent teleology 
was subjectivized, so that purposes no longer concerned the natural, good 
end of a natural (including human) movement, but mental (and hence 
­memory-based) anticipation, which in turn brings about human action 
with corresponding consequences.373 The modern rationality of feasibility 
is then applied to the question of whether and to what extent this succeeds. 
One of the consequences of this bifurcation of extended and mental exis-
tences associated with Descartes is renunciation of the notion of a world 
rationality, with the result that an extremely restless culture of opposing 
developed. One had held onto everything one had expected in the form of 
a giant memory and now had to recognize in the light of new information 
that it had not come about. The system then had to activate new means or 
correct its memoirs to update what it could expect. Comparing the actual 
status of things with the desired status became an enduring problem, and 
the continuous need for correction gradually ruined what had been pre-
supposed in the way of ties. Ultimately, only values remained as forms of 
the self-confirmation of culture.
Whether the invention of the computer, which first of all only ex-
pands the possibilities of monitoring, in the sense of comparing informa-
tion and memory, can change this remains to be seen. It is also uncertain 
what will condense from these possibilities in the way of culture. That the 
computer can raise the average level of expectation fulfillment if it also 
stores expectations is unlikely. What can be achieved is to improve and ac-
celerate the organization of complexity. This allows expectations, too, to 
be better pretested before being stored—but still only with the aid of the 
technique of comparative monitoring, that is, always only in relation to 
the past. There is little danger of this leading to a calculated culture, for 
meaning forms condense only in communication itself. We must more 
likely assume that the acceleration of monitoring operations will be the el-
ement to which culture has to react—which it must do by renouncing a 
positive evaluation of temporal stability.
However, structural analyses of this sort can only provide examples. 
At best, they record single perspectives that fail to do justice to the overall 
complex of modern culture, being unable to reduce it to a basic problem. 
We can still work with genetic analysis, even if we have to manage with-
out a description of phenomenal complexity in the case of highly complex 
states of affairs of this type. We can inquire how things come about—even 

 
  Communication Media
if we cannot explain why things are the way they are. It is useful for the 
purposes of such genetic analysis to use a systems theory that demands pre-
cision in determining the operations that produce and reproduce the sys-
tem with its boundaries. This chapter has accordingly been devoted to the 
concept of communication. In the next chapter, we turn to a related theory 
called “evolution,” which likewise provides only genetic analysis without 
explaining phenomena.

Evolution
1. Creation, Planning, Evolution
Society is the outcome of evolution. We can also speak of “emer-
gence.”1 But this is only a metaphor, which does not explain anything 
but presents us logically with a paradox. Accepting this, we can describe 
evolution theories as transforming a logically insoluble problem into a 
genetic one.2 However unsatisfying the explanations offered by evolu-
tion might be by the logical, theory-of-science and methodological stan-
dards of causal explanation and prediction, no other theory today is in a 
position to explain how the structures of the social system develop and 
reproduce.
So far, I have only mentioned a word and referred to a rather con-
fusing discussion.3 Our inquiry will be guided by the paradox of the prob­
ability of the improbable.4 For statisticians, this is a triviality (or a false 
application of statistical concepts). After all, every totality of characteris-
tics, for instance, the particularity of a given person, is, if we consider the 
conditions for these characteristics to come together, extremely improb-
able: the result of a chance meeting. However, this holds in every case and 
is therefore quite normal. Statistics can and must ignore this problem. For 
evolution theory, however, the resolution of this paradox is the point of 
departure. The improbability of isolated individuals or isolated families 
surviving is transformed into the (lesser) improbability of their structural 
coordination, which is when sociocultural evolution begins. Evolution theory 
shifts the problem to time and attempts to explain how it is possible that 
3

 
  Evolution
ever more demanding and ever more improbable structures develop and 
function as normal.5 The basic proposition is that evolution transforms 
low probability of origination into high probability of maintenance.6 This 
is merely another way of putting the more familiar question of how (de-
spite the entropy principle) entropy can give rise to negentropy. To put it 
in still another way, it is about the morphogenesis of complexity.7
This definition of the problem, involving time and geared to dynam-
ics, precludes simply gauging evolution from its structural results, for ex-
ample, from its effects on the distribution of energy and power or on the 
coordination of integration levels in society.8 Although it is important to 
take such results into account, for instance, in the form of the distribu-
tion of action potential among “levels” or “subsystems,” they are precisely 
what evolution theory has to explain. Describing the differences that come 
about is not itself a theory of evolution, not even if the material is or-
dered in historical sequence, presented as a succession. We therefore see 
the problem in the morphogenesis of complexity.
More recent evolution theories explain the morphogenesis of com-
plexity neither in terms of a corresponding law (which can be empirically 
verified) nor in terms of the rationality advantages of complexity, which 
would suggest a purposive if not intentional interpretation of evolution. 
It is assumed rather that evolution behaves recursively, that is, applies the 
same procedure iteratively to its own results. But we must then define 
more precisely what sort of “procedure” we are talking about. In what fol-
lows, this is attempted with reference to the neo-Darwinian schema of 
variation, selection, and restabilization.
Another assumption for which we claim empirical evidence is that in 
the course of evolution, the biomass to be found on earth and, since the 
advent of language, the quantity of communicative events have increased. 
This is to begin with a purely quantitative statement and accordingly easy 
to verify. In explaining the finding, we must assume that quantitative in-
creases of this sort are possible only through differentiation. And in the field 
of linguistic communication, it must be added that the possible amount 
will increase enormously if communication can also run negatively, that is 
to say, in the form of denying or rejecting communications.9 Behind the 
assumption of quantitative growth therefore lies the precondition of non-
arbitrary structural differentiation. We can couch this in the usual terms of 
complexity enhancement, for example, with Darwin, in terms of the dif-

Evolution    
ferentiation and specialization of parts, provided we drop the additional 
assumption that higher complexity serves to improve the adaptation of 
systems to their environment. This points us in certain directions but does 
not yet explain why improbabilities come to be transformed into probabil-
ities and why such differentiation-driven quantitative increases take place. 
Evolution theory thus faces a problem, but this merely sets the framework 
within which solutions to this very problem are to be sought.
Evolution theory does indeed operate with causal assumptions, but 
it renounces explaining evolution in terms of causal laws. On the contrary, 
nonrepeatability assumptions are built in, and in this sense, it is a theory 
of the historically unique development of systems. For evolution comes 
about through the use of transitory, impermanent conditions. This very 
possibility provides the opportunity for developing an improbable order 
over time. Evolution is, as it were, a theory of waiting for useful chances, 
and this requires systems capable of persisting and/or reproducing, and 
that can maintain themselves—and wait. Time is accordingly one of the 
essential preconditions of evolution, and this means among other things 
that close temporal ties between environmental states and system states 
have to be interrupted. We now call this “loose coupling.”
Evolution hence means that the number of preconditions on which 
an order can depend increases. Through a process of self-reinforcing de-
viation from basic assumptions of even distribution, an order emerges in 
which positions, dependencies, and expectations can be expected with 
greater or lesser certainty in dependence on this same order. If meaning-
ful communication becomes possible at all, every specific utterance being 
equally probable at every specific point in time becomes improbable. Spe-
cific probabilities condense into expectabilities, but given that all expec-
tations are fundamentally uncertain, they are in themselves still evidently 
improbable.
There are various theories on offer relevant to this problem against 
which evolution theory has to hold its own. People have long admired 
the world’s complexity and produced creation theories in response.10 With 
hindsight, this had a major theoretical advantage. One could distinguish 
the world, describe it as a work, as the unity of the totality of all visible 
and invisible things, while always explicitly or implicitly recalling another 
side to the distinction: God. The genesis of complex order was ascribed 
to an intelligent cause and uncomprehending admiration of the world di-

 
  Evolution
verted into uncomprehending admiration of God. Order is the execution 
of a plan. The unity of order is mentally duplicated in cause and effect. The 
cause is God the Creator, and the effect, in which the cause reveals itself, is 
the world. But this explanation satisfies only those who believe in it.
Creation theories have to be elaborated in sufficient detail to allow 
both redundancy and variety to be derived from them. They have to help 
process the diversitas temporum and be open to both positive and nega-
tive aspects. Only thus can they generate information under the impact 
of daily events. The traditional distinctions between good and bad events 
and between the perfection and corruption of nature did justice to these 
demands. They could be supplemented by theological theories about the 
special providence of God, which, for example, give sense to prayer. In 
the early modern age, these plausibility conditions dissolved under the 
theoretical and methodological pressure exerted by the demands of both 
research in the natural sciences and the human scope for action. The Aris-
totelian theory of natural final purposes was abandoned. The thesis of the 
divine creation of the world therefore lost all resonance as a complement 
to everyday experience and action. It no longer generates information and 
serves only—as it were, to spare traditional religion—as concluding for-
mula for indicating the otherwise unobservable unity of the world.11 After 
a protracted phase of religious quarantine and search for new symbioses, 
evolution theory asserted itself from the second half of the nineteenth cen-
tury despite its theological offensiveness. Creation theory renounced ex-
plaining the world and withdrew into theology. Specific problems now 
arose in this domain. The “nothing” of creatio ex nihilo could not be left 
in the past. It was constantly needed to allow being to be being. Creatio 
­continua requires constant re-creation, also from nothing. But evolution 
theory has no need to concern itself with this.
Another obstacle lay in the ontological cognitive presuppositions 
of tradition, combined with the low resolution capacity of science. One 
spoke of the species and genera of living beings that had to be treated in ac-
cordance with the schema being/nonbeing. Nature and creation had fixed 
forms of being and substances. Variation was possible only in the domain 
of the accidental. Event-like breaches were understood as “miracles”—as 
naturally improbable happenings by means of which God drew atten-
tion to Himself. More or less legendary mixed forms went by the name of 
“monster,” but they were denied any classificatory value. At best, they had 

Evolution    
the function of providing roundabout proof of the perfect order and har-
mony of nature: this is what you get when something goes wrong! It was 
this order of species that had blessed rabbits with enough offspring to feed 
foxes, something that theologically could not otherwise be explained.
Ontology and its bivalent logic also dictated that a distinction was 
to be drawn between moveable and immovable (between mutable and im-
mutable) things. All theories of change had taken this distinction as their 
point of departure, which was summed up in the paradox of the unmoved 
mover and was at this point implemented in concepts of potency (will, 
power) and interpreted religiously (omnipotence). It was simply out of the 
question (as long as the movement concept was retained) to think of ev-
erything as moved and to forgo any counterconcept. Or one was obliged 
to introduce a two-sided form into the concept of movement, distinguish-
ing between faster and slower movement.
As long as living beings, like all things, were defined in terms of fixed 
generic characteristics, they preserved the memory of their origin. With 
the transition to evolution theories, indeed, even with Lamarck, things, so 
to speak, lost their memory. They owe what they are to some variations or 
other, which repeat themselves in other forms and can lead to other forms. 
This means history! Evolution theory offered scientific proof for this—
thus rousing the theological ire of the nineteenth century and its progeny. 
The eighteenth century had already extenuated much. To avoid entangle-
ment in theological dogmatics, the Creator was now called “Providence.” 
And he was allowed time. He had not created the whole world all at once. 
He was still at it.12 But no longer with works and wonders, no longer with 
“signs,” but with an “invisible hand.” At the same time “history” was dis-
covered. Finally, the increasing resolution capacity of geological/biological 
research also called the typological rigidity of species and genera into ques-
tion. On the one hand, it was and remained clear that there were narrow 
limits to cross-breeding. This corresponded to a new concept of the popu-
lation as a polymorphous unity. On the other hand, history provided more 
and more evidence of the variation and diversification of species. And this 
imposed the idea of seeing evolution theory as a theory of history. In Dar-
win, it dissociates itself from the assumption of a compact creation of spe-
cies and genera as a gradualistic concept of evolution, which understands 
the coming into being of species and genera as a gradual, continual pro-
cess.13 Finally, coordination, the possible coexistence of the differentiated, 

 
  Evolution
is explained historically—and not as the result of a corresponding inten-
tion.14 It is this that makes it interesting for the contemporary theory of 
society. The “invisible hand” is now replaced by the invisible forces of his-
tory, the subliminal changes of evolution, the latent motives and interests, 
which can be rendered visible only with the aid of scientific theories.
But what alternative is there to creation theories? What distinction 
can replace the unity of origin and the difference between moved and un-
moved as the lead distinction in the theory of historical change? From the 
seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries, a semantic alternative had ini-
tially been sought in theories of progress. Today, this is considered behind 
the times, not least in evolution theories.15 The emergence of evolutionary 
advances cannot be assigned to any consistently evaluated line of prog-
ress. But if progress is not to be assumed, what then is the architecture 
of an evolution theory? Even biology had found it difficult for almost a 
century to comprehend the complex design of natural selection.16 As the 
systemic contours of the course of life became apparent, the distinction 
between natural and artificial that had initially guided Darwin was suc-
ceeded by a distinction between outside and inside, so that the concept of 
natural selection came to mean external selection. When taken up by the 
theory of society, this concept blends with existing notions about histori-
cal processes (in the plural or singular), the nineteenth century tending 
to adopt a fatalistic view of history and no longer simply to accept that 
“man makes history.”
Since the eighteenth century, this problem had been contemplated 
in the form of stage models of historical development. Although not quite 
consistent with the meaning of the term, I shall be calling them develop-
ment theories. What is involved is a sort of “operationalization” of progress 
theories—for how is one to prove progress empirically other than by com-
paring different stages of the historical process?17 The unity of the history 
of society is reconstructed as a distinction between epochs, and what does 
not fit is incorporated with the anomaly-absorbing concept of the simulta-
neity of the nonsimultaneous.
This corresponds to the notion of history as a process, which gained 
binding form in Hegel’s philosophy of history. It was still based on the idea 
of a hierarchy of lower and higher activities extended into the temporal di-
mension. On the basis of the distinctions this brings, the theory can show 
the same to be acting in different domains. It incorporates—in the guise 

Evolution    
of logical metaphysics—the element of negation, by which the higher do-
main in awareness of itself interprets for itself the lower domain as insuffi-
cient, as deficient, as pain, as something to be overcome. In this negation, 
it discovers and realizes its “freedom” as its own. It thus discovers a contra-
diction in itself and can choose to perish by this contradiction or, as phi-
losophy advises, to “sublate” it. Such inner reflection requires “mind” as 
the principle of becoming. The mind moves by its ability to distinguish, 
including the “absolute” final ability to distinguish itself in itself. The mind 
thus only enriches itself, it deletes nothing. It forgets nothing. Nor does it 
forgo the realization of possibilities. It is perfect because in the end only 
exclusion is excluded and everything possible becomes real.
No theory has ever again attained this closed form, and all later the-
ories have therefore to be distinguished from it. All post-Hegelian theo-
ries must accordingly provide not for the exclusion of exclusion but for 
the inclusion of exclusion. In the empirical sciences, which, without being 
preoccupied by the mind, operate with inductive concepts of epoch, the 
notion of process unity has given rise to innumerable controversies that are 
no longer relevant today—for example, on the characterization (and then 
naturally on rejection of the characterization) of this process as continu-
ous, as unilinear, as regular, as necessarily progressive.18 Where such defi-
nitions are advanced in evolution theory, they can only be rejected.19 But 
they are based on a confusion that can probably be rectified with a mini-
mum of conceptual care.
Such divisions into epochs and development theories in general are 
seen with increasing skepticism.20 The same holds for the global process 
theories that have been inspired and borne by them. But whatever we 
might think of them, they are not evolution theories.
Another approach, which also does business under the name of evo-
lution theory, pursues a quite different explanatory goal. At issue is the 
problem of differential evolution, that is, the question why some societies 
develop and others do not; for example, why “states” emerge in some soci-
eties and not in others. Certain variables, especially population growth, to 
which others are added (e.g., ecological conditions or social organization) 
typically serve as point of departure in explaining why differential devel-
opment has taken place.21 Another schema also sold as evolution theory 
is the distinction between innovation and diffusion.22 The research inter-
ests pursued, particularly by archaeologists and prehistorians, are perfectly 

 
  Evolution
­legitimate. It is only confusing that this also goes by the name of evolution 
theory, which blurs the line dividing it from theories addressing the mor-
phogenesis of complexity.
Although these differences are now hardly recognized in social an-
thropology and sociology,23 from the Darwinian perspective they are quite 
clear.24 Evolution theory (however far it may now have left Darwin behind) 
uses a quite different sort of distinction to replace that between moved and 
unmoved. It distinguishes not between epochs but between variation, selec­
tion, and restablization.25 It explains, to use the old terminology, the origin 
of forms of being and substances in accident. It frees the order of things 
from all ties to an origin, to a formative beginning. It simply reverses the 
conceptual framework of world description.
That a distinction is made between variation, selection, and restabi-
lization makes sense in a way that conceals the distinction itself. The dis-
tinction explains that and how it is possible to use temporary and passing 
constellations. It serves to unfold the paradox of the probability of the im-
probable with the aid of another distinction. The concepts variation and 
selection shift the problem to another level and thus displace the question 
of the unity of the distinction between probable and improbable. They put 
the initial paradox in a more manageable form: naturally erratic, logically 
abstruse, creative. The paradox becomes less recognizable, it is rendered in-
visible, and its place is taken by another distinction that offers prospects of 
empirical inquiry. For we can now ask about the conditions under which 
the mechanisms of variation and those of selection separate and can then 
be distinguished by an observer.
As always, a distinction that serves for observation requires a blind 
spot. It finds it where the boundary has to be drawn that separates the two 
sides of the distinction. The dividing line has to be drawn unobservably 
because the observer has to connect to one side of the distinction or the 
other. In the case of the distinction between variation and selection and 
that between selection and restabilization, the boundary is called chance, 
which means negation of any systemic connection of evolutionary func-
tions. We can accordingly not know (not observe) whether variations lead 
to the positive or negative selection of innovation; and just as little whether 
restabilization of the system after positive or negative selection will succeed 
or not. And the very proposition that one cannot know, cannot calculate, 
cannot plan characterizes a theory as an evolution theory.

Evolution    
As long as we proceed like Darwin on the assumption of “natural se-
lection” by the environment, we have a certain guarantee of stability.26 Not 
all, but well-adapted systems were therefore considered stable as long as 
the environment did not change. There was no question of a special func-
tion. This changes if we abandon the principle of natural selection and 
switch evolution theory to the co-evolution of structurally coupled, auto-
poietic systems.27 Such systems have to provide their stability themselves if 
they are to continue taking part in evolution. Three evolutionary functions 
or mechanisms are now needed, of which variation and selection refer to 
events, while restabilization refers to the self-organization of evolving sys-
tems as an essential precondition for variation and selection.
Considering two distinctions, between variation and selection and 
between selection and restabilization, is a first step toward resolving the 
problem of unobservability that we label “chance,” namely, in the form of 
the downstream concept of restabilization, which comes to bear only when 
variation and selection interact “by chance” and in turn reacts randomly 
(systemically uncoordinatedly) to this chance interaction as unity of the 
distinction. If the theory had had only one of these distinctions at its dis-
posal, it would, so to speak, not have got past chance, and would have had 
to refer via this concept to the environment of the system. Only the cou-
pling of two distinctions centered on the concept of selection allows the 
theory to conceive of evolution as an endless process in irreversible time, 
in which every stability achieved—the more complex it is, the more this 
holds true—offers a starting point for variation.
It is above all obvious that both positive and negative selection pro-
duces a stability problem. In the case of positive selection, a new structure 
has to be built into the system with consequences that have yet to prove 
their worth. In the case of negative selection, the system “potentializes” the 
rejected possibility. It has to live with its rejected option, even though it 
could have taken it and other systems have perhaps done so or would do 
so. This might have been a mistake, and this remains so. Selection does not 
necessarily guarantee good results.28 In the long run, it has to pass the sta-
bilizability test.
This account suggests that restabilization is the end of a sequence. 
But stability is also required for the start, as precondition for varying some-
thing. The third factor of evolution is therefore both beginning and end, a 
concept of its unity, which, because it amounts to structural change, can be 

 
  Evolution
described as dynamic stability. In a temporally abstract model, evolution 
theory describes a circular relationship. It thus also indicates that and how 
time intervenes as an asymmetricizing factor. From a superficial point of 
view—which, however, completely suppresses the initial paradox—it ap-
pears for this very reason to be a process.
Having clarified these points, it hardly needs to be stressed that evo-
lution theory is not a theory of progress. It accepts the emergence and 
destruction of systems with equanimity. Darwin had also (albeit not com-
pletely consistently) refused to use expressions like “higher” and “lower” to 
characterize species. Even the idea that evolution improves the adaptation 
of systems to their environment cannot be understood as progress because 
we would have to assume that the environment changes continuously and 
triggers ever-new adaptations. It is just as doubtful whether specialization 
can continue to be seen as a sort of evolutionary attractor, which (but how 
in fact?) leads to more and more specific competencies, roles, organiza-
tions, systems being differentiated. It seems that the economic theory of 
the division of labor and the restriction of competition through market di-
versification has imposed itself on evolution theory and, above all, through 
Spencer, been generalized into a historical law—only to provoke evolution 
theory to discover the evolutionary advantage of the unspecified.29 Such 
ideas need not be rejected across the board; but with the aid of evolution 
theory, we must examine whether and to what extent they are tenable.
These definitional considerations have consequences for the explana-
tory goal of evolution theory. Evolution theory provides no interpretation 
of the future. It enables no predictions.30 It presupposes no teleology of 
history—with regard to either a good or a bad end to it. It is not a control 
theory, which could help in deciding whether we should let evolution be 
or correct it.31 It is concerned solely with how we explain that more com-
plex systems develop in a world that always offers and retains other pos-
sibilities; and perhaps why such systems fail. In very simple terms, it is 
concerned with explaining structural changes.
Here one normally thinks of unplanned structural changes. How-
ever, planning theory offers no alternative to evolution theory. Evolution 
theory also deals with systems that plan themselves. There is no disputing 
that planning or, more generally, intentional anticipation of the future, 
play a role in sociocultural evolution. We then speak of forward induc-
tion.32 But, in the first place, the basis for forming intentions is typically, 

Evolution    
if not always, deviation from established routines (thus not at all a spon-
taneous self-realization of the mind); it is hence itself a result of evolution. 
Moreover, the future does not comply with intentions but only takes the 
intentionally created facts as the starting point for further evolution. Evo-
lution theory therefore assumes—and is not far from reality in doing so—
that planning cannot determine the state in which the system will end up 
as a result of planning. Planning, when it takes place, is accordingly an ele-
ment of evolution, for even the observation of models and the good inten-
tions of planners put the system on an unforeseen course. Evolution theory 
would say: what structures result will emerge through evolution.
If we wish to understand structural changes evolutionistically, we 
have to forgo the notion that structures are something “fixed” as opposed 
to something “in flux.” (An observer, however, can see it thus, but if we 
want to know what he sees as structure we have to observe the observer). 
Structures are conditions for restricting the area of connective operations, 
and are hence conditions for the autopoiesis of the system. They do not 
exist in abstraction, not independently of time. They are used or not used 
in progressing from operation to operation. They condense and confirm 
through repetition in various situations a wealth of meaning that eludes 
exact definition; or they are forgotten. Structures appear “stable” (to the 
observer) inasmuch as there are other structures that invite reuse.33 But 
structures always realize themselves only in directing (restricting the possi-
bilities for) progression from operation to operation. And it is this opera-
tional context (in our case communication) that exposes the structures of 
society to evolution.
No extraordinary effort is therefore required, as the classical theory 
would have to see it, to change structures despite their immanent stabil-
ity. They can become obsolete if other channels of operational connections 
come to be preferred. Their use can be limited to certain situations or ex-
tended to new situations. Evolution is always and everywhere.
2. Systems-Theoretical Basis
Recent developments in evolution theory since its Darwinian begin-
nings have been influenced above all by gradual realization of the extent to 
which evolution theory has to take recourse to systems-theoretical prem-
ises and has accordingly been drawn into the controversy between systems 

 
  Evolution
theories.34 Systems theory treats variation and selection as “sub-dynamics 
of the complex system.”35 The nineteenth century had preferred a seman-
tics of demography, of populations, of heredity. The more uncertain the 
semantics of subjectivity and freedom, the more certain life and corpore-
ality were. Without this background, Darwin’s interest and, above all, the 
interest of ideologies in Darwin are inconceivable. With the innumerable 
variants to be found, the individual serves as the final reference, and this 
also holds for attempts to combine action theory with evolution theory.36 
This does not take us beyond the theories of the nineteenth century, which 
claimed the individual for the self-regulation of the evolutionary process, 
thus for development theories that present themselves as theories of his-
tory and often explicitly rejected the expression evolution. Even more than 
in the refusal of religious explanation, this appears to be the unifying el-
ement of most nineteenth-century theories of evolution or history (with 
the exception of Hegelian derivatives), and hence the undisputed start-
ing point for all controversies.37 In comparison, systems theory imposes 
sharper abstractions but also greater conceptual precision.
We return to our general point of departure: systems theory does 
not have to do with a particular type of object but uses a certain distinc-
tion, namely, that between system and environment. In essence, evolu-
tion means nothing other than that structural changes, precisely because 
they can take place only intrasystemically (autopoietically), are not at the 
disposal of the system but have to impose themselves in an environment 
that the system itself cannot probe, at any rate cannot include in its plan-
ning. The evolutionary diversification and reproduction of systems is at 
the same time a diversification and reproduction of environments.38 Only 
the difference between system and environment makes evolution possible. 
In other words, no system can evolve from within itself. If the environ-
ment did not constantly vary differently than the system, evolution would 
come to a rapid end in “optimal fit.”39 It also follows that, although evo-
lution does not have to effect the adaptation of the system to the environ-
ment, such adaptation is required as a sort of minimum condition. But this 
says no more than that systems that no longer exist can also not evolve. It 
should above all be noted that the difference between system and environ-
ment lends every change a multiplication effect. It changes a system and at 
the same time the (relevant or irrelevant) environment of other systems. 
Every change is accordingly very likely to set off a whole series of effects, 

Evolution    
which in turn generate effects independently of one another, and for which 
the same holds true.40 The world becomes dynamic from within, precisely 
because of the simultaneity of what happens and because of the associated 
impossibility of coordination. If, in other words, both the system that we 
observe and the systems in its environment evolve (co-evolve), the result 
is the “co-evolution of unsustainability”;41 and observers can react only by 
observing “chance occurrences.” Only against this backdrop can we under-
stand what role “chance” plays in evolution theory.
If we take this difference-theoretical starting point seriously, an old 
dispute about the relative weight of external and internal causes (exo­genous 
and endogenous evolution) becomes obsolete. With the aid of the “popula-
tion” concept, older evolution theory had localized the causes for variation 
within the system. On the one hand, this led to the view that demographic 
variables, mainly the irresistible human drive to multiply, are the factors 
that trigger all higher evolutionary development, for example, the transi-
tion to agriculture, the division of labor, the formation of hierarchies. Such 
single-factor explanations are now considered obsolete.42 Even from the 
perspective of our concept of society, however, we would have to operate 
with variables such as communication density or frequency and diversity of 
information produced, and, above all, to take account of circular relation-
ships amplifying deviation.
But this demographic interpretation of the population concept has 
overlooked the most important innovation it introduces. A population—
and in this the concept supersedes the older typological essentialism of 
species and genera—consists of individuals, and this means of differing indi-
viduals. It is thus a polymorphous unity. The source of variation is not seen, 
as in later social Darwinism, as the occasional occurrence of particularly 
creative, innovative, assertive individuals, but as the diversity of individuals 
in the collectivity of the population. For the biologist this means that the 
genetic heterogeneity of populations explains evolution better than perhaps 
“natural selection.” Possibilities are therefore available for the population to 
reinforce this or that characteristic in order to adapt to changing require-
ments. We are thus dealing, if such a term is allowed, with a collective indi-
vidualism and not with an individualism that places emphasis on the single 
being. The possibility of variation lies in variety and not in the sufficiently 
probable chance of there being exemplars among a large number of indi-
viduals that distinguish themselves as being particularly innovative.

 
  Evolution
Then again, the selection mechanism is transferred to the environ-
ment, and in this sense, one speaks of “natural selection.” However, if we 
formulate systems theory radically as a theory of the production and repro-
duction of a difference between system and environment, this distribution 
of internal (variation) and external (selection) factors cannot be upheld. 
Merely criticizing the concept of “natural selection” and setting out be-
yond Darwin from that position does not suffice either.43 Moreover, the 
converse approach is just as unconvincing, namely, advocating the “natu-
ral selection” concept, and hence orientation on external causes, in socio-
logical theory,44 which had hitherto clearly favored endogenous causes.45 
Causal propositions always presuppose selection, thus the attribution of 
causes and effects, and hence an observer. But evolution neither makes 
such attributions nor observes itself.
The system reference of “social systems” also allows the dispute be-
tween more demographic-ecological evolution theories and those oriented 
rather on culture to be decided. Whoever is interested in human beings as 
a living population (in the fight against bugs, lions, bacteria, and so on) 
has to adopt a demographic orientation. In contrast, we can speak of the 
social system society evolving only if we conceive of it, not as living, but 
as a communication system, which reproduces meaning in each of its op-
erations, presupposes knowledge, draws on its own memory, uses cultural 
forms. It is therefore a matter, not of meaningful scientific controversy, 
but of a choice of system reference, that is, of a decision on the object of 
­evolution-theoretical analysis.46
Apart from these rapidly settled questions, systems theory also in-
tervenes substantively in evolution theory in deciding to base the research 
program of the theory on operationally closed, autopoietic systems.47 This 
theory first of all allows us to explain that there is scope for evolutionary 
structural development in systems. Autopoiesis itself makes only minimal 
demands; in the case of the system of society, it requires only that com-
munication take place with regard to further communication. But this 
can happen in widely differing structures.48 Structures are necessary be-
cause they narrow the scope for suitable connective operations to such an 
extent that progression from operation to operation can be achieved. We 
could also say that they are necessary complexity reductions. However, this 
selectivity of structure formation also provides the opportunity for dif-
ferent developments. The need for structural selection compatible with auto­

Evolution    
poiesis—and this is only the other side of the coin—explains the chance 
of differential evolution. Types of autopoietic operation and corresponding 
system formation—such as life, consciousness, and communication—are, 
as it were, one-off inventions of evolution, which have proved their worth 
through their potential for structural development. Their worth lies, how-
ever, in the specification of widely differing forms, which develop in the 
medium of autopoietic necessity and can further specify. This interplay 
between self-continuation and structure formation enables and imposes 
evolution without any need to posit “natural selection” or other sorts of 
external structural determination. It is therefore not a question of almost 
optimal, or at any rate competitive, adaptation to the environment. Under 
similar ecological conditions very differently endowed living beings can 
survive.49 Moreover, this resolves an old controversy in theory, namely, the 
dispute about the higher evolutionary potential of the underspecified.50 In 
reality, there is no nonspecific reproduction. But there is a difference be-
tween autopoiesis and structural determination.
This fundamentally contradicts the research program of sociobiology. 
The genetic determination of life is an undisputed point of departure. But 
it does not follow that social orders are also determined from this position 
(although it must naturally be conceded that no social order can survive 
that requires people to walk on their hands rather than on their feet). The 
genetic determination of life is rather compensated by a societal order of 
social systems endowed with high (can we say higher?) degrees of freedom. 
And this order develops structural determinations of a particular type.
In another regard, too, the distinction between systems theory and 
evolution theory provides useful insights—especially if we take the con-
cept of operationally closed autopoietic systems as the basis. For these sys-
tems practice a self-referential, circular relationship between structure and 
operation. They generate structures through their own operations, but on 
the assumption that structures guide the determination of connecting op-
erations. From a temporally abstract point of view, such a theory is empiri-
cally empty. Evolution theory, in contrast, asymmetricizes the relationship 
between structure and operation, because it is concerned only with chang-
ing structures, and autopoiesis plays a role only as a boundary concept. In 
this context, exertion of influence on an operation can provide the point 
where the system can mutate by chance. Evolutionary selection, in con-
trast, is the procedure that decides whether a structural change is accepted 

 
  Evolution
or rejected. If we see autopoietic systems as resulting from evolution (and 
what is to be said against it?), we have to consider the restrictions on pos-
sible structural change that permit empirically substantial theories to be 
formulated.51 We shall be pursuing this issue above all with regard to evo-
lutionary change in the forms of societal differentiation.
While these reflections can elucidate the links between systems theory 
and evolution theory, the theory of operationally closed, autopoietic sys-
tems finds itself in other regards in flagrant contradiction to the usual way 
of thinking in evolution theory. How is an operationally closed system of so-
ciety to evolve if it cannot use its own operations to start or stop, but either 
operates autopoietically or not at all? How is it to come about gradually? For 
transitional situations, there is no “half” life, no “little bit” of communica-
tion. A living being is either alive or not. Communication either takes place 
or not. The concept demands such uncompromising stringency.52
We should recall that autopoietic systems always perform their opera-
tions only in the actual present. The recursive interconnection of ­operations 
also takes place in the present on the basis of currently available conditions 
and connectivity options. For the operation (and this also holds for com-
munication if it is to be an autopoietic operation), there is accordingly nei-
ther a beginning, because the system must always have already begun if it 
is to be able to reproduce its operations from its own products, nor an end, 
because every further operation is produced with an eye to further opera-
tions.53 Only an observer (and this can be the operating system itself ) can 
make out a beginning and an end if he takes a corresponding before/after 
construction as his basis. Only when the system is operating and has built 
up sufficient complexity to describe itself in the temporal dimension can it 
“postcipate” its beginning. The determination of a beginning, an origin, a 
“source,” and a (or no) “before” is a myth fabricated in the system itself—
or an account by another observer.54
Where autopoietic systems are involved, evolution can therefore not 
be understood as a mere meeting of particulars where what already exists 
enables something to be added that could not have been done without 
this precondition. We do not have to completely exclude such a develop-
ment; but it alone cannot explain the speed of evolution. Autopoietic sys-
tems make evolution possible, rapid evolution, precisely because they close 
themselves off on the basis of their own distinctions and can thus recruit 
their own requirements whenever the simultaneous environment suffices. 

Evolution    
Anyway, the time dimension is not a system/environment schema in the 
sense that systems exist in time, and past and future constitute their envi-
ronment.55 The system/environment difference can be observed solely in 
the factual dimension. The observer can think of them as difference ex-
tended into the past or future and imagine a beginning and an end, but 
only as present operation simultaneous with the given environment.
This shifts the issue (in relation to “objective” thinking about time). 
Autopoietic systems can come into being when presents occur in which re-
cursive reproduction can be installed. This is of course not possible on the 
basis of just any past history. In order to recognize what is required, the auto­
poietic operation has to be indicated with sufficient precision. For example, 
communication (and hence society) is always set in motion whenever utter-
ance and information can be distinguished in observation (which hence be-
comes “understanding”). This is also possible pre-linguistically, but language 
imposes this distinction so compellingly that the understander, when he 
speaks himself, can rely on the very mechanism that allows him to under­
stand. The result is recursive closure, which uses no elements of any sort 
from the environment but operates with an emergent distinction. It is also 
easy to demonstrate that the consciousness, too, reproduces itself through 
such recourse.56
This “exclusivity” of language offers major advantages in relation to 
the environment. It allows the system constantly to address a continu-
ally changing environment, and thus not to adapt its structures once and 
for all to lasting or recurring environmental states, but (like an organism’s 
faculty of sight) to attune itself temporarily to temporary states on account 
of structural conditions prevailing only in the system and not in the en-
vironment.57 All subsystems established in society can then specialize in 
particular opportunities. When the evolution of this condition “began” 
can no longer be objectively and definitely determined; such a critical mo-
ment is construed in the system itself as an event to which the closed sys-
tem owes its existence and criteria. Only a specially endowed observer will 
then be able to ask about prior developments, preconditions enabling and 
favoring closure, and provide an answer in accordance with his cognitive 
possibilities.
This basic procedure can be varied in many ways wherever auto­
poietic systems can form. A class of nobility closes itself off by means of 
endogamy or some other mechanism—but naturally only if the families 

 
  Evolution
in question can be identified. Only then are genealogies constructed going 
back to heroes or gods or family primogenitors.58 The differentiation of a 
legal system requires dispute events and dispute resolution events to have 
occurred that point to rules for future practice, even if what is recalled 
as having happened had nothing to do with applying rules.59 ­Science can 
develop as an independent autopoietic system only if there is already suf-
ficient knowledge for critical review to ascertain whether this knowledge 
is true or untrue.60 The first coins were minted, not for purposes of ex-
change, but as clearing units in household economy contexts. Money 
came into use originally as a sign for performance imbalances, as a sub-
stitute for gratitude, as it were.61 But once there was a sufficiently large 
quantity of such coins, and a barter economy was well enough developed 
to stagnate, owing to the difficulty of finding suitable items to exchange, a 
money economy was able to differentiate itself—however small the extent 
and complexity of transactions may initially have been. With the differ-
entiation of an economy based on coinage, an economic development set 
in that can be attributed neither to the prior state nor to the “invention” 
of coinage, but only to its own recursive network, which could count on 
a willingness to accept money however its value was guaranteed. Or, to 
conclude with an example from early modern times: the state differenti-
ated under the heading of sovereignty presupposed governmental struc-
tures of an older sort, but understood itself in retrospect as completely 
new—as if there had always been sovereign legal concentration and only 
the abuses of the nobility had ruined the old system.62 With the procla-
mation of the sovereign state, especially in the France of the second half 
of the sixteenth century, the historians took up their work. The present 
needs a past that fits.
Analysis thus shows that the problem of the gradual beginning can 
be solved only if we revise the underlying concept of time. Just as drastic 
changes are needed to adapt the concept of adaptation.
Evolution theory beyond Spencer and Darwin has already had seri-
ous reservations about the assumption that the best adapted (or perhaps 
the least badly adapted) systems are chosen by “natural selection” for sur-
vival.63 It has also been found irritating that some species of living beings 
can apparently exist unchanged for millions of years, while others evolve 
under the pressure to adapt.64 Furthermore, in many cases, adaptation pre-
cedes need—an explanatorily essential insight for evolution theory. For in-

Evolution    
stance, even before the invention of DDT, there were insects adapted to it 
that could survive exposure.65 In general, biological critique of older adap-
tionism was limited to asserting that not all phenotypical changes in living 
beings could be explained as better adaptation.66 Revision of the concept 
was first called for by the theory of autopoietic systems, for which adapta-
tion is a precondition rather than a result of evolution; and if a result, then 
at best in the sense that evolution destroys its material if it can no longer 
guarantee adaptation.67 The onus of explanation is now on the concept of 
“structural coupling,” which has always guaranteed adaptation sufficient 
to continue autopoiesis. Although the mobility of living creatures harmo-
nizes with earth’s gravity, knowing that does not tell us in what form this 
opening is exploited, whether as dinosaur or as insect. In many respects 
(e.g., speed), societal communication thus depends on structural coupling 
with consciousness systems, without this determining what is communi-
cated and how the autopoietic system of society draws its boundaries with 
the environment. No steadily improving adaptation of survivors is hence 
to be expected from evolution; and a glance at the ecological problems of 
modern society is likely to provide enough evidence to deny such an as-
sumption any plausibility. Precisely because autopoietic systems are oper-
ationally closed systems, they have broad scope for developing structures 
that prove compatible with autopoiesis. On the basis of adaptation, more 
and more daring disadaptations can thus arise—as long as autopoiesis it-
self is not interrupted.
These considerations make it essential and possible to redefine the 
importance of the concept of complexity for an understanding of evo-
lution. The old idea that evolution is a process that leads from simple to 
complex conditions is untenable, if only because there are no simple con-
ditions; and because less complex and more complex systems obviously 
still co-exist today, so that the former have not been replaced by the lat-
ter (e.g., owing to “better” adaptability). Where we find directional indi-
cations of this sort, we are dealing with simplifying self-descriptions of 
modern society, and such descriptions are especially plausible for today’s 
society, because it is now a single, global system that tolerates no “simple” 
societies within or beside itself. Evolution itself needs no directional speci-
fications. It is not a purposive process anyway.
In any case, evolution theory is perfectly compatible with the ob-
servation that highly complex systems are destroyed or abandoned,68 that 

 
  Evolution
they often have too little evolutionary capacity, and that evolution not 
infrequently replaces highly complex arrangements by superior simplifi-
cation.69 With regard to language, in particular, the thesis of increasing 
complexity in the course of evolution cannot be maintained.70 Despite 
all these objections, there is no denying that complexity tests occur in 
the course of evolution, and that more complex systems come into being 
alongside others. Complexity is an epigenetic product of how auto­poietic 
systems operate.71 Under conditions still to be clarified, it permits more 
(or “softer”) structural couplings between system and environment and 
consequently more differentiated system irritabilities. But complexity 
can never be a selection criterion itself (it is too complex).72 In particu-
lar, we must therefore always ask, “what kinds of situations would give 
positive selective value to increased or decreased complexity,”73 and only 
because both are possible can highly complex systems also develop in the 
course of evolution.
This redefinition of the relationship between evolution theory and 
systems theory can take account of the fact that new developments often 
occur abruptly, very rapidly, and under special conditions, and hence do 
not result from the structures already realized of large systems or popula-
tions.74 We need think only of the particularities of the peripheral Hebrew 
or Greek cultures of the ancient world, what Parsons has called “seed-bed 
societies.”75 Finally, the perhaps most important, or at any rate, potentially 
upsetting, concept in evolution theory requires systems-theoretical reinte-
gration: the concept of chance.
The importance of chance in evolution theory could be understood 
as meaning that the theory is grounded in a postulate of ignorance—­
ignorance of the microphysical, chemical, biochemical, neurophysiologi-
cal, psychological processes that ultimately determine what happens.76 This 
reduces the problem to an epistemological formula and makes it a paradox 
(knowledge grounded in nonknowledge). But this is only a special case of 
a far more general law, namely, that systems always manifest limited (re-
duced and enhanced) response capacity and, one might say, are accessible 
to one another only through “windows.” Phrasing it differently, in order 
to generate the information needed to guide them, all systems have to per-
form measurements. For this reason, a system substitutes full knowledge of 
the environment by preparedness for something that is chance for it. Only 
this makes evolution possible.

Evolution    
In contrast to older assumptions, the concept does not therefore 
serve to negate causality; it does not imply causeless occurrence. “Chance” 
is therefore no makeshift causal construction, for example, a cause ad-
vanced (as it were to complete a causal schema in explaining the world) if 
we can give no cause. We ascribe no causal-theoretical importance to the 
concept of chance. In extremely abstract terms, we can speak of chance as 
a difference-theoretical boundary concept. Chance then means that deter-
mination of the one side of a distinction has no meaning for determination 
of the other side. This is how Hegel understands the concept of chance 
and correspondingly the counterconcept of necessity. A narrower defini-
tion suffices us, relating to the distinction between system and environ-
ment. By “chance,” we understand a form of correlation between system 
and environment that eludes synchronization (i.e., also control, “system-
atization”) by the system.77 No system can take account of all causalities. 
Their complexity must be reduced. Certain causal relations are observed, 
expected, preventively induced or averted, normalized—and others are left 
to chance. In other words, the “irregularity” of chance is not a global phe-
nomenon, and it is consequently not useful to bring it up in the discussion 
of determinism/indeterminism. It presupposes system reference, for only 
thus can an observer say for whom something is chance.
This rather negative characterization is complemented by a positive 
one. Chance is the capacity of a system to use events that cannot be pro-
duced and coordinated by the system itself (hence not in the network of 
the system’s autopoiesis). From this point of view, chances are risks, occa-
sions, opportunities. To “take a chance” means to win structuring effects 
from it with the means of systemic operations. Measured against existing 
structures, these effects can be both constructive and destructive (insofar 
as this can be distinguished at all in the long term). In any case, the ob-
servation of chance events expands the information-processing capacity of 
the system, thus correcting as far as possible the tightness of its own struc-
tural formations without sacrificing the orientational advantages of these 
strictures.
However, this does not yet tell us how it happens. There are very 
general ideas about it in systems theory. The “order from noise” principle 
is one of them;78 the notion that structural couplings channel irritations is 
another. Systems theory is thus ready to receive evolution theory. But this 
naturally does not explain how evolution is possible.

 
  Evolution
3. The Neo-Darwinian Theory of Evolution
The independence of evolution theory lies in the independence of its 
distinctions. Since Darwin, one has spoken of variation and selection. Since 
selection is double-edged, however, either protecting what exists or chang-
ing it, we need a further concept, which I shall call restabilization. As our 
framework theory teaches (see § 1 above), this involves a paradox resolu-
tion program, the unfolding of the paradox of the probability of the im-
probable. These terms therefore refer to forms, to identifiable distinctions, 
and particularly in this context, this is likely to be immediately under-
standable. Variation does not simply mean change (for this would then al-
ready be evolution), but the production of a variant for possible selection. 
Similarly, selection in the context of evolution theory does not mean sim-
ply the pure fact that something happens the way it does and not other-
wise; the term refers to selection on the occasion of a variation that occurs 
in the system. They are corresponding concepts that are not used outside 
evolution theory, and this immanent reference of its lead distinction gives 
the concept of evolution its form.
Whereas stage models shift difference into mere succession and can 
describe the historical process only as the unity of these differences, evolu-
tion theory itself presupposes the generation of difference over time and 
can thus allow the difference principle to become reflexive. However vari-
ation operates empirically, it generates a difference, namely, a deviation 
from what has hitherto been usual. This difference imposes a selection—
against or in favor of innovation. In turn, the selection, if it opts for inno-
vation, imposes cascades of adaptation or demarcation movements in the 
system, and, if it opts for the status quo, confirmations of this option, since 
what had previously been a matter or course has become contingent. The 
distinctions of evolution theory therefore refer to differences that process 
differences. And it is this structure that makes it unnecessary to speak of a 
final goal or a law of historical movement.
We arrive at similar notions if we set out from the problem of ge-
netic or cultural transmission.79 Authors of this inclination tend to proceed 
on the assumption of a generation change and see the problem of evolu-
tion primarily in bridging this break dictated by life. This brings us to 
the question whether there are transmissible equivalents in culture for the 
role of genes in biological evolution. And we then speak of populations 
rather than systems. But here, too, at the next theoretical stage, the prob-

Evolution    
lem of coping with deviant transmission arises, the question of whether 
malformations are simply eradicated or in rare cases lead to structural in-
novations. And only this is really evolution that goes beyond the mere 
auto­poiesis of life or society.
The distinction between variation, selection, and (autopoietic) stabi-
lization gives us the point of departure for a general theory of evolution that 
still completely ignores what sorts of system can effect a separation of these 
evolutionary functions. They can be both living systems and societies.80 For 
every application of evolution theory, the system reference must therefore 
first be determined. If it is a matter of society, all living systems belong in 
the environment of the system.81 The way in which variation, selection, 
and restabilization are separated and divided could differ. For the evolution 
of living beings, we could consider various types of system—of genetically 
programmed cells as the object of variation, of the survival of organisms as 
the object of selection, and of ecologically stable populations as the object 
of restabilization. In societal evolution, there is no indication of any sort 
for this type of separation guarantee. The medium of meaning alone, with 
its immense referential and connective capacity, makes such isolated evo-
lutionary functions at various levels of the system improbable.82 Critics of 
neo-Darwinism accordingly reject the proposition that variation and selec-
tion can be separated for social systems—mainly with the argument that 
individuals anticipate the future.83 However, this does not exclude systems 
that operate meaningfully from separating variation, selection, and restabi-
lization. The question is only how they do so.
This question has hardly arisen let alone been satisfactorily answered 
in the social sciences, where they have taken up the Darwin schema at all.84 
I propose relating the various components of evolution to various compo-
nents of the autopoiesis of the societal system as follows:
(1) Variation varies the elements of the system, in this case communications. 
Variation consists in the deviant reproduction of elements by the elements 
of the system, in other words, in unexpected, surprising communication.
(2) Selection concerns the structures of the system, in this instance, expecta-
tions that steer communication. From deviant communication it chooses 
meanings promising for developing structures, which are suitable for re-
peated use, which can form and condense expectations; and, by attribut-
ing deviation to the situation, consigning it to oblivion or even explicitly 

 
  Evolution
rejecting it, it discards innovations that appear unsuitable as structure and 
hence for guiding continuing communication.
(3) Restabilization concerns the state of the evolving system after selection, 
whether positive or negative. This has primarily to do with the societal sys-
tem itself in relation to its environment. Consider, for example, the primal 
development of agriculture with consequences that had to be “systemically 
viable” in the social system of society. Or the avoidance of agrarization 
(for ecological or other reasons), which led to the emergence of “nomadic 
peoples” on the periphery of already politically developed peasant societ-
ies. In the course of societal evolution, the restabilization function shifted 
more and more to subsystems of society, which have had to prove their 
worth in the intrasocietal environment. The problem was ultimately the 
permanence of system differentiation.
Elements, structures, and the unity of the reproduction context are neces-
sary components of an autopoietic system. There are no elements without 
a system, no system without elements, and so on. This raises the question 
how evolution is possible at all if it requires access differentiated by varia-
tion, selection, and restabilization to these individual components. With 
this question, we also reconstruct the thesis of the improbability of all evo-
lution and the improbable probability of the system forms it generates.
The concept of the autopoietic system alone shows that these com-
ponents of the system structure and evolution have a circular relationship 
to one another. Although the distinction between variation, selection, and 
restabilization suggests temporal succession, and is also so intended, it is 
just as correct to say that variation presupposes stability or, if you will, nor-
mal reproduction. Evolution is therefore always only the modification of 
existing states; and if we try to capture it with concepts such as innovation 
or emergence we are left with abstracted descriptions in which we must ask 
ourselves why the focus is on discontinuity and not continuity.
Just as artificial is episode formation that starts with variation and de-
scribes restabilization as its result. Only selection—in keeping with its key 
position in the concept of evolution—cannot describe the beginning or the 
end of an evolutionary episode. An autopoietic system can neither begin nor 
end a structural change with selection. In very simplistic terms, we can there-
fore also describe evolution as structural selection, and, when we consider 
that structures steer the selection of operations, as the selection of selections.85

Evolution    
4. The Variation of Elements
To this day, the sociological literature has failed to produce a satisfy-
ing explanation of evolutionary variation—just as biology initially under­
stood mutation only as an abrupt and inexplicable change in genotype. 
Older sociology was satisfied to point to the practically infinite possibili-
ties of variation in individual behavior.86 Even today, action theoreticians 
argue—either against systems theory or with the intention of comple-
menting it—that any explanation of societal change requires recourse to 
highly motivated individual action, hence localizing it (together with the 
individual agents?) in social systems.87 On closer analysis and, above all, 
with a better understanding of the individuality of organic-psychic sys-
tems, this is untenable. The concept of successful evolutionary variation 
also speaks against it. On the one hand, recent biological research suggests 
that the conditions of genetic variation are also subject to highly complex 
fine-tuning.88 But such regulation can take place only within the evolving 
system itself. On the other hand, a theory of operationally closed systems 
cannot accept that the variation mechanism lies in the organic-psychic en-
vironment of society. The high systemic complexity and extrasocietal auto-
poiesis of human organisms and psychic systems allow, indeed, oblige, us 
to consider that they collaborate in societal evolution by chance—despite 
the socialization of these individuals and their dependence on society. If 
we want to clarify evolutionary variation, we must turn to the system of 
society itself and look for the conditions of possible variation in the basal 
operation of this system, in communication.
Also unacceptable is a further proposition, more at home in the so-
ciology of the twentieth century, to understand intellectuals as disruptive 
factors, in accordance with a pattern developed in the eighteenth cen-
tury, and to put them at the service of variation.89 This brings us from the 
individual to the role. The production of deviating ideas gains a certain 
regularity, an almost businesslike nature. Intellectuals accordingly regard 
“critique” as a positive attitude. What they find more difficult is the in-
sight that specialization in variation demands renouncing responsibility 
for selection.90 More important, however, is another objection: evolution-
ary variation is far too broad, too much of a mass phenomenon to be left 
to special roles. Intellectuals may well act as amplifiers, but they are too 
strongly determined by fashions, polemics, and the semantic consistency 

 
  Evolution
of their ideas to be able to generate sufficiently open variation if put to the 
test. Prague structuralists of the prewar period rightly renounced ascribing 
a decisive role in the evolution of literature and art to writers and artists as 
outstanding personalities.91 However indispensable this factor of chance, 
they claimed, it failed to explain the frequent occurrence of “pleiads” at 
certain periods, differences in position, or the nature of controversies; and 
these are, after all, decisive variations in evolution. Historical “greatness” is 
a description fabricated to explain variation, a societal construction.
The primary variation mechanism is already to be found in the lin-
guistic nature of communication (and in this we see parallels to the re-
quirement of chemical stability in genetic mutation). Already as variation, 
language makes variation dependent on complex fine-tuning. Linguisti-
cally, communication has to be approximately correct, it has at any rate to 
be understandable. Variation hence lies neither in the occasional slip of the 
tongue nor in slips of the pen or typographical errors. Such occurrences 
are far too rare and trifling to give a society sufficient opportunity for selec-
tion. Linguistic communication has to condense meaning in advance with 
the aid of acceptable words and sentence constructions in which minor 
technical errors disappear; and evolutionary variation comes about only 
where linguistically successful meaning proposals are called into question 
in the communication process or flatly rejected. Variation can lie in an un-
usual utterance, but also, and presumably more frequently, in the unex-
pected nonacceptance of an utterance in view of a situation that makes this 
possible or likely. In any case, it must be linguistically understandable—
with regard not only to the meaning that is directly negated but also with 
regard to the whys, wherefores, and whatnows.
To put it more precisely and consider it with respect to its commu-
nicative use, the variation mechanism consists in the invention of negation 
and the yes/no coding of linguistic communication this makes possible.92 
We note the improbability of the evolutionary achievement. In first place, 
linguistic communication is, after all, a positive, actually experienceable 
event in the real world; and a differentiating event that indicates something 
determinate. What we can initially observe is only the operation of distin-
guishing itself—quite independently of the question of whether it refers 
to something, what this something is, and whether it does so positively or 
negatively. What is not indicated remains in the “unmarked state” of the 
world and is not negated (for this would require indication).93 The possibil-

Evolution    
ity of understanding a communication as negation, let alone the possibility 
of taking such a possibility into account in anticipation, is a very contin-
gent result (our argument is circular!) of its own evolution.
As we know, there is no environmental correlate for negations. They 
come about only for internal use. This holds true a fortiori for the linguis-
tic code, which ensures that every communication is concentrated as com­
munication (and not, e.g., owing to its external reference) on a bifurcation 
of acceptance or rejection of the meaning proposed. Purely linguistically, 
this is not be prevented, however much rhetorical effort is invested. In con-
trast to an environment-related use of negation (“I haven’t seen him”) the 
coding directs communication toward itself. It is a matter of acceptance 
or rejection of the meaning it conveys and not of whether communication 
has taken place or not. Through coding, communication itself becomes re-
flexive and in this form can also put pressure on environment-related ne-
gations by discussing whether an assertion to this effect holds true or not. 
Once introduced, the coding can never be eliminated as an element in the 
autopoiesis of linguistic communication. It grows with the possibilities of 
linguistic communication, hence with society. The more possibilities for 
expression and understanding the development of a complex semantics 
provides, the more stimulus for rejection this produces.
This need not mean that the yeses and noes are originally equally 
probable. The coding creates a surplus; society helps itself out by inhibit-
ing the noes. Whatever is linguistically possible and understandable is nev-
ertheless not always appropriate. Where inhibition does not take effect or 
institutional disinhibition restores the possibilities of rejection, the varia-
tion mechanism finds room for maneuver, and only by this complicated 
detour of surplus production, inhibition, and disinhibition can it adapt to 
the given status of societal evolution.
Variation therefore comes about through communication that rejects 
the content of communication. It produces a deviant element—nothing 
more nor less. The process focuses on the expectation of acceptance al-
ready articulated or implied or expected in communication. It thus looks 
into the past—with its back to the future, like the prophets of Israel. This 
separates variation from selection; for a proposed selection would itself be 
a positive meaning proposal, which is in turn subject to the bifurcation 
of acceptance and rejection. Variation is therefore not the spontaneous 
­genesis of innovation (“new” will still long be a suspect category, almost to 

 
  Evolution
be equated with aberrance)94 but the deviant reproduction of elements of 
the system. And deviation is a recursive concept, for it presupposes some-
thing to deviate from.
Rejection contradicts the expectation of acceptance or simply the as-
sumption of continuity in “business as usual.” All variation therefore oc-
curs as contradiction—not in the logical sense, but in the more original, 
dialogical sense. It can occur only as self-contradiction of the system.95 It 
resigns itself to the requirements of the system’s autopoiesis—it commu-
nicates!—it ensures the continuation of communication, even if with freer 
connectivity options and with an immanent tendency toward conflict.
Day in, day out, corrective variation of this sort takes place on a mas-
sive scale, the correction of opinions expressed, or conflicts also vaguely 
hinted at and then mostly avoided. It is thus important to keep the trifling 
nature of evolutionary variation in mind. Like all operational elements of 
dynamic systems, communication, including deviant communication, is a 
situation-bound occurrence whose importance normally passes very rap-
idly. The concept of variation hence provides no answer to the much too 
compact question of how great, epoch-making ideas or inventions come 
into being. Evolution makes no large, abrupt leaps (even though its results 
can be so interpreted in retrospective observation). But it requires mate-
rial amenable to evolution to be produced on a massive scale and normally 
to disappear again unused. This alone ensures that selection has sufficient 
chances, that minor chance events reinforce each other frequently enough, 
and that one variation can support another taking place at the same time.
It should also be noted that variation, unlike selection, is not commu-
nicated as such. It is not conveyed with regard to selection.96 It is explained 
somehow—but not by its evolutionary function. There are also practical 
grounds for this. If variation were to take place only or largely with an eye 
to selection chances, it would run a high risk of disappointment; for social 
reality is extremely conservative and does not lightly negate what exists and 
has proved its worth in the light of something unknown whose prospects 
of consensus have yet to be tested, and that cannot be tested in the given 
situation. Rejection must seek justification elsewhere. The ban on usury is 
not respected—not because this serves the evolution of the economic sys-
tem but because legally and ecclesiastically tenable ways of circumventing 
it can be found. Or one simply dissociates oneself and opts out: NIMBY. 
This naturally does not exclude deviations from usual practice being pro-

Evolution    
posed for selection (and in fact, it is misleading to describe sociocultural 
evolution as “blind”). But the proposal itself is not the selection; and, any-
way, only a small part of variation occurrences relevant to evolution take 
such intentional form.97 Only through the noncoordination of variation 
and selection, in other words, by avoiding communication on this rela-
tionship, can evolution become sufficiently probable and lead sufficiently 
rapidly to the development of an order that is in itself improbable. It is in 
this sense that we can also describe the relationship between variation and 
selection as chance: the determinacy of variation tells us nothing about the 
chances of selection.
If evolution produces more complex societies, this therefore cannot 
mean that more “useful” variations now have to be generated. The greater 
the complexity, the more improbable it is that any kind of innovation can 
fit in structurally. The chance coordination of variation and selection there-
fore has to be maintained; the alternative would be to switch to planning. 
In the functional area of variation, however, the dialectic of surplus produc-
tion, inhibition, and disinhibition is adapted to the conditions of higher 
complexity by the means of higher complexity. In other words, additional 
facilities for massing and accelerating variation are needed (as where bio-
chemical mutation is complemented in the evolution of life by bisexual re-
production). In societal evolution, this has happened in two ways: through 
the dissemination medium writing and by enhancing conflict competence 
and conflict tolerance in society (to put it another way, by renouncing the 
externalization of all conflicts as typical in segmentary societies).
Where writing is accepted as a dissemination medium (and not only 
for recording purposes), this has a double effect. Communication can be 
given greater spatial and temporal reach and is freed from the constraints 
of interaction, which means that it gains greater liberty in producing (writ-
ing) and receiving (reading). Greater dissemination makes it possible to 
change many things, indeed innumerable things, with one change. The no-
tion that we can change something directly with a word is consequently 
lost or reduced to certain magical-religious practices. Moreover, the re-
sulting increase in the unobservability of effects has to be institutionally 
safeguarded. As with all techniques, this raises religious problems, such as 
that narrated in the Prometheus myth. The rigidity of traditional holy law 
dissolves in the flames of writing, for example, and the now “valid” law 
makes legislation possible; but how?98 Or when the ethos of the nobility 

 
  Evolution
was written down and, as in early modern times, even printed, the nobil-
ity soon found itself confronted by indeterminable people who had read 
the books and were therefore (!) better acquainted with what had previ-
ously been only pretension, could handle it with greater “virtuosity,” and 
judge it critically.
Written and hence interaction-free communication need not and 
cannot take account of physically present interlocutors, but must replace 
the aids to understanding provided by the unity of the face-to-face situ-
ation. It must explicate more clearly and only by means of the text itself. 
This leads to new types of linguistic form and above all to the formation of 
concepts with their own unforeseeable consequences. As long as God was 
only designated by a name that one had to know in order to invoke Him, 
it was possible to solve the problem by keeping the name secret. If we have 
a concept for God that is fixed in writing, the concept can condense expe-
rience, demand specification, lead to consistency problems—in short, pro-
voke everything that occupied medieval theologians.
The other possibility for enhancing variation competence men-
tioned above, namely, the generation and toleration of intrasocietal con-
flicts, also had to be asserted against structurally obdurate reservations; 
and even today conflict is frowned upon by all but a few sociologists. 
Conflicts test the potential for rejection. They lead to the all-round inte-
gration of participants’ behavior, to continual observation of observation, 
and hence to an intensive exchange of information. If a no wins a con-
flict, we can assume that it has passed a first test and proved sustainable.99 
Nevertheless, conflicts easily get out of control and disturb the intrasoci-
etal environment. In older societies, face-to-face violence was much more 
frequent than today, and a propensity for violence was correspondingly 
subject to severe repression.100 This must have affected the willingness to 
say no; for if a person dares to refuse after others have already committed 
themselves in communication, conflict is at the door. The others will in-
sist, look for and find arguments and allies, and all of a sudden a system 
forms within the system: a conflict. In small societies formed in the inti-
macy of interaction, conflict repression is therefore vital for survival. With 
increasing size and complexity, as Late Archaic societies already showed, 
this condition was eased. However, this can happen only under similarly 
complex conditions, which make it possible to attain more conflict and 
more peace at the same time.

Evolution    
One widespread attempt in this direction was to shift the problem of 
deviation to the level of social roles and to solve it there through the dif-
ferentiation of success roles on the one hand and failure and misfortune-
related roles on the other. The former became celebrity roles and were 
then engaged for conflict regulation,101 and the latter were neutralized by 
assumptions regarding the evil eye, witchcraft, and the like.102 This situa-
tion was superseded only by the development of political decision-making 
powers with complicated consequences for the now necessary balance be-
tween religion and politics.103
With the development of effectual political rule, it becomes possi-
ble to strengthen the rejection of communicative offers of meaning while 
mitigating the consequences of conflict. Legitimate force arises to combat 
illegitimate force.104 The form found to achieve this is a structurally se-
cured asymmetry—be it on the basis of property or on the basis of power 
secured by followers. Whoever has the resources can say no, can elude de-
mands for help or handouts without having to reckon with conflict.105 He 
can concentrate his resources. This achievement is restabilized by stratifi-
cation of the societal system.106
Another possibility is to permit conflicts but to defuse them through 
­social regulation and the influence of third parties on the outcome of disputes. 
To this end, arbitration procedures, ultimately, the rule-bound settlement 
of disputes, became established, which, epigenetically, as it were, produced 
semantic material that eventually became known as “law” and used for the 
autopoiesis of a legal system.107 The wealthy man can reject a communica-
tion anyway; but the poor man can now also do so, if he is in the right.108 
Contrary to the “moral functionalism” assumptions of a Durkheim or cer-
tain philosophers of law, the prime function of the law is not the moral 
integration of society but the intensification of conflict possibilities in 
forms that do not endanger social structures.109 The enhancement of con-
flict competence can be used differentially, and in older societies it serves 
mainly to develop stratificatory differentiation.
Hardly comparable is a third possibility of highly complex society, 
namely, the differentiation of conflict grounds and conflict topics.110 There can 
be deep-seated structural reasons for the repeated outbreak of conflicts, 
but the conflicts themselves seek other occasions and topics, because the 
structural trigger is anyway no “solvable problem.” The insistent search by 
some sociologists for the “real” reasons of conflict, their Marxist heritage, 

 
  Evolution
in other words, has concealed the fact that this very difference between 
grounds and topics is an achievement provided the system is big enough 
to endure conflicts.111
Among the imponderables provoked by these extended possibili-
ties of variation is the corresponding transformation of the semantics and 
its consequences. The more possibilities of rejection are admitted, the 
greater is the need for nonnegatability. But the very search for what is 
necessary, if it can be observed as a search (and writing guarantees this), 
produces ever-new contingencies. Religion, inasmuch as it is under the 
aegis of theology, joins in this dangerous course.112 Reality, which had 
been considered nonnegatable per se, falls under suspicion of being mere 
creation, mere “appearance,” a mere correlate of consciousness, or now 
a mere “construction.” The differentiation of special functional systems 
gives rise to related contingency formulae that can assert system-specific 
indisputability, for instance, scarcity for the economic system, legitimacy 
for the political system, justice for the legal system, limitationality for the 
science system.113 But tying such formulae to particular special functional 
systems leaves open their meaning for society as a whole. The saving for-
mula since the mid-nineteenth century has been values. But they are ex-
posed to the same process of corrosion. Once in the world, they allow 
discussion of the “reevaluation of values” or “value change.”
All these reflections on forms of variation presuppose that deviations 
can be perceived at all. All variation thus depends on a predetermined se-
mantic, on the memory of the system, which informs all communication 
about what is known and normal, what can be expected, and what not. 
What stands out is hence guided by already established structures. This 
precondition is all the more important because it operates unseen. The 
unity of the distinction between expected and unexpected, normal/­deviant 
is not itself addressed. Finely ramified semantics, in particular, as in reli-
gious or legal dogmatics, feed problems back into themselves to rougher 
or more fundamental distinctions, but do not result in the differentiation 
schema being called into question. The choice is then apparently between 
tradition and variation, old and new. In favorable cases a variation can as-
sert itself. But it will hardly be possible to ask why the question is put the 
way it is and not otherwise.
Dependence on a predetermined semantics is an essential precondi-
tion for recognizing deviations, and thus for evolution. Nevertheless one 

Evolution    
can imagine that difficulties arise on the threshold to radical change. When-
ever the invisible hand of tradition (and for many fields this means religion) 
determines how to draw distinctions between conformity and deviation, 
variations are likely that categorize problems wrongly, for example produc-
ing exceptions from rules that as rules have lost their importance (e.g., ex-
ceptions to and ways round the [ecclesiastical] ban on charging interest on 
loans). This also means that in times of radical change, the radical nature 
of structural change cannot be observed and, in retrospect, communica-
tion employs distinctions that are no longer appropriate. Where the early 
modern age saw its problem in bringing innovation in almost all functional 
areas into harmony with a fundamentally religious positing of the world, or 
to taking its distance from them, we now ask ourselves whether it was in-
deed this problem that decided the transition to our modern, functionally 
differentiated society.
On the basis of this situation, can we expect society to describe the 
world and itself ever better, and hence to learn to control the formation 
of categories prescribing what is experienced as old and what as new? 
In a certain sense, the question answers itself. The fact that we can put 
it merely shifts the problem to another level of abstraction without de-
finitively solving it. What we can observe, however, is a different sort of 
re­action, namely, intensification of differentiation between variation, se-
lection, and restabilization, which not by chance takes place by degrees 
where far-reaching structural breaks occur, for example, the spread of an 
easily manageable system of writing or a change in the differentiation form 
of society. ­Although we do not notice that a schema revision is due, evo-
lution itself evolves; it autonomizes selection and restabilization vis-à-vis 
variation and thus creates a higher degree of freedom in dealing with not 
understood or insufficiently positioned problems.
When in premodern societies one came under the pressure of en-
hanced possibilities of variation, it could always be assumed that selec-
tion had to be guided by the One, True, and Good. People could believe 
themselves accommodated in a cosmos of essences. The means might be 
uncertain or they might fail, but there was no doubting the goals, “quia ex 
se patet quod optatur” (because what is desirable is obvious in itself). But 
this trust in the only right selection, which ultimately brought perfection, 
peace, stability had been secretly reensured by stratification and the center/
periphery differentiation of the societal system, safeguards that no longer 

 
  Evolution
hold. Instead, one begins to value what is new as such,114 to understand 
“critique” to mean rejection of what is criticized, and to understand “alter-
natives” no longer as mere options but as variants to be deemed better than 
what exists without closer inspection. In sum, variation suffers semantic 
hypertrophy—and society consequently develops a built-in disappoint-
ment with itself. For variation alone cannot effect evolution.
As a result, however, something quite different from mere reevalua-
tion took place in relations between old and new. In fact, society has now 
adapted to modes of selection that not longer offer a prospect of stability. 
It differentiates between selection and restabilization—simply because the 
pressure of innovation is growing and has to be dealt with more rapidly. If 
we are to assess this process, however, we must first examine the functional 
vehicles of selection and restabilization as such.
5. Selection Through Media
The concept of evolution takes form in the distinction between 
variation and selection. “Form” necessarily implies “another side,” which 
means in this case that where variation occurs, selection is necessary. The 
interest of the nineteenth century in evolution was an interest in selection, 
whether natural or unnatural;115 and the interest in selection was an inter-
est in the production of a unity or unities, now that they could no longer 
be taken as given.
Since variation and selection are coupled only “by chance,” a theory 
of evolutionary selection can be elaborated separately.116 Here and there, a 
structural innovation occurs, “whatever its causes.”117 Different initial sit-
uations may also be said to be “equifinal”—rather misleadingly, because 
this naturally does not mean that established forms converge in the course 
of evolution. It should only be noted that the selection function depends 
solely on the fact of variation, not on which concrete activating factor 
brings it into the world.
Like variation, selection is possible only if and as long as the system 
exists, that is, if and as long as the adaptedness of the system can be main-
tained. In evolutionary selection, this boundary condition (which does not 
serve as a selection criterion!) is expressed in the form of the reusability of 
selection viewpoints. They recall and condense the test experience of the 
system and make it available internally.118 For this purpose, they must be 

Evolution    
abstracted from concrete situations, but also so conceived that they “fit” 
many, concretely different situations—regardless of whether their earlier 
use and worth is remembered or not. Furthermore, not least for under-
standing the problem on hand, a high degree of conformity with existing 
structures is required. The compatibility of the innovation is examined. 
However, evolution is accommodated by the difficulty of testing consis-
tency and can generally be recognized only when the innovation has been 
introduced and has led to problems in practice. At any rate, the case that 
modern social critique has in mind, namely, that an innovation is preferred 
because it deviates, must be considered a rare exception.119
Every variation necessarily leads to selection. Even if no positive se-
lection takes place, selection takes place because operation-bound variation 
passes away without changing structures, and everything remains the way 
it was and is. What is selected is the existing state—and not the innovation. 
Selection itself is hence a two-sided form: if not positive, then negative. 
That it is a form also distinguishes it from variation, which for its part is 
form because it can occur—or not occur. The form of evolution (­variation/
selection) is therefore a second-order form, a form formed of forms.
The fundamental condition of all evolution is hence that the facilities 
for variation and those for selection do not coincide, but remain separate. 
In cybernetic terms, the operation connects with the system in the form of 
feedback. This feedback can be negative or positive, it can concern keeping 
within a given range of fluctuation in system states or amplifying deviation, 
developing complexity, which then comes to bear with its own problems.
History can be reversed neither by negative selection (= selection of 
nonselection) nor by negative feedback. The system never returns to its 
earlier state. It can only remember and compare. It can attribute variation 
to the situation and explain why the opportunity for change was not taken. 
But this cannot prevent a conservative course from being regretted later or 
the problem addressed anew, indeed, it rather points in this direction. In 
any case, repetition creates a different situation.
Whether evolutionary selection tends in one direction or another 
is decided through its own mechanisms. It is accordingly by chance that 
a variation is relevant for selection through its own determinacy alone.120 
Above all, no purposive relationship may be installed, with the result that 
a variation is carried out only for the sake of selection. This may well moti-
vate variations, and communications anticipating useful outcomes are nat-

 
  Evolution
urally not excluded.121 But if evolutionary structural changes then occur, 
this is due not to the achievement of a purpose but to the system reacting 
by structural changes to the efforts to achieve it. Evolution makes use of 
calculated optimism to stimulate variation. But what is selected as struc-
ture is not yet decided for this reason alone.122
The separation of these evolutionary functions is already ensured by 
their relating to different components of the societal system: variation to 
elements, that is, communications, and selection to structures, that is, the 
formation and use of expectations. This means above all that no one-to-
one relationship is to be assumed between variation events and selections 
(just as little as between mutations and the selection of phenotypical char-
acteristics in organic evolution). Communication, especially when it is ob-
served, is much too diffuse in its effect. A single no cannot yet change 
structures, and if this does occur, it would be an extremely rare exception 
that cannot explain the tempo of evolution. Contradiction to assumed ex-
pectations can attract attention, can confer social prestige, can encourage 
repetition or parallel action, and together with other conditions can overall 
change (or consolidate) structures quite different from those originally re-
jected. An existing social order always plays a part in the structural effects 
of rejecting communication. And only this can explain why in the evolu-
tion of life, as in the evolution of society, the results are always entirely co-
herent, not to say harmonious.
Returning to the problem of the probability of the improbable dis-
cussed at the outset of this chapter, we now see much more clearly how 
this overall effect comes about. The rejection of a demand for acceptance, 
like a negation of anticipated rejection in an attempt to achieve it none-
theless, is among the highly probable events of daily life. Variation in this 
sense occurs constantly. Only through selection of a structure using, con-
firming, condensing this event does something improbable come about, 
namely, a marked deviation from the initial state. It is clear that classi-
cal theories of linear causal laws cannot explain such phenomena. It is 
not that suitable causes necessarily produce effects where necessary con-
straints are present; events that repeatedly occur are used occasionally (on 
the whole often enough) by processes of circular deviation amplification 
to build structures that had not previously existed.123 And the “no” has 
the attention value needed to trigger this. However complex mediation 
might be, there are indeed links between communication and structural 

Evolution    
formation; or, at any rate, what is never communicated can never in-
fluence structure formation. But, given prior structures, if communica-
tion actualizes a deviant variant, this can set into structure—or not, as 
the case may be. Variation as such generates both possibilities, through its 
very determinacy. It clears the way for selection; otherwise it would be no 
variation. But what mechanisms ensure that this is not the end, but that 
society provisionally opts for one or other of the possibilities? This ques-
tion allows historical specification of the selection process, the possibility 
of recognizing the dependence of evolution on the societal formations it 
has itself created.
Darwinian theory had a simple answer: variation takes place in the 
system, but selection as “natural selection” through the environment. This 
simple opposition now finds hardly any proponents. Biologists, for exam-
ple, have resolved it with game theory assumptions. It is above all incom-
patible with an elaborated systems-theoretical conceptuality. If we accept 
the theory of operationally closed, structurally determined systems, we 
must assume that systems can change their structures only through their 
own operations, however they react to occurrences in the environment in 
the form of disruption, disturbance, disappointment, deficiency, and so 
on. We must therefore examine society itself for selection mechanisms.
For all societies, including the most primitive, the primary selection 
mechanism is the differentiation of interaction systems and societal sys-
tem.124 No criteria are needed and there are no authorities for carrying out 
corresponding tests. The question is only whether what turns up in par-
ticular interaction systems, convincing owing to their situation, prevails in 
society as a whole, and if so in what form.
In face-to-face interaction, diverging opinions, if expressed, can hardly 
be ignored (tact, humor, and so on are relevant inventions, but come late in 
civilization). Since communication is attributed to a person as an action, we 
must reckon with its recurrence or with corresponding connective behav-
ior inside or outside the system. Conflicts then arise that deplete resources. 
The system is too small to tolerate conflicts within it; it becomes a conflict. 
Or the system grasps the opportunity and sets out on the suggested course. 
Within interaction systems, the probability of structural transformation 
through communicative events is therefore very high—practically so high 
that there can be no evolution, because selection cannot be independently 
installed, but is taken in by practically every variation. Interaction can ex-

 
  Evolution
periment with all sorts of peculiarities, because it can be certain that society 
will continue to exist anyway.
But society not only carries out interactions, it is also the societal en-
vironment of interactions.125 This intrasocietal difference prevents every-
thing that presents itself, that pleases, that displeases in interaction from 
affecting the structures of the societal system. All meaning—and especially 
what can be person or role—is constituted transinteractionally with an eye 
to use outside current interaction. This is already taken into account in in-
teraction, and, compared with what can happen in interaction, very little 
innovation can pass this filter for diffusion throughout society.
In early segmentary societies, it was still relatively clear what could 
happen elsewhere in society or be acceptable. When society becomes more 
complex, it loses this easy possibility of self-assessment. Unlike in sim-
ple societies, however, there can now be “subcultures” in which deviations 
can sustain themselves, and also subsystems drawing their own boundar-
ies, which have to be crossed if an innovation is to have societywide reso-
nance.126 In contrast to the usual diffusionist theories, we are dealing here 
with a different sort of use, made possible by boundaries, of a stimulus that 
is initially volatile or with only limited scope for expansion (e.g., the use 
of an established stone-working technique for large-format religious pur-
poses). However, the evolutionary situation undergoes a profound change 
only with the invention and spread of writing. Since not all communica-
tion still takes place in interaction systems, and writing gives negation new 
opportunities, only corresponding amplifiers in the field of selection can 
ensure that evolution remains possible.
To begin with, religion could absorb the pressure. It was able to offer 
criteria for judging whether letting oneself in for variations could cause 
difficulties with otherworldly powers; and it could be assumed that the 
mundane world was open to experiment (e.g., with new production tech-
niques) on condition that the domain of the sacred was spared. How-
ever, one had to know what pleased the gods and spirits and what did 
not. Major religious innovations took place. The archaic arbitrary behavior 
of sacred powers was limited and disciplined—as arable farming and city 
building disciplined society. The gods of Mesopotamia acted in accordance 
with adopted plans; they accepted governmental structures and family or-
ders for themselves too. Through religion, society put itself under pressure 
to adapt and develop sanctified selection criteria for intercepting and sort-

Evolution    
ing out wild variations. This function could perhaps be performed by a 
single god attributed the ability to observe and judge everything, so that it 
could not be wrong to accept his criteria.
We have this need to reorganize selection to thank for the world re-
ligions still practiced today. Each for itself, they are religions for everyone, 
for all human beings. They intensify the moral demands on God and on 
humans, as if it were crucial to hold onto the unity of the selection con-
text of a culture and fix it with the aid of “canonic” texts.127 Morality al-
lows scope for interpretation and legal casuistry. Religion itself finds forms 
of vying radicalness and can thus take its distance from both the ruling 
bureau­cracy and social stratification. Consider the relation of Buddhism to 
the caste system or the Augustinian theory of the two civitates. The com-
bination of evidence and duration, problematic for all meaning, is shifted 
to transcendence. With the help of its texts, religion was converted into 
(largely orally practiced) tradition, and through ritualization (especially 
in India) or popular versions, it was made accessible to broad sections of 
the population. And because what had been written down was passed on 
orally, the text showed a stability not (or only imperceptibly) varied in 
oral transmission, whose obviousness conceals that there could be other 
possibilities.
While this solution predominates and has proved highly persuasive, 
there are other approaches, too, to a different, functionally equivalent ampli-
fication of the means of selection. This lies in the development of function-
specific, symbolically generalized communication media. Selection tests 
whether one can invoke feasibility and, in considering the consequences, 
truth; whether the innovation can be financed and whether the power avail-
able suffices to assert it against any resistance.
What needed to be said about symbolically generalized communica-
tion media was said earlier (Chapter 2 §§ 9–12), so we can limit ourselves 
here to a few considerations. Symbolically generalized communication 
media can secure the acceptance of communications with highly exigent 
content, even under improbable conditions, by conditionalizing motives 
for acceptance and rendering them expectable through conditionalization. 
This is based on a process of dissolution and recombination, thus an enor-
mous enhancement of combinatorial possibilities in search of forms that 
are nevertheless binding. Money is a good example, but power, backed by 
the threat of superior physical force, also has this structure. Similar the-

 
  Evolution
matic openness, bordering almost on the arbitrary, is generated with the 
methodization of scientific truth, and art is also reputed to be able to give 
shape to something in the “soft, simple element” of imagination that is not 
to be found in this guise in nature, which serves as model.128
In their basal structure, the media are loosely coupled, gigantic sets 
of elements with which tradition can be circumvented. This offers the 
chance to formulate new selection criteria that manage without perfec-
tion, peace, and stability. “Profit” hence becomes a selection viewpoint for 
the use of money, even though profit itself is unstable and depends on the 
exploitation of unstable, continuously changing market situations. All reli-
ance on perfection is abandoned, whether in the quality of work or goods, 
in the entrepreneurial lifestyle and the income that goes with it, or, finally, 
in a human instinct that reason must tame and put to use. What remains 
are profitability calculations bound to single forms. For example, they re-
quire differentiable assets, which as such cannot even consider the stability 
of the economic system. In parallel, passionate love proclaims sovereignty 
over its own realm, represses object- and quality-related concepts of love, 
the love of God and the love of virtue, and sets store rather by the lesson of 
experience that it cannot last long.129 Seventeenth-century political theory 
focused on opportunities (referred to at the time as “coups d’état”)130 and 
justified the need to concentrate power in the state mainly from this point 
of view. Finally, science, too, relaxed its assertion of certainty lying in the 
nature of objects and in cognition itself (initially indispensable in holding 
its own against religion) to find truth only in the free market of inductive 
inference, falsification experiments, and constructions.
The striking parallel development in these semantic innovations 
points to a link with functional differentiation. What interests us in the 
present context is only that in this manner selection is uncoupled from any 
prospects of stabilization, that a boundary is thus once again drawn, a di-
viding line between selection and stabilization functions.
It is obvious that this socially (and, as it later proves, religiously) 
ruthless broadening and narrowing of scope for selection can provide an 
answer to the problem that the enormous increase in possibilities for varia-
tion has caused. If deviations occur in the ambit of such media, they have 
no particular difficulty in noting and imposing them—provided that they 
satisfy the special conditions that apply for the medium in question. A new 
invention is introduced—for instance, the printing press—and money is 

Evolution    
already available for calculating the costs and benefits of a business pro-
gram to be put into effect with this invention where economically feasible. 
Money can offer resistance only in quantity, but not, for instance, by in-
tervening in the printing process. Or a new research question is launched, 
and tried and tested techniques are available that alone decide the extent to 
which results can be provided in the form of true or untrue propositions. 
Or one has read novels and knows what love is about. All that is then lack-
ing is a person around whom the emotion can crystallize.
Whereas religion places its hopes in the unity of selection criteria 
and, where necessary, is willing to pay for it with stagnation, the develop-
ment of societal complexity under the regime of symbolically generalized 
communication media depends on which media are more suitable than 
others. Considerable disbalances must accordingly be expected. It cannot 
at any rate be assumed that the system of society develops evenly in all 
areas, that every possible meaning is unfolded sooner or later, and that 
all needs and interests are finally satisfied at a higher level. Such illusions 
of a total ascendency of “humanity” prevailed in the eighteenth century 
and, if we count “communism,” even in the nineteenth. We have in the 
meantime bid farewell to these notions, which have no successors. Certain 
functional areas must be expected to solve their selection problem more 
successfully than others, to adapt more rapidly to the tempo of modern so-
cieties or to accumulate achievements better than others.131 The outcome 
is the dominance of technology or of money or of special rationalities that 
are not fully satisfying.
Despite all the semantic differences between religion and symboli-
cally generalized media, they do appear to have something in common. 
In both domains, selection establishes itself at the level of second-order 
­observation. Religion observes God as observer of humankind, symboli-
cally generalized communication media direct the observing of other ob-
servers, for instance, in the markets of the economic system or in the field 
of knowledge assertions. The selection arrangements now needed distance 
themselves from the immediacy of variation events as an observer who ob-
serves what other observers observe. But if this is the technique employed 
in reaction to increasing complexity, it can, if successfully practiced, be ex-
pected to dissolve direct trust in reality. How, then, can the outcome of se-
lection obtain stable form?

 
  Evolution
6. The Restabilization of Systems
As long as selection events are oriented on determined, only tem-
porarily disturbed states, it does not make much sense to speak of a third 
evolutionary function. Selection itself ensures stability, and if it fails to do 
so (as is to be expected in a world determined by corruption or sin), selec-
tion has to be repeated over and again and as well as possible. The early 
modern state had still been described in the light of this task, and “peace” 
was the concept recommending it.132 For where peace is secured, it can be 
left to each individual to safeguard his spiritual welfare and earthly liveli-
hood. In the evolution-theoretical literature, too, selection and stabiliza-
tion are often combined in a single concept. The talk is then of “selective 
retention” or “stabilizing selection.”133 This was plausible as long as biol-
ogy, not to mention economic theory, understood selection to be natural 
selection by the environment and the outcome to be “optimal fit.” Stabil-
ity was described as “equilibrium,” which used homeostatic mechanisms to 
balance out disturbances and reestablish a state of equilibrium. However, 
this required a fixed equilibrium point not displaced by any deviations that 
might occur. On condition that the environment itself did not change, this 
then needed no further provision for stabilization after structural change. 
This view is now hardly upheld.134 It is dynamic systems that are amenable 
to evolution, systems far from being in equilibrium and that can repro-
duce. This is all the more true if we are obliged to abandon this premise, 
if we understand selection (as we do) to be a purely internal process. For 
what guarantees the assumption that only the prospect of stability can suc-
cessfully select? And, above all, what guarantees this in a society that de-
scribes itself in relation to a difference between past and future states and 
has to cope daily with the experience of very rapid structural change? Does 
not today’s society orient its selections only on what appears to be useful at 
the moment or temporarily?135
For living beings, the function of restabilization is performed by the 
formation of populations—population being understood in this context 
as the reproductive isolation of a gene pool that can accept variations to 
a limited extent and include them in reproduction. Each population can 
produce offspring only within itself, snakes and cats cannot produce snats. 
The Lamarckist thesis of the heritability of acquired characteristics is con-
sidered to have been refuted. This is what the closure of the population (in 

Evolution    
the strict systems-theoretical sense) is based on, as well as on the closure of 
its strong ecological autonomy (= stability). Very few ecological factors still 
intervene, namely, only those that can inhibit reproduction.
Current theorizing on societal evolution has produced few ideas for 
describing the restabilization function more precisely. Without any pro-
found awareness of the problem, some authors rely on the normal con-
tinuity of facts and inventories,136 others rely on the nineteenth-century 
distinction between mind and matter and explain stability in terms of cul-
tural transmission and heredity.137 Here, too, the lack of a sufficiently elab-
orated systems-theoretical conceptuality is apparent; for stability can best 
be determined with regard to systems.
We assume that the selection process already leads to the formation 
of structures. A further problem can therefore lie only in the relation of 
structures to systems whose autopoietic operations take place indepen-
dently of structures. It should also be considered that both positive and 
negative selections can cause a restabilization problem, which accordingly 
reacts to selection per se. This is obvious in the case of positive selections 
that change structures. Innovated structures have to be adapted to the sys-
tem and must be compatible with its environmental conditions without 
advance knowledge (upon selection) of whether and how this can be man-
aged. In 1789, unrest in Paris was observed as “revolution” and described 
with a concept especially modified for the purpose. The consequences 
could be neither stopped nor controlled, and can probably best be de-
scribed as a hundred years of failed follow-up revolutions, which, however, 
succeeded in transforming the French political system into a representa-
tive democracy. Codification of law, the abandonment of the economy to 
effectual intrasystemic forces, secularization in the religious field, privati-
zation of the great families were also compensatory developments that can 
be understood as restabilizing revolutionary innovations.
But also where revolution selects negatively, where rejection prevails 
as it did in Prussia, restabilization is necessary, for example, in the sense 
of the Kulturstaat program for schools and universities. To put it in more 
general terms, variations can disappear into the unseen, but selections are 
normally retained by the system’s memory, and one has to cope with the 
knowledge that something possible has not been realized. Conservational 
tendencies can thus be described and criticized as conservative ideology.138 
In these cases, too, (negative) selection does not yet decide that and how 

 
  Evolution
the system can adapt to itself and to its environment (e.g., to the expecta-
tions of individuals). It may well be that the innovative impact of a rejected 
innovation is much greater in the long run than the effect of an innovation 
that is realized—to the advantage or disadvantage of the system.
At any rate, the term “restabilization” refers to sequences of building 
structural changes into a system whose operations are structurally deter-
mined; and it takes into account that this also takes place through varia-
tions and selections, but always through operations of the system itself. In 
each case, selection, whether positive or negative, leads to an increase in the 
complexity of the system, to which the system has to react by restabilizing.
Such problems of structural compatibility (or “structural contradic-
tions”) are now the daily fare of sociologists, and it is therefore surpris-
ing that they have not received due attention.139 System formation itself 
helps reduce problems of structural compatibility. It produces form, that is, 
boundaries on the inner side of which reduced complexity and a high de-
gree of indifference toward the outer side can be gained. Incompatibilities 
can then be externalized—by blaming them on someone or by attributing 
them to God and entrusting them to the mystery of God. In this func-
tional position, we often find specific institutional, indeed, organizational, 
inventions. For instance, banks serve the evolutionary restabilization of the 
money economy, which had dissolved the old maxim of reciprocity. And 
the modern “state” serves to restabilize long prepared political centraliza-
tion. This trick of differentiation in already differentiated systems can be 
repeated, so that evolution leads to ever more contingent (and thus im-
probable) system formations in order to keep the burden of structural in-
compatibilities as light as possible and to distribute them among various 
systems. The cost, however, is structural incompatibilities among systems. 
This initially occurs in the relatively clear form of town/country differentia-
tion and stratification, which help to legitimize this very process. Under to-
day’s functional differentiation regime, the problem assumes more drastic 
forms, and the overall system of society can then only register that this is so.
The function of evolutionary restabilization, like the formation of 
populations of living beings, is therefore subject to historical specification. 
It makes use of system differentiation, albeit with considerable residual 
problems, and develops solutions that vary depending on the dominant 
differentiation form. Whereas the cumulative deposition of more and more 
structures and the repetition of system formation in systems led to in-

Evolution    
creasing form binding,140 a change in forms of system differentiation, thus 
through evolutionary transition from segmentary differentiation to center/
periphery- differentiation, to stratification, and eventually to functional dif-
ferentiation, can provide new latitude for dissolving and recombining such 
forms, giving chances for new structures of more favorable complexity. This 
is also apparent in the parallel form changes in religion (religio = bind).
Externalization can naturally never be the final solution to a prob-
lem. Problems return in altered form in relations between system and en-
vironment. We can study this in the ecological problems in which modern 
society has become involved, but also in intrasocietal problems, for exam-
ple, discussion of the now dubious “externalization of costs” through the 
money economy. It is therefore worth taking a closer look at how the pro-
cess of restabilization proceeds in building new structures into the fabric 
of existing structures.
Here, too, the system benefits from already reduced complexity. 
Structural contradictions become apparent at certain points, for instance, 
in the late Middle Ages in the growing dependence of the nobility on 
money or in the age of the welfare state where politics becomes depen-
dent on the successful operation of the economy, being able to attain suc-
cess in its own right only by withdrawing more and more resources from 
economic calculation. “Inflation” is then the consequence of externalizing 
political conflicts,141 but at the same time a problem for whose permanent 
supervision and continual handling specific skills and tools can be devel-
oped. Innovations are then, as it were, kept under surveillance on the infla-
tion monitor, and we see relatively soon whether things are still in order or 
not. Specific techniques can be found for dealing even with highly gener-
alized problem-distribution mechanisms—for which the money economy 
is notorious—and with a wide range of civilizational diseases. Conditions 
remain confused. In introducing new structures (e.g., automatic data-­
processing in more and more fields of society), we cannot always foresee 
what will happen; and when something does, it is usually too late to with-
draw the innovation. Still, we can always invest in dealing with the re-
sulting problems. Motorized traffic requires liability laws and insurance, 
rescue and ambulance services, specialized accident hospitals, upgraded 
and downgraded (“traffic calming”) streets. Overall, society switches its 
stabilization efforts to reactive procedures. Society has become too com-
plex and too opaque to set stability as an attainable goal.

 
  Evolution
It is no accident that the differentiation of selection criteria that no 
longer offer stability goes hand in hand with transition to the functional 
differentiation of the societal system. Selection and restabilization are sepa-
rated more strongly than ever before. The multifunctional problem-solving 
by family households and morality is broken up and replaced by functional 
specifications. The stability of functional systems and of the organizations, 
professions, and roles differentiated within them on the principle of the 
division of labor is compatible with a wide range of variations and selec-
tions. It is based on the circumstance that a function, once differentiated 
out, can be fulfilled at an advanced level only in the facility provided for 
this purpose. The function itself is the point of reference for the limitation 
of functional equivalents, and for the function itself there is therefore no 
functional equivalent (unless with reference to a more general problem, 
for which the same then applies). Research can, for example, now only be 
carried on “scientifically.” The amateur is no more. When political or eco-
nomic organizations set up research institutes, the operations performed 
there proceed nevertheless in the science system—or they are not research 
institutes but possibly covert advertising organizations or addresses where 
deserving politicians can be put out to pasture. The order of such systems 
is then organized self-substitutively in the sense that their structures can be 
replaced only by other structures with the same function and of the same 
type: theories only by other theories, legislation only by other legislation, 
political platforms only by other political platforms. The stability principle 
this embodies takes the form of demand for a substitute solution. Anyone 
who wants to abolish nuclear power stations consequently faces the ques-
tion of how power is to be generated by other means.
With the shift of the restabilization function to functional systems, 
stability itself becomes a dynamic principle and indirectly a major initia-
tor of variation.142 Under the condition of functional equivalence and the 
net superiority of new forms, functional systems are amenable to change. 
Even if they do not themselves bring innovations into the world, they have 
strong potential for reacting to innovation by innovation. This is increas-
ingly so where organizations form within functional systems which can 
change themselves and their decision-making by means of decisions.143 Al-
ready in the markedly stratificatory order of the Middle Ages, corporations 
such as the Church, monasteries, orders, cities, guilds, and universities as-
sumed innovative functions—initially, because, thanks to their corporate 

Evolution    
stability, they were able as co-residential communities to keep themselves 
outside the estates system. Society was already experimenting with forms 
of dynamic stability, which were not provided for in their differentiation 
form.144 But this very offside position of corporations also meant that their 
innovation potential was limited to themselves and that in the transition 
to modernity, they tended to be registered as rigid and obdurate. The order 
of estates and corporations was replaced more and more by the order of 
organizations within functional systems; and it was this turn of events that 
gave the primary societal subsystems themselves the possibility of develop-
ing conditioned dynamic stability.
In the course of this stage of evolution, functional systems switch their 
mode of selection to essentially unstable criteria. Selection can no longer be 
grounded in the quality of what is selected, but only in the criteria of selec-
tion. Reasons of state are invoked to allow politics to bow to situational con-
straints and let stable norms of morality or natural law fall by the wayside. 
The orientation of the economy on profit allows the continuous adaptation 
of production to market conditions. Any balance lies in a now only mathe-
matical theory of equilibrium. The notion that love is a passion abandons in-
timate relationships to their own, at all events finite, temporal development. 
Balance lies in the assumption that love leads to marriage, but that this path 
can unfortunately not be taken by anyone who is already married. Since the 
second half of the eighteenth century, one has spoken of style to describe a 
both factual-formal and temporal unity, a unity that itself contains points 
of departure for possible deviations, which are allowed provided they suc-
ceed as works of art. Law now finds its validity principle in positivity, with 
the result that other decisions can bring other law into force. In early mod-
ern times, the same destabilization of criteria also shows itself in religion, 
thus depriving it of the possibility of offering other systems aids to stabiliza-
tion. The medium of religion lies in the relationship between its boundary 
identities God and the soul. In Christianity, it could be elaborated as belief 
in revealed truths on the basis of biblical texts and glossed through the in-
stitutional order of the Church, through confession, moral casuistry, and so 
on. However, since the late Middle Ages, with its theological controversies, 
and since the ever stronger individualization of the soul (individuality = 
self-reference), the possibilities of forming forms in this medium have been 
problematic. Specifically, this means that the conditions for salvation of the 
soul become a problem to which the texts of tradition no longer provide a 

 
  Evolution
satisfactory answer. Neither the confidence conveyed by the Church, with 
its administration of grace , nor the life counseling offered by the Jesuits suf-
fices, neither the invocation of faith (sola fides) nor the certainty that one 
hoped to find in seeking salvation by one’s own efforts. Selection criteria, 
that is, the programs for programming coded functional systems, are geared 
throughout to instability, and this means that new “inviolate levels” have to 
be inserted—semantically in the form of the nineteenth-century conceptu-
ality of value, structurally in the form of the autopoietic autonomy of func-
tional systems.
Such immanent but open-ended safeguarding of stability manages 
without certainty about the world. Nor does it require reference to a de-
scription of society. Only function-related packages of alternatives are dif-
ferentiated; all-too-abstract problem formulations prove ineffective because 
not informative enough for assessing the extent of change in the process 
of ongoing restabilization. What is striking from an evolution-­theoretical 
point of view is that functional systems are geared to variation in order to 
stabilize, so that the stabilization mechanism also operates as an engine of 
evolutionary variation.145 This accelerates societal evolution to an unprec-
edented extent. As in a short circuit, stabilization and variation appear to 
coincide. Only thus could selection criteria be chosen that do without any 
commitment to a morality binding on society as a whole or to consider-
ations of stability; and only thus could a seriously posited semantics con-
ceive of and welcome innovation, critique, change, and hence variation 
as such free of deviation. The opponents of society benefit not least of all 
from society encouraging itself in this historically unprecedented manner. 
The result is an unusually high frequency of change in the structures of the 
societal system perceptible within the lifetime of individuals. “We need an 
annual supplement to the Decalogue,” groaned Edward A. Ross.146 This 
fits the assumption in evolution theory that the extent to which variation, 
selection, and restabilization are differentiated correlates with the tempo 
of evolutionary change.
After all this, the concept of system stability needs to be redefined. 
Recognition of structural contradictions and the concept of dynamic sta-
bility were steps in this direction. Over and above this, however, it is ques-
tionable whether stability can be described at all in terms of a bivalent 
logic such that stable relates to unstable the way A relates to non-A. Self-­
referential systems are always so constructed that they provide options 

Evolution    
whose alternatives are also available and whose unity must therefore be de-
scribed as paradoxical. And only because this is so can changes be set off 
from without. Liquid water contains within itself the possibility of freez-
ing into ice or evaporating; and only because of this can external changes 
in temperature cause these effects. The form of communication offers the 
possibility of reacting to meaning proposals by accepting or rejecting them; 
and only because this is so can external changes affect society through the 
states of consciousness of psychic systems. This does not amount to a dia-
lectical theory positing that, on account of the logical instability of its self-
generated internal contradictions, a system works on synthesizing them 
itself. Evolution rather leads to systems in which every internal operation 
realizes something determinate at the cost of something else, thus making 
it possible to “cross” the internal boundaries of the distinctions used if the 
occasion or opportunity to do so arises.
In describing modern, functionally differentiated society, this can no 
longer be left out of account, because it concerns not only the external 
relations of the societal system but also its internal relations. Magoroh 
Maruyama is therefore perhaps right in assuming a quite new, nonstation-
ary situation. In the past, too, he claims, there had been both impercep-
tible change as well as occasional sudden and radical change, but always 
from one stationary state to another. Societies were therefore always able 
to describe themselves as stationary and to accept a corresponding episte-
mology of constant order. Only the transition to modern society effected 
a “metatransition,” a transition from a stationary state to a nonstationary 
state; and an appropriate epistemology was only now developing.147 The 
distinction between various forms of system differentiation in combina-
tion with the theory of the evolutionary differentiation of evolutionary 
functions could offer an explanation.
This description is, however, still very one-sided. The other side to it 
is the conservatism of this very society. The methodology of planning re-
active changes—let alone freely chosen, purposive planning—fails to keep 
pace. In decision theory, only “bounded rationality” is still in demand. 
Methodology becomes a brake, develops uncertainty, and complexity is 
defined—and practiced—as a lack of information. Inasmuch as the chan-
neling of restabilization lies in the hands of organizations, that is, operates 
by decision and has to be secured against “postdecisional regret,”148 inno-
vation faces resistance. Meaning is established retrospectively after action 

 
  Evolution
has been taken and decisions made.149 But, for better or for worse, society 
does not evolve at the level of its organizations.
The outcome is an unusual, unique case for evolution theory. Al-
though evolution has never exhausted the possibilities of its basal substra-
tum—this holds for proteins, for photosynthesis, for meaning, and for 
language—the result has always been the diversification of structurally de-
termined systems. The fullness of being lies in the multitude of realized 
possibilities. Societal evolution has produced innumerable tribal societ-
ies. Depending on how one counts, there are some twenty to thirty ex-
amples of advanced civilizations. In contrast, there is only a single case of 
a functionally differentiated society. Thus evolution in only one case? This 
appears to amount to forgoing all redundancies and the avoidance of all 
safeguards. If this society no longer exists, there will be no others—unless 
new forms emerge from within it. We shall have to examine the possibili-
ties of intrasocietal evolution,150 but this alone is clearly not an adequate 
answer to the question posed. The answer can be found only in this soci-
ety itself, for example, in its ability to take the pace, to find replacements 
for failures, to capitalize contingency reserves, and, above all, to exert a so-
cializing influence with these requirements and to make the consciousness 
systems of human beings acquainted with these matters. For it is all too 
understandable if under such circumstances people accustomed to other 
things in a long-living culture become nervous.
7. Differentiation of Variation, Selection,  
and Restabilization
As I have sought to show, societal evolution requires and realizes a dif-
ferentiation of evolutionary functions, which means to say their realization 
through various circumstances. In the course of evolution, and with grow-
ing differentiation of evolutionary functions, the separation problem shifts. 
In segmentary societies without writing, it must have been difficult to sepa-
rate variation from selection, for face-to-face interaction was the only form 
of system available for communication and the segmentary form of system 
differentiation ensured that similar conditions could be assumed everywhere 
in the intrasocietal environment. In highly cultivated societies, both writing 
and differentiation on the basis of inequality facilitate this primary process of 
separation. However, this very circumstance makes it difficult to distinguish 

Evolution    
selection from restabilization. Selections are understood as answers to distur-
bances and as restoration of a state of rest, a stable state of society. If a divid-
ing line is drawn between selection and restabilization, and this enables the 
transition to a primarily functional differentiation, the problem shifts anew. 
Now, as we have seen, it becomes difficult to distinguish between restabiliza-
tion and variation. The forms of societal differentiation clearly correspond to 
priority problems in separating evolutionary functions.
The coming into being of distinct forms of intrasocietal system dif-
ferentiation is thus a result of evolution. Differentiation forms are them-
selves evolutionary advances. On the other hand, they have an effect on 
evolution itself inasmuch as they have specific difficulties in establishing a 
separation between evolutionary mechanisms. Differentiation forms dif-
fer in the extent of structural complexity that makes them possible, and 
in the semantics with which they react to the associated problems. This 
affects the possibilities of separating evolutionary mechanisms institu-
tionally. Highly cultivated societies that rely on center/periphery differ-
entiation, for example, can already formulate and apply criteria; but they 
have to defend the inequalities built into them and fend off unrest, and 
therefore need a stability-focused semantics to guide selection. Only under 
the regime of functional differentiation do selection criteria arise that have 
a destabilizing effect. But then the difference between stabilization and 
variation collapses, for stability now has to be grounded primarily in flex-
ibility, changeability, decidability. With these shifts in the transition from 
one differentiation form to another, the frequency of structural changes 
also changes, along with the tempo of evolution. Time itself seems to pass 
more quickly.
These considerations alone show that the separation and (chance) re-
connection of evolutionary functions depend neither on laws of nature nor 
on the necessities of a dialectical process.151 There is no eternal world order 
that provides for this to happen. Evolution is due to evolution.152 It makes 
itself possible by developing the conditions for the differentiation of its 
mechanisms. How everything began, we must leave to the “big bang” the-
ory or like myths to explain. For all later onset points of evolution, ­system/
environment differences can always be presupposed and hence the multi-
plication mechanism that allows only such systems to emerge that can ad-
just to the mix of phenomena they can construe as disorder or order, as 
chance or necessity, as expectable or irritating, and thus also as variation, 

 
  Evolution
which triggers pressure for selection. The theory of self-referential evolu-
tion thus no longer places the “reason” for what happens at the beginning 
(archē, principium). It replaces this traditional way of explaining things by 
a difference-theoretical one, namely, specification of the difference of evo-
lutionary functions and the optimal localization of special conditions for 
their separation in the empirical reality of evolving systems. In this way, 
evolution theory generates a practically endless research program for his-
torical studies.
If evolution is not a process and if it requires circularity of function, 
theory abstracts from time. However, there can be no doubt that evolu-
tion takes place in time. This means not only that structural change can 
be dated—by reference to longer or shorter periods of time. It takes place 
not only in time but also uses historical situations that arise from evolu-
tion itself, and that are possibly unique or manifest a certain typicality 
that makes a multiple emergence of evolutionary advances probable—the 
eye, the last will and testament, and so forth. Such situations offer both 
opportunities and restrictions; they offer possibilities for selection whose 
reproduction, however, is possible only under certain conditions. Preadap-
tive advances, evolutionary advances, and history are relevant here. At the 
moment, we note only that evolution theory is not based on a linear con-
cept of time, even if it relies on time measurements for dating, but that the 
time in which structural innovations occur assumes the form of a histori-
cally unique present in which a combination of opportunities and restric-
tions is available; available in combination, for there are no opportunities 
without restrictions, just as there is no variation and selection without sta-
bility. In other words, evolution is possible only in empirical concretion, 
even though evolution theory cannot supply a causal explanation for what 
then changes and appears to be new.
Systems theory provides the same insight. In view of the systemic 
basis of all evolution, in view of the indissoluble link between elemen-
tary operations, structure formation, and operational closure of the sys-
tem delimited against the outside world, the differentiation of evolutionary 
functions cannot mean that causal separation takes place. It does mean, 
however, that the functions variation, selection, and restabilization are not 
coordinated, cannot be adjusted to one another by the evolving system; this 
would mean that only so much varies from the outset as can be selected to 
contribute to “system maintenance.” Forgoing this sort of expedient coor-

Evolution    
dination means that from the point of view of the system, it is by chance 
that variations lead to positive or negative selection, and that it is also a 
matter of chance whether and how these selections, which apply their own 
criteria, can be stabilized in the system. “Chance” in this connection means 
that the evolving system is uncontrolledly responsive to the environment 
at these inner boundaries. Chance, possibly transient environmental condi-
tions, can have an impact, and in this way the system can, without planning 
to do so, use opportunities to carry out structural changes in a communi-
catively plausible manner that would be impossible in other historical sit-
uations. Thus the introduction of writing produced new possibilities and 
gave rise to new problems for the existing difference between competent 
and incompetent roles in dealing with sacred matters—for instance, that of 
consolidating a tradition held to be holy. Thus, it probably made a differ-
ence for the development of talmudic Judaism and how it handled inter-
pretation of Holy Scripture that the political unity of the Jewish people had 
been destroyed, that no discriminating political support and stabilization 
of theological controversies, as in the case of Islam and Christianity, were 
to be expected. Thus, the regional and political segmentation of Europe 
(the failure of the imperial idea in the face of resistance from the Church in 
the eleventh and twelfth centuries) produced an abundance of differential 
progress in individual regions, which served to experiment with progress, 
providing ­models for other regions in deciding their path to functional dif-
ferentiation. Thus, there was a nation-state in France at a very early stage, 
but a literature on the theory of art developed only after the establishment 
of the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture (1648), both, it should 
be noted, on the Italian model. These considerations explode the classical 
theoretic distinction between ­endogenously and exogenously induced evo-
lution, which is untenable anyway from a systems-theoretical point of view. 
It has to be replaced by a more complex theory, namely, by the hypothesis 
that, in differentiating evolutionary functions, an evolving system will ac-
cept more external influences, will react more to historical situations, and 
will therefore evolve faster (but always purely internally).
If it is true that evolution comes about through the separation of its 
functions (through realization of its form), we can conclude that opera-
tionally necessary chance, so to speak, gains a higher degree of organization 
in the course of evolution. It becomes more and more likely that the im-
probable, the chance event, will occur, because the highly complex struc-

 
  Evolution
tures of evolved systems offer more possibilities for deviation and more 
possibilities for coping with deviations.153 It follows that evolution begins 
to speed up as it takes its course. This naturally cannot mean that all sys-
tems or all types of system begin to change more and more rapidly in the 
course of evolution. The lizards alone would protest. It can only mean that 
morphogenetic transformations also occur more rapidly as evolution pro-
ceeds and generate forms that can handle a faster rate of change in the en-
vironment and in the system itself.
At this point at least, evolution theory has to rely on close coop-
eration in research with systems theory. Systems theory would say that 
the greater system complexity (achieved through evolution) is, the more 
probable innovation will be. The necessity of the form variation/selection/­
restabilization corresponds to the necessity of the form system/environ-
ment. The two necessities place chance such that the determinacy of 
variation means nothing for the determinacy of selection and the deter-
minacy of the environment means nothing for the determinacy of the sys-
tem. In other words, evolving systems are structurally determined systems, 
and in higher organizational forms, systems that can establish an inter-
nal representation for externally induced chance. I have spoken of “irrita-
tion.” Hence, the greater tempo of evolution corresponds not, for example, 
to more and more overlap, interlinkage, dedifferentiation at the system 
boundaries but to operational closure and self-organization accompanied 
by increasing irritability.
The thesis that system stabilization is the precondition for variation 
or, in brief, the thesis of the evolution of evolution mediates in the no-
torious controversy between Lamarckism and Darwinism. Be that as it 
may, evolution is based on self-made starting positions, one could say on 
a past added up to make a present, which limits what is possible in each 
case. This also holds for the surviving populations of organic evolution. 
Lamarck’s achievement had been in asserting the concept of change in 
structural characteristics set off by environmental changes against the older 
notion of fixed essential characteristics of species and genera.154 Lamarck 
called the most important structural characteristic of all living beings that 
replaced fixed type characteristics irritabilité.155 This characteristic also de-
scribed the relation of the system to the environment. Nothing has since 
been changed. The dispute that later genetics decided, it would appear,156 
against Lamarck was only about the secondary aspect of the heritability of 

Evolution    
acquired characteristics, to which Lamarck devoted hardly any attention. 
In the theory of sociocultural evolution, however, it had never been pos-
sible to renounce “Lamarckism” anyway, because in this field the possibil-
ity of structural change through the interaction of memory and learning 
cannot be disputed.157 As I have noted, organic and sociocultural evolution 
certainly differ in how they invest the functions of variation, selection, and 
restabilization. But for the general theory of evolution, the ongoing circu-
lar interlinkage of these functions and thus the autopoiesis of evolution it-
self are the decisive aspect, which comes to bear when we assume that the 
genetic endowment of the individual organism can no longer be changed 
through its mode of living.
This interim appraisal summing up the inquiry thus far brings us 
back to general evolution theory. At the same time, the overview raises new 
questions, to which we must now turn our attention. One concerns the re-
lation between continuity and discontinuity, in other words, the relation 
between the gradualness and erraticism of evolutionary changes. Both are 
clearly to be found. It obviously makes little sense to start a scientific con-
troversy at this point and to leave it to the professors to take sides. It is a 
further distinction with which the initial paradox of the probability of the 
improbable is resolved and transferred to a research program. The next sec-
tion is devoted to this topic, under the heading of evolutionary advances.
Another question we shall then be examining is the unity or plurality 
of societal evolutions. Since society is only one system, there can be only 
one societal evolution. But this does not exclude that there are other evo-
lutions in the system of society that use society as already ordered intraso-
cietal environment, which thus arise from the evolution of society itself. 
With considerable doubts about the details, I shall be affirming this.
8. Evolutionary Advances
If we wish to describe evolution in general, to define it as the enable-
ment of higher complexity suffices. But this amounts only to an almost 
useless blanket phrase. We must therefore explore more precisely what en-
ables higher complexity and how. This transfers the question to a level on 
which the system is described as a unity (it “is” complex), the level of sys-
tem structures. On this level, too, we need a concept that can indicate the 
result of evolution, a concept for a structural arrangement markedly supe-

 
  Evolution
rior to functional equivalents. Consider the eye or money, the opposable 
thumb or telecommunication. Consolidated gains of this sort, which are 
more compatible than others with complex conditions, I call evolutionary 
advances.158
That there are better and less good solutions has to do with the prob-
lem of complexity. From a purely functional point of view, the solutions 
are after all “equivalent.” There are two different levels of assessment to 
the concept of evolutionary achievement, and neither presupposes abso-
lute validity.159 A solution must be suitable. Writing, for example, must 
be suitable not only for recording purposes but also for communication. 
The suitability of a solution depends on the specifications of the problem 
(with respect to writing, for example: suitable for all communication, easy 
to learn, phonetically autonomous, readable without great demands on 
interpretation). Beside this level of assessment, there is that of evolution-
ary advantageousness. Here it is a matter of the relation to the complexity 
of the system that accepts and practices the evolutionary advance. From 
this point of view, advances reduce complexity in order to organize greater 
complexity on the basis of restriction. Thus a road network reduces pos-
sibilities for movement to enable easier and faster movement and hence 
increase the options for movement concretely available. Enhancement by 
reducing complexity: evolutionary advances choose reductions that are 
compatible with greater complexity, indeed, often making it possible in 
the first place (and often only very gradually). The formula is so general 
that it offers many potential applications, for instance, greater complexity 
of the environment accessible to the system or greater complexity of the 
system itself and greater independence (less integration) or more varied 
options for intervention.160 Above all, however, an increase in complexity 
means an increase in combinatorial options, typically bringing together 
various societal functions. This can contribute to the rapid stabilization 
of such advances where they have become visible and usable. In any case, 
by complexity, I mean a complexity situation that is historically relative. 
Keeping to our example, a road network makes more complexity available 
by improving possibilities for movement and integrating long-distance 
traffic into the general complexity network of society. In this regard, there 
are strategically crucial evolutionary advances that enable greater complex-
ity in very many areas of society. Examples are agriculture, writing, the 
printing press, telecommunications.

Evolution    
There are no clear causes for any evolutionary advance, not even for 
the genesis of agriculture. A wide range of initial situations can have an 
“equifinal” effect favoring form finding. This presupposes that there are 
limited possibilities in evolution for realizing gains in complexity.161 This 
is clearly due to the peculiar combination of renunciation and gain, of re-
duction of complexity to build up complexity. This gives direction to evo-
lution in the sense of increasing complexity, although at the same time 
societies without certain evolutionary advances may very well survive (i.e., 
not succumb to unsolved problems).
This complicated concept of evolutionary achievement takes account 
of criticism leveled at a purely functionalistic concept of evolution. Suit-
ability is not the sole “cause,” as it were, of better solutions to problems 
being gradually found and asserting themselves. In relation to function, 
there is, after all, always an abundance of possible solutions. It is the sur-
rounding complexity that narrows the choice to those that are more advan-
tageous than others. And the complexity already attained determines the 
form in which problems present themselves for which alternative solutions 
come under consideration. Suitable structures are fixed in the form of evo-
lutionary advances, and to the extent that independent gains in complexity 
are realized, the advance is built in irreversibly. It can no longer be given up 
without catastrophic effect.
Evolutionary advances accordingly do not come about because they 
are suitable for solving certain problems. The problems arise with the ad-
vances. Only when there is magic does one see what it can be used for. 
Only when municipal offices are established to get rid of kings does filling 
them have to be politicized and do conditions have to be created that will 
later be celebrated as “democracy.” The concept therefore does not contain 
the notion of a search for ever better solutions to problems. It rather also 
explains that societal evolution can be left with not very suitable or quite 
unsuitable achievements if they satisfy the level of aspiration set with them 
or, as in the case of magic, perform functions that are not in view at all.162
A number of known facts can be better explained in this way than by 
teleological theories (or functionalistic theories constructed on teleological 
lines). We need not dispute that solutions to problems can be purposively 
sought. But far-reaching evolutionary advances mostly do not come about 
in this manner.163 Discoveries are often made, evolutionary advances often 
develop under false or peculiar perspectives (situational perspectives offer-

 
  Evolution
ing little prospect of complexity).164 One example, mentioned above,165 is 
the origin of Chinese script in the complex interpretation patterns of div-
ination practices. In another example, money had existed in other forms 
(e.g., bookkeeping tallies) long before coinage developed in the context of 
the domestic economies of emporia and palaces. Marking the metal was 
initially intended only to indicate ownership—and not, for instance, to 
affirm an official political or religious guarantee of value. But once these 
proto­coins began to circulate outside the household to which they be-
longed and where they could be used—and, moreover, small change came 
to be needed—within a few decades, other forms of coinage followed, 
which had to take on new functions, and above all, to guarantee value. The 
suddenness of the breakthrough, which revolutionized all business and 
even political forms (e.g., the transition to the tyrannis), is impressive.166 
Another example: the invention of the synallagmatic contract presupposes 
acquaintance with reciprocity relations, but replaces the institutionaliza-
tion of duties of gratitude by the legal institution of the synallagma as the 
basis for the incurrence of obligations actionable in the case of default 
in performance, and which can also be enforced against third persons. 
The contract is suitable for a law of transactions with a regionally broader 
reach, and it made it possible (in Roman civil law and again in the devel-
opment of European law in the eleventh and twelfth centuries) to separate 
legal protection by criminal law and by civil law. To begin with, action 
under the terms of a contract was allowed in only a few, strictly defined 
cases; then the innovation was, as it were, released on parole and rapidly 
expanded from the late Middle Ages on.
It is often the case that formulations, and thus legitimation, are found 
only after the corresponding practices have been successfully introduced 
and have become usual. Innovation is facilitated by nameless introduction. 
We can thus speak of a political concept of “public opinion” only from 
the second half of the eighteenth century on, and its spread throughout 
­Europe only after the French Revolution. But the real innovation lay in the 
use of the printing press for political pamphlets or, in seventeenth-century 
England, for the dissemination of petitions addressed to Parliament. For 
this alone made it clear that not only the addressee was being spoken to, 
and that handling matters confidentially was out of the question.
Evolutionary advances tend to reinforce the results of evolution. 
They cannot be got rid of. New possibilities for dealing with complex-

Evolution    
ity are gained and other societal institutions adapt to them. Eliminating 
them would have far-reaching, destructive effects and is hence as good as 
excluded. At this level, innovations have to be able to step in as functional 
equivalents, and this typically takes place, not in the form of complete 
substitution, but rather as supplementation and specialization—as when 
banknotes came to be used alongside coins, and then instead of banknotes, 
money guaranteed by the state and bank accounts.
Important improvements to complexity arrangements in systems 
often originate in the need to cope in a changing environment. In the case 
of the alphabet, transcription of the entire cultural heritage appears to have 
been initiated by efforts to improve mnemonic techniques for business 
purposes, and then also for oral texts, perhaps in competition among a 
multitude of singers and poets. Such processes are particularly likely where 
restrictions offer chances of complexity, because at the moment of innova-
tion, there is no foreseeing what can be done with it, so that there must be 
other grounds, which can later cease to apply. In such cases, we therefore 
typically find the emergent structure suitable for several functions, which 
need not be realized at the same time.167 Evolution accordingly benefits 
from the possibility of realizing multifunctionality sequentially, and thus 
of exploiting it for functional specification. An already known structure is 
then only “co-opted” in a later context.168
Even in the evolution of living systems, such a switch of identical 
characteristics from one adaptation context to another is typical rather 
than rare. The same is true of societal evolution. Here, too, it appears to be 
almost the norm that the emergence of evolutionary advances is favored, 
indeed enabled in the first place by predevelopments, by “pre­adaptive 
advances.”169 Major achievements in all communication media offer ex-
amples. But the same is also to be found in many details. The guilds, so 
important for adapting the household economy to municipal or to terri-
torial politics, came into being as religious fraternities and only later as-
sumed this mediating function.170 As long as family formation took place 
in a system of stratification, the semantics of passionate love could initially 
be developed only for extramarital relations. It was only when partners 
could be freely chosen—a development favored in Europe by the older 
idea of founding a new family in each generation, by the claim to eco-
nomic autonomy (substitutable by approval of the liege lord), and by an 
above-­average marrying age—that the notion of sexually based love could 

 
  Evolution
be given the final function of providing a basis for marriage. An arrange-
ment favorable to complexity was thus permitted to arise, and it was only 
later, when it came to be exploited to a more complex end, that was it dis-
covered what it was suitable for. This concretizes J. B. S. Haldane’s some-
what vague assertion that “every now and then an evolutionary advance is 
rewarded by a large increase in numbers.”171
The interpretation and also the invention of traditions often serve in 
the unrecognized introduction of innovations.172 Perhaps the most famous 
example is the Protestant Reformation. Another would be the abolition of 
manorial jurisdiction in France on the grounds of the “abuse” of a right 
falling under the “sovereignty” of the king. Innovation is thus spared hav-
ing to be legitimated and enforced as such. It appears in the guise of a past 
it belongs to.
Evolutionary advances can thus be introduced as if on a trial basis 
and mostly without any possibility of assessing their implications; and this 
is in keeping with the premise of evolution theory that the coordination of 
variation, selection, and stabilization has to be left to a random factor. If 
we examine the context for the emergence of evolutionary advances more 
closely, we discover further conditions. They include the “law of limited 
possibilities.”173 Only when the field of suitabilities that come into ques-
tion is too limited can we distinguish better solutions from less useful ones. 
Theoretically, this means that evolutionary advances are to be expected 
only in the context of resultant structural problems—and not simply from 
the point of view of better possibilities for agreement or better complexity 
reductions as such. The restrictions this implies are compensated to a cer-
tain degree by the possibility of “equifinal” developments.174 One and the 
same achievement can develop on the basis of differing initial situations. 
For if the solution is both short on alternatives and compatible with many 
different situations, and can hence be used as a generalized institution, it is 
not improbable that it will be found frequently and therefore able survive 
any failure of supporting systems.
Thanks to this concurrence of limited possible solutions with equi-
finality, advances in the field of societal evolution are amenable to diffu-
sion. They can exceed their context of origin and be copied elsewhere. This 
phenomenon of diffusion has wrongly been played off against evolution 
theory. Diffusion presupposes evolution and relates only to evolutionary ad-
vances, which for their part can then become important for the differentia-

Evolution    
tion of evolutionary functions (e.g., writing). It cannot be overlooked that 
evolutionary advances often acquire their final form and prominence only 
through diffusion. In the process of diffusion, they are empirically tested, 
refined, and generalized. Thus important political notions of the Greeks like 
homonoia and democracy appear to have originated in the course of found-
ing colonies, hence in the copying of urban patterns.175 This state of affairs is 
even more obvious in the development of phonetic scripts through constant 
copying and adaptation to other languages. It may well be that the discov-
ery of original forms, purely historical derivations, for example, the search 
for original, autochthonous state-building, yields little because the advance 
acquired the form in which it provided the basis for further evolution only 
during diffusion.
It is an indispensable prerequisite for all this that the social system be 
already sufficiently complex to provide for the interruption of inter­dependence 
between various solutions and thus to enable temporal shifts. This allows con-
ditions that have just occurred historically to be used and later decoupled as 
superfluous. In such an event, evolutionary advances are relative consolida-
tions, which prove their worth with regard to structure-dependent problems 
provided they are constant.
The concept of evolutionary advances has nothing to say about the 
relative weight of the corresponding arrangements. They include agricul-
ture, but also the fountain pen, which obviates the need for an inkwell; 
the potter’s wheel; the extension of family consciousness by the invention 
of grandfathers; the computer; purgatory, to tide us over the period until 
the Final Judgment; and the printing press, not to mention pagination 
(already introduced), which made possible the subject index and easier 
references in books. The concept alone provides no overall view. We can 
nonetheless ask whether there are such things as “epoch-making” advances 
and, if so, what characterizes them.
Changes in certain structures have far-reaching, “catastrophic” effects 
on the complexity of the societal system. These structures are the dissemi-
nation media of communication (extended by writing, then the printing 
press, and now telecommunication and electronic data processing) and the 
forms of system differentiation (segmentation, center/periphery differenti-
ation, stratification, functional differentiation). Taken alone, each of these 
distinctions provides no epochal structure of world history. Although cer-
tain irreversible sequences can be discerned (no printing press before the 

 
  Evolution
invention of writing, no direct transition from segmentation to functional 
differentiation), the distinctions alone do not impose a specific course of 
events. There can indeed be evolutionary advances that set off dramatic 
changes in form—for instance, when, in a society that already knows dif-
ferences in rank, the notion of the equality of families is introduced, thus 
initiating the end of the nobility, with all the advantages of centralized in-
terdependence. Thus, to put it paradoxically, hitherto impossible possibili-
ties arise whose use lifts society gradually onto a level of greater complexity.
If evolutionary advances intervene in these fundamental structures, 
whether of the dissemination media of communication or of system differ-
entiation, and enable transition from one to the other, the observer gains 
the impression of certain formations of society that are clearly distinct 
from one another. In very simplistic terms, he can then distinguish illiter-
ate from literate cultures, or strongly stratified societies from segmentary 
societies, or from modern society, which is based on the operational clo-
sure of functional systems. But since there are two areas of such distinc-
tions, communication media and differentiation forms, epochs can still 
not be clearly demarcated. We can say that modern society begins in the 
fifteenth century with the transition from the large, well-organized work-
shops for manuscript production on the late Middle Ages to the produc-
tion of texts with the aid of the printing press. Or we can say that modern 
society begins in the eighteenth century with observation of the collapse of 
stratification and the new formation of operationally closed functional sys-
tems. The facts and circumstances do not permit any more definite turning 
points. If we want to know how modern society demarcates itself histori-
cally, we have to observe it from a second-order level. We have to describe 
how it describes itself.
9. Technology
If we define evolutionary advances in terms of proving their worth 
under conditions of increasing complexity, they come close to what we 
usually call technology. Evolutionary advances require a certain decoupling 
from given conditioning relations—amour passion, for example, needs to 
be decoupled from family interests. The same applies for technology. We 
can go so far as to take technology (technics, techniques technizability, and 
so on) as the superlative form of evolutionary advances, as giving form to 

Evolution    
what is most important. That romantic love can be compared with tech-
nology, indeed, be placed on the same level of specific special characteris-
tics as technology, is at first surprising, and differences can naturally not 
be denied; but we can take account of these differences through additional 
distinctions, especially distinguishing various communication media.
In describing technology as an evolutionary achievement we reject no-
tions that the “world,” “society,” and “civilization” have themselves become 
technical.176 This is difficult to imagine if it means that only technically 
mediated relations now occur. That the development of technology affects 
what is experienced as world, society, civilization is naturally not to be dis-
puted; but totalizing concepts can be neither conceptually nor empirically 
redeemed. The concept of evolutionary achievement serves us as a bridge.
It is now probably agreed that the evolution of technological achieve-
ments cannot be explained simply as applied science.177 There are many 
other, especially economic, factors in play, and science is often, indeed, 
mostly, not in a position to say how specific technical problems can be 
solved. We often find the reverse to be the case: that specialized fields of 
scientific research owe their initiation to technological developments (steel 
production—metallurgy; computers—computer science). This is not to 
underestimate the contribution of the knowledge that science produces. 
It lies in a “unique combination of opportunities and constraints.”178 It 
also lies in the provision of expert competence that increases awareness of 
problems and alternatives. But this does not yet supply a recipe for techno-
logical developments but only provides an evolutionary chance, a height-
ening of probabilities.
If technical arrangements are preferred in societal evolution, this ap-
pears mainly to be because, although they involve artificial objects, they 
save consensus. What works, works. What proves its worth has proved its 
worth. Agreement does not have to be reached. In coordinating processes, 
technology also saves the always difficult and conflictual coordination of 
human action. Whatever the chance causes of technical inventions, evo-
lution steps in and drives the structural development of society in the 
direction set. That this can also entail risks, and that these risks can be var-
iously assessed, is a late insight, and some would say all too late an insight, 
which can then help only with additional technology.179 Technical cou-
pling divides consensus problems into problems of purpose and problems 
of means and costs. We can then develop relational rationalization strate-

 
  Evolution
gies to examine whether the purpose justifies the effort. The evolution of 
technology follows a structuring of rationality geared to this end, and ra-
tionalization is nothing other than a form of solving still unresolved, so to 
speak, marginal questions of consensus.
But what is technology? A look at the history of the concept shows 
firstly that the problem (and hence the concept) of technology has always 
been determined by counterconcepts, whose task it was to cover what 
technical performances are differentiated from; and whenever denotations 
are determined by counterconcepts, this betrays the presence of an ob-
server, whose interests can be investigated.180 This is particularly the case, 
for example, where technology is defined as a substitute for organs (­Gehlen 
following Kapp).181 In a world still understood in religious and cosmolog-
ical terms, technology was distinguished from nature. In the Greek un-
derstanding of the concept, there are also aspects of violation of a natural 
order, insistence on human ability against a nature coming to be in itself 
and of itself. This was religiously deproblematized through concepts of 
progress. Since that time, technology has been regarded as something “ar-
tificial.”182 In Christian thinking, the concept of nature was set against a 
different counterconceptuality. Nature was distinguished from grace with 
the possibility of understanding the unity of the distinction as God. This 
set the technology concept free to be developed as imitation of increasingly 
recognizable natural law.
This corresponds with an increasing shift since the late Middle Ages 
from what-questions to how-questions, universally disseminated by print-
ing, itself an achievement celebrated as technology. The beautiful world 
was no longer only the object of religious admiration, with practical prob-
lems of coping. Its manifestations raised the question of how they came 
into being, and how one could produce corresponding effects oneself. In 
the early Renaissance, this shift was first conceived of as an interest in re-
cuperating the knowledge and skills of antiquity. But if we once know how 
something can be produced, we can vary our goals and undertake to pro-
duce new, unprecedented phenomena. Modern science formulates its un-
derstanding of nature in terms of method and experiment; but the theory 
of the art of government also sets out from the question of how power is to 
be gained and how power positions are to be maintained. The technology-
related semantics of imagining and producing, of Vorstellen and Herstellen 
(Heidegger) fully favors the assumption of an externally positioned subject 

Evolution    
who uses technical possibilities from outside without himself functioning 
in the manner of a technostructure.
In early modern times, technology was hence understood as the ap-
plication of knowledge about nature to human ends, almost, indeed, in par-
allel to Divine Creation, or as the copying of the archetypes Creation had 
provided. This made it possible to call for a science of “technology” to deal 
with the subject matter.183 It was this close link between nature and tech-
nology that suggested the now usual opposition drawn between technology 
and humanity. For subjectivist philosophy, for Romanticism, for Husserl’s 
phenomenology, indeed, for Habermas, this opposition is decisive, gener-
ating a technology aversion, a characterization of technology as a necessary 
evil. The warning is that man should not allow his view of himself to be de-
termined by technology; he should rebel against the resulting dependence as 
against domination per se; he should, if he wishes to save his humanity and 
his self-determination, free, “emancipate” himself from an alienation caused 
by technology and domination. Even today, many a complaint is to be heard 
that technology is not sufficiently under control (remarkably, the market is 
left out of account or declared inadequate as a controlling force),184 but criti-
cism from the right or the left has no basis in a clear definition of the prob-
lem. The moves toward technology assessment that have been developing 
for some time now shift the problem, without having solved it, to the future.
Meanwhile, the classical efforts by the humanities and social sciences 
to address the subject of “technology”185 have failed to free themselves from 
this situation.186 They have proceeded either on the assumption of a con-
cept of culture or one of action, and have thus limited and externalized the 
phenomenon of technology to a material substratum. Focusing the concept 
of technology on the use of energy (and energy in a new sense = work)187 
has enhanced the resolution capacity of the conceptuality but has changed 
nothing with respect to the counterconceptuality in relation to human 
concerns. Modern electronic communication technologies, as well, and in 
particular, are based on the clear separation of technical networks from in-
formation and thus on the cultural semantics that is communicated with 
their aid. Research into “artificial intelligence” is concerned with the ma-
nipulation of “symbols,” not with the forming of meaning.
However, there are now increasing signs that this opposition between 
technology and nature or technology and humanity (technology and rea-
son, technology and “life-world,” etc.) is obsolete. If the natural sciences 

 
  Evolution
have themselves dissolved the (observer-independent) concept of nature, 
and technology and nature mingle inseparably and unpredictably in the 
ecological context, it no longer makes any sense to order phenomena in 
terms of the distinction between technology and nature.188 Technology be-
comes nature again, a second nature, because hardly anyone understands 
how it works, and because this understanding can no longer be assumed in 
everyday communication. How (and why) should we distinguish geneti-
cally engineered organisms from others? Only so that we can communi-
cate that we are against them? Henry Adams counted “Niagara Falls, the 
Yellow­stone Geysers, and the whole railway system” among the wonders 
that nineteenth-century America had to offer.189
In other regards, too, technical artifacts are, on the one hand, some-
thing special that is particularly characteristic of modern society, while 
on the other they are achievements that cannot be explained in them-
selves. Numerous detailed studies on technological developments in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries have shown that the discovery of the 
forms that finally imposed themselves was far from obeying a logic of tech-
nology-immanent improvement, but can be explained only in terms of 
responsiveness of the social environment, of demand for and use of the 
technology.190 At the same time, this means that technology does not rule 
over society as an anonymous power, but that society makes itself depen-
dent on technology, in a manner not rationally planned, by becoming in-
volved with it. If, however, life and the survival of humankind depend 
all too clearly on technology (in both a positive and negative, destructive 
sense), it is implausible to place the really human aspect on the other side 
of the distinction that defines the concept of technology. Awareness of the 
problem is changed above all by high-risk high technologies but also by 
the limits to predicting technically supposedly safe performance. This re-
quires safety technologies that can be realized mechanically only to a lim-
ited extent. We therefore need a broader concept of technology not geared 
exclusively to predictability and rationality in this narrow sense. This holds 
a fortiori if we include action formalization of the more general sort, reg-
ulatory technologies, condition programming, calculation technologies, 
and so on. Especially calculation technologies oriented on money make 
the development of the economy unpredictable, even for the immediate 
future. Research aimed at new knowledge, particularly where it addresses 
technical realizations, produces unforeseeable effects. The problem appears 

Evolution    
to be more and more whether and how the typical characteristics of tech-
nology can still and repeatedly be secured in the face of the growing need 
for technology. Or is technology as a form of evolutionary achievement 
coming up against insurmountable limits?191
Looking for a concept that fits this situation and this interest, we 
might consider understanding technology as functioning simplification. It 
may be a matter of causal technology or information-processing technol-
ogy. Causal technologies are not only concerned with recognizing the ef-
fects of causes that somehow occur and that can possibly be foreseen; the 
causes themselves have to be “de-randomized,” removed from chance and 
producible in almost any state of the world.192 For information-processing 
technology, calculations, at any rate, conditional programs, are to be con-
sidered in borderline cases that are redundant to the extent that, given the 
information provided for, we can know what then has to happen. In any 
case, it is a process of effective isolation; the elimination of the rest-of-the-
world; leaving undisputed realities out of account—whether they be other 
causes and effects or other information; hence restrictions that cannot be 
deduced from the reality of the world.193 Functioning can be ascertained if 
the excluded world can be prevented from having an effect on the intended 
result. The decisive distinction that determines the form “technology” is 
now that between controllable and uncontrollable states of affairs. To put 
it in extremely abstract terms, it is a question of the successful reduction 
of complexity. Whatever else might happen, technology supplies the in-
tended results. However, we also know, as noted above,194 that complex-
ity itself can be captured in no reduction, can be represented in no model. 
Even if it works, we must also expect something to be left over. “Success-
ful” reduction thus amounts to harmless ignoring. With this concept of 
technology, we by no means deny that the deployment of technology is sub-
ject to numerous social and cultural conditions. The sociology of technol-
ogy has in recent times demonstrated this in many ways.
A somewhat different but compatible description of technology uses 
the distinction between strict and loose coupling, which I have already 
taken as the basis for the concept of medium. Nowadays (in contrast to 
older notions of “natural law”), we see that the stability of organisms and of 
ecological “equilibrium” requires the avoidance of strict couplings, in other 
words, robustness in absorbing disturbances.195 For technology, in contrast, 
strict coupling is a condition. Hence we see a reformulation of the old prob-

 
  Evolution
lem of relations between nature and technology, and the advantage of (as 
well as the motive for) this new version is to throw light on the problems of 
technical intervention in natural systems and in relations between systems. 
In brief, this suggests that the increase in knowledge about nature can lead 
only to an increase in ignorance about the effects of technical interventions; 
this applies explicitly to the effects of modern medicine.
If technology is geared to strict (as opposed to loose) coupling, the 
material basis on which it works is irrelevant as long as it works. It may in-
volve physical, chemical, biological, neurophysiological, or also conscious 
processes, provided that they are set up in such a way that decisions are not 
constantly required ad interim. Consider, for instance, the link between 
the printing press and reading technology, with its unnoticed, enormously 
fast dovetailing of perception and the mini-actuation of eye movements. 
Reading is a good example of how very much the distinction between mat-
ter and mind or between technology and human being can lead astray. 
The problem is rather how to reintroduce alternatives and hence decision-­
making requirements into an automated process—for example, how to 
bring a reader to notice that he is not understanding what he is reading. A 
technology that is planned and set up to be as trouble-free as possible has 
the problem of coming by disturbances that draw attention to problems 
that are important for the context of functioning. And whenever decision-
making requirements are inserted in technicized processes, strict coupling 
is interrupted by loose coupling.
Technology (always provided that it works) thus makes it possible 
to couple completely heterogeneous elements. A physically actuated signal 
may set off communication. A communication may bring a brain to cause 
levers to be moved. And all this happens in (almost) reliably repeatable man-
ner. Technology therefore operates orthogonally to the operational closure 
of autopoietic systems. This is likely to explain why societal evolution takes 
recourse to technology in order to secure couplings between the societal sys-
tem and its environment to which internal processes of information pro-
cessing and social technization can connect. This does not contradict the 
theorems of the theory of autopoietic systems, for technology, too, can be 
observed and installed only if a system determines which of innumerable el-
ements are to be coupled.196 Technology accordingly provides good evidence 
in support of my initial thesis that operational closure does not mean causal 
isolation, but makes it possible to realize couplings with the environment 

Evolution    
within the system through disposition over intrasystemic elements. And this 
also makes it possible to control the system’s sensitivity to sources of distur-
bance from the environment at the risk of disregarding important matters.
In contrast to the traditional concept of technology oriented on abil-
ity, action, and decision-making, the emphasis is not so much on gaining 
new possibilities and, in the concept of technical rationality, on choos-
ing between alternatives, but on the isolation of such a selective area. The 
world does not only consist of alternatives to be accepted and rejected; it 
is first of all the wilderness of what happens simultaneously—and for this 
reason alone, uncontrollably: other simultaneously real causes and effects, 
other sources of information. Simultaneity is chaos. Superseding this chaos 
therefore always requires distantiation in time and space.197 And before 
any technical forms are developed that can be inserted in this time-space 
(dechaoticized) world, systems have to be formed that take their distance 
from the other realities that they can treat as environment.
At first glance, this concept of technology appears to be too broad. 
For example, impassioned love can hardly be understood as a function-
ing simplification (that is nonetheless exposed to chaos). But, in a sort of 
concurrent thematization, this has always also been perceived; we need 
think only of the Don Juan theme. The concept of technology must only 
be freed of any humanistic counterconceptuality, for this change in the 
concept is to enable new relationships to be seen.198 Various advantages 
are associated with the form of technology. They include expansion of the 
scope of possible options; comparability and repeatability of the same in 
various situations; associated with this: the possibility of gathering experi-
ence, learning, refining, hence of bringing an initial discovery into a form 
that can no longer be improved; the determinability of errors—be they in 
design or in operation; the limitability of input to what is needed, thus 
the planability and rationalizability of resource allocation; and, finally and 
above all, a certain degree of intrasystemic control over external relations 
that the system sees, with the conversion of risks of differentiation into 
risks of technology. Technization therefore combines generalizations and 
specifications in a specific way, namely, for use in widely differing situa-
tions and in often very different purposive contexts with a high measure of 
precision in specifying functional conditions, repair potentiality, replace-
ment requirements. The reach of a technological development—such as 
the computer or laser technology—can then be determined by the extent 

 
  Evolution
of generalization and diversification under existing specifications and con-
ditions of operational integrity.
I shall not speak of the evolution of technology. Technological devel-
opments are oriented on presumable improvements and come about far 
more quickly than is typical for evolution. Think only of the present use of 
genetically modified organisms. Evolution in the strict sense occurs only 
when technological achievements are inserted in a natural or societal envi-
ronment without it being possible to foresee what will happen.
The importance of technology for societal evolution can be explained 
by a very specific relationship between redundancy and variety, which in 
turn influences societal communication.199 Artificial redundancies are cre-
ated (it works or it doesn’t), with subsequent variety. New goals, new values, 
new calculations, new errors become possible. More and more communi-
cation can concern itself with sounding out this specific way of increasing 
redundancy and variation and take inspiration from corresponding suc-
cess. But the assessment of rationality remains tied to precisely this form 
of increase and cannot be projected to macrosocietal rationality. This may 
give repeated cause for criticism of technology, which for its part, however, 
gives an impression of helplessness if society has reasons (e.g., military and 
economic) to prefer the exploration of technological possibilities.
Over the past two centuries, technological development has sped 
up enormously, but above all, the advent of the computer has marked a 
turning point. Nineteenth-century machinery was oriented on energy ef-
ficiency and time-saving. It was based on an extended action schema. This 
drew on the notion of the human body as work energy and on the possi-
bility of accelerating the transport of things and bodies. As has often been 
described, this led in the second half of the nineteenth century to the de-
velopment of machine-based big industry. It has become apparent in re-
cent times that the computer has fundamentally changed this concept. It 
has shifted technology from bodies and things to signs whose meaning 
consists in making other signs accessible.200 The time problem lies no lon-
ger in the need for transport but in the necessity of a sequence of orders 
that are required to make the invisible machine in the computer work and 
make its results visible. On the level of a universal network of machines, 
we then have simultaneity, which, however, has to be dissolved into places 
and points in time by user request. The unambiguity of machine switch-
ing processes is transformed back into the ambiguity (meaningfulness) of 

Evolution    
use contexts. Thus, the old problems of energy and time-saving do not be-
come completely unimportant, but they are now decisive neither for fur-
ther technological development nor for its societal effects.
Mostly but not always in dependence on computers, there are also 
tendencies to use the simplification of technology to build highly complex 
technical systems, which, although constructed, raise difficult problems in 
analyzing and interpreting any disturbances that occur. Since technology 
functions continuously, the consequences of a disturbance often occur at 
quite different points in the system and can cascade. The control of techni-
cized processes cannot then limit itself to correcting defective behavior or 
sorting out defective products; it therefore becomes more difficult to orga-
nize it in the form of hierarchical supervision.201 It needs more intelligence, 
and especially in the event of unexpected incidents, rapidly available intel-
ligence to ward off damage. These problems can be solved neither by means 
of complex control systems, which extremely rarely come to bear, nor by 
calling on higher authorities. From the outset, error tolerance or, where 
risks are involved, redundant safeguards have to be built into systems.
The universal spread and concrete presence of technologies best ex-
plain why there is so much talk today of “innovation.”202 The observa-
tion of functioning technology is an important source of ideas about what 
can be done differently and how. This explains the often noted influence 
of practitioners and clients on technological development, for example. 
When it comes to innovation, even organizations are regarded as func-
tioning technologies. The consolidated past is present as a comprehensible 
present, inspiring consideration of how changes can bring better results. 
The concept of innovation transforms this possibility into a general soci-
etal recommendation. Existing processes are treated retrospectively as a 
realized technology which still has certain defects or possibilities of im-
provement. If we abstract from technological realizations, the concept of 
innovation loses its hold and assumes ideological form to the effect that 
new is better than old.
Society has meanwhile grown accustomed to technology. This is not 
to say that society itself has become a sort of technology, as we sometimes 
read.203 Any such thesis would be easy to refute. It also flies in the face of 
all everyday experience. Only dependence on functioning technology has 
increased, with the result that any breakdown of technology (especially 
energy supplies) would also lead to the breakdown of our familiar society. 

 
  Evolution
In other words, technological development has led to innumerable non­
natural self-evidences. We take it for granted that the cistern will refill when 
we flush the toilet. This in turn produces strange dependencies. “The more 
options we develop for ourselves, the less the institutional structure (and 
here we would have to add especially the technical structure) with whose 
aid we develop them is available itself as an option.”204 This state of af-
fairs can be described with the help of the structural coupling concept. This 
means that societal communication has to presuppose technology and be 
able to rely on technology in all present operations, because other possibili-
ties are no longer available in the problem horizons of the operations. And 
the time needed to replace technology by initiating retrogressive develop-
ment would be so long, and the factual consequences would be so serious 
and unpredictable in detail, that a switch to other external references of so-
ciety is practically excluded.
The result of this dependence on technology is that the structural 
coupling of the physical world and society can no longer be captured by 
the concept of nature, just as if there were an analogia entis grounded in 
nature. The nature concept is replaced in this context by the paired con-
cepts energy/work and energy/economy. Technology consumes energy and 
performs work and in this manner links physical givens with society. As 
always, this structural coupling also couples the channeling of irritations. 
Technology itself defines and changes the boundaries of the conversion of 
energy into work. The risks that have to be accepted increase, and the fu-
ture depends on technologies that are not yet available.
The social consequences of this switch to risks provoked by tech-
nology and reinforced by organized decision-making are difficult to over-
estimate. The technology of evolutionary advance was introduced into 
a society that was neither structurally nor semantically ready for it. Al-
though the future is still uncertain in the given present in all societies, this 
uncertainty could nevertheless be appresented in older societies as coming 
from outside. This led to the rewarding of social solidarity,205 which, as it 
were, offered a safety net for coping with any dangers. When, however, 
risks are involved, which society takes with decisions considered rational 
because they are necessary to take advantage of opportunities or to prevent 
worse happening, the consequences are precisely the opposite.206 Conflicts 
develop between decision-makers and interested parties, between risk cal-
culations mostly worked out by organizations and those who bear the con-

Evolution    
sequences without being taken into account. What constitutes a risk for 
decision-makers is, for the parties possibly affected, a danger that comes 
from outside but originates within society itself, namely, in the decision 
taken, and is hence attributed to it.
As long as solidarity is needed and in demand, absolute criteria 
whose social conditionality is not addressed provide orientation. They are 
criteria of religious, moral, or tribal (ethnic) content. They, too, are socially 
discriminating, but such that a distinction can be drawn between confor-
mity and deviation and those deviating can be excluded and expelled as 
unbelievers, as barbarians, as heathens, as saraceni, or, at a later date, as 
unreasonable. They are owed neither solidarity nor moral duties. The shift 
to risk perspectives changes this form of discrimination radically. Now di-
vergences in perspective are within society. With regard to the future, they 
divide society into varying decision-makers and affected parties; and what 
is rational for the one is for the other a convincing reason for protest and 
resistance. Now, too, there are newly developing solidarities, but they as-
sume a fundamentalist guise. Such solidarity unfolds in awareness of re-
ligious or ethnic otherness; but this takes place in a world society, which 
people know they are dependent on as far as communication, supply, ser-
vices, and, of course, technology are concerned.
What is more, technical links in mass production, transport, and 
energy and information supply cross traditional, regional-society bound-
aries. Apart from and in interplay with the functional differentiation that 
dissolves spatial bounds, technological developments are among the most 
important conditions that have made a “global system” in the form of a 
world society inevitable.207 In our context, this means that less and less re-
liance can be placed on ethnic or national solidarity or concentrations of 
interests in coping with problems of technology impact. From a political 
point of view, there is completely new potential for threats and sanctions, 
consisting in cutting regions off from the advantages of technical supply, 
or, vice versa, refusing to collaborate on ecologically controlled or less risky 
technological development.
Well-meaning treatments speak of pluralism or of the diversity of 
postmodern discourses. But this addresses only the social dimension. 
However, it cannot be denied that the root of the problem lies in the time 
dimension and particularly in the various forms of realizing future uncer-
tainty. Technology enables and imposes decisions that have an uncertain 

 
  Evolution
future at their disposal, and solidarity or even common value orientations 
cannot be expected for such decisions.
In the context of evolution theory, this understanding of technology 
amounts to a renunciation of adaptationist concepts. Technology does not 
enable society to adapt progressively to its environment as it is. By multi-
plying possible options, it serves to develop the endogenous dynamics of 
the societal system. The concept remains completely open on the question 
of what happens next. Warning signs can no longer be ignored in the field 
of risky high technology. In view of the continuous dependence of all tech-
nology on energy, it is extremely questionable whether technologies will al-
ways be found to guarantee an adequate energy supply.208 And it cannot be 
excluded that chaos will catch up with technology in its further evolution.
For this reason, technology concepts geared to nature or mind or 
the human being as counterconcept now get us no further. The really in-
teresting question is rather whether in the logic of evolution, the achieve-
ments of technology are irreversible, and every failure can therefore by 
compensated for only by new technologies; or whether technology is to be 
understood as a store of possibilities we can draw on again at any time as 
the need arises. Under present economic conditions, there is much to be 
said for irreversibility, given the scarcity of resources and the unpredictably 
high costs of retrogression (compared with the opportunities and costs of 
new development, which are easier to calculate). But these are economic 
arguments, of which no one can at present say whether they will withstand 
the future development of the societal system or be dismissed by necessity 
when the energy needed to supply technology no longer suffices.209
In the age of the steam engine it was not steam that was the prob-
lem, but the engine. This appears to change where the operating condi-
tions of technology and, with them, the generation of energy become a 
problem. The cosmology now required had already been indicated by the 
law of entropy. For the theory of society and its concept of evolution, the 
corresponding problem lies in the reproduction of improbable structures.
10. The Evolution of Ideas
 Societal evolution has thus far been spoken of in the singular, de-
spite the many societies in the past that evolved together in the fashion of a 
species or population and, as it were, constituted the varietal pool for soci-

Evolution    
etal evolution. The issue of whether further evolution can take place within 
a societal system is a separate one, requiring the description of further in-
stances of unplanned structural changes, aided by differing variation, selec-
tion, and restabilization. Because such evolution, assuming it is possible, 
cannot take place in society independently of society, a co-evolutionary re-
lationship would have to be assumed, and the theory of macrosocietal evo-
lution geared to this additional complication.210
The distinction between the dissemination media of communication 
and forms of system differentiation raises two further questions. The sub-
ject of this section is whether the separating out of written communication 
allowed fixed, recorded semantics that was handed down, and hence vari-
able, to evolve independently.211 I shall be referring to this as the “evolution 
of ideas.”212 The next section then goes on to investigate whether indepen-
dent evolution at the level of societal subsystems is possible, too. Current 
knowledge on both questions is more than scant.
Regardless of the concrete historical conditions for a special evolu-
tion of ideas, isolating it ultimately goes back to the distinction between 
operation and observation. Since all observations can be realized only in 
the form of factual operation (in this instance, communicating), the soci-
etal system is operationally closed at this level, with the possibility of evo-
lutionarily divergent structure formation, triggered by further operational 
closures within the operationally closed societal system. Communication is 
possible only as an observing operation. It has to rely on the meaning of the 
difference between utterance and information being understood and hence 
processed for further communication. Observations, too, are real events, 
and thus operations. They can be realized connectively only in operation-
ally closed systems. Otherwise, they would not take place at all. Their re-
ality value therefore lies not, as all tradition interested in cognition had 
assumed, in the reality of their objects, which are observed and described 
as either true or false, either accurate or inaccurate. It lies solely in the real­
ity of the observational operations themselves, in other words, in the testing 
of resistance, which is to be found not in the objective outside world but 
exclusively in the recursive interconnection of system operations themselves. We 
could also say that it lies in the successful processing of irritations, which as 
such do not yet contain any information about the environment.
Just as observations are a special sort of operation and draw their 
reality from this, semantics are a special sort of structure. Further to the 

 
  Evolution
distinction between operation and observation, we must therefore draw 
a distinction between the corresponding structures: the structures of sys-
tem differentiation and the semantic structures that identify, fix, and 
remember meaning worth preserving or consign it to oblivion. As obser-
vations, the operations that condense and confirm semantics are blind to 
their own operating. For they cannot observe themselves without coming 
up against the paradox of the unity of the different.213 However, the fact 
that operations produce differences can be observed and described by an 
observer; and this also holds for differences that are generated by other 
observational operations.214 The relationship between operation and ob-
servation is therefore doubly circular, and the two circles are separated by 
latencies. While observations are operations that reproduce the operating 
systems autopoietically but cannot observe themselves, all operations can 
be observed by observations aimed at doing so, for otherwise we would 
know nothing about them.
This double circle takes effect in the morphogenesis, in the evolu-
tionary development, diversification, and dissolution of structures. At the 
operational level, system differentiations are produced that continue differ-
entiation of the societal system internally, enriching it with complexity. At 
the semantic level, structures arise that steer the observation and description 
of these results of evolution, that is to say, provide them with distinctions. 
The semantics requires latencies. Its own self-description must distinguish 
what it describes without being able to include the unity of what is differ-
entiated in the description. The result is divergence between the evolution 
of system differentiation and the description of its outcomes. The struc-
tural breaks that the evolution of new forms of system differentiation gen-
erates are not observed and described in the change itself, because how the 
innovation differs cannot also be captured. The semantics grants structural 
innovation a certain honeymoon period until it has so consolidated that it 
can hold its own as order in its own right. There are numerous other tem-
poral incongruities between system structural and semantic evolution—in-
cluding how newly invented ideas are learned and tested in the semantics 
before being deployed in the structural context of differentiations.215
These considerations lead us to ask whether we can speak of evolu-
tion in the domain of semantic structures, too, and what conditions in the 
history of society could have actuated an endogenous dynamic in the evo-
lution of ideas.

Evolution    
If, in the context of the autopoietic social system society, we assume 
that communication serves to reproduce communication, we must expect 
situations to arise in which the old way of letting this happen no longer 
suffices. Structures are reproduced as tradition, but current conditions be-
tray that the descriptions of structure determined by tradition no longer 
fit. A discrepancy is apparent: the possibilities of present reproduction are 
no longer adequate for what is to be reproduced.216 Time breaks lead to fac-
tual differentiation. Such circumstances reveal differences between social 
structure and semantics. This puts the semantics under pressure to adapt 
but also enables ideas to be fixed ahead of time, before being assigned so-
cial functions.217
This can happen only if there is enough memory capacity, if society 
disposes of writing in adequate measure. In the evolution of ideas, the in-
vention and spread of writing was the starting point for independent evo-
lution, and the advent of the printing press was the turning point that 
triggered far-reaching semantic adjustments. Before writing had been in-
troduced, meaning was so concretely instituted that the specific form of 
stability (fixing in writing) that could set off a special form of variation did 
not exist. Semantic structures change by adapting their use to situations 
and by forgetting. Where ideas have already been fixed in writing, they 
can only have a disturbing effect on institutions, rituals, interpreted situ-
ations geared to nonwritten communication.218 The primacy of the oral 
tradition (above all in teaching) was maintained for thousands of years 
after the invention of writing, but writing itself made such novel demands 
on the explication of thought (to be understood only from the text) that 
it produced new words, new concepts, ideas about ideas (hence “philoso-
phy”). Despite the primacy of the oral tradition and although it was not 
really realized (above all conceptually!) that writing and reading are com-
munication, this invention broke the prepotence of the spoken word. The 
effects are particularly apparent in the world of religious ideas.219 To begin 
with, however, there were still major limitations to the use of writing, also 
among the upper classes and in the cities. They lay partly in its restriction 
to special roles,220 partly in its limitation to learned languages otherwise no 
longer in common use (Sanskrit; Latin in medieval Europe), which were 
held to be indispensable for appropriate expression and thus merged with 
the form of the ideas themselves to form a unity. In some societies, cultural 
elites then emerged with a problematic (mostly religiously safeguarded) 

 
  Evolution
relation to the predominant ascriptive status order.221 Only where these 
socio­structural restrictions on the use of writing were lifted could increas-
ing demands be made on the plausibility of ideas and thus on the more in-
tensive co-evolution of written material and system differentiations.
The possibilities thus initiated but inhibited by such restrictions were 
abruptly made available by the printing press. Above all, additional capac-
ity for control and storage was gained. It was now broadly apparent how 
much knowledge there already was. For no more than a few decades, ef-
forts continued to put all the old aids to memory into print, the common-
places, quotations, sayings, and so on, everything that had been passed on 
as topic.222 Finally, it was realized that printing had made this pointless and 
superfluous. But morality, established in this domain, where it had enjoyed 
drawing on the possibilities of rhetoric, now had to be reformulated on the 
basis of principles. In theology, the more that was published, the greater 
were the doubts about the old “disputed question” technique, that is, pro-
viding authoritative solutions to contradictions between opposing opin-
ions.223 The possibilities for comparison also grew. Different books could 
be put side by side and read almost at the same time. This brought new in-
transparency and a need for methodical access.224 Around 1600, the word 
“system” began its career—initially, in the form of a book title and decla-
ration of the intention to write a book with properly ordered contents.225 
As always when control capacity is increased, the power of the past over 
the present grows; contrarotulare means to compare texts fixed in the past 
against present information. But precisely this makes it possible to recog-
nize what is new and to appreciate it. The distinction between new and old 
(moderni/antiqui ) is taken out of the context of the encomiums in which 
it was at home.226 Applied to history, it is temporalized.227
Thought in written form, accessible to the anonymous reader in 
print, has in its favor the weight of a tradition and the power of being (pre-
sumably) known; moreover, it offers an incentive to express other views on 
the same subject or problem. In the printed word, we can discover and ac-
tualize latent potentialities for other opinions. And this is particularly true 
where acute (especially politically acute) situations suggest the advisability 
of instrumentalizing such innovations.228 Political criticism of the asser-
tion of parliamentary sovereignty by Westminster, for example, led to the 
introduction into the discussion of the term “unconstitutional,” with un-
foreseeable consequences for the then necessary distinction between illegal 

Evolution    
and unconstitutional, for the separation of powers, civil rights, judicial re-
view, and much more.229 But this move presupposed an understanding of 
“constitution”—a term already introduced for other reasons—that differed 
from that in Roman law.
These indications serve above all to recall the importance of the turn-
ing points brought about by the introduction of writing and the printing 
press.230 For a theory on the evolution of ideas (in contrast to more detailed 
studies of issues in the history of ideas), they are important because they 
concern the separability of evolutionary functions and hence the condi-
tions for ideas to evolve independently. But what still needs to be clarified 
is whether variation, selection, and restabilization can be separated spe-
cially for the evolution of ideas, and what forms evolutionary mechanisms 
assume in this case.
The point of departure for variation is the fixing of the material in 
writing and the freedom this gives to both writing and reading from sur-
veillance by an interaction system. Writing makes objective, almost man-
nerly, criticism possible. When writing and reading, we also have more 
time than when we are under pressure to act in interaction. Surplus activ-
ity typically develops in relation to the text, which tends to find expression 
in critical rather than merely receptive communication. However, this very 
high probability of deviation rapidly dissipates, since few readers react to 
what they have read in writing let alone in print.231 Those whose calling it 
is to criticize are under all the more pressure to do so. The Enlightenment 
was carried by gens de lettres.
It should also be noted that the conditions for the structural cou-
pling of consciousness processes and communication processes change in 
written communication. Since the environment can irritate communica-
tion only by means of communication, such a change is extremely impor-
tant. It acts selectively, for most consciousness systems switch themselves 
off in writing and reading. They do not know how to go on, they tire, they 
give up. Those who stay the course are specialists, who skillfully convert 
texts into texts, as it were, as annex to the communication process, but 
who have their difficulties and have to make a substantive and stylistic ef-
fort to remain recognizable as individuals.232
These problems are usually addressed under the “text and interpre-
tation” schema. Especially since the advent of new—no longer in the old 
sense “grammatical”—philologies in the eighteenth century, the relation of 

 
  Evolution
text to interpretation has become the subject of thoroughgoing secondary 
reflection. The associated scientific endeavors go by the name of “herme-
neutics.” This cannot be addressed in due detail at this point. On the prob-
lem of variation in the evolution of ideas, there is nonetheless agreement 
that it is important for text and interpretation to stabilize one another. Im-
manent circularity and not an external subject has been the decisive factor 
since Hans-Georg Gadamer at the latest. As in all other cases of evolution-
ary variation, considerable provision is thus made here, too, for the stabil-
ity of deviating variants. If they are to come into question at all, they must 
satisfy the postulate of the unity of text and interpretation; they must be 
able to prove themselves to be interpretations of the text. At the same time, 
however, the figure of the hermeneutic circle shows that this does not de-
cide finally whether and which ideas will prevail. This can be seen as evi-
dence that here, too, the evolutionary functions of variation, selection, and 
restabilization have been successfully differentiated.
Whereas the variation of ideas is largely endogenous through the 
production of texts from texts, evolutionary selection has to rely on cri-
teria of plausibility or, even more stringently, on evidence.233 It may seem 
plausible, indeed evident, that plausibility and evidence are crucial for the 
evolution of ideas. Stimulated by this remarkable autology, we must nev-
ertheless ask why this is so.
Plausibility is secured by using common schemata or scripts in the 
sense of modern cognitive psychology.234 It is a matter of descriptions of 
something as something, but also of causal attributions relating certain ef-
fects to certain causes and hence provoking moral judgments, demands for 
action, evaluations. Schemata are the form in which communication de-
velops judgments and condenses memory. But since schemata do not yet 
determine their use in communication, because in any case they cannot be 
applied schematically, this concept does not yet explain how plausibility is 
gained and can be revised where necessary in certain historical situations.
Before the age of the mass media, which now address this problem, 
conceptually feasible forms of thought had already been developed in skep-
ticism and rhetoric, which also served as arguments for the evidence of the 
ontological description of the world. Skepticism was regarded as futile, as 
foundering on its own autology. Rhetoric was the only description of com-
munication whose self-reflection was allowed.235 It could present itself as 
rhetoric and face practical testing in the given society. It was no coincidence 

Evolution    
that paradox, skepticism, and rhetoric experienced a renaissance after the 
introduction of printing. This lasted from the sixteenth century until well 
into the seventeenth and began to lose ground only with the incipient self-
awareness of modern society in the eighteenth. But what has taken its place?
No direct semantic successor is in sight, an indication of the radical 
nature of the structural break. Instead, we find abundant offers of uncer-
tainty: contingency philosophy, relativism, historicism, the use of ideolog-
ical distinctions, and, recently, such disparate offers as “postmodernism” 
or “deconstructivism,” which appear to prove that things cannot continue 
like this or any other way. But we can substitute the distinction between 
paradox and the unfolding of paradox, and analysis of historical (social 
historical) conditions of plausibility and evidence, for such information.
Cognitive schemata require coordination with the unwritten givens 
of the internal and external environment of the societal system. Thus in 
aristocratic societies, one cannot very well deny that the noble “lives bet-
ter” and therefore “is better” than the peasant. Any child can see that. The 
limitations to technical and professional skill, the differences in the nature 
of things, the heavens above, the earth below—all this provides a frame-
work for testing plausibilities and curtailing extravagance. Ideas are plau-
sible if they make immediate sense and do not have to be further justified 
in the communication process. This is now the case, for example, for the 
“values” of the moment. We can speak of evidence when something makes 
sense to the exclusion of alternatives. What is important is that sporadic 
confirmations of this sort do not impose the acceptance of more complex 
communication. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the new pau-
perism caused by industry could be accepted as a natural law determined 
by progress, or it could be combated as the consequence of arbitrary rule—
but the fact of it could not be disputed. The position is similar for present-
day discussion on ecological problems.
As time passes more rapidly and ever more structural changes accu-
mulate, only situational evidence will suffice. The trial of Galileo Galilei or 
the causes of the American War of Independence, the Lisbon Earthquake, 
which gave Voltaire a welcome occasion to address the question of theo-
dicy: the insight supplied by present evidence suffices for selection. How-
ever, on this basis, it cannot also assume the function of restabilization.
As a consequence of these plausibility tests, selections in the evo-
lution of ideas are markedly dependent on the environment, and hence 

 
  Evolution
subject to conditions that they can control neither in written form nor 
argumentatively. For the same reason, the evolution of ideas always leads 
only to historical semantics. It remains dependent on social structures, 
which are determined by the predominant form of system differentiation. 
Plausibilities convey a sort of reality index, and anyone who does not sub-
mit to it has little chance. Innovations have to be introduced with them, 
not against them. All the same, printing increases the complexity of the 
possible so fast and to such an extent that innovations can for their part se-
lect their plausibilities. Furthermore, a high degree of self-gratification sets 
in. One cites, giving the impression that others have already taken care of 
plausibility.
Especially in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the literature, 
which should have been offering something new, vibrated with this prob-
lem. The new aphoristically and fragmentarily formulated morality was 
clearly geared to what found favor in the salons. The same can be said of 
the mania for portraits and caractères.236 For a while, “common sense” be-
comes a criterion of knowledge,237 and “evidence” becomes a buzzword, es-
pecially among the physiocrats. Ridiculousness was accordingly proposed 
as a criterion for sorting plausible from implausible communication.238 It 
is not difficult to guess that all this was in quest of covert reinsurance in 
oral communication. Only the parallel development of new scientificity 
and Romanticism put an end to the discussion. For the Romantics, “frag-
ment” had a quite new and fundamental sense, namely, that of protest 
against totalizing worldviews. And Romanticism is also to the forefront 
in cultivating the plausibility of the implausible. This leaves disposition 
over plausibilities to writing, printing, and finally to the mass media. Oral 
communication loses its function as supervisory authority with the upper 
classes.
Plausibility, let alone evidence, can be secured for semantic struc-
tural change only if the changes to which changes in conceptuality react 
are sufficiently clear. Innovation requires not only temporal but also fac-
tual awareness of difference.239 Only when this condition is met can dis-
continuities be marked. In the course of rapid and far-reaching structural 
changes such as in the transition from stratificatory to functional differ-
entiation, adequate self-observation and self-description are difficult if not 
impossible. Discontinuity is then not marked. Instead, old names con-
tinue to be used, for example, the term “state,” possibly with attributes 

Evolution    
such as “constitutional” or “modern,” which do not affect the substance. In 
this manner, meaning is so enriched that the concept ultimately becomes 
indefinable. The evolution of ideas cannot follow structural evolution fast 
enough, coping instead with inconsistencies and, in this regard, imprecise 
concept reference.
The stability of ideas is initially expressed through the normativi­
zation of the expectations leveled at communication and behavior. With 
the help of normativization, one can claim that something is right even 
if in individual cases it is not. God and the Devil obviously agreed that 
humanity would otherwise not manage.240 Even what nature demands is 
normatively supported, that is, regardless of deviating cases. Statistics—
which does the same in a different way and therefore makes it possible to 
abandon the normative concept of nature—began only in the seventeenth 
century, in a society in which it was increasingly necessary to work with 
artificially generated plausibilities.
As in societal evolution in general, selection aspects and notions of 
stability are at first difficult to separate in the evolution of ideas. Interest 
in the consistency of statements already develops with the spread of writ-
ing—but this works in both directions: stabilizing and, in the case of in-
consistencies, destabilizing.241 The movement of skepticism that reacts to 
this, which itself owes its existence to writing,242 can only shake its head, 
but not change anything. Only after the arrival of the printing press, and 
only in the seventeenth century, do things begin to move. I have already 
mentioned the invention of statistics. It demonstrates clearly that there can 
be forms of certainty in uncertainty that undermine the old opposition 
between dogma and skepticism.243 Leaving aside religion, the concepts of 
dogma, dogmatics, dogmatism, dogmaticism (note the successive degree 
of rejection) are hence negatively connoted.244 In parallel, the new order 
concept of system is relativized and used in the sense of purely subjective 
projection.245 With Shaftesbury, we can then say: “The most ingenious 
way of becoming foolish is by a system.”246 Ideas, in particular, which owe 
their selection only to situational plausibilities, depend on novel forms of 
stabilization in mobile systems. They endure beyond the favor of the mo-
ment—or not. In any case, they can no longer base their selection on a 
stable world order. But then it seems advisable to watch the current state 
of affairs for opportunities to innovate. As with societal evolution in gen-
eral, the evolution of ideas also tends to collapse if, even though variation, 

 
  Evolution
selection, and stabilization can be separated, the difference between stabi-
lization and variation begins to diminish.
At the end of the eighteenth century, the old form of the evolu-
tion of ideas with text-related variance, plausible or evident selection, and 
normative or dogmatically unquestioned stability also appears to have 
come to an end. The French Revolution sent a message that could be 
heard everywhere; and although it changed little in societal structures, 
its effects on the world of ideas in the period that followed can hardly be 
overestimated.247 In Königsberg and Berlin, new attempts were made to 
safeguard the world of ideas with a philosophical concept of science. In 
fact, however, the reflective endeavors of functional systems assumed the 
lead.248 Economics and politics, science and the law, now each have their 
own histories of ideas, written, also, in historical retrospective. The ex-
tent to which they pursue an independent evolution of ideas within func-
tional systems requires special investigation. At the macrosocietal level, 
at any rate, we can hardly speak of a corresponding general evolution of 
ideas any longer.
General trends can be identified. With Bernhard Barbar, we can per-
haps speak of a tendency toward greater abstraction, stronger systematiza-
tion, and greater comprehensiveness of idea complexes.249 It is also apparent 
that plausible ideas and concepts now have to cope with more disorder 
in the environment of the societal system and intrasocietal environments 
of the functional systems within the societal system. In search of some-
thing permanent and necessary, ever-new contingencies are revealed, up to 
and including the contingency of natural laws themselves. In many areas, 
especially in art and literature, an individualism plagued by self-doubt is 
considered a symptom, if not the very nature, of modernity, and ideas are 
accordingly expected to be individual-friendly in their formulation (undog-
matic, consensual, open to learning). Reference problems and code prob-
lems, thus the distinctions self-reference/other-reference and distinctions 
such as true/false, good/bad, right/wrong can no longer be brought into 
line—as the failure of logical positivism and then of analytical philosophy 
to integrate the concept groups of reference, meaning, and truth demon-
strates. This is likely to tally with the assumption that the points of conver-
gence holding ideas together recede increasingly into the distance250—or, 
alternatively, have to be introduced into societal differentiation, hence 
being differentiated in step. If the two courses are embarked upon at the 

Evolution    
same time, more universality (especially including history) and greater pre-
cision can be realized than in the older literature.
The trends by which the evolution of ideas reacts to itself have re-
cently acquired the empty title of postmodernism (Toynbee, then Lyotard). 
This can mean renouncing comprehensive claims to unity and a transition 
to radically differentialist approaches. It is thus likely to confirm that the 
end of dialectic cannot be stopped even by a negative dialectic that, as a 
principle of progress, announces the end of progress.251 The outbidding 
logic of progress and its avant-garde, who reflect on and disavow it, can 
be followed only by an underbidding logic. What is past is stripped of its 
historical situating, and hence of its status of having been overcome, its 
temporal nature. It can thus be used capriciously—in music by Stravinsky 
or Schnittke, in social philosophy by old-style anti-liberals (Carl Schmitt, 
Leo Strauss, Alasdair MacIntyre);252 or, most recently, in such fields as civil 
society with particular emphasis on women. Philosophers react to the di-
saster of all the ethics of modern times (Kant, Bentham, Max Scheler)—
with Aristotle. One might suspect this of being a vogue that has passed its 
peak. But perhaps a sense develops in the constant deconstruction and re-
construction of forms for the limits to combinatorial options, for a thor-
oughgoing construction of interrelations. And this circumstance would 
once again point to evolution. For who could say how this will happen, 
and what then?
Contrary to the earlier distinction between population evolution (ap-
plicable to both human beings and animals) and cultural evolution (only 
human artifacts), I shall resist the temptation to distinguish stages or epochs 
within the evolution of ideas; at least not in the sense of a self-­generated his-
torical sequence of cultural epochs or historical types. If we can afterward 
reconstruct historical divisions of this sort, this is due solely to sociostruc-
tural evolution, or, to be more precise, to the dominance of certain differ-
entiation types. These types of differentiation can be assigned to certain 
semantic forms.253 But this does not justify concluding that an indepen-
dent cultural evolution generates a type sequence of its own in parallel to 
sociostructural evolution. After all, the evolution of ideas has to rely in its 
selection mechanism on “plausibility.” It can deduce this plausibility only 
from observing society. From the logic of its own determinations, it can win 
critical or innovative potential and thus lead to “preadaptive advances.” Or 
it can continue to pursue its own traditions even where they are long since 

 
  Evolution
obsolete—for example, the notion, associated with hopes of upward social 
mobility, so enduringly beloved of “middle-class society,” that we live in a 
stratified society with linear transitions between “down” and “up.” These 
temporal shifts are important for a sufficiently realistic theory of “socio-
cultural” evolution. But this does not mean that the semantics is strong 
enough in itself, as it were, from an “intellectual history” or ideation-causal 
point of view, to produce epochal divisions. It only observes what is pro-
duced in societal autopoiesis—but using its own distinctions, constructive 
and deconstructive, and including time-related concepts such as “modern” 
or divisions such as antiquity/Middle Ages/modern age.
11. The Evolution of Subsystems
We come up against quite different problems when we ask whether 
independent intrasocietal evolution with differentiation of variation, selec-
tion, and restabilization is possible at the level of societal subsystems. In 
this case, too, our results will be historically differentiated and run coun-
ter to our assessment of the evolution of ideas. Subsystem evolutions begin 
only with the functional differentiation of the societal system, for only 
with this form of differentiation is the combination of operational closure 
and high internal complexity attained at the level of subsystems that gives 
the differentiation of evolutionary functions sufficient hold.254
In some, albeit few, cases, attempts have been made to apply the con-
ceptuality of evolution theory to the functional systems of modern society. 
From the perspective of the history of science, such attempts have been 
motivated by the collapse of older theoretical notions, especially by doubts 
about the immanent rationality of the subject matter. Evolutionary episte-
mology for the functional system called science provides the most striking 
example. An alternative to Neo-Kantianism and to logical-methodologi-
cal theories geared to deduction had already developed along with prag-
matism in the late nineteenth century.255 A particular attraction appears 
to have been that the legitimation of “chance” provided an opportunity 
to include innovations and escape the corset of a methodology adapted to 
control and not to discovery. As a result, attention focused almost exclu-
sively on the variation function. Evolution theory, with its schema of vari-
ation and selection, also offered a possibility of breaching the justificatory 
circle that threatens all theories of knowledge without having to take re-

Evolution    
course to an unquestioningly self-assured authority: that is, without hav-
ing to invoke reason.
Having for decades gone along with the ups and downs of “Darwin-
ism,” and having itself to fight for survival, evolutionary epistemology is 
today one of the few remaining theories on offer in this field. However, 
it ranges from biologically inspired epistemology (which I shall disregard) 
and theories of the Popper or Kuhn type, which do not operate with the 
variation/selection schema, to not very elaborated cases of applied general 
evolution theory.256 At present, the bottleneck lies both in the inadequate 
elaboration of a general evolution theory, as well as in unsolved problems 
of “constructivism,” and, as a sociologist might be permitted to note, in 
the unsettled relationship between science and society.257
Attempts have been under way to apply evolution theory to the eco-
nomic system for some forty years now.258 Here, too, the collapse of an 
older theory, namely, the theory of price determination by the market with 
(quasi-) perfect competition, has clearly been the incentive.259 This shows 
that the starting point is not the economic system itself, but the individual 
enterprise and its decisions, and that population theoretical notions are 
therefore in play. If economic decisions are no longer made by the mar-
ket, but in enterprises under conditions of lacking information and un-
certainty, it seems obvious to treat decisions as chance variations260 and to 
attribute the selection of corporate success, that is, of the surviving pop-
ulation, to “natural selection” by the market.261 Meanwhile, however, it 
has been realized that adaptive strategies within firms and selection by the 
market offer no meaningful theoretical alternative, but that the two always 
take effect together. This view has established itself in both “population 
ecology” and in a narrower (late-Darwinian) understanding of economic 
evolution.262 However, it raises problems of “structural drift,” and these 
cannot be adequately handled by traditional research approaches, which 
concern themselves with the entry and exit of firms in the population.
The more recent theoretical discussion in economics, which has 
given considerable impetus to evolution-theoretical considerations, 
amounts to criticism of neoclassical “orthodoxy.”263 The blame is placed 
on the fixation of prevailing opinion on a link between equilibrium mod-
els and optimization strategies, which can comprehend the economic de-
cision only as reaction and not as innovation. Close ties result between 
evolution theory and research into technological change, which cannot 

 
  Evolution
be satisfactorily treated by traditional neoclassicism. This gives rise to a 
new version of criticism directed at the conventional premises of rational 
behavior. The loss of the historical dimension is also lamented. On the 
other hand, no common opposing standpoint has yet been found, and 
any recourse to neo-Darwinian theoretical notions of biology in particu-
lar is rejected.264 A discussion between only reactive or primarily proactive 
(creative) theoretical interests is unlikely to prove productive, for both 
ultimately confirm the unpredictability of evolution. What is especially 
convincing, however, is that interests have to be diversified for transac-
tions, that is, for the way in which the economy operates, to be possible 
and this is precisely what evolution can be expected to achieve.
For research into other functional systems, practically no evolution-
theoretical approaches are to be found. We might at best mention the legal 
system,265 and here, too, the incentive lies in the failure of preceding deduc-
tive theories, whether they draw on natural law, analytical approaches, or 
analytical jurisprudence. An evolution-theoretical treatment of the politi-
cal system of modern society is lacking,266 although development toward 
and in the welfare state could offer good possibilities for such a project.
The status of research renders any assessment difficult. We must there-
fore make do with a number of questions that arise when seriously addressing 
studies on co-evolution between the societal system and the functional sys-
tems differentiated within it. This entails analyses of system differentiation.
The theoretical point of departure would have to lie in the societal 
nesting of operationally closed autopoietic systems, hence in the ques-
tion of how it is possible for a social system within another to establish its 
own autopoietic reproduction on the basis of operational closure. Only 
where this is possible, and only where adequate internal complexity de-
velops on this basis within subsystems, can the differentiation of varia-
tion, selection, and restabilization find a hold. I presume that here, too, 
the variation mechanism lies firstly in the observation of communication 
as (provoking) negation and is systematized only with the setting in mo-
tion of functional differentiation by binary codings—now in the coding 
of function-specific operations with the aid of such distinctions as true/
false, propertied/unpropertied, lawful/unlawful, rulers/subjects, aestheti-
cally consonant/disconsonant (beautiful/ugly).
These special codes provide for differentiation while facilitating the 
code-specific switch from one side to the other. This allows keeping an eye 

Evolution    
on the opposing case to become daily routine. But this circumstance also 
means that which of the code values (for example true or false) is chosen 
to indicate its own operations is impossible to predict and depends on the 
system’s programs.
Formally speaking, binary coding does not mean that external con-
siderations are excluded. The binary structure of code values is in orthogo-
nal relation to the distinction self-reference/other-reference, and therefore 
does not prejudice the criteria by which code values are assigned. Other-
wise, no society could take the risk of reacting to certain problems with bi-
nary codings. But inasmuch as the codes inaugurate the need for criteria, 
it can and must become apparent that such criteria first have to be found. 
Even if it is only a matter of decorating everyday objects: what is beautiful 
and ugly first has to be tried out. Even where situations involving superior 
power arise in tribal or religious settings and have to fulfill the conditions 
of the societal context, how this power is exercised is not yet determined. 
Or, in the case of norm projections invoking conventionalities, latitude 
for judgment arises as soon as controversy develops. The stringent coding 
to the exclusion of third values generates open contingencies that create a 
need for meaning and at this very point become susceptible to evolution. 
If a variation intervenes here, it is likely to be considered for selection. The 
adoption of external selection criteria is then felt to be methodologically 
less and less appropriate—a partly continuous, partly abrupt switch, which 
depends on the societal reach of the criteria and on the tried and tested 
eigen­values of the domain of special evolution, and is accordingly delayed 
or furthered by them.
Binary codes therefore appear to be hinges for opening the gates to 
subsystem evolutions in society where favorable circumstances occur; and 
writing, as we have seen,267 will have had an important role to play in this. 
Binary structures have speed advantages: they offer the fastest way to de-
velop complexity and, at the same time, the simplest form of ordering 
memory. Since language is already binarily coded, memory is easy to up-
date. On the one hand, binary decisional situations occur often enough 
and have enough practical relevance in life not to have to rely on cor-
responding functional systems already existing in autopoietically closed 
form. On the other, they entail a sufficiently specific need for criteria, so 
that special evolutions can take off as soon as recursive reference to crite-
ria of the same type comes into play. That artistic criteria, even in the case 

 
  Evolution
of poetry, are not suitable for deciding questions of truth was recognized 
at the latest in early modern times (that legal matters cannot be settled in 
the form of vase paintings and the artistic portrayal of judicial scenes pro-
vides no legal argument will already have been realized).268 Property was 
still long treated as an instrument of power, while the power of political 
office, consolidated in the territorial state, had since the late Middle Ages 
no longer been able effectively to control events in the economic market-
place. As early as 1200, England experienced inflation that influenced the 
development of law and, above all, broke the complex feudal structures of 
landed property in the interest of clear property relations suitable for bor-
rowing and liability.269 However, inflation itself is not a problem for the 
courts to decide; evolution of the economy and of the law, because codes 
and underlying programs differ, go their separate ways.
Whereas at the code level, that is, in the mechanism of self-variation, 
systems are determined by eigenvalues—for this defines their distinctness 
from other systems—at the program level they are adaptable. Theories and 
legal rules or contracts, investment or consumption programs, political 
agendas are more or less sensitive to the societal environment. Here, too, 
systems are structurally determined and closed, for only they themselves 
can decide and apply their programs. But in selecting programs that serve 
to select operations, they can be irritated and influenced by the environ-
ment. To express this, one often speaks of “interests.” As always, stability 
lies in the autopoiesis itself. It is thus not a static but a dynamic stability. 
The ability to change structures (especially programs), often against resis-
tance from their own organizations, opens the way to restabilizing inno-
vations. The short-circuit I have noted for the functionally differentiated 
societal system is thus repeated at this level: stabilization facilities are so 
dynamized that they also serve the function of evolutionary variation. Pre-
cisely this appears to be the outcome of co-evolution between societal evo-
lution and subsystem evolutions: society cannot defend itself (it has no 
organ for this purpose) against the pace dictated by functional systems.
The coding and programming of functional systems is both result 
and condition of their evolution. Such a circular relationship is typical and 
inevitable for evolution-theoretical accounts, but does not satisfy as histor-
ical explanation. We must return to the insight that evolution has to rely 
on transient situations that can be used for takeoff even if they later lapse 
or lose their fundamental importance.

Evolution    
Particulars can be clarified only by detailed historical studies. We 
must make do with examples. In the second half of the sixteenth cen-
tury, printing, having more broadly informed the reading public and more 
widely disseminated religious, political, and humanistic propaganda—­
irreversible changes in relations between individuals, who no longer par-
ticipate only in court circles and territorial-state politics—is likely to have 
contributed much to the transition to modern theater. At any rate, the 
theater simulated this situation with the new fixed architectural division 
between stage and auditorium and, on stage, political themes and char-
acters abandoned to their fate. For the endogenous dynamics of the vi-
sual arts that began to develop in the Renaissance, the social upgrading of 
artists through courtly contacts is considered to have been an important 
stimulus.270 The American mass media system began its historical career 
with advertising free sheets containing added and therefore ideologically 
neutral news;271 there must therefore first have been a market without fur-
ther sociopolitical interests. In early modern times, European universities 
profited from the switch from a religiously determined clientele system to 
a political, territorial-state one, which could provide greater freedom in 
professional training;272 and then again in the nineteenth century from the 
switch to the “unity of research and teaching,” thus to science. As long ago 
as the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the legal system achieved remark-
able independence from the feudal system, which still controlled politics, 
and from the dogmatic premises of religion, because it was employed as 
an instrument for differentiating religion (canon law) and politics (com-
mon law, city charters, feudal rights) and for developing broad organiza-
tion of government for both the Church and the emerging territorial states 
(­England, Sicily). It therefore had to satisfy the relevant requirements for 
precision and adaptability.273
That evolution can recruit opportunities that may later lapse when a 
new format of autopoiesis and self-organization is secured therefore breaks 
the circularity of the evolution-theoretical explanation and moves on to 
historical analysis. This naturally does not mean that there is an automa-
tism that exploits every opportunity; nor does it mean that one can return 
to a purely narrative sequence. A theory of self-referential systems and self-
evolving evolutions is needed to formulate the problem.
Inasmuch as subsystem evolutions are set into motion on the basis 
of special functions and codings, and then ensure evolutionary structural 

 
  Evolution
changes within these systems that are no longer coordinated between sys-
tems, the conditions to which the evolution of the societal system reacts 
change. That societal evolution is increasingly the result of subsystem evo-
lutions must have considerable impact. It certainly does not mean that we 
can no longer speak of societal evolution, because, after all, the subsystems 
themselves carry out the (deviating) reproduction of society. It is also, from 
the point of view of the system reference society, still a matter of language, 
of symbolically generalized media and of the relationship between system 
and environment. What can be observed, however, are changes in the se-
mantic self-description of society.274 Since the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury, no one has dared presume progress. Despite all the controversy about 
“social Darwinism,” evolution itself was still described in terms of posi-
tively connoted structural characteristics (for instance, survival of the best 
adapted), but this sort of postulate can now be advanced only ideologi-
cally, only controversially. And behind the increasing uncertainty about 
the future, the presentiment is emerging that an evolution of evolutions 
per se will produce unforeseeable states of affairs.
In the second half of the twentieth century, society as a whole can 
be characterized only by the specific problems that arise at the level of this 
system with the extrasocietal environment: with the ecological conditions 
for ongoing restabilization and with increasingly intractable, alienated in-
dividuals. Evolution is no longer expected to produce ever better adapta-
tion. The facts speak for the contrary. The question can therefore only be 
how society is to maintain the state of adaptedness required to continue its 
own autopoiesis under conditions of high complexity and improbability. 
Subsystem evolutions can give no answer. They make it much more likely 
that science will generate more and more knowledge, leading to more and 
more uncertainty; that the economy will generate more and more capital 
looking to be invested, but which is not invested; that, in the course of de-
mocratization and thematic universalization, the proportion of decisions 
taken in politics to refrain from a decision will increase; that the law will 
be embedded in a framework where it is subjected to renewed deliberation 
and “weighing up” of how it is to be determined, and whether it ought to 
be applied at all. In all these cases, acceleration and delay multiply simul-
taneously, producing friction that makes synchronization more and more 
difficult. For a young generation with a long life expectancy, the perspec-
tives become blurred.

Evolution    
We have at any rate to abandon an idea that long dominated in 
modernization research after World War II, the notion that modernization 
trends in the individual functional systems, namely, political democracy, 
the market-oriented money economy, the rule of law, dogmatically un-
hampered scientific research, uncensored mass media, school education for 
the entire population according to individual aptitude, and so on would 
trigger a wave of development in which the achievements of the various 
functional systems would mutually support and confirm one another. The 
contrary is more probable. Following Richard Norgaard, I have already 
spoken of the “co-evolution of unsustainability.”275 We could also say that 
evolution can confirm only itself.
All this enhances the impression that only evolution will get us fur-
ther, but the question is how and where to. If this cannot be answered, not 
even in such a simple schema as better/worse, the resulting uncertainty 
will become a factor that reacts to evolution in similarly unforeseeable 
manner, possibly quite differently, depending on the subsystem evolution 
concerned.
12. Evolution and History
Evolution theory describes systems that reproduce themselves from 
moment to moment in many individual operations, using or failing to use 
and changing or failing to change structures. All this happens in a pres-
ent and in a world that exist simultaneously (and can hence not be influ-
enced). For its operational reproduction, such a system requires no history 
to begin with. Having got as far as I have in writing this book, I only need 
to find the next sentence. Here it is.
Evolution theory, like systems theory, therefore assumes that un-
counted operations (counting would be another operation) take place si-
multaneously and, by producing further operations, reproduce the system. 
The special interest of evolution theory is in deviant reproduction as a 
condition for structural change. To begin with, this has nothing to do 
with historiography, which makes it understandable that from the stand-
point of the history of science, evolutionism and historicism are at log-
gerheads.276 Conceding the difference in perspective, the controversy is 
unnecessary. Characteristically, historians look for new knowledge in the 
past (instead of keeping it in memory only through ritually maintained 

 
  Evolution
contact). They combine narration with causal explanation with the pro-
viso of doing justice to accessible sources. No theory of societal evolution 
can or wants to compete with this. For the sociological perspective and es-
pecially for systems-theoretical analysis, causal explanations are so difficult 
that they are inadvisable at the level of general theoretical propositions, 
and for narration, the sociologist lacks improvisational talent. This is par-
ticularly true because the societal system has to be understood as a self-­
referential system (a nontrivial machine in Heinz von Foerster’s sense)277 in 
which transformations do not simply take place: their taking place is also 
observed and communicated. As a result, intentions (however inappropri-
ate) develop that seek to prevent the change or to promote it.278 The theory 
of societal evolution can accordingly not undertake to explain the cause of 
the course of history or merely of certain events. The objective is only to 
provide a theoretical schema for historical studies, which, under favorable 
circumstances, may point to causally relevant origins. But hypotheses for 
such transitions would first have to be developed with regard to certain 
historical states of affairs. They can neither be derived from evolution the-
ory nor, correspondingly generalized, can they “verify” evolution theory. 
The “variation—selection—restabilization” differentiation schema of evo-
lution theory is circular. All historical analyses must, however, set out from 
specific situations and, for the purposes of evolution-theoretical explana-
tion, show how opportunities and restrictions in these situations interlock.
To give an example, in the historical and social-science literature deal-
ing with Europe’s special path [Sonderweg] since the Middle Ages, hence 
with the origins of modern society, factor theories confront one another that 
single out religion, economics, political state building, or law. When consid-
ering the Middle Ages, the differentiation of functional systems has clearly 
been the schema to assert itself. Where a primary factor is postulated, the 
relevance of others is recognized and attributed to it. ­Immanuel Wallerstein, 
for example, takes the segmentation of the European world of states to be a 
consequence of the international division of labor in the economy.279 Max 
Weber derives the primacy of religious orientation from a need to legitimate 
unleashed economic motives.280 More recent authors give primacy back to 
politics and see the decisive factor in the prevention of empire building and 
in the segmentary, territorial-state order of the political control of force.281 
For just as good reasons, the early differentiation of a systematized legal cul-
ture is posited as a European peculiarity that generates deviation.282 These 

Evolution    
controversies will persist as long as such primacy theories are advanced. 
Methodologically, it should be noted that many good arguments but no hy-
pothesis of a particularly important factor can be derived from the sources. 
And theoretically, we must ask whether it makes any sense at all to attribute 
the transition to functional differentiation (if that is what is at issue) to pri-
macy of one of the functional systems, however historically relative.
A theory of societal evolution renounces causal explanations (or ­limits 
them to minimal sectors of macrosocietal evolution). It replaces the causal 
schema by the assumption of circular evolutionary conditions.283 In every 
historical situation, society is a nontrivial, historical machine, which uses 
variation, selection, and restabilization in accordance with the momen-
tarily given state of affairs. What matters is only that these evolutionary 
mechanisms can be separated, and this requires a minimum of complex-
ity in the system. The result is a trend toward deviation amplification in 
which, returning to our examples, the early territorial-state organizations 
(such as the Norman states of England and Sicily or the republics of Italy) 
were able to use legal instruments also deployed by the Church in combat-
ing the theocratic ambitions of the Holy Roman Emperor, and that owed 
their essential impetus to the chance rediscovery of ancient Roman texts 
and their glossing for teaching purposes. The development of the money 
economy (for instance, banking) used the same instruments, which at the 
same time, however, freed the concept of property from its basis in feu-
dal law in the course of the first monetary inflation in England (around 
1200).284 Much depended on a system of territorial-state jurisdiction that 
also functioned outside the cities (e.g., with respect at least to loans se-
cured by land), and thus also on the consolidation of political control over 
a territory that was itself not vast enough in its impact to be able to regu-
late trade. Typical of these early forms of functional differentiation there-
fore appears to be that evolutionary advances of a very specific sort develop 
within the ambit of particular functions and act on other evolutionary pos-
sibilities as chance events that can be used in the historical situation.
In other words, evolution theory stresses the rather improbable, op-
portunistic tendency for structural changes, which, all in all, transform im-
probable opportunities through integration in systems into probabilities of 
maintaining and developing their possibilities. At any rate, no historiogra-
phy can manage without the notion of structural change. It will also have 
to consult evolution theory; and the question can only be whether the res-

 
  Evolution
olution capacity of evolution theory takes the need for sources in historical 
research and its propensity for putting unanswerable questions so far that 
any account of a meaningful, coherent history in which what comes later 
is explained by what comes earlier cannot be achieved in this roundabout 
way. Historians have anyway dissociated themselves from any notion of 
“universal history.”
History is made when events of importance in society are observed 
with regard to the difference between before and after (hence as events 
and, more precisely, as breaks). It presupposes that the difference in time 
thus revealed cannot simply be dissolved by disidentification in the sense 
that the society existing after the event is a different one than that before. 
Thus the Persian wars made the Greeks aware of their identity beforehand 
and afterward—an identity that united the many cities of Greece. The ear-
liest Western historiography documents this. More and more, events that 
make history could also be structural changes in the system—for instance, 
the great politico-economic reforms in early Greece and in Rome, or the 
announcement of a religious reform, which in the face of resistance was, 
in historical retrospective, to become the revelation of a new religion. The 
difference between before and after makes it possible to celebrate the unity 
of the different. Even the “revolutions” of modern times can make history 
in this fashion, as success for people or success of ideas.
The old world was able to safeguard this unity of the difference be-
tween before and after in the horizon of time itself with the aid of the dif-
ference between transient time and eternity.285 Eternity could describe the 
position simultaneous with all times from which God observed human-
kind and their history, whereas the advent of difference (the emergence of 
time as the one side of this difference) was explained as the break with God, 
the Fall of Man.286 In timeless time, eternity, lay the real meaning of history 
and also the certainty that everything is going the way God wishes it to go.
In the transition to modern society, this safeguarding of the meaning 
of events in a timeless eternity breaks down. In the seventeenth century, we 
find this position occupied by the notion of a conservatio as a natural result 
of natural processes. In other eyes, in Milton’s Paradise Lost, it is assumed 
that the meaning of history has to be explained to man (Adam, the reader) 
in the midst of history; for Adam was not able to observe the beginning 
and cannot yet observe the end; but he needs orientation now. The eigh-
teenth century reacted to this by rethinking historical time and history, 

Evolution    
with history itself becoming part of history and having to be rewritten in 
every age.287 The space of history was now too small for what one would 
now like to, indeed, have to, do to persist in the future. The nineteenth 
century found itself confronted by the same problem, and solved it partly 
through the notion of unique historical processes and “individual laws” of 
history,288 partly through evolution theory. No further progress had been 
made even by the end of the twentieth century.
Expecting evolution theory to meaningfully interpret the unity of 
difference is asking too much of it scientifically. Its real achievements lie in 
the theoretical specification of the problems of structural change. It does 
not even offer a theory of the historical process, let alone any substantive 
directional indications—for example, in the sense of concepts of prog-
ress or decline. It provides no information about the future—in either a 
comforting or discomforting sense. If it can nevertheless contribute to the 
self-description of modern society, and this can happen only in close asso-
ciation with systems theory and communication theory. Such a combina-
tion of theory can produce historically fruitful questions. Only thus can 
the demand for sufficiently complex analytical tools and conceptual preci-
sion be met. And only thus can a specifically scientific contribution be made 
to the self-description of modern society, which can be also be put to the 
test in science itself, through research.
Whether evolution theory or not, every theory of history leads to the 
reorganization of data requirements. The need for data is independent of 
the source situation, for it arises from the theory. This might drive histo-
rians to distraction or to renounce theory. The problem presents itself dif-
ferently for the sociology of societal history. It has no intention of writing 
history, nor does it seek to establish sufficient coherence in relations be-
tween events. Its problem is that the time dimension of the societal system 
can be excluded or ignored by no theory of society. It knows that all sys-
tems that reenter the distinction between system and environment into the 
system require a memory function that informs them of the present as the 
result of an unchanging history. It is thus concerned, not with the coher-
ence of events, but with consistency in the theoretical apparatus of societal 
theory. I have mentioned one example of this problem in discussing the 
links between evolution theory and systems theory. The consequence is a 
considerable data deficit with corresponding verification difficulties. How-
ever, substantial possibilities for reinterpreting sources are also created.

 
  Evolution
13. Memory
The evolution theory used above treats society as if it could be ob-
served from without. This may well be due to its origins in biological re-
search. But sociologists, too, often uphold the claim of their discipline to 
scientific status as if they could observe society from the outside and had 
at best to take account of “intersubjective” agreement and the effects of the 
communication of their observations on society. In principle, historians rec-
ognize that all history is written in current and continuing history; but their 
concept for self-reference is and remains history, not society. They are satis-
fied to work with provisional historical accounts, which, although not tak-
ing their perspective from the end of history, do set out from the state of 
knowledge at the time of writing. A sociology concerned with the theory 
of society will have to revise these assumptions, which means it will have 
to observe them again. Here we are concerned, however, only with how so-
ciety reenters its evolution into evolution; that is to say, what role the fact 
that transformation is observed and commented on plays in evolutionary 
transformations.
I have repeatedly emphasized that evolution theory does not dem-
onstrate causal sequences (though it does not exclude observers maintain-
ing that they can discover links between causes and effects). What is more, 
evolution theory is unable to confirm a further form of the usual historical 
account of continuity, namely, that innovations explicitly assert themselves 
against existing structures, thus mobilizing a historical process. For this 
would presuppose an observer who singles out certain distinctions from 
others, for example, who speaks of a rising social class that differentiates it-
self both upwardly and downwardly. This is not to deny that time-related 
distinctions occur, for example, between old and new or between before 
and after. But what needs to be clarified is why certain distinctions are pre-
ferred over others. For this we need a theory that goes beyond merely ob-
serving and explaining continuities and discontinuities, lasting influences, 
or marked breaks, and that can ask how such distinctions can be made in 
an already evolving system and what decides that this distinction is made 
and not that.
This presupposes that the system can distinguish itself. If the com-
plexity of the societal system then permits the distinctions the system uses 
to reenter what it has distinguished,289 the system becomes opaque to itself. 

Evolution    
It can no longer adequately observe itself with the operations that generate 
and change its own state. This holds true particularly dramatically for the 
time dimension, for the very reason that complexity is now increasingly 
“temporalized,” in other words, has to be developed and reduced succes-
sively. This is only another way of putting the common thesis that no sys-
tem can control its own evolution. Instead the system uses an additional 
facility in current (present) operations, which can be called “memory,” fol-
lowing Spencer-Brown.290 In any case, a system that establishes historical 
causes for its present state or wishes to describe this as differing from early 
states, for example, as “modern,” requires a memory to process the distinc-
tions.291 But what is memory?
I use the term “memory” here neither in the sense of a possible return 
to the past nor in the sense of a store of data or information we can draw 
on as need be.292 I am talking about a function in constant but only present 
use that tests all incipient operations for consistency with what the system 
constructs as reality. In the field we are dealing with, these operations are 
communications, and thus not neurobiological changes in the state of the 
brain nor what enters the awareness of a single consciousness. The function 
of the memory is therefore to limit possible consistency checks and at the 
same time to free information-processing capacities in order to open the 
system to new irritations. The main function of memory therefore lies in 
forgetting, in preventing the system from blocking itself by congealing the 
results of earlier observations.293
Forgetting should not be understood as a sort of loss of access to what 
is past; for this would mean that time is fundamentally reversible. Forget-
ting has a positive function, because time acts both irreversibly and cumu-
latively.294 The link between these two properties must be both preserved 
and interrupted, and precisely this is the function of memory, or, to put it 
more exactly, the double function of remembering and forgetting. With-
out forgetting there would be neither learning nor evolution. This double 
function is already built into ongoing reimpregnation (psychologists often 
say “reinforcement”). On the one hand, a compact impression of famil-
iarity, of acquaintance with things is developed through repetition of the 
communication, the language it uses, its references. On the other, how 
things were when certain impressions or demands and irritations were new, 
surprising, unfamiliar, is forgotten. The repetition itself generates both re-
membering and forgetting. But it is always a question of preconditions for 

 
  Evolution
the operation under way, not of jumping about in time. In chess, for in-
stance, we can set out from the present positions of the pieces on the board 
and do not need to remember how they reached them. Chess problems are 
accordingly presented in newspapers without going into the history of the 
game. It would be far too complex if this history had to be remembered to 
enable the game to continue, even though it might be useful to recall the 
last moves of one’s opponent in sequence the better to guess his strategy. 
This example shows that the present suffices largely as representation of the 
past. But this is a highly stylized borderline case, which demonstrates how 
very much forgetting enables complexity to be overcome. The situation is 
different for even the simplest language games. We cannot enter an ongo-
ing conversation and join in without being introduced to the history of 
the interaction or being able to guess it. A conversation cannot constantly 
forget itself; but this has repercussions for complexity and, we can perhaps 
say, for the relative rulelessness of the system.
If the present has to be accepted as congealed past, this generally suf-
fices—on condition that enough identities (in our examples, the potential 
moves of the various chessmen; the possible uses of words) guarantee that a 
forgotten past that is with us only as present can be linked to a future. Iden-
tities are special achievements that disburden memory. Only exceptionally 
are identities so condensed that they are available for repeated use. Only 
exceptionally do “objects” develop in the recursive operating of the system 
as system-specific “eigenvalues” by which the system can observe stability 
and changes.295 Only exceptionally is forgetting therefore inhibited. And 
only exceptionally are memories provided with a time index, which pre-
vents too much heterogeneous material as a permanent property of objects 
from generating too many inconsistencies. Thus, only exceptionally are the 
system’s eigenvalues dissolved through time markings such as past/future 
or even through datings to allow temporary objects, limited-term entities, 
episodes, and so on, to arise, whose present relevance can again be filtered.
The present is nothing other than the distinction between past and 
future. It is not an independent period but takes up only the operational 
time necessary to observe distinctions in the time horizons of past and fu-
ture (in whatever factual regard). If the memory can exercise its function 
only in current operation, that is, only in the present, this means that it has 
to do with the difference between past and future, that it manages this dis-
tinction—and does not, for example, operate in relation only to the past.296 

Evolution    
We can therefore also say that the memory controls the resistance of the 
system’s operations to the system’s operations. With its consistency checks, 
it notes what, after processing of this internal, self-organized resistance, the 
system takes to be “reality” (in the sense of res). And this in turn means that 
it examines which reality provides the system’s perspective on the future.
Can we visualize this more precisely?
We go a step further with the thesis that the transfer function of 
memory relates to distinctions; or, more exactly, to indications of some-
thing as opposed to something else. The memory operates with what has 
been successfully indicated and tends to forget the other side of the dis-
tinction. Although it can also mark distinctions as forms, for instance, 
the distinction between good and evil, it tends to forget what this distinc-
tion was distinguished from. The particularity of discrimination in the 
forgetting/remembering schema is determined not least by language and 
is insofar a characteristic of social systems. Although the subject/predicate 
structure of our language does not exclude always mentioning what all 
components of a sentence are distinguished from, this would be extremely 
long-winded. Even the perceiving consciousness when remembering con-
centrates on things or events rather than on the settings in which they 
were embedded when perceived; or it remembers these settings as complex 
arrangements for which further links are lacking. This has proved worth-
while, not least because the things that we consciously remember or the 
topics to which communication can return can be taken out of their con-
text by identification and confirmed as worth repeating, whereas concrete 
situations never repeat themselves—although there can be no indication 
without distinction, no singling out, no observation.
Throwing light on the background to the distinctions a system uses to 
observe shows how the memory contributing to this process distinguishes 
between and links past and present. Whereas the distinction itself remains 
unmarked in the past (which, as we have seen, also holds for the distinguish-
ing of distinctions), in the area that functions as future, the distinction is 
used to enable oscillation, the crossing of the internal boundary.297 If, for ex-
ample, in extradomestic (“political”) matters talk has explicitly or implicitly 
been only of men, a future can be conceptualized that remembers that men 
are to be distinguished from women, and that the boundary can be crossed 
and recrossed within this distinction, that oscillation is possible. In the pres-
ent, the function of memory is then to remember the distinction or to sub-

 
  Evolution
stitute the distinction man/unmarked by the distinction man/woman, or to 
remove this distinction from the context of the polis/oikos distinction (see 
Plato’s “community of women”) in order to gain a past that provides the fu-
ture with scope for oscillation.
Memory is not the system, for the system must already be running if 
it is to be able to remember anything; and the remembered past is conse-
quently not the past of the system. An external observer can always add an-
other past or treat the past remembered in the system as fictional. ­Logicians 
and linguists (as external observers) will be tempted to distinguish “levels” 
and to advance a principle of nonconfusion; which is more plausible in 
this context than elsewhere, for by forgetting, memory distinguishes itself 
from the level of system operations.
We need such a general theory of memory, suitable also for mathe-
matical, neurobiological, and psychological purposes, if we are to ask how 
the memory of society and its subsystems work. I am not talking about 
so-called “collective memory,” which consists only in consciousness sys-
tems subjected to the same social conditions remembering by and large 
the same states of affairs.298 Social memory does not consist in the traces 
communications leave behind in individual consciousness systems.299 It is 
an achievement of communicative operations themselves, of their own, 
indispensable recursivity. A social memory is reproduced only by every 
communication actualizing determinate meaning; it is assumed that com-
munication is in a position to make something of this meaning, that, so 
to speak, it already knows it. At the same time repeated use of the same 
references ensures that this will also be so in future cases.300 The ongoing 
reimpregnation of communicatively usable meaning and the correspond-
ing forgetting presupposes that consciousness systems collaborate, but 
does not depend on what single individuals remember and how they re-
fresh their own memories by participating in communication. Individuals 
are, in other words, free to associate identical topics with widely differing 
memories and thus to influence social communication as if by chance. Al-
though social memory would not function if there were no consciousness 
systems endowed with memory (just as consciousness systems for their 
part have to rely on neurophysiologically reproduced memory), it is not 
based on the memories held by consciousness systems, for they are much 
too diverse and cannot be brought down to a common denominator in 
communication. Although we can assume that the scope of social evolu-

Evolution    
tion for variation is limited where individuals have a strongly developed 
collective memory at their disposal and communication can presuppose 
that all participants have sufficiently similar memories, this does not ex-
plain how evolutionary variation is possible at all and how social commu-
nication separates remembering (past) and oscillation (future).
Every society has to rely on its own, self-produced memory taking 
part in all operations; for no society could make the continuation of its 
own operations dependent on first clarifying (and how, if not by means 
of communication?) what is given participants neurophysiologically and 
psychologically as known, as familiar, as past facts. Illiterate societies rely 
on “objects” or “quasi-objects.”301 What is meant is neither topics of com-
munication expressly spoken about from case to case, nor the mere mate-
riality of matters in the outside world, but determination of the meaning 
and correct form of objects (houses, tools, places, and ways, or names of 
natural objects, but also of human beings) to which communication can 
refer without doubts arising about what is intended and how to deal with 
it. The memory function is marked by the assumption that there are “cor-
rect” forms and “correct” names and that knowledge of names gives power 
over objects. Ornaments can intensify this labeling and build bridges for 
directing mental attention. There are also “quasi-objects,” rites or celebra-
tions or narratable myths, in other words, stagings whose special function 
it is to provide the operations of the system with memory in a manner not 
foreseeable in detail. The narrative traditions of illiterate societies now so 
thoroughly investigated also serve not to transfer knowledge but to prepare 
narrators and audience for something they already know and reactualize as 
memory. The required memory performance of singers is tied to the form 
of communication, to rhythm, music, formalisms, ready-made phrases al-
ready adapted to rhythms, stagings, and so on, and could not even be 
brought to awareness independently of communication.
There was hence memory of this sort long before writing was in-
vented.302 The memory of early societies is above all topographical mem-
ory.303 A topographical memory suffices as long as the problem lies in 
providing scenes for repeatable action (for example, sacred places or tem-
ples for worship). It provides places, including buildings, that enable and 
separate interactions.304 In this lies the structure to be taken as known, 
which regulates meetings (and the avoidance of meetings). An area of soci-
ety is also demarcated, an inhabited “civilization” in opposition to an un-

 
  Evolution
known and therefore “wild” environment, and nonobjectivated events can 
be forgotten. Since this state of familiarity (like all memory) operates un-
noticed, the only special problem that remains is the personal wish not to 
be forgotten. In Mesopotamia, it was addressed initially to the gods, and 
later to posterity.305 Writing merely complements the object-bound mem-
ory with a more mobile memory, which can constantly be regenerated, but 
which, when it comes to writing matters down, also requires decisions to 
be made between remembering and forgetting, for which criteria and con-
trols have subsequently to be developed.
Neither illiterate nor literate societies had been able fully to grasp 
their dependence on self-produced memory, even though there was a 
highly developed cult of memory and corresponding techniques for learn-
ing to remember. Only in modern societies has a sufficiently general con-
cept of culture developed that is suitable for distinguishing social memory 
from other social functions.306 Without an adequate theory of memory at 
his disposal, Talcott Parsons had a ground-breaking intuition. His general 
theory of the action system provides for a function of “latent-pattern main-
tenance,” latency meaning that patterns of order have to be maintained 
and handed down even if they are not actualized at the moment. Accord-
ing to Parsons, this is the task of the cultural subsystem of the action sys-
tem. Culture must accordingly have existed since the formation of human 
society began, and the problem is only that and how a cultural system and 
a social system differentiated in the course of evolution that contributed 
differently to enabling action.307 However, the concept of culture does not 
yet explain precisely enough how this bridging function is performed. To 
discover this, we must take recourse to a theory of memory, and this raises 
the question of what we gain by calling social memory culture.
Let us therefore reformulate the problem and ask why society invents 
a concept of culture to describe its memory. For culture is a historical con-
cept,308 and modern society would have to recollect when and why it intro-
duced it. It presumably did so to reorganize its memory and adapt it to the 
requirements of modern, highly complex, endogenously dynamic society.
For “culture” as an independent domain in opposition to “nature” 
was spoken of only from the second half of the eighteenth century,309 in re-
action to increasingly universalistic, historical, and regional comparisons, 
which included extreme cases (“wild,” prebiblical times), and process the 
material from the point of view of a “culture” necessary for humankind. 

Evolution    
The phenomenon addressed has yet to be successfully demarcated, for ex-
ample, semiotically in relation to “signs” in general or sociologically in rela-
tion to “action.”310 This could suggest that culture is indeed nothing other 
than the memory of society, hence the filter of forgetting/­remembering 
and the appropriation of the past to determine the variation framework 
of the future. This could also explain why culture does not understand it-
self as being the best of all possibilities, but rather as responsible for steer-
ing the possibilities of comparison, and thus obstructing the view of other 
possibilities. In other words, culture prevents us from considering what we 
could do instead of what we are accustomed to. The invention of a special 
concept of culture would accordingly be due to a situation in which soci-
ety has become so complex that it has to forget more and remember more 
and has to reflect on this, and therefore needs a sorting mechanism that 
can satisfy these requirements.
This brings us to the concept of “cultural capital” introduced by 
Pierre Bourdieu.311 For capital is nothing other than accumulated past, 
which can be treated as a disposable resource without the learning and ap-
propriation processes themselves having to be remembered. The concept 
of capital conceals the possibilities of comparison, which were originally 
the concern of the culture concept, and replaces them with the social com-
parison of the prestige value of symbolic goods, so that the concept of cul-
tural capital covers only a narrow segment of what the culturally formed 
memory means for society.
The influence of the memory on structural developments goes largely 
unnoticed. Memory is not named as their cause. Thus incipient political 
centralism in early Mesopotamia might be attributable to the deeds of 
kings being the main subjects of reports and to these reports being handed 
down,312 but their selectivity is naturally not to be seen as the cause of royal 
rule. The problem of memory is instead seen mainly in memory losses. To 
begin with, it was mainly people who wanted to prevent being forgotten. 
Only later did one want to preserve existing factual knowledge and skills 
from oblivion. In the old memoria theory, a key problem was already how 
to prevent forgetting, at any rate, forgetting truths. The so-called Renais-
sance with its refined theory of memory had discovered that things in the 
arts and sciences had once been better in this world (!) and that the level 
then reached had once again to be attained. The proof of this possibility lay 
in the past.313 However, this tradition-dependent concept was overtaxed. 

 
  Evolution
Rethinking of the problem began with Giambattista Vico [1668–1744],314 
and toward the end of the eighteenth century resulted in the newly formu-
lated concept of culture.
This can be conceived of as a special “sphere of subject matter” that 
is comprehensible to science (even be it only to the “humanities”). The 
discussion continues. If, however, we assume that interest in “interesting” 
comparison was the activating factor, it is evident that a new sort of differ-
entiation technique is in play. Triadic relations are needed, if not triv­alent 
logics, namely, a comparative perspective from which what is the same can 
be recognized despite major, often extreme diversity—no longer in the 
schema of natural similarities between species and genera but in that of 
functional equivalences. For example, there is now a function of religion 
that can be fulfilled in very different ways. And there is a cultural symp-
tomatology that reads cultural phenomena as symptoms for something 
else.315 The broad radius of comparison stimulates a culture of suspicion to 
which sociology can then connect.316 And tradition is now no longer the 
self-evidence of what memory presents, but a form of observing culture.317
With this new semantics of “culture,” a newly formed thinking about 
difference appears—newly formed in the form of comparisons. Older soci-
eties, too, had grounded their institutions on judgments of like and unlike, 
thus cognitively safeguarding these institutions.318 Depending on the state 
of familiarization in the societies in question, this could happen in various 
ways and without the concept of culture. The culture concept switches, 
and hence mobilizes orientation, from sameness to comparability. At least 
when it began, this still allowed one to presuppose a multiplicity of societ-
ies that could be compared in their regional and/or historical diversity. This 
comparison has far-reaching effects. In the course of time—for example, 
in the empirical research of ethnology, not to mention the research of the 
Durkheim school into classifications—it demolishes the supposition that 
there can be any natural basis in the nature of things for judging likeness 
and unlikeness. Formally, this interest in comparison burdens itself with 
the advance determination of comparative standpoints and the question of 
the social conditionality of this decision. Initially, one appears to have had 
enough self-confidence to locate comparisons regionally (centered on Eu-
rope, if not on a single nation) or historically, which required a special con-
cept of zeitgeist or modernity. Or the mass of material was processed strictly 
“scientifically” (in ethnology, the historical sciences, the humanities); and 

Evolution    
it had to be accepted that the scientific status of these efforts had to be dis-
tinguished from the established natural sciences. Yet all this produced con-
ceptual problems that would not have arisen (or arisen differently) in a 
systems-theoretical approach that regards society itself as difference.
The differentiation technique of culture, relating to comparisons and 
developed on the basis of comparisons, has considerable consequences for 
how society reacts to its own evolution. To an unprecedented degree, cul-
tural comparisons inhibit forgetting. Not only truths are saved from the em-
brace of forgetting but, one could say, all sorts of things. More is recognized 
as like than before, but this no longer provides certain orientation. Memory 
thus loses the function of providing leads. It loses the function of check-
ing for consistency in the ongoing operations (communications) of society. 
This task has to be left to the special memories of the functional systems, 
which can no longer be mutually integrated.319 The reality construction of 
society as a whole thus remains indeterminate.320 It is transferred to a func-
tional system, the system of the mass media. What can now be offered as 
overall formula for reality construction is that there is no longer any such 
formula.321 As we know, Hegel had no heirs.
But this does not mean that every link between past and future is 
broken; for this would also mean that the two time horizons can no longer 
be distinguished, since they would be “unmarked states” for each other.322 
Something along these lines seems to be envisioned when the legend of the 
“end of history” is invoked; but it is in stark contradiction to what society 
assumes and reproduces every day in its communications. At this point, 
the theory of societal memory outlined above might be of help.
It seems that our culture operates by reading distinctions into the 
past, which supply frames in which the future can oscillate. The distinc-
tions indicate forms that determine what the “other possibility” to a deter-
minate something would be. Concretion of the distinctions used in each 
instance remains variable; but in order to vary distinctions, they have to 
be distinguished, marked as forms, and thus submitted to the same condi-
tions of oscillation within implicitly or explicitly presupposed distinctions. 
There appears to be no binding “primary distinction” any more323—­neither 
that of being and nonbeing nor that of truth values, neither that of science 
nor that of morality.324 But this does not mean that distinctions are not neces­
sary. The consequence is only that we are obliged to observe who uses what 
distinctions for setting their past for their future.

 
  Evolution
Whereas we assume that evolution happens the way it happens, and 
that it does so in a fashion that leaves the coupling of past to future to 
chance in the forms of variation/selection/restabilization, the operational 
memory of the system is concerned precisely with the coupling of past and 
future; but to couple these time horizons, it first has to distinguish be-
tween them. Evolution knows no beginnings. Memory (and possibly evo-
lution theory, where it serves as system memory) may well find order and 
satisfaction in the construction of beginnings (e.g., Homer). Breaks then 
serve as distinctions that make it possible to consider what has come before 
to be insignificant. For its part, memory is a product of evolution; but it 
cannot remember this. It builds a manageable, self-constructed time differ-
ence into what has happened. The forms in which this occurs, that is, the 
distinctions with which memory operates, evolve with evolution and take 
effect within it. But they generate no representation of evolution, they do 
not represent it; they can therefore not control it. The future remains evo-
lutionarily indeterminate and unpredictable. But memory can nevertheless 
determine the future as the sphere of possible oscillations, thus making the 
operations of the system dependent on the distinctions that are used in 
each case for indicating one side (but not the other), and that hence point 
to which boundary can be crossed.
Evolution is and remains unpredictable. Memory cannot change 
this. It can only adapt with various forms, depending on the irritation 
and acceleration coefficients that arise from evolution. An ontologically no 
longer comprehensible, identifiable culture locating itself in itself appears 
to be the form that the memory of society has invented and accepted in 
order to adapt the historical constructions and future perspectives of soci-
ety to the conditions that have developed from the transition to primarily 
functional differentiation and from the threatening collapse of the distinc-
tion between stability and variation. It is thus justified and justifiable to 
retain a usage already introduced and to describe societal evolution also as 
“sociocultural evolution.”

Notes
abbreviations
Luhmann, Aufklärung  Niklas Luhmann, Soziologische Aufklärung, 6 vols. 
(­Opladen, 1970–1995)
Luhmann, Gesellschaft  Niklas Luhmann, Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft 
(Frankfurt, 1997)
Luhmann, Gesellschaftsstruktur  Niklas Luhmann, Gesellschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik, 4 vols. (Frankfurt, 1980–1995)
Luhmann, Systeme  Niklas Luhmann, Soziale Systeme: Grundriß einer allgemeinen 
Theorie (Frankfurt, 1984)
Spencer-Brown, Laws  George Spencer-Brown, Laws of Form (1969; new ed., 
New York, 1979)
preface
1.  Trans. under the title Social Systems (Stanford, CA, 1995).
2.  Trans. under the title Law as a Social System (Oxford, 2004).
3.  Trans. under the title Art as a Social System (Stanford, CA, 2000).
4.  Niklas Luhmann and Raffaele De Giorgi, Teoria della società (Milan, 1992).
5.  See Mary B. Hesse, Models and Analogies in Science (Notre Dame, IN, 1966).
translator’s note
1.  Niklas Luhmann, Soziologie des Risikos (Berlin, 1991), trans. Rhodes Barrett 
under the title Risk: A Sociological Theory (New York, 1993).
chapter 1: society as a social system
1.  In similar vein, Lars Löfgren uses the term “autolinguistic” to mean a form 
that has to be logically “unfolded” in distinguishing between levels. See Löfgren, 
“Life as an Autolinguistic Phenomenon,” in Autopoiesis: A Theory of Living Orga­
nization, ed. Milan Zeleny (New York, 1981), 236–249.

    Notes to Chapter 1
2.  Following Gotthard Günther, see, e.g., Fred Pusch, Entfaltung der sozial­
wissenschaftlichen Rationalität durch eine transklassische Logik (Dortmund, 1992).
3.  To this day! See Friedrich H. Tenbruck, “Emile Durkheim oder die ­Geburt 
der Gesellschaft aus dem Geist der Soziologie,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 10 (1981): 
333–350. To emphasize relations and dynamics, Georg Simmel writes only of “so-
ciation” [Vergesellschaftung]. Max Weber places so much (and such “tragic”) weight 
on differences between the value spheres, life orders, etc., of society that he man-
ages without a superordinate concept of unity. See Hartmann Tyrell, “Max Webers 
Soziologie—eine Soziologie ohne ‘Gesellschaft,’” in Max Webers Wissenschaftslehre, 
ed. Gerhard Wagner and H. Zipprian (Frankfurt, 1994), 390–414
4.  See Helmut Schelsky, Ortsbestimmung der deutschen Soziologie (1959; 3rd 
ed., Düsseldorf, 1967), 93ff. See also Horst Baier, Soziologie als Aufklärung—oder 
die Vertreibung der Transzendenz aus der Gesellschaft (Constance, 1989).
5.  See Friedrich H. Tenbruck, Geschichte und Gesellschaft (Berlin, 1986).
6.  See Peter Bürger, Prosa der Moderne (Frankfurt, 1988).
7.  At least in organizational theory, this is now recognized as the unfolding of 
a paradox. See Paradox and Transformation: Toward a Theory of Change in Organi­
zation and Management, ed. Robert E. Quinn and Kim S. Cameron (Cambridge, 
MA, 1988), esp. the article by Andrew H. Van de Ven and Marshall Scott Poole.
8.  See also Michael Mulkay, The Word and the World: Explorations in the Form 
of Sociological Analysis (London, 1985); John Law, ed., Power, Action and Belief: A 
New Sociology of Knowledge? (London, 1986).
9.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Warum AGIL?” Kölner Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 40 (1988): 127–139.
10.  See Richard Münch, “Moralische Diskurse: Das unvollendete Projekt 
der Moderne,” in id., Dynamik der Kommunikationsgesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), 
13–36.
11.  See Warren Weaver, “Science and Complexity,” American Scientist 36 
(1948): 536–544.
12.  See Gaston Bachelard, La formation de l’esprit scientifique: Contribution à 
une psychanalyse de la connaissance objective (Paris, 1947), 13ff. See also the reflec-
tions on counteradaptive results of adaptive change in Anthony Wilden, System 
and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange (1972; 2nd ed., London, 
1980), 205ff.
13.  Severe criticism of these premises dating back to the nineteenth century 
is to be found in Charles Tilly, Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Comparisons 
(New York, 1984). However, it remains theoretically unproductive, because along 
with the premises it also abandons the concept of society itself.
14.  The problem this posed for sociology was really clear from the outset. Dur-
kheim writes, e.g., in Les règles de la méthode sociologique (1894; 8th ed., Paris, 
1927), 127: “la société n’est pas une simple somme d’individus, mais le système 

Notes to Chapter 1    
formé par leur association représente une réalité spécifique qui a ses caractères 
propres.” What was at issue was only to define the specificity of this association. 
For can one conceive of an association without associates? As long as this theo-
retical gap is not filled, relapses will occur. Even more recent systems theories that 
introduced the concept of self-reference sometimes proceed on the assumption 
that social systems consist of people. To cite a philosopher, a physicist, a biolo-
gist, and a sociologist, see Pablo Navarro, El holograma social: Una ontología de 
la socialidad humana (Madrid, 1994); Mario Bunge, “A Systems Concept of So-
ciety: Beyond Individualism and Holism,” Theory and Decision 10 (1979): 13–30; 
Humberto R. Maturana, “Man and Society,” in Autopoiesis, Communication, and 
Society: The Theory of Autopoietic System in the Social Sciences, ed. Frank Benseler, 
Peter M. Hejl, and Wolfram K. Köck (Frankfurt, 1980), 11–13; Peter M. Hejl, 
Sozial­wissenschaft als Theorie selbstreferentieller Systeme (Frankfurt, 1982). Such con-
fusion renders it impossible, however, to define with any precision the operation 
performing autopoiesis in the case of organic, neurophysiological, psychic and 
social systems. To be sure, it is typically conceded that the entire human being is 
not part of the social system, but only so to the extent that he interacts with oth-
ers or actualizes consensual (parallelized) experiences. See, e.g., Peter M. Hejl, 
“Zum Begriff des Individuums—Bemerkungen zum ungeklärten Verhältnis von 
Psychologie und Soziologie,” in Systeme erkennen Systeme: Individuelle, soziale und 
methodische Bedingungen systemischer Diagnostik, ed. Günter Schiepek (Munich, 
1987), 115–154 (128). But far from improving things, this makes them worse: for 
it now becomes quite impossible to say what operation this “to the extent that” 
distinction performs; it is clearly neither cell chemistry nor brain, nor conscious-
ness, nor societal communication—at best a differentiating observer. One typical 
solution is to ignore system-constitutive operations altogether and to tackle the-
ory construction only at the level of “variables,” whose selection, however, then es-
capes theoretical control. See, e.g., B. Abbott Segraves, “Ecological Generalization 
and Structural Transformation of Sociocultural Systems,” American Anthropologist 
76 (1974): 530–552.
15.  Based on the current state of knowledge, we must presumably say that what 
is experienced and referred to as reason, will, sentiment, etc., is an interpretation 
after the fact of the outcome of neurophysiological operations, most likely serving 
to prepare them for conscious further processing, but by no means the decisive 
cause of human behavior. See, e.g., Brian Massumi, “The Autonomy of Affect,” 
Cultural Critique 31 (1995): 83–109.
16.  See J. H. Plumb et al., Man Versus Society in 18th-Century Britain: Six Points 
of View, ed. James L. Clifford (Cambridge, 1968).
17.  Georg Simmel, “Über sociale Differenzierung” (1890), in id., Gesamtaus­
gabe, vol. 2 (Frankfurt, 1989), 109–295 (126).
18.  On the current discussion, see Lea Campos Boralevi et al., Contrattualismo 

    Notes to Chapter 1
e scienze sociali: Storia ed attualità di un paradigma politico, ed. Antonio Carbonaro 
and Carlo Catarsi (Milan, 1992).
19.  See John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971), German trans. under the title 
Eine Theorie der Gerechtigkeit (Frankfurt, 1975), 27ff.
20.  See Emile Durkheim, Le suicide: Etude de sociologie (1897; Paris, 1987).
21.  This view owes much to the “social behaviorism” of George Herbert Mead, 
which is, however, repeatedly built into the usual consensus theory and conse-
quently misunderstood in its essential point. However, Mead is primarily con-
cerned with the generation of permanent objects as stabilizers of behavior in flux 
from event to event and only secondarily with whether such objects can also func-
tion as symbols for concordant views—but as symbols precisely because consensus 
can never be controlled under the conditions of the simultaneous eventness of ex-
perience and action. It is in the first place a theory of time and only in the second 
place a social theory based on necessary fictions. The question is how sociality is 
possible at all under the condition of simultaneity (= uncontrollability). And the 
answer is: through the constitution of objects as eigenvalues of behavior flowing 
in time. See esp. George Herbert Mead, “A Behavioristic Account of the Signifi-
cant Symbol” (1922) and, with reference to Whitehead, “The Genesis of Self and 
Social Control” (1925), trans. under the titles “Eine behavioristische Erklärung des 
signifikanten Symbols” and “Die Genesis der Identität und die soziale Kontrolle,” 
in Mead, Gesammelte Aufsätze, vol. 1 (Frankfurt, 1980), 290–298, 299–328. On 
criticism of social contract theory on the basis of a concept of “quasi-objets,” see 
­Michel Serres, Genèse (Paris, 1982), 146ff. However, Serres is concerned only with 
the special case that certain symbolic objects are specially constituted for the pur-
pose of social coordination. My reflections go far beyond this.
22.  For the best-known example, see Martin Heidegger, Sein und Zeit (1927; 
6th ed., Tübingen, 1949), § 10 (45ff.).
23.  Günter Dux, Geschlecht und Gesellschaft: Warum wir lieben: Die roman­
tische Liebe nach dem Verlust der Welt (Frankfurt, 1994) is particularly trenchant 
(and thus rather atypical).
24.  The objections are quite widespread and are made particularly by authors 
who take individuals/persons as their point of departure. See, e.g., Tim Ingold, 
Evolution and Social Life (Cambridge, 1986), 119ff. But they typically take the form 
of objections to the systems-theoretical concept of society—as if systems theory 
were obliged to set the boundaries of systems in space and time. We therefore have 
a double problem: (a) to explain why sociologists disregard evident reservations 
about the territorialistic concept, and (b) to formulate systems theory as the basis 
of society in such a way that in determining the boundaries of society, it does not 
have to rely on space and time.
25.  Immanuel Wallerstein, a strong critic of the concept of a state society, 
points out that in the twentieth century, the language area encompassing the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic, and Austria had 

Notes to Chapter 1    
sometimes been a single society and sometimes several societies. See Wallerstein, 
“Societal Development, or Development of the World-System,” International 
­Sociology 1(1986): 3–17, repr. in Globalization, Knowledge and Society, ed. Martin 
Albrow and Elisabeth King (London, 1990), 157–171. On the other hand, precisely 
Wallerstein stands by a regional understanding of society, apart from which he 
speaks only of a world-system.
26.  See only Wilbert E. Moore, “Global Sociology: The World as a Singular 
System,” American Journal of Sociology 71 (1966): 475–482; Roland Robertson, Glo­
balization: Social Theory and Global Culture (London, 1992).
27.  Anthony Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity (Stanford, CA, 1990), 
12ff. (16); see also 63ff. in extenso on “globalization.”
28.  See (with application to the development of cybernetic systems theory) the 
concept of skeuomorphs borrowed from archaeological anthropology in N. Kath-
erine Hayles, “Boundary Disputes: Homeostasis, Reflexivity, and the Foundations 
of Cybernetics,” Configurations 2, no. 3 (Fall 1994): 441–467. “A Skeuomorph is a 
design feature, no longer functional in itself, that refers back to an avatar that was 
functional at an earlier time” (446).
29.  This is advised by Italo Calvino in his Lezioni americane: Sei proposte per il 
prossimo millennio (Milan, 1988), 6–7. See also Niklas Luhmann, “Sthenographie,” 
Delfin 10 (1988): 4–12; also in Niklas Luhmann et al., Beobachter: Konvergenz der 
Erkenntnistheorien? (Munich, 1990), 119–137.
30.   Kenneth Burke, Permanence and Change (New York, 1935).
31.  Formulated in terms of language and text, see only Paul de Man, Resistance 
to Theory (Minneapolis, 1986).
32.  It can, of course, be denied that expectations of a theory of society can be 
satisfied in the manner. See Thomas Schwinn, “Funktion und Gesellschaft: Kon-
stante Probleme trotz Paradigmawechsel in der Systemtheorie Niklas Luhmanns,” 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie 24 (1995): 196–214. But then we would have to state more 
exactly and justify what is expected of a theory of society.
33.   For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Was ist der Fall, was steckt ­dahinter? 
Die zwei Soziologien und die Gesellschaftstheorie,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 22 
(1993): 245–260.
34.  An instructive outline of the limits to these methodological conceptions 
is provided by Karl E. Weick, “Organizational Communication: Toward a Re-
search Agenda,” in Communication and Organizations: An Interpretive Approach, 
ed. Linda L. Putnam and Michael E. Pacanowski (Beverly Hills, CA, 1983), 13–29.
35.  For its part, a skeptical description of this concept is a tradition. See, e.g., 
Herbert Blumer, “Sociological Analysis and the ‘Variable,’” American Sociological 
Review 21 (1956): 683–690. On the other hand, renouncing this restriction leads 
to a sort of overdetermination of research findings that makes it difficult if not 
impossible to achieve generalizable results. The dispute between schools has been 
going on for decades.

    Notes to Chapter 1
36.  For an overview of recent interest in these questions, see Michael Smith-
son, Ignorance and Uncertainty: Emerging Paradigms (New York, 1989). Linguists 
tend to have more understanding than sociologists of the fact that when language 
is used, the selection area, and thus what is not said, is always actualized as well. 
See, e.g., M. A. K. Halliday, Language as Social Semiotic: The Social Interpretation 
of Language and Meaning (London, 1978), e.g., 52 and elsewhere.
37.  This might be one of the reasons why sociology finds it difficult to switch 
from action to communication.
38.  See p. 14 above. For a similar correction of typical procedure in research 
on “artificial intelligence,” see Revue internationale de systémique 8, no. 1 (1994).
39.  Such an assumption is rapidly refuted as final theoretical figure, although 
in specific regards everyone can naturally ascertain that he does not know some-
thing. But this is a question of memory—be it that we search for something we 
have forgotten, be it that we believe we can remember that we never knew any-
thing specific.
40.  See esp. Henri Poincaré, La science et l’hypothèse (Paris, 1929).
41.  “The theorist could succeed in furnishing the necessary linkages with ob-
servation language by drawing selectively from the storehouse of ‘what everybody 
knows,’” Kenneth J. Gergen writes, after scathing criticism of the procedures and 
results of the usual empirical social psychology (Gergen, Toward a Transformation 
in Social Knowledge [New York, 1982], 103–104). The methodological problem lies, 
of course, in the word “selectively.”
42.  In so-called pragmatism, the argument often runs differently, in an effort 
to balance out theory relativism (renunciation of paradigms, pluralism, and so on) 
by maintaining a knowledge-securing understanding of method. See, e.g., Nicho-
las Rescher, Methodological Pragmatism: A Systems-Theoretic Approach to the Theory 
of Knowledge (Oxford, 1977).
43.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Sinn als Grundbegriff der Soziologie,” in Jürgen 
Habermas and Niklas Luhmann, Theorie der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie—
Was leistet die Systemforschung? (Frankfurt, 1971), 25–100; id., Systeme, 92–147; 
“Complexity and Meaning,” in id., Essays on Self-Reference (New York, 1990), 
80–85.
44.  See also Gilles Deleuze, Logique du sens (Paris, 1969), e.g., 87ff.: “Le sens 
est toujours un effet”; “Le sens n’est jamais principe ou origine, il est produit.” For 
Deleuze, this is closely related to the thesis that meaning can be gained only by 
resolving a paradox.
45.  See Spencer-Brown, Laws, esp. 56ff.
46.  Cyberneticians would speak of the reintroduction of output as input in 
the same system.
47.  For reasons that lie in systems theory, I go beyond Spencer-Brown with 
this distinction.
48.  It is a moot point whether this also applies to living systems that, while 

Notes to Chapter 1    
operating free of meaning, are capable of discrimination. See, e.g., Madeleine Bas-
tide, Agnès Lagache, and Catherine Lemaire-Misonne, “Le paradigme des sig-
nifiants: Schème d’information applicable en immunologie et en homeopathie,” 
Revue internationale de systémique 9 (1995): 237–249, esp. the formulation: “La 
structure vivante est capable de recevoir l’objet sémantique non pas comme objet 
matériel affectant le soi, mais comme information sur cet objet, appelant dès lors 
le traitement et la régulation active par l’ensemble du système” (241). Only thus 
can the concept of information justifiably be used with reference to living systems.
49.  In Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology, the methodological corre-
late consists only in the distinction between the phenomenological reduction, 
which only dissolves the claim to being in consciousness, and the eidetic reduc-
tion, which captures what appears in variations to be identical. See Edmund Hus-
serl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie, vol. 
1, in Husserliana, vol. 3 (The Hague, 1950), esp. 136ff.
50.  The “linguistic turn” in philosophy is hence to be understood as a corre-
late of a societal development that denies plausibility to substance ontology and 
its transcendental refuge. This also implies a transition from “What . . . ?” ques-
tions to “How . . . ?” questions, the problematization of the translatability of lan-
guages, and, in general, the need recognized since de Saussure to replace identities 
by differences.
51.  This need not be automatically understood in the sense of “omnis deter-
minatio est negatio.” Negation is always a specific operation that presupposes the 
identity of what is to be negated, which we could also affirm. We have not yet 
come to the already specific distinction between positive and negative meaning 
processing, and drawing a distinction itself points to the co-constitutive relevance 
of what is not indicated.
52.  The exception that tradition offers is the concept of God. On its accep-
tance outside theology, see, e.g., Sir Thomas Browne, Religio Medici (1643; Lon-
don, 1965), 40, 79. For this very reason, “God” must be an extraordinary concept.
53.  This formulation with reference to politics is to be found in Bernard 
Willms, “Politik als Erste Philosophie oder: Was heißt radikales politisches Philos­
ophieren?” in Der Begriff der Politik: Bedingungen und Gründe politischen ­Handelns, 
ed. Volker Gerhard (Stuttgart, 1990), 252–267 (260, 265–266).
54.  See also Deleuze, Logique du sens, 83ff.; non-sens reflects on what Deleuze 
calls “donation du sens” (87).
55.  On this concept, see Yves Barel, Le paradoxe et le système: Essai sur le fantas­
tique social (1979; 2nd ed., Grenoble 1989), 71–72, 185–186, 302–303.
56.  This includes this statement itself. We can also speak only in a certain man-
ner about “infinite” or “indeterminable,” namely, in the context of certain (and 
not other) distinctions such as infinite/finite or indeterminate/determinate.
57.  See Louis H. Kauffman, “Self-Reference and Recursive Forms,” Journal of 
Social and Biological Structures 10 (1987): 53–72 (58–59).

    Notes to Chapter 1
58.  See Winfried Menninghaus, Lob des Unsinns: Über Kant, Tieck und 
Blaubart (Frankfurt, 1995).
59.  See Alois Hahn, “Sinn und Sinnlosigkeit,” in Sinn, Kommunikation und 
soziale Differenzierung: Beiträge zu Luhmanns Theorie sozialer Systeme, ed. Hans 
Hafer­kamp and Michael Schmid (Frankfurt, 1987), 155–164.
60.  This provides an answer to the old question of whether there is a criterion 
for meaning that enables the meaningful to be distinguished from the meaning-
less, and, if so, whether this criterion is itself meaningful or meaningless.
61.  The term “eigenbehavior” is used here in the sense of Heinz von Foerster, 
Observing Systems (Seaside, CA, 1981), 273ff.
62.  See in more detail Niklas Luhmann, “Gleichzeitigkeit und Synchronisa-
tion,” in id., Aufklärung, 5: 95–130.
63.  This possibility exists regardless of time measurements; but time measure-
ments can be introduced in addition to determine distances from the present, 
making it easier to judge the no longer actual or not yet actual relevance of tem-
porally distant events.
64.  I note in anticipation that this temporal form of conveying redundancy 
and variety has become extremely important in modern times because the natural 
hedging of redundancies by means of necessities and impossibilities has had to be 
increasingly abandoned, while the uncoordinated irritability of societal commu-
nication, i.e., variety, has grown.
65.  See Spencer-Brown, Laws, 5.
66.  In both the old European and the later subjectivized meanings of securus. 
See Emil Winkler, Sécurité (Berlin, 1939).
67.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “The Paradoxy of Observing Systems,” Cultural 
Critique 31 (1985): 37–55.
68.  This could give occasion to consider the specialization of science in (un-
usual) comparisons, be they quantitative or functional. It is a matter of marking 
differences in the domain of what is still comparable.
69.  All other beings are “something but by distinction, “ according to Browne, 
Religio Medici, 40.
70.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 1.
71.  As Ranulph Glanville and Francisco Varela show in “Your Inside Is Out 
and Your Outside Is In” (Beatles [Lennon–McCartney, “Everybody’s Got Some-
thing to Hide Except Me and My Monkey”] 1968), in Applied Systems and Cyber­
netics, ed. George E. Lasker, vol. 2 (New York, 1981), 638–641, the same is true for 
all similar paradoxes of the absoluteness of the universal (which excludes noth-
ing) and the elementary (which includes nothing) and of the beginning and end 
of the world. This brings us close to arguments that prompted [the fifteenth-­
century Neoplatonist] Nicholas of Cusa [Nicolaus Cusanus] to engage in theo-
logical reflection.
72.  It should be noted that such presupposition of presuppositions in the same 

Notes to Chapter 1    
form is, of course, paradoxical only if it remains in the form and if this form is 
understood as a closed description of the world, because it otherwise amounts to 
infinite regression.
73.  See chap. 2, § 1.
74.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, helps clarify this.
75.  Spencer-Brown accordingly formulates (only!) two axioms: (1) “The value 
of a call made again is the value of the call”; and (2) “The value of a crossing made 
again is not the value of the crossing” (ibid., 1–2).
76.  Trading opposing concepts like this is proposed by Christopher Alexander, 
Notes on the Synthesis of Form (Cambridge, MA, 1964).
77.  We return to this in the discussion of the distinction between medium and 
form in chap. 2, § 1.
78.  Fritz B. Simon, Unterschiede, die Unterschiede machen: Klinische Epistemol­
ogie: Grundlage einer systemischen Psychiatrie und Psychosomatik (Berlin, 1988), esp. 
47ff., is both explicit and comprehensive.
79.  It follows that the distinction between system and environment cannot be 
ranked in importance, cannot be “hierarchized”—or if it can, then in what Hof-
stadter calls a “tangled hierarchy” [Douglas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: 
An Eternal Golden Braid (Hassocks, Sussex, UK, 1979)], See Olivier ­Godard, 
“L’environnement, du champs de recherche au concept: Une hiérarchie enchevêtrée 
dans la formation du sens,” Revue internationale de systémique 9 (1995): 405–428.
80.  See Heinz von Foerster, “On Self-Organizing Systems and Their Envi-
ronments,” in Self-Organizing Systems: Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Confer­
ence, ed. Marshall C. Yovits and Scott Cameron; (Oxford, 1960), 31–50, German 
translation in Heinz von Foerster, Sicht und Einsicht: Versuche zu einer operativen 
Erkenntnistheorie (Braunschweig, 1985), 115–130; Henri Altan, Entre le cristal et la 
fumée (Paris, 1979).
81.  Henri Altan goes so far as to say that organizational changes in the system 
can therefore only be explained externally. See id., “L’émergence du nouveau et du 
sens,” in L’auto-organisation: De la physique au politique, ed. Paul Dumouchel and 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy (Paris, 1983), 115–130. See also Henri Altan, “Disorder, Com-
plexity and Meaning,” in Disorder and Order: Proceedings of the Stanford Interna­
tional Symposium, ed. Paisley Livingston (Saratoga, CA, 1984), 109–128.
82.  For a summary, see Humberto Maturana, Erkennen: Die Organisation und 
Verkörperung von Wirklichkeit (Braunschweig, 1982). For an overview of the recent 
discussion, see John Mingers, Self-Producing Systems: Implications and Applications 
of Autopoiesis (New York, 1995).
83.  In German, we can speak of Ausdifferenzierung. There is no equivalent in 
English. This perhaps explains why insufficient attention has hitherto been paid 
to this aspect of autopoiesis. After all, Maturana draws a clear distinction between 
autopoiesis and autopoietic organization (structure formation).
84.  Today, the perfect example is the brain. For a brief introduction, see 

    Notes to Chapter 1
­Jürgen R. Schwarz, “Die neuronalen Grundlagen der Wahrnehmung,” in Systeme 
erkennen Systeme, ed. Schiepek, 75–93.
85.  This is now generally accepted, but the specificity of Gödel’s argumentation 
is often overlooked. See also the systems theoretical arguments of W. Ross Ashby, 
“Principles of the Self-Organizing System,” in Principles of Self-­Organization, ed. 
Heinz von Foerster and George W. Zopf (New York, 1962), 255–278; repr. in Mod­
ern Systems Research for the Behavioral Scientist: A Sourcebook, ed. Walter Buckley 
(Chicago, 1968), 108–118.
86.  Michel Serres, Le parasite (Paris, 1980), trans. under the title Der Parasit 
(Frankfurt, 1981), 365.
87.  This operational understanding of social systems differs radically from the 
approach that defines social systems in terms of a multiplicity of interacting ele-
ments and the maintenance of their network even where elements are eliminated. 
See Milan Zeleny, “Ecosocieties: Societal Aspects of Biological Self-Production,” 
Soziale Systeme 1 (1995): 179–202. The consequence is that organisms, even cells, 
can be taken to be social systems. I’d rather avoid this conceptual overreach.
88.  For detailed conceptual clarification, see Luhmann, Systeme, 191ff. We shall 
be coming back to this issue whenever greater depth of focus is needed in our 
analysis.
89.  For application in literary studies, see Henk de Berg, Kontext und Kontin­
genz: Kommunikationstheoretische Überlegungen zur Literaturhistoriographie 
(­Opladen, 1995); id., “A Systems Theoretical Perspective on Communication,” Po­
etics Today 16 (1995): 709–736.
90.  See Gotthard Günther, “Cognition and Volition: A Contribution to a Cy-
bernetic Theory of Subjectivity,” in id., Beiträge zur Grundlegung einer operations­
fähigen Dialektik, vol. 2 (Hamburg, 1979), 203–240, with the important insight 
that no operationally closed system can renounce taking an active role in relation 
to its environment (212).
91.  On the influence of these and other metaphors on the concept of com-
munication, see Klaus Krippendorff, “Der verschwundene Bote: Metaphern und 
Modelle der Kommunikation,” in Die Wirklichkeit der Medien: Eine Einführung in 
die Kommunikationswissenschaft, ed. Klaus Merten, Siegfried J. Schmidt, and Sieg-
fried Weischenberg (Opladen, 1994), 79–113.
92.  See Michael Hutter, “Communication in Economic Evolution: The Case 
of Money,” in Evolutionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics, ed. Richard W. 
England (Ann Arbor, MI, 1994), 111–136 (115): “The self-referential nature of the 
process implies its logical closure. Understanding appears always complete, be-
cause it contains its own foundation. Understanding operates blindly, and it has to. 
The sense of completeness is an eminently helpful property; without it, we would 
probably die of fear and insecurity.”
93.  With regard to theory comparison note that we can manage without the 
classical distinction between process and structure, which had to distinguish be-

Notes to Chapter 1    
tween two levels and therefore had no possibility of indicating the (production of 
the) unity of the system—unless it be purely linguistically through the conjunc-
tion “and” between process and structure.
94.  What consequences this has can also be illustrated with the mathematical 
concept of recursive functions, which underlies the modern mathematics of the 
unexpectable and the compensation of incalculability by the systemic production 
of eigenvalues. See Heinz von Foerster, “Für Niklas Luhmann: Wie rekursiv ist 
Kommunikation?” Teoria Sociologica 1, no. 2 (1993): 61–85, with the result: com-
munication is recursivity.
95.  There continue to be good reasons for retaining these concepts when sys-
tem models are to be described. But they take us no further than model building. 
In their operational reality and fluidity—especially in the wealth of their ignored 
possibilities—systems are much more complex than can be shown by a model. I 
must therefore reject Pierpaolo Donati’s proposal in Teoria relazionale della società 
(Milan, 1991) that systems theory be replaced by a theory of relations, as well as 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur’s suggestion in Postmoderne Rechtstheorie: Selbstreferenz—Selbst­
organisation Prozeduralisierung (Berlin, 1992) for supplementing it (see, e.g., 165).
96.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 10, 12.
97.  See chap. 2, 190ff, in this volume.
98.  See Jacques Derrida, Marges de la philosophie (Paris, 1972), esp. 1ff., 365ff. 
For a comparative analysis, see also Niklas Luhmann, “Deconstruction as Second-
Order Observing,” New Literary History 24 (1993): 763–782.
99.  “C’est que cette unité de la forme signifiante ne se constitue que par son ité-
rabilité, par son possibilité d’être répétée en l’absence non seulement de son ‘­référent’, 
ce qui va de soi, mais en l’absence d’un signifié déterminé ou de l’intention de signi-
fication actuelle, comme de toute intention de communication présente” (Derrida, 
Marges de la philosophie, 378).
100.  The question of how exactly this is to be understood must remain open. 
At any rate, the nervous system can observe only the organism from which and in 
which it lives. It discriminates states of the organism without any access to its en-
vironment. Consciousness appears to have developed to resolve the resulting con-
flicts in information processing. It sees an external space, a time that goes beyond 
the present moment, it imagines what is absent in order to settle contradictions that 
would otherwise arise (e.g., those resulting from binocular vision or the consistency 
checks of memory). But this solution can work, even for animals, only if the con-
sciousness does not live somewhere bounded in space.
101.  Similarly, for the “self,” Gregory Bateson, Mind and Nature: A Necessary 
Unity (New York, 1979), trans. under the title Geist und Natur: Eine notwendige 
Einheit (Frankfurt, 1982), 163ff.
102.  I am speaking here about the memory of the communication system itself 
and not about neurophysiological or psychic processes. By using its own resource 
of communication, the communication system can then substitute the memory 

    Notes to Chapter 1
performance of single psychic systems, finally creating its own memory with the 
written word.
103.  In the sense of Foerster, Observing Systems, 304ff.
104.  Aristotle Politics 1252a5–6.
105.  E.g., as in Mary B. Hesse, Models and Analogies in Science (Notre Dame, 
IN, 1966), 157ff.
106.  See preliminary work on this in Luhmann, Systeme.
107.  One can, of course, argue that this is impossible anyway owing to the 
complexity and operational speed of consciousness systems, and that evolution 
has for this very reason come up with communication as a solution, which also 
gives consciousness systems the possibility of developing their own complexity. 
This, too, holds true. However, the argument presented in the text still means 
that communication does not allow one to recognize the state of the participants’ 
consciousness but only to guess or fabricate it to an extent that permits commu-
nication to continue. Apart from that, the argument excludes redundancies in re-
lations between people just as little as in relation to things: one knows her footfall 
and his hat, and the one knows how to annoy the other.
108.  See also Alois Hahn, “Verstehen bei Dilthey und Luhmann,” Annali di 
Sociologia 8 (1992): 421–430.
109.  Alois Hahn points this out with the concept of agreement [Verständnis] 
that can include consensus fictions, but that can use other means, too, to enable the 
continuance of communication where psychic states diverge. See Hahn, “Verstän­
digung als Strategie,” in Kultur und Gesellschaft: Soziologentag, ed. Max Haller, Hans-
Joachim Hoffmann-Nowotny, and Wolfgang Zapf (Frankfurt, 1989), 346–359.
110.  Further decomposition into single words or phonetic components of 
words (phonemes) is naturally possible and can be important for linguistics. But 
we are then speaking not about communication but about language—language as 
the subject matter of communication. From the point of view of communication, 
sound units or words are only (loosely coupled) media of communication, which 
work in communication only if coupled with utterances of determinate meaning 
(forms). For detailed treatment, see chap. 2 § 1.
111.  See Foerster, “Für Niklas Luhmann,” 61–88.
112.  For more detail, see Luhmann, “Gleichzeitigkeit und Synchronisation.”
113.  Esp. George Herbert Mead, Mind, Self, and Society From the Standpoint of 
a Social Behaviorist (Chicago, 1934).
114.  See Maturana, Erkennen, esp. 258ff. See also 155, where language is de-
scribed as “recursive structural coupling of the nervous system with its own struc-
ture” (emphasis added).
115.  This is also seen and accepted by Peter M. Hejl, Sozialwissenschaft als Theo­
rie selbstreferentieller Systeme (Frankfurt, 1982).
116.  See Philip Lieberman, Uniquely Human: The Evolution of Speech, Thought, 
and Selfless Behavior (Cambridge, MA, 1991), esp. 36ff.

Notes to Chapter 1    
117.  For more detail, see Luhmann, Systeme, 191ff.; and see also chap. 2, § 1, in 
this volume on language.
118.  The reason is that the concept of action, which is generally understood 
as presupposing actors, blurs the boundaries between systems and environments. 
But this does not rule out reintroducing the concept of action as a construct of an 
observing system, where the system can localize actions as points of imputation in 
the system and in the environment.
119.  Pierre Livet, “La fascination de l’auto-organisation,” in L’auto-­organisation: 
De la physique au politique, ed. Paul Dumouchel and Jean-Pierre Dupuy (Paris, 
1983), 165–171, endorses such clôture épistémologique, but notes that it does not en-
sure the consistency of a uniquely correct self-description.
120.  A similar exclusion of all states of consciousness, subjective intentions, 
or emotions is to be found in Jean-François Lyotard’s discourse theory, where 
the basic unit is the sentence (phrase), which concatenates with other sentences 
(enchaînement). See Lyotard, Le différend (Paris 1983). However, Lyotard explicitly 
ignores the systems-theoretical notion that the concatenation itself necessarily in-
volves generation of a system/environment difference that would have to be taken 
into consideration in the system (in the discourse?).
121.  See the examples discussed in Niklas Luhmann and Peter Fuchs, Reden 
und Schweigen (Frankfurt, 1989).
122.  In distinguishing between logical and existential paradoxes in Le paradoxe 
et le système, esp. 19ff., Barel seems to be saying the same thing. Existential para-
doxes are inevitable in systems capable of self-referential operations.
123.  Wil Martens, “Die Autopoiesis sozialer Systeme,” Kölner Zeitschrift für 
Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 43 (1991): 625–646, takes the view that they could 
at least contribute the components of the elements of social systems (thus to com-
munication, information, utterance, and understanding). But even this is not 
possible. From a causal point of view, there is naturally such an extraneous origin. 
But this origin cannot be communicated as well. It does not enter into the mean-
ing of the communication but remains in the environment as the social system 
emerges. This is only another way of formulating the principle that the autopoi-
etic process necessarily draws system boundaries.
124.  We shall shortly see that this statement has to be modified by the concept 
of structural coupling within the scope of this situation.
125.  This broadens what linguistics and literary theory call the “resistance of 
language to language” (Wlad Godzich, foreword to de Man, Resistance to Theory, 
xvii).
126.  I say “typically” because it should not be excluded that, where sufficiently 
complex, the system obtains information about itself, which is to say, surprises 
itself with itself. The distinction between self-reference and other-reference thus 
refers in the first place only to the individual operation and not simply to the sys-
tem. Whereas the utterance cannot be otherwise understood as internal to the 

    Notes to Chapter 1
system, the information component can be either external to the operation or ex-
ternal to the system.
127.  On the function of this reentry and the coming into being of an “imagi-
nary” space that alone can then represent unity, see Spencer-Brown, Laws, 56–57, 
69ff. See also Louis H. Kauffman, “Self-Reference and Recursive Forms,” Jour­
nal of Social and Biological Structures 10 (1987): 53–72 (56–57); Jacques Miermont, 
“Les conditions formelles de l’état autonome,” Revue internationale de systémique 
3 (1989): 295–314.
128.  From this point of view, it is not by chance that the theory of operation-
ally closed systems arose at the same time as the matching, very general “construc-
tivist” concept of cognition for which the old objections to supposedly realityless 
idealism no longer apply.
129.  The emphasis is on structural entities as opposed to merely operational en-
tities (events). This means that objects can remain identical in progression from 
communication to communication; however, not because the natural conditions 
of the external world guarantee their persistence, but because they are generated 
through the other-reference of the system (as “topics” of communication) as struc­
tural entities of the system.
130.  Maturana, Erkennen, 143ff., 150ff., 243–244, 251ff.; id. and Francisco J. 
­Varela, Der Baum der Erkenntnis: Die biologischen Wurzeln des menschlichen Erken­
nens (Munich, 1987), esp. 85ff., 252ff.; Mingers, Self-Producing Systems, 34ff. The 
difficulty of distinguishing between own operations and causalities taking effect 
through structural couplings has been repeatedly pointed out. See, e.g., Stein 
Bråten, “Simulation and Self-Organization of Mind,” Contemporary Philosophy 2 
(1982), 189–218 (204). We try to solve this problem by defining the concept of 
communication as precisely as possible.
131.  See, e.g., Humberto R. Maturana, “Reflexionen: Lernen oder onto-­
genetische Drift,” Delfin 2 (1983): 60–72 (64).
132.  See Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in An­
thropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (Chicago, 1972), trans. under 
the title Ökologie des Geistes: Anthropologische, psychologische, biologische und episte­
mologische Perspektiven (Frankfurt, 1981), 376–377; Anthony Wilden, System and 
Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange (1972; 2nd ed., London 1980), 
155ff. and passim.
133.  At this point, critics might have an Aha! experience, which I want to pre-
clude. The statement does not limit the basic constructivist thesis and is not a 
reversion to an ontological concept of the world. I am only explaining the im-
plication of a theoretical mode of observation that makes use of the autopoiesis 
concept. The point of departure remains a differentiation-theoretical one: that the 
system/environment distinction must be introduced into a world that would re-
main unobservable without any distinction being drawn. And by “reality,” in this 
connection, I always mean a result of consistency checks.

Notes to Chapter 1    
134.  That this does not exclude the steering of perception through communi-
cation should be noted in passing. For this requires effort on the part of conscious-
ness, whose own autopoiesis is continually irritated by (perceptual) participation 
in communication.
135.  See Jurgen Ruesch and Gregory Bateson, Communication: The Social 
­Matrix of Psychiatry (1951; 2nd ed., New York,1968), 23–24, 208ff.
136.  For an early critical treatment, see Klaus Merten, Kommunikation: Eine 
Begriffs- und Prozeßanalyse (Opladen, 1977), 43ff. Many of the presuppositions of 
the transmission concept are now questioned by cognitive psychology, e.g., the as-
sumptions that communication expresses existing thoughts in words, that words 
function in the transmission process as vehicles of a certain semantic content, 
that understanding is the inverse process of converting words into thoughts, and, 
moreover that “semantics” denotes a process of representation both in the psychic 
system and in communication. On these points, see Benny Shanon, “Metaphors 
for Language and Communication,” Revue internationale de systémique 3 (1989): 
43–59. The consequence is that we have to understand semantics in terms of prag-
matics (in terms of the autopoiesis of communication), and not, as is generally the 
case, the other way round.
137.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Die Form ‘Person,’” Soziale Welt 
42 (1991): 166–175.
138.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 10.
139.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Individuum, Individualität, Indi-
vidualismus,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 3: 149–258.
140.  See W. Ross Ashby, An Introduction to Cybernetics (London, 1956), 206ff.; 
id., “Requisite Variety and Its Implications for the Control of Complex Systems,” 
Cybernetica 1 (1958): 83–99.
141.  For detailed treatment, see Luhmann, Systeme, 286ff.
142.  Since in the concepts of autopoiesis and structural coupling, I draw on 
Maturana’s ideas, a remark on demarcation is needed at this point. Maturana and 
I share the rejection of a purely denotative, as well as a purely structuralistic, con-
cept of language, and, like Maturana, I give primacy to the concept of operation. 
In contrast to Maturana, however, my argument here treats structural coupling 
through language, not as a relationship between living beings, but as a relationship 
between consciousness and communication. The nervous systems of various liv-
ing beings can be structurally coupled even without language. I thus dispense with 
the construction of a “super-observer” of language, which is needed in Maturana 
if the relationship of language to reality is to be described (Maturana, Erkennen, 
264ff.), avoiding the question of the structural couplings of this observer. Instead, 
I take the autopoietic system of communication as my starting point, which de-
pends on structural couplings with consciousness systems, which can in turn be 
coupled with one another through language and through perceptions of other 
types. This is naturally not to deny that every consciousness depends on structural 

    Notes to Chapter 1
couplings with its own nervous system. I dispense with the super-observer based 
on the much simpler assumption that in communication systems, language is one 
of the things about which communication is possible.
143.  C. Wright Mills proposed that there be a separate discipline, which he 
called “sociotics.” See Mills, “The Language and Ideas of Ancient China,” in id., 
Power, Politics and People (New York, 1963), 469–520 (“sociotics,” 492–493); id., 
“Language, Logic, and Culture,” American Sociological Review 4 (1939): 670–680. 
However, this never went beyond suggestions and numerous detailed studies. The 
systems-theoretical approach has the advantage of rendering the vague concept 
“culture” superfluous, and of making the distance between psychic and social sys-
tems extreme. However, this raises the question of what concepts tolerate this.
144.  Wilhelm von Humboldt, “Ueber die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen 
Sprachbaues und ihren Einfluß auf die geistige Entwicklung des Menschenge-
schlechts,” in id., Werke, vol. 3 (Darmstadt, 1963), 368–756 (425ff., quotation, 438).
145.  See Frederic C. Bartlett, Remembering: A Study in Experimental and Social 
Psychology (Cambridge, 1932), inspiration for far-reaching research.
146.  See, e.g., Roger C. Schank and Robert P. Abelson, Scripts, Plans, Goals 
and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human Knowledge Structures (Hillsdale, NJ, 
1977); Robert P. Abelson, “Psychological Status of the Script Concept,” American 
Psychologist 36 (1981): 715–729.
147.  See Arthur C. Graesser et al., “Memory for Typical and Atypical Actions 
in Scripted Activities,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory and 
Cognition 6 (1980): 503–515.
148.  See Joseph W. Alba and Lynn Hasher, “Is Memory Schematic?” Psycho­
logical Bulletin 93 (1983): 203–231.
149.  See esp. Talcott Parsons, Robert F. Bales, and Edward A. Shils, Working 
Papers in the Theory of Action (Glencoe, IL, 1953).
150.  Chapter 2 will deal with this in detail.
151.  On the relationship between presentation and concept, see likewise “Of 
the Schematism of the Pure Conceptions of the Understanding,” bk. 2, chap. 1, in 
Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, “Von dem Schematis-
mus der reinen Verstandesbegriffe,” B176ff.). Kant speaks of homogeneity [Gleich­
artigkeit] because his problem lies in subjective consciousness.
152.  See esp. Brian Massumi, “The Autonomy of Affect,” Cultural Critique 31 
(1995): 83–109.
153.  This refers to the section on “Sense-Certainty” in Hegel’s Phenomenology 
of Spirit (“Die sinnliche Gewißheit,” in Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, ed. Jo-
hannes Hoffmeister, 4th ed. [Leipzig, 1937], 79ff.). According to Hegel, conscious-
ness thus contradicts itself when it says to itself, “This is a tree,” because in the next 
moment, it will say (and knows that it will say), “This is a house.” On this tension 
between what is meant and the way it is meant, see also de Man, Resistance to The­
ory, 61–62, 86–87, on the basis of Walter Benjamin’s essay on translation.

Notes to Chapter 1    
154.  However there are economists, too, who think differently. See, e.g. ­Ronald 
H. Coase, The Firm, the Market, and the Law (Chicago, 1988), 4.
155.  This followed the new appreciation of sensory perception through mod-
ern aesthetics that began with Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten (Aesthetica, vol. 1 
[Frankfurt a/O, 1750; repr. Hildesheim, 1970]) and accompanied the differentia-
tion of an autonomous art system. For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Kunst 
der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), 13ff.
156.  See Steve Woolgar, “Reconstructing Man and Machine: A Note on Socio-
logical Critiques of Cognitivism,” in The Social Construction of Technological Sys­
tems: New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology, ed. Wiebe E. Bijker, 
Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor J. Pinch (Cambridge, MA, 1987), 311–328.
157.  Ibid., 327n5.
158.  See in chap. 1, § 3 above.
159.  See A. Moreno, J. Fernandez, and A. Etxeberria, “Computational Darwin-
ism as a Basis for Cognition,” Revue internationale de systémique 6 (1992): 205–221.
160.  See W. Ross Ashby, Design for a Brain: The Origin of Adaptive Behaviour 
(2nd ed., London, 1954); id., Introduction to Cybernetics; id., “Requisite Variety 
and Its Implications”; id., “Systems and Their Informational Measures,” in Trends 
in General Systems Theory, ed. George J. Klir (New York, 1972), 78–97.
161.  This naturally presupposes a still undefined concept of cognition. ­Maturana 
avoids the problem by adopting too general a concept of cognition. However, it is 
useful to keep the question of specifically cognitive mechanisms evolving within 
systems open.
162.  For the moment, I leave aside societal-historical constraints on the under-
standing of knowledge in favor of a more general framework concept. There are 
societies that treat the “knowledge of names” as knowledge. I include both opin-
ions (doxa, certitude morale) and certain, indisputable knowledge insofar as this 
enables and facilitates the handling of information.
163.  This argument can be repeated for consciousness systems. They, too, 
cannot monitor or even register their neurophysiological condition. Neuronal 
processes are strictly tied to their locus; but the consciousness has to omit all in-
formation about this locus, has to delocalize cognition if it is to give the impres-
sion of being able to perceive something “outside.”
164.  Including the conditioning of conditionings. See Ashby, “Principles of 
the Self-Organizing System.”
165.  With this shift, we can also answer the question that could not even be put 
in the traditional context, namely, that of the reality of cognitive and volitional 
operations that face resistance. See Jacques Miermont, “Réalité et construction des 
connaissances,” Revue internationale de systémique 9 (1995): 251–268 (262–263).
166.  In the early twentieth century, the scientific community was shocked by 
this idea in Poincaré’s La science et l’hypothèse (e.g., 133).
167.  For evidence from the United States, see Timothy W. Luke, “On Envi-

    Notes to Chapter 1
ronmentality: Geo-Power and Eco-Knowledge in the Discourses of Contempo-
rary Environmentalism,” Cultural Critique 31 (1995): 57–81.
168.  We shall be coming back to this in chap. 2.
169.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Ökologische Kommunikation: Kann 
die moderne Gesellschaft sich auf ökologische Gefährdungen einstellen? (Opladen, 1986).
170.  See Wolfgang Krohn and Johannes Weyer, “Die Gesellschaft als Labor: 
Risikotransformation und Risikokonstitution durch moderne Forschung,” in 
Riskante Entscheidungen und Katastrophenpotentiale: Elemente einer soziologischen 
Risikoforschung, ed. Jost Halfmann and Klaus Peter Japp (Opladen, 1990), 89–122.
171.  On older societal formations, see also Roy A. Rappaport, Ecology, Mean­
ing, and Religion (Richmond, CA, 1979), esp. 145–173.
172.  Again I would point out that this concept of organizing differs from that 
of Maturana; here it means the production of ordered (connective) selections. 
See also Karl E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing (Reading, MA, 1969), 
trans. under the title Der Prozeß des Organisierens (Frankfurt, 1985), albeit with an 
insufficiently explicated criterion (11).
173.  See for an overview of efforts at more precise treatment in two essays 
by Eric Bonabeau, Jean-Louis Dessalles, and Alain Grumbach, “Characterizing 
Emergent Phenomena,” 1 and 2, Revue internationale de systémique 9 (1995): 327–
346, 347–371.
174.  See, e.g., Thomas J. Fararo, The Meaning of General Theoretical Sociology: 
Tradition and Formalization (Cambridge, 1989), esp. 139ff.
175.  See Helmut Willke, Systemtheorie entwickelter Gesellschaften: Dynamik 
und Riskanz moderner gesellschaftlicher Selbstorganisation (Weinheim, 1989), 10.
176.  There is a great deal of literature on the broader question of how complex-
ity can be formally modeled and measured, for example, as the need for informa-
tion an observer requires to fully describe a system. At this juncture, I shall set 
such reflections aside, since their usefulness for the theory of social systems is not 
yet sufficiently established.
177.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Haltlose Komplexität,” in id., 
Aufklärung, 5: 59–76.
178.  If we regard “human beings” as elements, the problem is less drastic, be-
cause one human can contact many others. But the problem becomes more acute 
if we take time into consideration and ask how many people someone can be in 
contact with at any one time.
179.  On this problem, see W. Ross Ashby, Design for a Brain (2nd ed., London, 
1960, repr., 1978), esp. 80ff. on ultrastable systems.
180.  See, e.g., Lars Löfgren, “Complexity of Descriptions of Systems: A Foun-
dational Study,” International Journal of General Systems 3 (1977): 197–214.
181.  Basically, the concept of operation sabotages the classical concept of com-
plexity because it sublates the distinction between element and relation into one 
concept (operation = selective relationization as elementary unity). This is perhaps 

Notes to Chapter 1    
why complexity is less talked about than in the past. Nevertheless, systems theory 
cannot do without the concept, because it is needed to represent the relationship 
between system and environment.
182.  For a comprehensive treatment, see esp. Edgar Morin, La méthode, 4 vols. 
(Paris, 1977–1991). See also id., “Complexity,” International Social Science Journal 
26 (1974): 555–582.
183.  E.g., by Jean-Louis Le Moigne and Magali Orillard, “L’intelligence stra-
tégique de la complexité, ‘En attente de bricolage et de bricoleur,’” Revue interna­
tionale de systémique 9 (1995): 101–104. However, the contributions that follow this 
introductory article hardly do justice to these aspirations.
184.  This incidentally explains, albeit indirectly, the renewed interest in the 
conditions for the possibility of repeatability. See only Gilles Deleuze, Différence 
et répétition (Paris, 1968).
185.  See also Henri Atlan, Entre de cristal et la fumée: Essai sur l’organisation du 
vivant (Paris, 1979).
186.  See Karl E. Weick, Social Psychology of Organizing; id., Sensemaking in 
O­rganizations (Thousand Oaks, CA, 1995).
187.  This is incidentally one of the many reasons why neither mechanistic (ma-
chine-theoretical) nor mathematical calculatory (now often referred to as “ma-
chine”) descriptions of society suffice.
188.  With some justification, Henri Atlan has therefore propose describing 
complexity in terms of the H function in Shannon’s information theory, in other 
words, as the measure for the information that is still lacking for a complete de-
scription of the system. See Atlan, Entre le cristal et la fumée; id., “Hierarchical 
Self-Organization in Living Systems: Noise and Meaning,” in Autopoiesis: A The­
ory of Living Organization, ed. Milan Zeleny (New York, 1981), 185–208.
189.  For this way of putting things, see Barel, Le paradoxe et le système, 71: “un 
système s’actualise, les autres, de ce fait, se potentialisent.” In Husserl’s phenom-
enology, this state of affairs is formulated from the standpoint of transcendental 
consciousness. The intentional activity of the consciousness can identify an ob-
ject only with reference to further possibilities of experience, only in “horizons” 
of other possibilities.
190.  Spencer-Brown expresses the same double meaning in elegant fashion in 
distinguishing between “condensation” and “confirmation.” The repetition of an 
expression brings nothing new but merely condenses it ( —>). Read backward ( —>), 
the same equation can be understood as the unfolding of a tautology. Spencer-
Brown speaks of “confirmation” (Spencer-Brown, Laws, 10). What I would like to 
stress more strongly is the diversity of the repetition situations that arise from the 
recursively connected operations that are differentiation systems.
191.  See the chapter “Scope and Reduction” in Kenneth Burke, A Grammar 
of Motives (1945; Cleveland, 1962), 59ff., and Jerome S. Bruner et al., A Study of 
Thinking (New York, 1956), esp. 12.

    Notes to Chapter 1
192.  I have deliberately chosen this counterconcept to creation, for I do not 
wish to exclude that complexity negates, and in this form of negativity then poten-
tializes, and can thus be saved for later actualization. Of course, we can say that 
something complex (e.g., physical movement in swimming) is quite simple; but 
we then give others the opportunity to deny this.
193.  See, e.g., Aegidius Romanus [Giles of Rome], archbishop of Bourges, De 
regimine principum (Rome, 1607), 403, 411–412.
194.  Plato Timaeus 92c.
195.  Using concepts such as imitation or diffusion to describe this process 
achieves too little and encourages the idea that it is a unidirectional process. In 
fact, the action of conveying also changes the conveying system. Which not least 
shows that, within its reach, communication—being always circular—produces 
world society.
196.  See Jan Assmann, “Der Einbruch der Geschichte: Die Wandlungen des 
Gottes- und Weltbegriffs im alten Ägypten,” Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 14 
November 1987, on Egypt after the Hyksos wars.
197.  See Shmuel N. Eisenstadt, The Political Systems of Empires (New York, 
1963).
198.  Nicholas of Cusa [Nicolaus Cusanus], De visione Dei, IX, says: “extra te 
igitur, Dominus, nihil esse potest” (Nikolaus von Kues, Philosophisch-Theologische 
Schriften, vol. 3 [Vienna, 1967], 130).
199.  Cf. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus logico-philosophicus 6.45: “The sense 
of the world as a limited whole is the mystical” (id., Schriften, vol. 1 [Frankfurt, 
1969], 82 [trans. RB].
200.  Friedrich Schlegel argues, e.g., that only what can be determined through 
distinctions can enter the consciousness, and that we are not obliged to renounce 
the concept of world in rejecting the notion of “things apart from ourselves” 
(id., Jena lecture on Transzendentalphilosophie [1800–1801], in Kritische Friedrich-­
Schlegel-Ausgabe, vol. 12 [Munich, 1964], 37).
201.  This world concept cannot be captured with traditional bivalent logic. 
It cannot be described as simultaneously positive and negative; this would run 
counter to the exclusion of contradictions, nor is a third value available to denote 
world. In retrospect, tradition hence had no choice but to see the world as an ag-
gregate of objects (aggregatio corporum, universitas rerum).
202.  On this tradition and its phasing out in the eighteenth century, see Rein­
hart Koselleck, “Zur historisch-politischen Semantik asymmetrischer Gegenbe­
griffe,” repr. in id., Vergangene Zukunft: Zur Semantik geschichtlicher Zeiten 
(Frankfurt, 1979), 211–259; Rudolf Stichweh, “Fremde, Barbaren und Menschen: 
Vorüberlegungen zu einer Soziologie der ‘Menschheit,’” in Der Mensch—das Me­
dium der Gesellschaft? ed. Peter Fuchs and Andreas Göbel (Frankfurt, 1994), 72–91.
203.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 12.
204.  Robertson, Globalization, 60, objects that this concept treats the global 

Notes to Chapter 1    
system as “an outcome of processes of basically intra-societal origin.” This is cor-
rect, but it merely shows that what is at issue is the concept of society. The op-
posing side in the controversy must show that a concept of society is possible that 
provides for communication external to society. This brings us back to the prob-
lems that arise if, despite all concessions to globalization, we insist on a multiplic-
ity of societies.
205.  For a similar argument, see Rudolf Stichweh, “Zur Theorie der Weltgesell­
schaft,” Soziale Systeme 1 (1995): 29–45.
206.  See Franco Cassano, “Pensare la frontiera,” Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia 
36 (1995): 27–39.
207.  Kant’s theses regarding the infinity of space, the incompleteness of cre-
ation, and “the inevitable tendency of each completed world system to move lit-
tle by little toward its downfall” (id., Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des 
Himmels [Leipzig, 1755], 118), were an important step in this direction.
208.  From the rich literature on the history of ideas, see, e.g., Pierre Duhem, 
Le système du monde: Histoire des doctrines cosmologiques de Platon à Copernic (1913–
1959; new ed., 6 vols., Paris, 1979–1988). Also Rodolfo Mondolfo, L’infinito nel 
pensiero dei Greci (Florence, 1934); Charles Mugler, Deux thèmes de la cosmologie 
Grecque: Devenir cyclique et pluralité des mondes (Paris, 1953); A. P. Orbán, Les dé­
nominations du monde chez les premiers auteurs chrétiens (Nijmegen, 1970); James F. 
Anderson, “Time and Possibility of an Eternal World,” Thomist 15 (1952): 136–161; 
Anneliese Maier, “Diskussionen über das aktuell Unendliche in der ersten Hälfte 
des 14. Jahrhunderts,” Divus Thomas 25 (1947): 147–166, 317–337.
209.  The objections to this are well known. Such a position is denounced as 
“relativist,” and justifiably so if one has one of the numerous consciousness sys-
tems in mind. But I am talking about a correlate of communication, not of con-
sciousness—about the problem of unity that always arises when information is 
obtained from distinctions, not about doubting the reality of things.
210.  See Spencer-Brown, Laws, 5.
211.  In other words, it is logically naïve to combat the worldwide proliferation 
of fundamentalism with an ethic of pluralism. Fundamentalism is a contagious 
disease that tends particularly to infect its opponents too. See Peter M. Blau, “Il 
paradosso del multiculturalismo,” Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia 36 (1995): 53–63.
212.  Henri Bergson, L’évolution créatrice (1907; 52nd ed., Paris, 1940), esp. 
chap. 1, takes a similar view with regard to mechanistic and finalistic descriptions 
of the world.
213.  In a very specific sense, Hegel therefore speaks of “world history.” See esp. 
Joachim Ritter, Hegel und die französische Revolution (1957), in id., Metaphysik und 
Politik: Studien zu Aristoteles und Hegel (Frankfurt, 1969), 183–255. Reflecting on 
the problem of colonization, Ritter writes: “For Hegel, industrial bourgeois soci-
ety is therefore destined by its own law to become world society; the relation of 
freedom to humanity and the human species that is decisive for the relation of politi­

    Notes to Chapter 1
cal revolution to world history is grounded in this potential universality of bourgeois 
society” (222; [trans. RB]). The thought that the individuality of the human being 
implies world society is already to be found in John Locke, who writes: “he and 
all the rest of mankind are one community, make up one society distinct from all 
other creatures, and were it not for the corruption and viciousness of degenerate 
men, there would be no need of any other, no necessity that men should separate 
from this great and natural community and associate into lesser combinations” 
(id., Two Treatises of Civil Government [1680–1690; London, 1953], II, § 128, 181).
214.  Talcott Parsons, The System of Modern Societies (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1971).
215.  What is then specific to the modern world-system is only the unrestricted 
possibility of accumulating capital. See Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-
System, vol. 3: The Second Era of Great Expansion of the Capitalist World-Economy, 
1730–1840 (San Diego, CA, 1989); id., “The Evolution of the Modern World-­
System,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 4–10. In the framework of this tradition, Chris-
topher Chase-Dunn, Global Formation: Structures of the World-Economy (Oxford, 
1989), also defines a world system as “intersocietal and transsocietal relations” (1), 
but the glossary lacks an entry on society. See also Christopher Chase-Dunn and 
Thomas D. Hall, “The Historical Evolution of World-Systems: Iterations and Trans-
formations,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 23–34 (23).
216.  See, e.g., Anthony Giddens, The Nation-State and Violence (Cambridge, 
1985); id., The Consequences of Modernity (Stanford, CA, 1990), 12ff.
217.  A formulation and research topic of Robertson, Globalization. See also 
Roland Robertson and Frank Lechner, “Modernization, Globalization and the 
Problem of Culture in World-Systems Theory,” Theory, Culture and Society 11 
(1985): 105–118. On “globalization” without underlying societal theory, see Global 
Culture: Nationalism, Globalization and Modernity, ed. Mike Featherstone (Lon-
don, 1990). See also Giddens, Consequences of Modernity, esp. 63ff., on “global-
ization” understood as the abstraction and disjoining of space/time contexts. 
Wherever “globalization” is talked about, what appears to be meant is a process 
that assumes that no world society yet exists. See explicitly Margaret S. Archer’s 
foreword to Globalization, Knowledge and Society, ed. Martin Albrow and Elisa-
beth King (London, 1990), 1.
218.  Kurt Tudyka, “Weltgesellschaft—Unbegriff und Phantom,” Politische 
­Viertelsjahresschrift 30 (1989): 503–508, for example, specifically defends the con-
cept of the “international system” against the newly fashionable concept of world 
society. However, his arguments are unconvincing. The concept of world soci-
ety admittedly needs clarification, since an adequate theory of society is lack-
ing. But the concept of an international system is even more unclear, since we 
neither know what a nation is nor are given any explanation of how an “inter” 
can be a system. It is far more useful to speak of a “system of states” [Staatensys­
tem] (cf. Klaus Faupel, “Ein analytischer Begriff der Entspannung: Große Poli-

Notes to Chapter 1    
tik, Machtpolitik und das Ende des Ost-West-Konflikts,” Zeitschrift für Politik 38 
[1991]: 140–165). It is then clear that only the political system of world society can 
be meant. And, indeed, “détente” exists, not as a state of world society, but, if at 
all, as a state of its political system. Also to be noted is the concept of “transna-
tional society” as used by Gerhart Niemeyer, Law Without Force: The Function of 
Politics in International Law (Princeton, NJ, 1941), by which, however, he means 
only a network of private interests.
219.  See, e.g., John W. Burton, World Society (Cambridge, 1972), albeit not-
ing: “But the study of world society is not confined to relations among states or 
state authorities. There are important religious, language, scientific, commercial 
and other relations in addition to a variety of formal, non-governmental institu-
tions that are world-wide” (19). But the author’s orientation on a nation-focused 
differentiation schema and representation of the cohesion of this world society in 
terms of the weak concept of “relations” prevents him from pursuing this insight 
in sufficient depth.
220.  See George M. Thomas et al., Institutional Structure: Constituting State, 
Society, and the Individual (Newbury Park, CA, 1987), esp. John W. Meyer, “The 
World Polity and the Authority of the Nation-State” (albeit with an unclear con-
cept of society).
221.  See Nicolas Hayoz, “Fictions socialistes et société moderne: Aspects soci-
ologique du naufrage programmé de l’URSS” (thesis, Geneva, 1996).
222.  In earlier times, too, hopes were placed from a European point of view 
in a world society promising equivalent standards of living and civilization. “The 
disturbed balance of his own forces makes the individual miserable, the inequality 
between citizens, inequality between nations makes the Earth miserable,” we read 
in Jean Paul’s Hesperus. “An eternal balance in Europe requires the four remain-
ing parts of the world to be in balance, which, disregarding minor librations, one 
can promise our globe. In future neither a savage nor an island will be discovered. 
One nation must deliver the other from its juvenility. The more equal culture will 
conclude commercial agreements with more equal advantages” (Jean Paul, Werke, 
ed. Norbert Miller, vol. 1 [Munich, 1960], 871, 872).
223.  See Francisco O. Ramirez and John Boli, “Global Patterns of Educational 
Institutionalization,” in Thomas et al., Institutional Structure, 150–172; John W. 
Meyer et al., School Knowledge for the Masses: World Models and National Primary 
Curricular Categories in the Twentieth Century (Washington, DC, 1992). Even if 
we consult textbooks from developing countries on the organization and plan-
ning of school/university systems (e.g., Vicente Sarubbi Zaldivar, Una sistema de 
educación superior para el Paraguay democrático [Asunción, 1994 (?)]), we find our-
selves on familiar ground.
224.  From the perspective of comparative education studies, see Jürgen K. 
Schriewer, Welt-System und Interrelations-Gefüge: Die Internationalisierung der 
Pädagogik als Problem vergleichender Erziehungswissenschaft (Berlin, 1994).

    Notes to Chapter 1
225.  See Morin, La méthode, vol. 1 (1977), 269–270 and passim.
226.  See Rudolf Stichweh, “Science in the System of World Society,” Social 
Science Information 35 (1996): 327–340. Stichweh finds that it is research disci-
plines and the external contacts of single investigators not exactly favored by home 
organizations that become operative.
227.  Now a much discussed topic. See, e.g., Hans-Christoph Froehling and An-
dreas Martin Rauch, “Die Rolle Multinationaler Konzerne in der Weltwirtschaft,” 
Zeitschrift für Politik 42 (1995): 297–315.
228.  See esp. Edward Tiryakian, “The Changing Centers of Modernity,” in 
Comparative Social Dynamics: Essays in Honor of S. N. Eisenstadt, ed. Erik Cohen 
et al. (Boulder, CO, 1985), 121–147.
229.  See The Invention of Tradition, ed. Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger 
(Cambridge, 1983).
230.  Far-reaching discussion on the subject began in the 1960s, and Japan has 
been one of the favorite examples. See, e.g., Reinhard Bendix, “Tradition and Mo-
dernity Reconsidered,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 9 (1967): 292–
346; Joseph R. Gusfield, “Tradition and Modernity: Misplaced Polarities in the 
Study of Social Change,” American Journal of Sociology 72 (1967): 351–362; S. N. 
Eisenstadt, Tradition, Change and Modernity (New York, 1973).
231.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, § 12.
232.  See, e.g., Volkmar Gessner, Recht und Konflikt: Eine soziologische Unter­
suchung privatrechtlicher Konflikte in Mexico (Tübingen, 1976); Marcelo Da Costa 
Pinto Neves, Verfassung und positives Recht in der peripheren Moderne: Eine theo­
retische Betrachtung und eine Darstellung des Falles Brasiliens (Berlin, 1992); id., A 
constitucionalização symbólica (São Paulo, 1994).
233.  A different view is taken by Horst Reimann, ed., Transkulturelle Kommuni­
kation und Weltgesellschaft: Theorie und Pragmatik globaler Interaktion (Opladen, 
1992). However, the contributions to this volume lack a concept of society and 
therefore any possibility of testing what could have changed through the global-
ization of communication.
234.  See Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System, vol. 1: Capitalist 
Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century 
(New York, 1974); id., The Capitalist World-Economy (Cambridge, 1979); id., The 
Politics of the World-Economy (Cambridge, 1984).
235.  See Mike Featherstone, ed., Global Culture, Nationalism, Globalization and 
Modernity (London, 1991); Robertson, Globalization. For an overview of this dis-
cussion, see also Gianfranco Bottazzi, “Prospettive della globalizzazione: Sistema-
mondo e cultura globale,” Rassegna Italiana di Sociologica 35 (1994): 425–440.
236.  See just Annibale Romei, Discorsi (Ferrara, 1586), 58ff.
237.  Even in Kant, it has been supposed. See Hartmut Böhme and Gernot 
Böhme, Das Andere der Vernunft: Zur Entwicklung von Rationalitätsstrukturen am 
Beispiel Kants (Frankfurt, 1983).

Notes to Chapter 1    
238.  Associated, however, with the individualization of the mode of commu-
nication and consequently with the nonbinding character and imprescribability of 
this solution to the paradox problem. The extravagance and willfulness of humor-
ous utterances were long insisted on, and the English word “humor” was trans-
lated into German as Laune [mood, whim, caprice]. See Johann Gottfried Herder, 
“Viertes Kritisches Wäldchen,” in id., Sämmtliche Werke, ed. Bernhard Suphan, 
vol. 4 (Berlin, 1878), 182ff.
239.  Summarized in Jürgen Habermas, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns, 
2 vols. (Frankfurt, 1981).
240.  Ibid., 1: 23; emphasis in original.
241.  See, e.g., Herbert A. Simon, “From Substantive to Procedural Rational-
ity,” in Method and Appraisal in Economics, ed. Spiro J. Latsis (Cambridge, 1976), 
129–148.
242.  On the decline of classical concepts of rationality in the light of the uni-
versalization of risks, see Klaus Peter Japp, Soziologische Risikotheorie: Funktionale 
Differenzierung, Politisierung und Reflexion (Weinheim, 1996), esp. 67ff. On the 
consequences of the loss of certainty for the demands of rationality, see also Ilya 
Prigogine, “A New Rationality?” in Laws of Nature and Human Conduct, ed. id. 
and Michèle Sanglier (Brussels, 1987), 19–39. The solution of taking probabilities 
as one’s point of departure is not very helpful, for there are no possibilities in the 
everyday life of society for calculating them. Although known things and pro-
cesses are probably kept stable microphysically, this does not necessarily produce 
a critical concept of rationality.
243.  See Elena Esposito, “Die Orientierung an Differenzen: Systemrationalität 
und kybernetische Rationalität,” Selbstorganisation 6 (1995): 161–176.
244.  See Heinz von Foerster, “Wahrnehmung,” in Philosophien der neuen Tech­
nologie, ed. Ars Electronica (Berlin, 1989), 27–40 (30).
245.  “Reentry” in Spencer-Brown’s sense (Laws, 56ff., 69ff).
246.  On such oscillation, see Stein Bråten, “The Third Position: Beyond Arti-
ficial and Autopoietic Reduction,” in Felix Geyer and Johannes van der Zouwen, 
Sociocybernetic Paradoxes: Observation, Control and Evolution of Self-Steering Sys­
tems (London, 1986), 193–205; François Ost and Michel van de Kerchove, Jalons 
pour une théorie critique du droit (Brussels, 1987), esp. 30ff.; Michael Hutter, Die 
Produktion von Recht: Eine selbstreferentielle Theorie der Wirtschaft, angewandt auf 
den Fall des Arzneimittelpatentrechts (Tübingen, 1989), esp. 37ff.
247.  More comprehensive treatment in Niklas Luhmann, “Observing Re-­
entries,” Graduate Faculty Philosophy Journal 16 (1993): 485–498; also in Protosozi­
ologie 6 (1994): 4–13.
248.  In the version proposed by Spencer-Brown, the form calculus moves 
between hidden reentry at the beginning and open reentry at the end, both of 
which, as boundary conditions, so to speak, elude calculation. To begin with, the 
operator is introduced as the unity of indication and distinction (hence as the dis-

    Notes to Chapters 1 and 2
tinction in which, in the sense of “perfect continence,” the distinction also occurs 
as what is to be distinguished). And at the end, this is justified by disclosing the 
figure of reentry, so that we can understand the calculus as a model of a self-closing 
system that represents nothing but only processes itself.
249.  Or with Spencer-Brown’s definition of distinction as “perfect continence” 
(Laws, 1).
250.  Ibid., 57.
251.  See, following Saussure, Ranulph Glanville, “Distinguished and Exact 
Lies” (i.e., lies in the double sense of untruth and situation, N.L.), in Cybernetics 
and Systems Research 2, ed. Robert Trappl (Amsterdam, 1984), 655–662; German 
trans. in Glanville, Objekte (Berlin, 1988), 175–194 and 195.
252.  Glanville, “Distinguished and Exact Lies,” in Cybernetics and Systems Re­
search 2, 657.
253.  See § 8 above in this chapter.
254.  See, e.g., Revue internationale de systémique 4, no. 5 (1994), and Richard 
B. Norgaard, “Environmental Economics: An Evolutionary Critique and a Plea 
for Pluralism,” Journal of Environmental Economics Management 12, no. 4 (1985): 
382–394. But the “plea for pluralism” ultimately means the necessity of political 
decisions, hence a shift in system reference.
255.  See Georg Kneer, “Bestandserhaltung und Reflexion: Zur kritischen Re-
formulierung gesellschaftlicher Rationalität,” in Kritik der Theorie sozialer Systeme, 
ed. Michael Welker and Werner Krawietz (Frankfurt, 1992), 86–112.
chapter 2: communication media
1.  See chap. 1, § 5, in this volume.
2.  Extensive research by Donald T. Campbell draws on such a theory of evo-
lution. See, e.g., with reference to the psychology of Egon Brunswik, Donald T. 
Campbell, “Pattern Matching as an Essential in Distal Knowing,” in The Psychol­
ogy of Egon Brunswik, ed. Kenneth R. Hammond (New York, 1966), 81–106; id., 
“Natural Selection as an Epistemological Model,” in A Handbook of Method in 
Cultural Anthropology, ed. Raoul Naroll and Ronald Cohen (Garden City, NY, 
1970), 51–85; id., “On the Conflicts Between Biological and Social Evolution and 
Between Psychological and Moral Tradition,” American Psychologist 30 (1975): 
1103–1126.
3.  See Alfred A. Lindesmith and Anselm L. Strauss, Social Psychology (3rd ed., 
New York, 1968), 284ff.; Albert Bandura, “Vicarious Processes: No Trial Learn-
ing,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, ed. Leonard Berkowitz (New 
York, 1968), 76ff.; Justin Aronfreed, Conduct and Conscience: The Socialization of 
Internalized Control over Behavior (New York, 1968), 76ff. Older research is also to 
be found under the rubric “imitation.”
4.  See, e.g., Donald T. Campbell, “Ethnocentric and Other Altruistic Motives,” 

Notes to Chapter 2    
in Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1965, ed. David Levine (Lincoln, 1965), 283–
311 (298–299).
5.  See also Eve-Marie Engels, Erkenntnis als Anpassung? Eine Studie zur evolu­
tionären Erkenntnistheorie (Frankfurt, 1989), 83ff., with further references.
6.  It is hence not only a system of concentrated dependence on political domi-
nance in Hobbes’s sense. Nor is it only a system of diffuse and optional dependen-
cies such as that which developed with the transition from the barter economy to 
the money economy. These are examples of successful evolutionary advances in 
our context. But they do not bring us to a theory of society, or if so, then to a the-
ory defined in terms of a primacy of politics or a primacy of economics.
7.  On this still quite novel view, see Benny Shanon, “Metaphors for Lan-
guage and Communication,” Revue internationale de systémique 3 (1989): 43–59. 
See also Humberto R. Maturana, Erkennen: Die Organisation und Verkörperung von 
Wirklichkeit: Ausgewählte Arbeiten zur biologischen Epistemologie (Braun­schweig, 
1982), 57–58; or Klaus Kornwachs and Walter von Lucadou, “Komplexe Systeme,” 
in Offenheit—Zeitlichkeit—Komplexität: Zur Theorie offener Systeme, ed. Klaus 
Korn­wachs (Frankfurt, 1984), 110–165 (120): “Information appears as a process 
whose effectiveness is conditionally determined by thermodynamic boundary con-
ditions and already existing information. The distinction between sender and re-
ceiver, as strictly formulated in Shannon’s information theory, is thus nullified.”
8.  For further discussion of this distinction with respect to functional systems, 
see also Niklas Luhmann, Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1990), 53ff., 
181ff.; id., Die Kunst der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), 165ff.
9.  It also replaces or at least complements Saussure’s distinction between langue 
and parole. This distinction can be generalized to a difference between structure and 
event. But it is then apparent that it lacks everything that systems theory achieves, 
namely, an explanation of how events produce structures and how structures direct 
events. The distinction between medium and form is situated in this intermediate 
sphere. It presupposes both elementary events capable of coupling (paroles) and 
the necessity of a structured language for carrying out this coupling and varying it 
from moment to moment.
10.  The term “communication media” is used here in keeping with established 
usage. Where greater precision is important and only the one side of the distinc-
tion is to be indicated in opposition to (and not in unity with) the other, I shall, 
as above in this chapter, speak of “medial substratum.”
11.  This brings us close to the distinction drawn in the natural sciences between 
equilibrium and states of nonequilibrium, particularly as used by Ilya Prigogine 
and equated with the distinction between entropy and negentropy or between 
disorder and order. These formulations give the impression that we are dealing 
with different, incompatible states. However, if we consider chaos research, de-
velopments in the natural sciences have already taken us beyond this. The prob-
lem shifts to the theory of time, and, in particular to the question of how we are 

    Notes to Chapter 2
    Notes to Chapter 2
to understand “simultaneity” in relation to “time.” At any rate, the medium/form 
distinction presupposes that states of loose and tight coupling exist simultaneously 
and have to be distinguished substantially. It is not a theory of the genesis of order 
as a development from medium to form.
12.  The distinction used in the text was first developed with reference to per-
ceptual media. See Fritz Heider, “Ding und Medium,” Symposion 1 (1926): 109–157.
13.  See chap. 1, § 3 and § 6, in this volume.
14.  Gracián’s version of this reads: “Dos cosas hacen perfecto un estilo, lo ma-
terial de las palabras y lo forma de las pensamientos, que de ambas eminencias se 
adequa su perfección” (Baltasar Gracián, Agudeza y arte de ingenio, discourse LX 
[1649; Madrid, 1969], 2: 228).
15.  See on this Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action (Cambridge, MA, 
1965).
16.  In Habermas, this leads to forms of communication that do not comply 
being nevertheless admitted, but—the theory sees no other way out—having to be 
devalued, for example, as mere “strategic” action. For the full exposition, see Jür-
gen Habermas, Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns (Frankfurt, 1981), and much 
secondary literature.
17.  Older optics had voted for exactly the opposite, understanding light parti-
cles as input, as sensations penetrating from without. Today, in contrast, we deny 
that stimuli can be perceived. On this turnabout in theory, see James J. Gibson, 
The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception (Boston, 1979), 54–55.
18.  I naturally do not deny that there can be one-word sentences, exclama-
tions, etc. It suffices to shout “Careful!” and answer “Why?”
19.  This is almost a citation of Hegel, who speaks of the “dark inwardness of 
thought” in Vorlesungen über die Ästhetik, vol. 1 (Frankfurt, 1970), 18,—without, 
however, coming the same conclusions.
20.  See Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind: Collected Essays in An­
thropology, Psychiatry, Evolution, and Epistemology (Chicago, 1972), trans. under 
the title Ökologie des Geistes: Anthropologische, psychologische, biologische und episte­
mologische Untersuchungen (Frankfurt, 1981), 524–25.
21.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Realität der Massenmedien (2nd 
ed., Opladen, 1996).
22.  See Floyd H. Allport, Institutional Behavior: Essays Toward a Re-­interpretation 
of Contemporary Social Organization (Chapel Hill, NC, 1933).
23.  See Odd Ramsöy, Social Groups as System and Subsystem (New York, 1963).
24.  What I am calling “recursivity” here, Mead calls “conversation in gestures” 
or (clearer) “of gestures”; see George H. Mead, Mind, Self & Society from the Stand­
point of a Social Behaviorist (1934; Chicago, 1952), 14, 63.
25.  On the concept of “anticipatory reactions,” which presupposes no expec-
tancy, see Robert Rosen, Anticipatory Systems: Philosophical, Mathematical and 
Methodological Formulations (Oxford, 1985). Gerd Sommerhoff had earlier spo-

Notes to Chapter 2    
ken of “directive correlation”; see id., Analytical Biology (London, 1950), 54ff., and 
Logic of the Living Brain (London, 1974), 73ff. Such anticipatory adaptation to a 
not yet visible future (trees lose their leaves before it snows) naturally functions 
only on the basis of regularities in environmental processes. It is not suitable for 
merely temporary adaptation to temporary situations.
26.  With reference to the status of research, see Bernard Thierry, “Emergence of 
Social Organizations in Non-Human Primates,” Revue internationale de systémique 
8 (1994): 65–77.
27.  See Jurgen Ruesch and Gregory Bateson, Communication: The Social Ma­
trix of Psychiatry (1951; 2nd ed., New York,1968), 208ff.
28.  What is more, in describing recursive interactions between organisms as 
“language,” Maturana presupposes an observer who can establish that behavior 
amenable to coordination is selected. See , e.g., Humberto R. Maturana, “The 
Biological Foundations of Self-Consciousness and the Physical Domain of Exis-
tence,” in Niklas Luhmann et al., Beobachter: Konvergenz der Erkenntnistheorien? 
(Munich, 1990), 47–117 (92ff.). In this version, the concept of language is close to 
the social-psychology/sociological concept of double contingency.
29.  From a historical point of view, this would mean that linguistic research 
can address not only language structures but would also have to expand its theo-
retical basis, e.g., to take account of functional analysis or a general semiology sub-
suming language as a special case.
30.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 3, 230–31, 565ff.
31.  German linguistic aesthetics makes this difficult to abide by, so that the 
corresponding literature repeatedly confuses Bezeichendem (signifier) with Zeichen 
(sign). This fosters the error of French semiologists (e.g., Roland Barthes, Julia 
Kristeva) in restricting themselves to a mere rhetoric of referenceless signs. The 
above considerations should make it clear that semiotics requires a more complex 
deep structure, which we can obtain with the aid of the two-sided form concept. 
See also Niklas Luhmann, “Zeichen als Form,” in Probleme der Form, ed. Dirk 
Baecker (Frankfurt, 1993), 45–69.
32.  Following Saussure, it is usual to speak of the arbitrary determination of 
signs (l’arbitraire du signe). This can, however, be misunderstood. See the critical 
comments by Roman Jakobson, “Zeichen und System der Sprache” (1962), repr. 
in id., Semiotik: Ausgewählte Texte, 1919–1982 (Frankfurt, 1988), 427–436. Arbi-
trariness exists only in the relationship between signifier and signified. This is a 
condition for the insulation of the sign use. The sign itself (as form of this distinc-
tion) is, however, dependent on tradition and on a high degree of redundancy in 
connectivity. If it had to be recreated from moment to moment, it would be nei-
ther learnable nor usable. Arbitrariness and tradition do not exclude one another; 
on the contrary, they are interdependent—like medium and form.
33.  Thus also Kenneth E. Boulding, Ecodynamics: A New Theory of Societal Evo­
lution (Beverly Hills, CA, 1978), 128–129.

    Notes to Chapter 2
34.  In his semiotics, Charles S. Peirce uses the more formal, difficult to inter-
pret concept of “interpretant.”
35.  This also means that the clarification of meaning and interpretation have 
no claim to another “quality” or “level of meaning” of the system; they have to be 
processed like everything that is communicated, namely, as a sequence of commu-
nicative operations. This is naturally not to deny that psychic systems can at times 
behave uncommunicatively and reflectively.
36.  This is not to say that I agree with Chomsky’s thesis that such structures must 
be innate, because the speed of language acquisition cannot otherwise be explained. 
See Noam Chomsky, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Cambridge, MA, 1965), trans. 
as Aspekte der Syntax-Theorie (Frankfurt, 1969), esp. 68ff. What Chomsky seeks to 
explain in terms of innateness, I explain in terms of structural coupling and the 
consequent intensification of (origin-specific) irritations and irritation processing.
37.  On the underspecification of language as a condition for the possibility of 
conversation, see Gordon Pask, “The Meaning of Cybernetics in the Behavioural 
Sciences (The Cybernetics of Behaviour and Cognition; Extending the Meaning 
of ‘Goal’),” in Progress in Cybernetics, ed. John Rose (London, 1970), 1: 15–44 (31).
38.  This is shown by the difficulty the arts face in obtaining scope for creating 
“new” works of art and for making them comprehensible in their originality. That 
only original works of art count as art and that, if we are to appreciate them, we 
have to recognize how they differ from preceding art and from perceivable nature 
make extremely high demands on trained observation. This includes inhibiting 
forgetting because only knowledge of preceding art makes it possible to recognize 
the novel value of a work. This possibility is built into linguistic communication 
from the outset.
39.  See Klaus Krippendorff, “Some Principles of Information Storage and Re-
trieval in Society,” General Systems 20 (1975): 15–35.
40.  In what sense there can be a “collective memory” going beyond this is a 
question that has attracted attention—and skepticism—for some time. See Rosa-
lind Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record in Classical Athens (Cambridge, 
1989), 4ff. One question that plays a role is whether memory is available for op-
tional access (as in the case of the written word) or only in the form of fixed se-
quences of individual reproductions (as in the case of narrators and singers).
41.  See the discussion in Plato Cratylus 292–297.
42.  Following David Hilbert, see Heinz von Foerster, “Objects: Token for 
(Eigen-) Behaviors,” in id., Observing Systems (Seaside, CA, 1981), 274–285. How-
ever, language is not the issue in this case but the calculation of the identity of ob-
jects by reusing the results of previous calculations. To the best of my knowledge, 
the obvious implications for language have yet to be explored.
43.  However, in transferring the concept to the theory of empirical systems, it 
must be noted that recursivity can then no longer be understood as strictly exclu-
sive. We must then argue in terms of the operational closure of the system.

Notes to Chapter 2    
44.  Instead of semiotic reality, we could speak of imaginary, imagining, con-
struing, constituting, etc., reality.
45.  The outline of such a program is to be found in Max Adler, but without a 
sufficiently elaborated theory of society. See Max Adler, Das Soziologische in Kants 
Erkenntnistheorie: Ein Beitrag zur Auseinandersetzung zwischen Naturalismus und 
Kritizismus (Vienna, 1924); id., Kant und der Marxismus: Gesammelte Aufsätze zur 
Erkenntniskritik und Theorie des Sozialen (Berlin, 1925); id., Das ­Rätsel der Gesell­
schaft: Zur erkenntnis-kritischen Grundlegung der Sozialwissenschaften (­Vienna, 
1925). And Wittgenstein’s Tractatus must be mentioned if we are concerned with 
genealogy.
46.  See Daya Krishna’s little-noted essay “‘The Self-Fulfilling Prophecy’ and 
the Nature of Society,” American Sociological Review 36 (1971): 1104–1107.
47.  That these structures themselves evolve (an example is the merging of the 
Greek aorist into one of the forms of the Latin perfect with retention of the acous-
tically conspicuous s) cannot be dealt with in this context.
48.  Chomsky, as we know, developed the theory of such deep structures with 
respect to the innate competence for language acquisition in an attempt to explain 
the speed with which such acquisition proceeds. The brief description in the text 
proceeds on the reverse assumption: that the need to learn rapidly from genera-
tion to generation must have been a constraint on the evolution of language, and 
that only those structures survive that make this possible—whatever neurophysio-
logical conditions prevail. In other words, only languages whose self-organization 
manifests enough redundancy to permit rapid communication and rapid language 
acquisition can exist.
49.  Sociologists tend to adopt the linguistic concept of code, which probably 
goes back to Vico’s work on historical symbol structures and in present-day usage 
owes much to Roman Jakobson and Morris Halle, Fundamentals of Language (The 
Hague, 1956). See, e.g., Bernhard Giesen, Die Entdinglichung des Sozialen: Eine evo­
lutionstheoretische Perspektive auf die Postmoderne (Frankfurt, 1991), and id., “Code 
und Situation: Das selektionstheoretische Programm einer Analyse sozialen Wan-
dels—illustriert an der Genese des deutschen Nationalbewußtseins,” in Sozialer 
Wandel: Modellbildung und theoretische Ansätze, ed. Hans-Peter Müller and Michael 
Schmid (Frankfurt, 1995), 228–226. In referring to the general context for the use 
of signs and symbols, I speak in what follows of semantics, reserving the concept 
of code for strictly binary structures. It should accordingly be clear that I am not 
using the linguistic but the cybernetic concept of code. See, e.g., Wörterbuch der 
Kybernetik, ed. Georg Klaus and Heinz Liebscher, 4th ed. (Berlin, 1976), s.v. Kode.
50.  This is not to deny that in psychic systems, even in animals, there are 
pre-linguistic irritations when expectations are disappointed, when consistency 
checks fail.
51.  In the sense of Spencer-Brown’s calculus of forms in Laws.
52.  As an exception—and the status of an exception is decisive in this respect!—

    Notes to Chapter 2
the concept of God has been discussed. As in the theory of the proofs of the exis-
tence of God, His existence is seen as a necessary predicate of the idea.
53.  See Philip G. Herbst, Alternatives to Hierarchies (Leiden, 1976), 88, who 
assumes a fundamental implication relationship between the irreducible distinc-
tions being/nonbeing, internal/external, and determinate/indeterminate.
54.  On “if conditionality” as a condition of self-organization, see W. Ross Ashby, 
“Principles of the Self-Organizing System,” in Principles of Self-­Organization, ed. 
Heinz von Foerster and George W. Zopf (New York, 1962), 255–278.
55.  See George Spencer-Brown, “Self-Reference, Distinctions and Time,” Teo­
ria Sociologica 1, no. 2 (1993): 47–53.
56.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 12.
57.  Roy A. Rappaport, Ecology, Meaning, and Religion (Richmond, CA, 1979), 
229, puts it as follows: “The problem of falsehood is not merely that of falsehood 
itself, nor even of its direct effects, as devastating as they may be, but of the corro-
sive distrust bred by falsehood’s mere possibility.”
58.  See, e.g., Campbell, “Ethnocentric and Other Altruistic Motives,” 298–299.
59.  From Ottilia’s diary in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Die Wahlver­
wandtschaften (Elective Affinities), in Goethes Werke, ed. Ludwig Geiger (6th ed., 
Berlin, 1893), 5: 500.
60.  Everyday experience teaches us that this discipline is not always complied 
with. At the same time, however, the irritation that then arises shows that the re-
quirements of orderly communication have been violated, and that there is little 
sense in continuing to talk in this fashion.
61.  See G. A. Miller, “Language and Psychology,” in New Directions in the 
Study of Language, ed. Eric H. Lenneberg (Cambridge, MA, 1964), 89–107 (102ff.).
62.  On this condition of processing indeterminacy (without outward penetra-
tion), see Bernard Harrison, An Introduction to the Philosophy of Language (New 
York, 1979), 113ff.
63.  On “markedness” in this sense, see John Lyons, Semantics, vol. 1 (Cam-
bridge, 1977), 305ff.
64.  See further p. 205 in this volume.
65.  It must be admitted that there can be an expressive interest in incom-
prehensible modes of expression, e.g., in religiously inspired communication; 
or, for instance, that skeptical rationalists have a mania for claiming that they 
cannot understand what one is saying, which for them amounts to the charge 
of metaphysics. But then one wants it at least to be understood that one does 
not want to be understood or cannot understand and deems this to be for good 
reason.
66.  I once again cite Jürgen Habermas—with all the emphasis on the yes/no 
position of the addressee. See, e.g., id., Nachmetaphysisches Denken: Philosophische 
Aufsätze (Frankfurt, 1988), 146: “Without the possibility of taking a yes/no posi-
tion, the communication process remains incomplete” [trans. RB].

Notes to Chapter 2    
67.  I therefore find myself on Lyotard’s side versus Habermas and [Karl-Otto] 
Apel in the current controversy, albeit for a different reason.
68.  See esp. Ashby, “Principles of the Self-Organizing System.”
69.  On secrecy as security behavior in a very broad sense, see Klaus E. Müller, 
Das magische Universum der Identität: Elementarformen sozialen Verhaltens. Ein ethno­
logischer Grundriß (Frankfurt, 1987), 310ff.; id., “Die Apokryphen der Öffentlich-
keit geschlossener Gesellschaften,” Sociologia Internationalis 29 (1991): 189–205.
70.  Similarly, statues were brought into temples in Mesopotamia to remind 
the gods not to forget the names of the dead. See Gerdien Jonker, The Topogra­
phy of Remembrance: The Dead, Tradition and Collective Memory in Mesopotamia 
(Leiden, 1995), esp. 71ff.
71.  On the transfer of this condition into the coding immanent/transcendent 
of a functionally differentiated system of religion, see Niklas Luhmann, “Die Aus-
differenzierung der Religion,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 3: 259–357.
72.  See, e.g., John S. Mbiti, Concepts of God in Africa (London, 1970), 8: “He 
may be in the thunder, but he is not the thunder.”
73.  See Fredrik Barth, Ritual and Knowledge Among the Baktaman of New 
Guinea (Oslo, 1975). Size of the tribe: 183 persons, all of whom know one an-
other. Period under study 1967–1968. First fleeting contact with passing Euro-
peans, 1927. First local patrol, 1964. Since then repeated three times. Rumors 
about “pacification” and for some years now more and somewhat more secure 
contact with neighboring tribes—that is all. From a methodological point of 
view, it was attempted to avoid all manipulation through questions and to ob-
serve the ways of communicating as such. This makes the findings exceptionally 
valuable for us.
74.  Many much more developed societies have also stressed that difficult, im-
portant knowledge has to be kept from women. “He [the good husband] keeps 
her [his wife] in wholesome ignorance of unnecessary secrets” for “the knowledge 
of weighty Counsels” is “too heavy for the weaker sex to bear,” we read in Thomas 
Fuller, The Holy State and the Profane State (Cambridge, 1642), 9.
75.  Barth, Ritual and Knowledge, 264–265.
76.  “Le sacré est par excellence ce qui ne saurait être circonscrit par des mots. 
D’où le rapport constamment évoqué entre le sacré et le secret,” Marie-Madeleine 
Davy says of the Middle Ages in Essai sur la symbolique romane (Paris, 1955), 39. 
This is to read the constitutive relations in reverse, starting with the result.
77.  Although symbol was usually defined as sign (signum) in the Middle Ages, 
what was always meant was that this sign itself effected access to what was other-
wise out of reach. Today, signs are, conversely, often referred to as “symbols,” but 
this only goes to show that people have forgotten (or irrationalized) what “sym-
bol” originally meant.
78.  See, e.g., Anthony F. C. Wallace, Religion: An Anthropological View (New 
York, 1966), 233ff.; Mary Douglas, Natural Symbols: Explorations in Cosmology 

    Notes to Chapter 2
(London, 1970), esp. 50ff.; Roy A. Rappaport, Ecology, Meaning, Religion (Rich-
mond, CA, 1979), esp. 173ff.
79.  See Michel Serres, Genèse (Paris, 1982), 146ff.
80.  See Jean-Pierre Vernant, Les origines de la pensée grecque (Paris, 1962).
81.  The “hermetic” movement of the early modern age can be understood as an 
attempt to do this nevertheless and thus to eliminate the emerging structural uncer-
tainties. However, precisely because of this anachronism, it had to present itself as 
“ancient wisdom” and dissolved as soon as source research delved into its origins.
82.  See Jean-Pierre Vernant et al., Divination et rationalité (Paris, 1974); Jean 
Bottéro, Mésopotamie: L’écriture, la raison et les dieux (Paris, 1987), esp. 133ff., 157ff.
83.  This, too, is good evidence of how much evolution depends on temporary 
constellations.
84.  See also Omar K. Moore, “Divination—A New Perspective,” American 
Anthropologist 59 (1957): 69–74; Vilhelm Aubert, “Change in Social Affairs” (1959), 
in id., The Hidden Society (Totowa, NJ, 1965).
85.  “Elle voit des choses à travers d’autres choses,” Jean Bottéro writes in 
“Symptômes, signes, écritures en Mésopotamie ancienne,” in Vernant et al., Divi­
nation et rationalité, 70–197 (157).
86.  The first half of this statement and a profound treatment of its impli-
cations are also to be found in Alois Hahn, “Zur Soziologie der Weisheit,” in 
Weisheit, Archäologie der literarischen Kommunikation, 3, ed. Aleida Assmann 
(Munich, 1991), 47–57.
87.  See, e.g., Madeleine David, Les dieux et le destin en Babylonie (Paris, 1949); 
Bottéro, Mésopotamie, 241ff.
88.  On this point and on the differences between oriental and Christian ver-
sions, see esp. Leo Koep, Das himmlische Buch in Antike und Christentum: Eine 
religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchung zur altchristlichen Bildersprache (Bonn, 1952).
89.  A knowledge of signs (names) calls for purifying (kathairein). See Plato 
Cratylus 396e–397a.
90.  On the development of cultural “elites” not based on the units of the pre-
vailing social structure, and that may therefore exacerbate the difference between 
secular and transcendental, see (following Max Weber) Talcott Parsons, Societies: 
Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 98–99; 
also Shmuel N. Eisenstadt, “Social Division of Labor, Construction of Centers 
and Institutional Dynamics: A Reassessment of the Structural-Evolutionary Per-
spective,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 11–22 (16–17). Weber himself summarized this 
differentiation problem above all in the (theoretically unproductive) concept of 
“charisma,” which refers to the spontaneous genesis of authority determined not 
by origins, class, or social status. On the ensuing (largely exegetically critical) dis-
cussion, see Max Webers Studie über das antike Judentum: Interpretation und Kritik, 
ed. Wolfgang Schluchter (Frankfurt, 1981).
91.  See, inevitably, Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into our Ideas of 

Notes to Chapter 2    
the Sublime and the Beautiful (1756; London, 1958). See also Samuel H. Monk, The 
Sublime: A Study of Critical Theories in XVIIIth-Century England (1935; 2nd ed., 
Ann Arbor, MI, 1960). The thrust was then against the rule-aesthetic and against 
the pompous style of merely glorifying societal forces of order (that were no longer 
such) with only an overtone of nostalgia for lost authenticity. Today, however, this 
is the primary motive when postmodernism attempts to correct itself by a gesture 
reaching for the sublime.
92.  This is how Léon Vandermeersch, “De la tortue à l’achillée: Chine,” in 
Vernant et al., Divination et rationalité, 29–51, explains the development of a suf-
ficiently complex system of writing in China through the mutation of divinatory 
signs.
93.  See Mbiti, Concepts of God, 16–17.
94.  It should be noted that these are twentieth-century developments.
95.  John 8:7.
96.  This process is apparent in the myth of paradise and original sin. It re-
mains God’s secret why he wished to forbid the capacity for moral discretion. But 
the prohibition was clear; this remains the unacknowledgable paradox of morality, 
which is there only to be contravened.
97.  From a statistical point of view, gods who concern themselves with the 
moral affairs of humans and in so doing commit themselves to good and against 
evil are clearly in the minority. Only 25 percent of the societal systems recorded 
by George P. Murdock in the Ethnographic Atlas (Pittsburgh, 1967) know a high 
god who sits in moral judgment over humans. The interest in a morally qualify-
ing high god may have to do with economic development and with the need for 
trust in property and trade relations. See Ralph Underhill, “Economic and Politi-
cal Antecedents of Monotheism: A Cross-Cultural Study,” American Journal of So­
ciology 80 (1975): 841–861.
98.  If we keep the original meaning of res in mind, we could also speak of “re-
ification” in this connection. What is involved is the constitution of external ref-
erences independent of how they are spoken about. Martin Heidegger reminds us 
that the “thing” is mysterious in itself; see specifically id., “Das Ding,” in Vorträge 
und Aufsätze (Pfullingen, 1954), 163–181. The advantage of Dinghaftigkeit [thing-
ness, materiality] is, however, that one does not need to respect this secret either 
communicatively or otherwise.
99.  A different view, albeit without sufficient empirical backing, is taken by 
Sighard Neckel and Jürgen Wolf, “The Fascination of Amorality: Luhmann’s The-
ory of Morality and Its Resonances Among German Intellectuals,” Theory, Culture 
& Society 11, no. 2 (1994): 69–99. The error appears to have to do with the relation-
ship between morality and societal differentiation. But even if there is no scope for 
expressing personal respect and disrespect between Indian castes or tribes in seg-
mentary societies, this does not mean that such scope does not exist within the sub-
systems in question. The opposite is so probable that it can be taken for granted.

    Notes to Chapter 2
100.  Whether the results are then formulated in abstraction from principles or 
in moral casuistry is another question and at any rate presupposes a corresponding 
morphogenesis of moral complexity.
101.  This scope becomes enormous if moral expectations are also expected, for 
then both ego and alter can attract approval or disapproval merely by applying 
morality rightly or wrongly to others or to themselves.
102.  The advanced forms of this list can naturally be attained only if writing 
is available.
103.  This is manifested semantically in changes in the concept of person 
(persona as opposed to anima), which accepts self-referential components (con-
sensus with oneself as opposed to remorse) and then tends to merge with the 
concept of individual. See esp. Hans Rheinfelder, Das Wort “Persona”: Geschichte 
seiner Bedeutungen mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des französischen und italien­
ischen Mittelalters (Halle, 1928).
104.  Explicitly, for example, in the ethics of Abelard; see Peter Abelard, Ethics 
(Oxford, 1971), esp. 4. The theological justification is that one cannot harm God 
but can scorn him by consenting inwardly to sin.
105.  On differences in the spatial form proximity/distance that differentiate 
the forms of reciprocity, see Marshall D. Sahlins, “On the Sociology of Primitive 
Exchange,” in The Relevance of Models for Social Anthropology (London, 1965), 139–
236. On the consequences for morality, see also F. G. Bailey, “The Peasant View of 
Bad Life,” Advancement of Science 23 (1966): 399–409.
106.  See, e.g., Werner Müller, “Raum und Zeit in Sprachen und Kalendern 
Nordamerikas und Alteuropas,” Anthropos 57 (1963): 568–590; John Mbiti, “Les 
Africains et la notion du temps,” Africa 8, no. 2 (1967): 33–41; Robert J. Thornton, 
Space, Time and Culture Among the Iraqw of Tanzania (New York, 1980). The same 
can be said of advanced civilizations, especially China and India.
107.  See Rüdiger Schott, “Das Geschichtsbewußtsein schriftloser Völker,” Ar­
chiv für Begriffsgeschichte 12 (1968): 166–205. However, it can be assumed that even 
before the invention of writing, an interest in better elaboration and depth of field 
in time relations developed with the differentiation of large politico-economic 
households, and this might have been a reason for introducing a technique of 
written records. See also, e.g., Burr C. Brundage, “The Birth of Clio: A Résumé 
and Interpretation of Ancient Near Eastern Historiography,” in Teachers of His­
tory: Essays in Honor of Laurence Bradford Packard, ed. H. Stuart Hughes (Ithaca, 
NY, 1954), 199–230; François Châtelet, La naissance de l’histoire: La formation de la 
pensée historienne en Grèce (Paris, 1962). The same can be posited about the emer-
gence of archaeological interests in the later Mesopotamia; see Jonker, Topography 
of Remembrance, esp. 153ff.
108.  The evolutionary originality of this (ultimately neurophysiological) phe-
nomenon and its occurrence throughout the world and in all periods are re-
markable. This includes the many new occurrences of trance-based cults in the 

Notes to Chapter 2    
twentieth century. Only religions of the Book appear to see this as a problem and 
to be able and obliged to replace cultic repetition by reports of such events, such as 
the stories of the prophets in the Old Testament or the Pentecostal miracle in the 
New Testament. Repetition becomes a matter of reading scripture.
109.  This is also true of cultures that already have writing, but whose com-
munication still takes place orally even in important matters. See Werner Glinga, 
“Mündlichkeit in Afrika und Schriftlichkeit in Europa: Zur Theorie eines gesell-
schaftlichen Organisationsmodus,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 18 (1989): 89–99.
110.  See Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record, 197.
111.  For more comprehensive treatment, see Dennis Tedlock, The Spoken Word 
and the Work of Interpretation (Philadelphia, 1983).
112.  For Greece, see Marcel Detienne, Les maîtres de vérité dans la grèce archa­
ïque (3rd ed., Paris, 1979), 53ff.
113.  Gen. 1:3. The assumption that in so doing, God consulted a text, namely, 
the Torah, is a specialty of the Jewish tradition, a sort of (naturally subsequent) 
hypostatization of scripture. There were differences laid down in writing (a sort of 
original text) before the Creation.
114.  With reference to the transition to monumental inscriptions of political 
and legal texts in Greek cities, Marcel Detienne speaks of “autoréférence. L’écrit 
renvoie à sa propre lettre; il évoque des lois contemporaines ou plus anciennes; 
il recommande d’obéir à ce qui est écrit, de se conformer à ce que dit la stèle” 
(Les savoirs de l’écriture en Grèce ancienne, ed. id. [Lille, 1988], 18); see also ibid., 
“L’espace de la publicité: Ses opérateurs intellectuels dans la cité,” 29–81 (49ff.), on 
autocitation and autodéfense.
115.  The paradigmatic text here is Don Quijote, the second part of which treats 
itself as a printed book known to all. Literary scholars speak in such cases of an 
“intertextuality” unavoidable in the use of writing, but whose refinement can be 
intensified.
116.  On such preadaptive advances and evolutionary functional changes, see 
chap. 3, § 8, in this volume.
117.  See Harald Haarmann, Universalgeschichte der Schrift (Frankfurt, 1990), 
70ff. It appears that inscriptions on statues in temples in Mesopotamia were also 
initially seen as communication with the gods—a “notch” (Einkerbung), so to 
speak, in their memory—and only later as messages to future generations (see 
Jonker, Topography of Remembrance, 178–179). For the prehistory of engravings, 
see Alexander Marshack, The Roots of Civilization: The Cognitive Beginnings of 
Man’s First Art, Symbol and Notation (London, 1972). For early forms of regis-
tering transactions thousands of years before the invention of writing in the real 
sense of the term, see also Denise Schmandt-Besserat, “An Archaic Recording 
System and the Origin of Writing,” Syro-Mesopotamian Studies 1, no. 2 (1977): 
1–32.
118.  For an overview and further references, see Jack Goody, The Logic of 

    Notes to Chapter 2
­Writing and the Organization of Society (Cambridge, 1986), trans. under the title 
Die Logik der Schrift und die Organisation von Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1990), esp. 
89ff.
119.  On the Sumerian beginnings, see Jean Bottéro, “De l’aide-mémoire à 
l’écriture,” in id., Mésopotamie, 89–112.
120.  See Léon Vandermeersch, “De la tortue à l’achillée: Chine,” in Jean-Pierre 
Vernant et al., Divination et rationalité (Paris, 1974), 29–51. See also Haarmann, 
Universalgeschichte, 126ff.
121.  See Bottéro, “Symptômes, signes, écritures,” in Vernant et al., Divination 
et rationalité, 70–197.
122.  See, e.g., Margaret R. Nieke, “Literacy and Power: The Introduction and 
Use of Writing in Early Historic Scotland,” in State and Society: The Emergence 
and Development of Social Hierarchy and Political Centralization, ed. John Gledhill, 
Barbara Bender, and Mogens Trolle Larsen (London, 1988), 237–252.
123.  See Alfred Heubeck, Schrift (Göttingen, 1979); id., “Zum Erwachen 
der Schriftlichkeit im archaischen Griechentum,” in id., Kleine Schriften zur 
griechischen Sprache und Literatur (Erlangen, 1984), 537–554; Walter Burkert, Die 
orientalisierende Epoche in der griechischen Religion und Literatur (Heidelberg, 
1984); Joachim Latacz, Homer: Der erste Dichter des Abendlandes (2nd ed., ­Munich, 
1989), 24ff., 70–71. On the uncertainty of sources, see also William V. Harris, An­
cient Literacy (Cambridge, MA, 1989), 45ff. The superiority of alphabetic script 
over other systems of writing, which had also managed to considerably reduce the 
number of signs they used, was not immediately apparent in the competitive situ-
ation prevailing at the time when it was introduced (e.g., it failed to catch on in 
Cyprus). See Anna Morpurgo Davies, “Forms of Writing in the Ancient Mediter-
ranean World,” in The Written World: Literacy in Transition, ed. Gerd Baumann 
(Oxford, 1986), 51–77.
124.  See Martin L. West, “Archaische Heldendichtung: Singen und Schrei­
ben,” in Der Übergang von der Mündlichkeit zur Literatur bei den Griechen, ed. 
Wolfgang Kullmann and Michael Reichel (Tübingen, 1990), 33–50 (38–39, 
47–48). Walther Heissig, Oralität und Schriftlichkeit mongolischer Spielmanns-­
Dichtung, Vorträge der Rheinisch-Westfälischen Akademie der Wissenschaften G 
317 (Opladen, 1992), also reports that written records were not called for by the 
singers themselves but by Mongolian nobles pursuing a rather archival (twentieth-­
century!) interest in collecting, safeguarding, and preserving. On the other hand, a 
knowledge of writing is now mentioned as a guarantee of faithfulness to the origi-
nal and truth value. This applies particularly with regard to Chinese sources, thus 
for loans from another culture.
125.  For important ideas, see Alfred B. Lord, The Singer of Tales (Cambridge, 
MA, 1960), Eric A. Havelock, Preface to Plato (Cambridge, MA, 1963), and Wal-
ter J. Ong, The Presence of the World: Some Prolegomena for Cultural and Religious 
History (New Haven, CT, 1967). As an example of the present-day discussion 

Notes to Chapter 2    
among experts, see Formen und Funktionen mündlicher Tradition, ed. Walther 
Heissig (Opladen, 1995).
126.  Such time shifts are evident, above all, and much discussed, in the Odys­
sey. However, we cannot really know to what extent they go back to the written 
version of the epic, or whether they were not already present in retarding inter-
polations in oral versions, albeit then less with a view to establishing the unity of 
a historical time.
127.  This deformation through writing is illustrated by the discussion of time 
in Aristotle Physics 4.10, which poses the question of the being or nonbeing of 
time, without asking why precisely this (ontological) distinction—for its part, cer-
tainly dependent on writing—should inform the account (see also Hegel in the 
Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften § 258). Furthermore, writing allows 
the adverb nyn (now) to be substantivized (to de nyn in [Arist. Phys. 4.10] 218a6 
and elsewhere). Translations give us not the adverbial “now” but formations such 
as “now-point” [Jetzpunkt]. This in turn makes it possible to ask whether a now-
point is part (meros) of time or not. Which again provokes controversy as in the 
paradox that a now-point (whether or not part of time) consists in not-yet-being 
and no-longer-being, so that time itself, as a unity of being and nonbeing, must 
appear a paradox in the ontological schema. In the tradition from Aristotle to 
Hegel, this paradox can then be unfolded through the concept of movement. But 
why the static observation schema of being/nonbeing and then part/whole? And 
above all, why if one wished to objectivize the meaning, is an adverb nominalized 
that is used orally as an indexical expression, and that therefore presupposes an 
observer of the observer involved in the situation? Both deformations are conse-
quences of writing and both prevent, at least initially, reflection on second-order 
observation in favor of an ontological metaphysics.
128.  This is easy to understand if we consider efforts to “textualize” what is now 
referred to as “oral literature.” See Lauri Honko, “Problems of Oral and Semi­
literary Epics,” in Formen und Funktionen, ed. Heissig, 26–40.
129.  On the “telescoping” of oral genealogical myths and reconstruction ef-
forts with the aid of writing, see Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record, 95ff., 
155ff. On Mesopotamia, see also Jonker, Topography of Remembrance, 213ff. It 
should be added that genealogies partly serve cultic purposes within families, but 
above all they provide evidence for the differentiation of prominent families—vis-
à-vis both society and one another.
130.  See Walter J. Ong, “Writing Is a Technology That Restructures Thought,” 
in The Written Word: Literacy in Transition, ed. Gerd Baumann (Oxford, 1986), 
23–50 (36ff.), with examples such as the distinction between the person who 
knows and what he knows; between text and communication; between the word 
and its phonic realization, between the word and the fullness of being (of the 
world); between past and present; logic and rhetoric, strict knowledge and ability 
(wisdom, sophia); between being and time, etc.

    Notes to Chapter 2
131.  One can, of course, point out with Stanley Fish that oral communication, 
too, is uncertain with respect to meaning and authenticity. No second-order observer 
can in principle deny that a first-order observer may be uncertain and dependent on 
interpretation. See Stanley Fish, “With the Compliments of the Author: Reflections 
on Austin and Derrida,” in id., Doing What Comes Naturally: Change, Rhetoric, and 
the Practice of Theory in Literary and Legal Studies (Oxford, 1989), 37–67.
132.  Dean MacCannell and Juliet F. MacCannell, The Time of the Sign: A Semi­
otic Interpretation of Modern Culture (Bloomington, IN, 1982), 119.
133.  That it is matter of change and not of creating a previously impossible so-
cial memory is also stressed by Jan Assmann, “Lesende und nichtlesende Gesell-
schaften,” Almanach (des Deutschen Hochschulverbandes) 7 (1994): 7–12. See also 
Jonker, Topography of Remembrance.
134.  This is dealt with in detail in chap. 3, § 18, in this volume.
135.  See Heinz Förster, Das Gedächtnis (Vienna, 1948); Heinz von Foerster, 
“Quantum Mechanical Theory of Memory,” in Cybernetics: Circular Causal, and 
Feedback Mechanisms in Biological and Social Systems. Transactions of the Sixth Con­
ference 1949, ed. id. (New York, 1950), 112–134. This shift to the difference between 
remembering and forgetting drew Foerster’s attention to the need for a macromo-
lecular, quantum mechanical analysis of the neurophysiology of memory.
136.  See Heinz von Foerster, “Was ist Gedächtnis, das es Rückschau und 
Vorschau ermöglicht,” in id., Wissen und Gewissen: Versuch einer Brücke (Frank-
furt, 1993), 299–336.
137.  This is naturally different for registers, archives, etc.
138.  That this abstraction had first of all to be learned is obvious, just as one 
had to learn to give up commodity money and thus not to confuse the value of 
money with the value of a given commodity (such as gold).
139.  See West, “Archaische Heldendichtung,” esp. 43–44.
140.  In addition to the literature cited in n. 125 above, see Oral Literature and 
the Formula, ed. Benjamin A. Stolz and Richard S. Shannon (Ann Arbor, MI, 
1976); Heissig, Oralität und Schriftlichkeit.
141.  A protracted process. For various aspects, see, e.g., J. L. Myres, “Folk-
Memory,” Folk-Lore 37 (1926): 12–34; James A. Notopoulos, “Mnemosyne in Oral 
Literature,” Transactions of the American Philological Association 69 (1968): 465–
493; Jean-Pierre Vernant, Mythe et pensée chez les grecs: Etude de psychologie histo­
rique (Paris, 1965), 51ff.; P. A. H. de Boor, Gedenken und Gedächtnis in der Welt 
des Alten Testaments (Stuttgart, 1962); Brevard S. Childs, Memory and Tradition in 
Israel (London, 1962); Willy Schottroff, “Gedenken” im alten Orient und im Alten 
Testament (Neukirchen-Vluyn, 1964); Frances Yates, The Art of Memory (Chicago, 
1966); Herwig Blum, Die antike Mnemotechnik (Hildesheim, 1969); Stefan Gold-
mann, “Statt Totenklage Gedächtnis: Zur Erfindung der Mnemotechnik durch 
Simonides von Keos,” Poetica 21 (1989): 43–66; Renate Lachmann, Gedächtnis und 
Literatur: Intertextualität in der russischen Moderne (Frankfurt, 1990).

Notes to Chapter 2    
142.  Jacques Gernet, La vie quotidienne en Chine à la veille de l’invasion ­mongole, 
1250–1276 (1959; repr., Paris, 1978), 247; in this connection, as a consequence of the 
use of the printing press.
143.  See Jonker, Topography of Remembrance, esp. 109ff.
144.  On the associated dissolution of the old indistinguishability of word and 
thing, see also David Palumbo-Liu, “Schrift und kulturelles Potential in China,” 
in Schrift, ed. Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht and K. Ludwig Pfeiffer (Munich, 1993), 
159–167.
145.  In cultures that already have writing and no longer need such insistence to 
develop social structures (especially leadership roles), a counter-topos develops. In 
this regard, reserve is considered good manners, turn-taking is cultivated, grands 
parleurs [big mouths] are warned against—a familiar theme in narrative literature 
since Plutarch, and, incidentally, one of many indications that the understanding 
of societal communication still concentrates on the oral medium.
146.  The concept and formulation are from Carl J. Friedrich, “Authority, Rea-
son, and Discretion,” in Authority, ed. id., Nomos 1 (Cambridge, MA, 1958), 28–48.
147.  See David Ganz, “Temptabat et scribere: Vom Schreiben in der Karo-
lingerzeit,” in Schriftkultur und Reichsverwaltung unter den Karolingern, ed. Rudolf 
Schieffer (Opladen, 1996), 13–33.
148.  That this capping of sociality in specializing on communication is a result 
of evolution is evidenced by the institutions surviving from the transition from 
ritual to written cultures—e.g., the joint reading and discussion of scripture in 
the synagogue.
149.  See Lorna Marshall, “Sharing, Talking and Giving: Relief of Social Ten-
sions Among !Kung Bushmen,” Africa 31 (1961): 231–249. See also Bronislaw Ma-
linowski, “The Problem of Meaning in Primitive Language,” in The Meaning of 
Meaning, ed. C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards (10th ed., London, 1960), 296–336 
(314): “for a natural man, another’s man silence is not a reassuring factor, but, on 
the contrary, something alarming and dangerous. The stranger who cannot speak 
the language is to all savage tribesmen the natural enemy.” The necessity and habit 
of talking is the direct correlate of the permanent presence of others whom one 
knows and meets again.
150.  On consciousness and other concepts of cognition as correlates of writing 
see E. A. Havelock, The Literate Revolution in Greece and Its Cultural Consequences 
(Princeton, NJ, 1982), 290–291.
151.  See Yves Barel, Le paradoxe et le système: Essai sur le fantastique social (2nd 
ed., Grenoble, 1989), 71–72, 185–186, 302–303. Among the traditions that pay par-
ticular attention to this is the Talmud teaching of the revelation on Mount Sinai 
intended for scripture and for oral tradition. This teaching invited the conclusion 
that precisely the differences of opinion and minority opinion were to be passed 
down because they could prove important in the unforeseeable future. See, e.g., 
Jeffrey I. Roth, “The Justification for Controversy Under Jewish Law,” Califor­

    Notes to Chapter 2
nia Law Review 76 (1988): 338–387. See also id., “Responding to Dissent in Jew-
ish Law: Suppression Versus Self-Restraint,” Rutgers Law Review 40 (1987): 31–99.
152.  Even if only to deny that possible/impossible can be (Diodoros Kronos).
153.  On the difficulty of getting this accepted and of gaining recognition for 
the reality value of the fictional, see, looking at the novel as an example, Lennard 
J. Davis, Factual Fictions: The Origin of the English Novel (New York, 1983). Cf. also 
Niklas Luhmann, “Literatur als fiktionale Realität” (MS, 1995).
154.  See Jackie Pigeaud, “Le style d’Hippocrate ou l’écriture fondatrice de la 
médecine,” in Les savoirs de l’écriture en Grèce ancienne, ed. Marcel Detienne (Lille, 
1988), 305–329. A compilation of passages from the Corpus Hippocraticum is to 
be found in Knut Usener, “‘Schreiben’ im Corpus Hippocraticum,” in Übergang 
von der Mündlichkeit, ed. Kullmann and Reichel, 291–299. On the ensuing under-
standing of science and method in Hellenistic antiquity, see also G. E. R. Lloyd, 
Magic, Reason and Experience: Studies in the Origin and Development of Greek Sci­
ence (Cambridge, 1979).
155.  See Niklas Luhmann, “The Form of Writing,” Stanford Literature Review 
9 (1992): 25–42; German trans. in Schrift, ed. Gumbrecht and Pfeiffer, 349–366.
156.  From a historical point of view, we have no complete understanding of 
how earlier scripts evolved into the alphabet. It can only be assumed that the inter-
ruption of written practice after the collapse of the Mycenaean culture and the ob-
ligation to choose and adapt a script to a different sort of language played a role. It 
is now denied that the need to write down oral poetry was the decisive factor. On 
the importance of literacy for both the functional and the social universal utiliza-
tion of writing, see Eric A. Havelock, Origins of Western Literacy (Toronto, 1976); 
id., Literate Revolution; Egert Pöhlmann, “Zur Überlieferung griechischer Litera-
tur vom 8. bis zum 4. Jahrhundert,” in Übergang von der Mündlichkeit, ed. Kull-
mann and Reichel, 11–30 (backdating the general accessibility of writing to the 
eighth century). It should naturally not be overlooked that nonalphabetic scripts, 
e.g., Chinese, developed functional equivalents with a different mix of advantages 
and disadvantages under different linguistic (and also phonetic) preconditions.
157.  See Marcel Detienne’s contributions to Savoirs de l’écriture, ed. id., 7ff., 29ff.
158.  See, on its extent, F. D. Harvey, “Literacy in Athenian Democracy,” Revue 
des études grecques 76 (1966): 585–635; Havelock, Literate Revolution, 27ff. And see 
now especially the overview in Harris, Ancient Literacy, with a very skeptical as-
sessment of the dissemination of reading and writing skills, also in Greek and 
Roman antiquity. Such speculation about the extent of competence in reading 
and writing in the population as a whole is, however, of limited interest, since the 
society in question was a stratified one and literacy was certainly very widespread 
among the upper classes.
159.  The dating of such expansion of the communication concept requires 
thorough research. At any rate, it is apparent in Galileo—with printing, in the 
context of the scientific acquisition of knowledge, and with an eye to the unat-

Notes to Chapter 2    
tainable ability of God to know everything at once and not to have to rely on 
sequential cognition. In the dialogue Sopra i due massimi sistemi del mondo, we 
find at the end of the first day: “Ma sopra tutte le invenzioni stupende, qual em-
inenza di mente fu quella di colui che s’immaginò di trovar modo di communi-
care i suoi più reconditi pensieri a qualsivolgia altra persona, benchè distante per 
lung­hissimo intervallo di luogo e di tempo? parlare con quelli che son nell’Indie, 
parlare a quelli che non sono ancora nati nè saranno se non di qua a mille e dieci 
mila anni? e con qual facilità?” (Le opere di Galileo Galilei [Florence, 1968], 7: 130).
160.  See Wauthier de Mahieu, “A l’intersection de temps et de l’espace du 
mythe et de l’histoire, les généalogies: L’example Komo,” Cultures et Développe­
ment 11 (1979): 415–457.
161.  See Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record, 175ff.
162.  See, with abundant material, Hans-Georg Pott, Literarische Bildung: Zur 
Geschichte der Individualität (Munich, 1995).
163.  Think only here of Jean Paul’s novels Blumen- Frucht- und Dornenstücke, 
oder Ehestand, Tod und Hochzeit des Armenadvokaten Siebenkäs [Flower, Fruit, and 
Thorn; or, The Married Life, Death and Wedding of the Advocate of the Poor, 
Firmian Stanislaus Siebenkäs] and Flegeljahre [The Teens], or of Benjamin Con-
stant’s Adolphe.
164.  At best they dictate—e.g., the Koran. Then the improbability of the event 
is acclaimed as its uniqueness. And this compromise is naturally directed toward 
the still more improbable solution of incarnation: that after the invention of writ-
ing, God Himself had to become flesh in order to communicate; in this case, im-
probability is concealed by the myth of sin and redemption.
165.  It was initiated by the differentiation of symbolically generalized commu-
nication media, a development that was just as important and later became even 
more important; see further §§ 9 to 12 of this chapter.
166.  Particularly in Mesopotamian and again in old Christian thinking. See, 
with copious material, Leo Koep, Das himmlische Buch in Antike und Christentum: 
Eine religionsgeschichtliche Untersuchung zur altchristlichen Bildersprache (Bonn, 
1952).
167.  See, in general, chap. 3, §10, in this volume.
168.  On this difference between divination and prophetic communication, see 
Cristiano Grotanelli, “Profezia e scrittura nel Vicino Oriente,” La Ricerca Folk­
loria: La scrittura: Funzioni e ideologie 5 (1982): 57–62.
169.  In the late eighteenth century, William Blake writes: “The Prophets Isaiah 
and Ezekiel dined with me, and I asked them how they dared so roundly to as-
sert that God spoke to them; and whether they did not think at the time that they 
would be misunderstood, and so be the cause of imposition. Isaiah answer’d: ‘I saw 
no God, nor heard any, in a finite organical perception; but my senses discover’d 
the infinite in every thing, and as I was then perswaded, & remain confirm’d, that 
the voice of honest indignation is the voice of God, I cared not for consequences 

    Notes to Chapter 2
    Notes to Chapter 2
but wrote’” (Blake, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell [1790–1793], in id., Complete 
Writings [London, 1969], 148–158 [153]).
170.  Now likely to be the generally accepted view. See esp. Thomas, Oral Tra­
dition and Written Record.
171.  See George Horowitz, The Spirit of Jewish Law (1953; repr., New York, 
1973), who attributes to this the civilizability of the crude beginnings of a legal tra-
dition. Also Geza Vermes, Scripture and Tradition in Judaism—Haggadic Studies 
(Leiden, 1973); id., “Scripture and Tradition in Judaism: Written and Oral Torah,” 
The Written Word: Literacy in Transition, ed. Gerd Baumann (Oxford, 1986), 79–
95; Susan A. Handelman, The Slayers of Moses: The Emergence of Rabbinic Interpre­
tation in Modern Literary Theory (Albany, NY, 1982), esp. 37ff.; José Faur, Golden 
Doves and Silver Dots: Semiotics and Textuality in Rabbinic Tradition (Blooming-
ton, IN, 1986), esp. 84ff. However, the distinction between written and oral in this 
context refers to text types rather than modes of communication. There is nothing 
to be said against quoting the written text verbatim and recording the oral inter-
pretation in writing.
172.  See pointers in Notopoulos, “Mnemosyne in Oral Literature.”
173.  See Plato Phaedrus 274bff. and also the more political reservations about 
written records in Plato’s Seventh Letter [http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/seventh_let 
ter.html (accessed 2 January 2012)]. On the ensuing, far-reaching discussion, see, 
e.g., Wolfgang Kullmann, “Hintergründe und Motive der platonischen Schrift­
kritik,” in Übergang von der Mündlichkeit, ed. id. and Reichel, 317–334 with fur-
ther information.
174.  Criticism of the written word is, of course, written criticism, and only 
a written culture can come up with the notion of “unwritten” law. See Michael 
Gagarin, Early Greek Law (Berkeley, CA, 1986), esp. 121ff.
175.  Also Walter J. Ong, Interface of the Word: Studies in the Evolution of Con­
sciousness and Culture (Ithaca, NY, 1977), 82ff.
176.  Marcel Detienne, Les maîtres de vérité dans la Grèce archaïque (3rd ed., 
Paris, 1979), 81ff., describes this as a “procès de laicisation.”
177.  Above all, Baltasar Gracián, in all his writings. Like hardly anyone before 
him, Gracián—and this is what makes him modern—argues that the world can be 
observed only by means of the difference between visible and invisible. It is the job 
of rhetoric to manipulate this difference aesthetically, politically, and cognitively.
178.  See Walter J. Ong, “Communications Media and the State of Theology,” 
Cross Currents 19 (1969): 462–480.
179.  With reference to the present-day situation in social theory, I have spoken in 
chapter 1 of “epistemological obstacles” (Bachelard’s “obstacles épistémologiques”). 
Another example is the persisting relevance of bourgeois/bürgerlich ideas and theo-
ries, which, put forward between 1760 and 1820, continue today as value ideologies, 
with the inevitable disappointment that society is still not reasonably set up, that 
liberty and equality are still lacking, not to mention fraternity.

Notes to Chapter 2    
180.  See chap. 3, § 10, in this volume.
181.  On this epoch-making turn, see Elisabeth L. Eisenstein, The Printing Press 
as an Agent of Social Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-
Modern Europe, 2 vols. (Cambridge, 1979); Michael Giesecke, Der Buchdruck in 
der frühen Neuzeit: Eine historische Fallstudie über die Durchsetzung neuer Informa­
tions- und Kommunikationstechnologien (Frankfurt, 1991); and id., Sinnenwandel, 
Sprachwandel, Kulturwandel: Studien zur Vorgeschichte der Informationsgesellschaft 
(Frankfurt, 1992). More skeptical authors point to the slowness with which literacy 
spread and to the uncertainty about the extent to which existing skills were used. 
See, e.g., Keith Thomas, “The Meaning of Literacy in Early Modern England,” in 
The Written Word: Literacy in Transition, ed. Gerd Baumann (Oxford, 1986), 97–131.
182.  Libri e lettori nel medioevo: Guida storica e critica, ed. Gugliemo Cavallo 
(Bari, 1983), provides an overview going back to the fifth century.
183.  Communication research and especially historical research tends for under-
standable methodological and source-related reasons to take the opposing view; for 
texts are easier to find and analyze than what goes on in the reader. On this problem 
and the “priority of reading over writing,” see Havelock, Literate Revolution, 56ff.
184.  As shown by the corresponding practices of both the Church and secular 
rulers, commencing only a few decades after the printing press became known, 
this was not excluded in Europe either.
185.  See Hans Rothe, Religion und Kultur in den Regionen des russischen Reiches 
im 18. Jahrhundert (Opladen, 1984), 34–35. See also Gary Marker, Publishing, 
Printing and the Origins of Intellectual Life in Russia, 1700–1800 (Princeton, NJ, 
1985), esp. 5–6, 39–40.
186.  References in Giesecke, Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit. However, con-
temporaries saw the innovation as a technical one. The invention of the print-
ing press was often admired in context with the invention of artillery. See, e.g., 
­Estienne Pasquier, Les recherches de la France (new ed., Paris, 1665), 369.
187.  However, page numbering, references to pages, and indices had already 
been introduced in the course of rationalizing manuscript book production in the 
late Middle Ages. See Bernhard Bischoff, Paläographie des römischen Altertums und 
des abendländischen Mittelalters (Berlin, 1979), 281–282, with further references. As 
in other regards, it was the printing press that brought existing inventions to full 
fruition; and it is nevertheless astonishing how long it took until the practice of 
quotation became established as a normal form of literary discussion.
188.  Given the range of reading matter available, this was recommended even 
in antiquity as a method, however, rather than as a stopgap in the absence of 
texts; see Marcus Fabius Quintilianus [Quintilian] Institutionis oratoriae libri XII, 
10.1.20 (ca. 95 CE; Darmstadt, 1975), 2: 438. And this was still so in the face of 
floods of new texts in the eighteenth century.
189.  For references, especially concerning “ballads,” see Davis, Factual Fictions, 
42ff.

    Notes to Chapter 2
190.  Articulating his sense of the superiority of new texts, John Dryden de-
scribes audience reaction to a performance of the unchanging story of Oedipus, 
for example, “so that they sate with a yawning kind of expectation, till he was to 
come with his eyes pull’d out, and speak a hundred or more Verses in a Tragick 
tone, in complaint of his misfortune” (Dryden, Of Dramatik Poesie: An Essay 
[1668; London, 1964], 53–54).
191.  See Michael Giesecke, “Schriftspracherwerb und Erstlesedidaktik in der 
Zeit des ‘gemein teutsch’—eine sprachhistorische Interpretation der Lehrbücher 
Valentin Ickelsamers,” Osnabrücker Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie 11 (1979): 48–72; id., 
“‘Natürliche’ und ‘künstliche’ Sprachen? Grundzüge einer informations- und me-
dientheoretischen Betrachtung des Sprachwandels,” Deutsche Sprache 17 (1989): 
317–340, repr. in Giesecke, Sinnenwandel, Sprachwandel, Kulturwandel, 36–72.
192.  Although there had been criticism of the rough medieval Latin and efforts 
to achieve an elegant style even before the advent of printing, the printing press 
profiled national languages and engendered awareness of the diversity and vari-
ability of the vernacular. See, e.g., Francois Loryot, Les Fleurs des Secretz Moraux, 
sur les passions du coeur humain (Paris, 1614), 70ff.
193.  The new playhouses certainly also exploited this possibility. See Jean-
Christophe Agnew, Worlds Apart: The Market and the Theater in Anglo-American 
Thought, 1550–1750 (Cambridge, 1986), 66–67.
194.  See Mervyn James, Family, Lineage, and Civil Society: A Study of Soci­
ety, Politics, and Mentality in the Durham Region, 1500–1640 (Oxford, 1974). Also 
Peter S. Bearman, Relations into Rhetorics: Local Elite Social Structure in Norfolk, 
­England, 1540–1640 (New Brunswick, NJ, 1993), on the transition from politics 
based on family relationships to a more abstract (especially religiously oriented) 
rhetoric that follows this line and was certainly also made possible by the print-
ing press (although this aspect is not dealt with). At the outset, however, even 
the Royal Society of London was not as certain about this issue as it was to be in 
the eighteenth century. At any rate, the presence of prestigious personalities (e.g., 
members of the royal family) were mentioned, as if this might contribute to the 
quality of the experiments and the knowledge derived from them. See Charles 
Bazer­man, Shaping Written Knowledge: The Genre and Activity of the Experimental 
Article in Science (Madison, WI, 1988), 73ff., 140ff.
195.  See Robert Mandrou, “La transmission de l’hérésie à l’époche moderne,” 
in Hérésies et sociétés dans l’Europe pré-industrielle: 11e–18e siècles: Communications 
et débats du Colloque de Royaumont, ed. Jacques LeGoff (Paris, 1968), 281–287.
196.  This should be compared with the soft landing of many a council mem-
ber in the lap of the strengthening papal Church shortly before the invention of 
printing.
197.  See again here Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 13.
198.  A pertinent example: The School of Salernum: Regimen sanitatis Salerni: 
The English Version of Sir John Harington (Salerno, 1953, 1966). The study materials 

Notes to Chapter 2    
of this famous medieval school of medicine were completely geared to oral trans-
mission and memorizing.
199.  For literature on this, see Davis, Factual Fictions, 138ff.
200.  Whereas in Greece, poets had been able to change the world, Shaftes-
bury imagined: “In our Days the Audience makes the Poet; and the Bookseller the 
Author” (Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd earl of Shaftesbury, Characteristicks of Men, 
Manners, Opinions, Times [2nd ed., 1714; Farnborough, UK, 1968], 1: 264). Since 
he had his own books printed, however, the affected rejection of the book market 
(and not so much of the printing press) is something of a conspiratorial wink at 
the reader at the level of private, well-considered convictions. Incidentally, Shaft-
esbury is also reacting to a specifically English tradition that celebrated the poet 
as a sort of lawmaker and speculates on the publicity effect of printing. See David 
Norbrook, Poetry and Politics in the English Renaissance (London, 1984).
201.  I mention this with regard to the advantages and disadvantages of a non-
phonetic script.
202.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 13.
203.  They are “transclassical” in the sense of Gotthard Günther, Das Bewußtsein 
der Maschinen: Eine Metaphysik der Kybernetik (Krefeld, 1963).
204.  See Wlad Godzich, “Vom Paradox der Sprache zur Dissonanz des Bildes,” 
in Paradoxien, Dissonanzen, Zusammenbrüche: Situationen offener Epistemologie, 
ed. Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht and K. Ludwig Pfeiffer (Frankfurt, 1991), 747–758.
205.  This naturally presupposes that the human perceptual apparatus reacts 
more strongly to movements than to the constants of its perceptual field.
206.  All that remains to human beings, we might assume, is thought, and that 
can easily go wrong. At any rate, the chief achievement of consciousness, the ex-
ternalization and ordering of the perceptual world, becomes less important—in 
other-referential and self-referential contexts: for the inner plausibility of world 
experience and for the secure placing of the individual in this world.
207.  Peter Klier, Im Dreieck von Demokratie, Öffentlichkeit und Massenmedien 
(Berlin, 1990), 106ff., speaks in this connection of re-aestheticization; Wolfgang 
Welsch, “Anästhetik—Focus einer erweiterten Ästhetik,” in Schöne Aussichten? 
Ä­sthetische Bildung in einer technisch-medialen Welt, ed. Wolfgang Zacharias (Essen, 
1991), 79–106, sees anestheticization as a comparative form of aestheticization.
208.  An important exception—albeit seldom significant, owing to the quality 
of broadcasting—would be perception as a work of art and corresponding criti-
cism of artistic means.
209.  With significant delay, incidentally; in the sixteenth century, books still 
exhorted readers to report their experiences in print likewise.
210.  I must stress this, because the computer can also be used personally for 
data processing for the user alone.
211.  There are parallels with communication about works of art, which, at least 
under modern conditions, can also be scattered so far afield that the artist can no 

    Notes to Chapter 2
longer foresee the observations of the viewer or indeed wish to leave things open, 
and the viewer can no longer believe he has understood the work if he believes he 
has grasped what the artist “meant.” See Umberto Eco, Opera aperta (1962; 6th 
ed., Milan, 1988).
212.  Mind you, chance contacts. This is not to deny that planned meetings and 
thus face-to-face interaction remain possible and need not be restricted. But what 
does society owe to chance?
213.  See, influentially, Herbert A. Simon, “From Substantive to Procedural Ra-
tionality,” in Method and Appraisal in Economics, ed. Spiro J. Latsis (Cambridge, 
1976), 129–148.
214.  In this connection, it is striking that a morality has developed uncoupled 
from religion and law and geared to inner acceptance, and thus fully individual-
ized, which declares its principles or values to be “ethics,” but has nothing to say 
on the question of the social coordination of ethical perspectives. Presumably, as 
evidenced by the American film industry with its strong moral standardization, 
one is already covertly relying on a symbiosis of television and morality.
215.  On a subsystem of modern society, see Dirk Baecker, Information und 
Risiko in der Marktwirtschaft (Frankfurt, 1988).
216.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, 2: 601.
217.  See Alois Hahn, “Identität und Nation in Europa,” Berliner Journal für 
Sozialforschung 3 (1993): 193–203.
218.  As a special study on this problem of the undemocratic nature of commu-
nication, see Austin Sarat, “Support for the Legal System: An Analysis of Knowl-
edge, Attitudes, and Behavior,” American Politics Quarterly 3, no. 1 (1975): 3–24.
219.  There are similar ideas for successful moves in evolutionary game theory. 
See D. Friedman, “Evolutionary Games in Economics,” Econometrica 59 (1991): 
637–666; P. H. Young, “The Evolution of Conventions,” ibid. 61 (1993): 57–84; 
Gisèle Umbhauer, “Evolution and Forward Induction in Game Theory,” Revue in­
ternationale de systémique 7 (1993): 613–626.
220.  [AGIL is Parsons’s acronym for Adaptation + Goal Attainment + Integra-
tion + Latency, the key functions required of every society according to him.] For 
the field of the social system, see Talcott Parsons, Social Systems and the Evolution 
of Action Theory (New York, 1977); ed. Stefan Jensen under the title Zur Theorie 
der sozialen Interaktionsmedien (Opladen, 1980). But this does not cover the media 
of the general action system. A thorough discussion, with attempts at application, 
is to be found in Explorations in General Theory in Social Science: Essays in Honor 
of Talcott Parsons, vol. 1 (New York, 1976), pt. 4. For developments on this line of 
thought, see, e.g., Richard Münch, Theorie des Handelns: Zur Rekonstruktion der 
Beiträge von Talcott Parsons, Emile Durkheim und Max Weber (Frankfurt, 1982), 
123ff. and passim; Bernhard Giesen, Die Entdinglichung des Sozialen: Eine evolu­
tionstheoretische Perspektive auf die Postmoderne (Frankfurt, 1991), 223ff. Cf. also Jan 
Künzler, Medien und Gesellschaft: Die Medienkonzepte von Talcott Parsons, Jürgen 

Notes to Chapter 2    
Habermas und Niklas Luhmann (Stuttgart, 1989). A comparable (but far less elabo-
rated) theoretical approach is pursued under the heading “capital symbolique” by 
Pierre Bourdieu; see also, e.g., id., Ce que parler veut dire: L’économie des échanges 
linguistiques (Paris, 1982), 68ff. Here, too, however, unlike with Parsons, the eco-
nomic concept of capital is used only metaphorically, and this is particularly true 
of the notion that “capital symbolique” is differentiated according to “markets.”
221.  I refer to what is said about structural coupling in chap. 1, § 6, above.
222.  It might have to do with the modern lack of understanding for the prob-
lem underlying amplification or with one-sided treatment by philosophy—at any 
rate, in the renewed modern interest in topic and rhetoric, inventio is stressed 
much more strongly than amplificatio. See, e.g., Lothar Bornscheuer, Topik: Zur 
Struktur der gesellschaftlichen Einbildungskraft (Frankfurt, 1976). Even classical lit-
erature (e.g., Quintilian Institutionis oratoriae 8.4) fails to give due status to am­
plificatio. The Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie contains a comprehensive 
article on inventio but none on amplificatio, only on (logical) ampliatio. Amplify-
ing’s difficulties with truth are perhaps off-putting. However, examination of the 
communicative function leads to a contrary assessment.
223.  After all, the elaborated tradition supplies two terms for it, namely, opinio 
and admiratio, just as if their separation were preprogrammed. “To amplify and 
to illustrate are two chiefest ornaments of eloquence, and gain of men’s minds to 
the chiefest advantages, admiration and belief,” John Hoskins writes in Directions 
for Speech and Style (1599; Princeton, NJ, 1935), 17. In keeping with the hierarchi-
cal structure of society, admiratio is thus a sort of passion (and hence a motivating 
factor), albeit a passion that, in contrast to all others, contains no contrary emo­
tion, and that can therefore be activated prior to any binary coding, as Descartes 
emphasizes in Les passions de l’ame, art. 53 (in id., Oeuvres et lettres [Paris, 1952], 
723–724). A communication that arouses admiratio thus effects undivided under-
standing and acceptance.
224.  I do not claim that this was the only cause. Other experience certainly 
also contributed—for instance, the now only politically manageable religious con-
flict, the corresponding consolidation of the schism between churches, criticism of 
the Latin schools and the growing differentiation of functional systems with their 
own motivation.
225.  See Joan Marie Lechner, Renaissance Concepts of the Commonplaces: An 
Historical Investigation of the General and Universal Ideas Used in All Argumenta­
tion and Persuasion (1962; repr. Westport, CT, 1974).
226.  Thomas Wright, The Passions of the Minde in Generall (1630; Urbana, IL, 
1971), 191.
227.  See Ong, Presence of the Word, 79ff.
228.  A similar argument is offered by Jack Goody and Ian Watt, “The Conse-
quences of Literacy,” Comparative Studies in Society and History 5 (1963): 304–345. 
See also Jack Goody, “Literacy in Traditional Society,” British Journal of Sociology 

    Notes to Chapter 2
24 (1973): 1–12; id., “Literacy, Criticism, and the Growth of Knowledge,” in Cul­
ture and Its Creators: Essays in Honor of Edward Shils, ed. Joseph Ben-David and 
Terry N. Clark (Chicago, 1977), 226–243.
229.  In comparison with other languages, alētheia is a very unusual coinage; 
see Jean-Pierre Levet, Le vrai et le faux dans la pensée grecque archaïque: Etude de 
vocabulaire, vol. 1 (Paris, 1976), esp. 80ff.
230.  Könnens-Bewußtsein: Christian Meier, Die Entstehung des Politischen bei 
den Griechen (Frankfurt, 1980), 435ff. See Berkley Peabody, The Winged Word: 
A Study in the Technique of Ancient Greek Oral Composition as Seen Principally 
Through Hesiod’s Works and Days (Albany, NY, 1975).
231.  This difference in quality could also explain why Indo-Germanic lan-
guages use different roots for truth and for lie. A lie is more than an untrue state-
ment. And only for this reason could the privative alpha be used to indicate truth 
[alētheia].
232.  We can concede to Heidegger that an indirectness of “being-relation” de-
cisive for the period following is thus attained. His verdict of guilty—Plato!—
can hardly be upheld. See esp. Paul Friedländer, Platon, vol. 1: Seinswahrheit und 
Lebens­wirklichkeit (3rd ed., Berlin, 1964), 233ff.
233.  On attribution to the poet Simonides of Ceos [now Kéa], familiar with 
money and writing, see Marcel Detienne, Les maîtres de vérité dans la grèce archaïque 
(3rd ed., Paris, 1979), 105–106. Important passages on the further history of the dis-
tinction are to be found in Plato Republic 6.20–21.
234.  On the etymology, see Franz Dirlmeier, ΦIΛΟΣ und ΦIΛIΑ im vorhel­
lenistischen Griechentum (Munich, 1931); Manfred Landfester, Das griechische 
Nomen “philos” und seine Ableitungen (Hildesheim, 1966). On the Latin amicitia, 
see also J. Hellegouarc’h, Le vocabulaire latin des relations et des partis politiques sous 
la republique (Paris, 1963), esp. 42ff., 142ff.
235.  Moreover, it is now assumed to have been of comparatively little impor-
tance in the Greek city, so that the difference to Rome had been long prepared. 
See Denis Roussel, Tribu et cité: Etudes sur les groupes sociaux dans les cités grecques 
aux époques archaïques et classiques (Paris, 1976); Felix Bourriot, Recherches sur la 
nature du genos (Lille, 1976).
236.  Laelius was then considered in Rome as symbolically representing the op-
posing position, which held friendship also to be possible with (political) enemies 
of one’s (political) friends, thus differentiating friendship from politics and privatiz-
ing it. See Fritz-Arthur Steinmetz, Die Freundschaftslehre des Panaitios (Wiesbaden, 
1967). See also Horst Hutter, Politics as Friendship: The Origins of Classical Notions 
of Politics in the Theory and Practice of Friendship (Waterloo, ON, Canada, 1978).
237.  On philia as the consequence of the discovery of freedom and thus of 
given possibilities for differentiation within the city independent of the clans, see 
also Jean-Claude Fraisse, Philia: La notion d’amitié dans la philosophie antique. 
Essai sur un problème perdu et retrouvé (Paris, 1974).

Notes to Chapter 2    
238.  See Fritz Heichelheim, “Die Ausbreitung der Münzwirtschaft und der 
Wirtschaftsstil im archaischen Griechenland,” Schmollers Jahrbuch 55 (1931): 
229–254; Michael Hutter, “Communication in Economic Evolution: The Case 
of Money,” in Evolutionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics, ed. Richard W. 
­England (Ann Arbor, MI, 1994), 111–136.
239.  See Michael Hutter, “Die frühe Form der Münze,” in Probleme der Form, 
ed. Dirk Baecker (Frankfurt, 1993), 159–180.
240.  On this, see esp. Peter N. Ure, The Origin of Tyranny (Cambridge, 1922).
241.  This change of name shows the politically determined contingency of law 
as opposed to the behavior-related understanding of truth. On the formal terms for 
laws (thesmos, nomos), see Martin Ostwald, Nomos and the Beginning of Athenian 
Democracy (Oxford, 1969); Jaqueline de Romilly, La loi dans la pensée Grecque des 
origines à Aristote (Paris, 1971), 9ff. See also Meier, Entstehung des Politischen, 305ff.
242.  See Romilly, Loi dans la pensée Grecque, 11–12, 20–21, citing Euripides 
Hiketides 432: “But when the laws are written, the poor man and the rich have 
equal rights. Then when a wealthy citizen does wrong, a weaker one can criticize, 
and prevail, with justice on his side” (Euripides, Suppliant Women, trans. Rosanna 
Warren and Stephen Scully [Oxford, 1995], 37).
243.  See the contribution by Christian Meier to the article on “Macht, ­Gewalt” 
in Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe: Historisches Lexikon zur politisch-sozialen Sprache 
in Deutschland, vol. 3 (Stuttgart, 1982), 817–935 (820ff.).
244.  See Peter Spahn, “Die Anfänge der antiken Ökonomie,” Chiron 14 (1984): 
301–323.
245.  See S. C. Humphreys, “Evolution and History: Approaches to the Study 
of Structural Differentiation,” in The Evolution of Social Systems, ed. J. Friedman 
and M. J. Rowlands (Pittsburgh, 1978), 341–371, esp. in regard to the relationship 
of politics, economy, and religion.
246.  On the lack of a systematic orthodoxy and on the freedom of criticism of 
the usual magical and religious ideas, see G. E. R. Lloyd, Magic, Reason and Ex­
perience in the Origin and Development of Greek Science (Cambridge, 1979), 10ff.
247.  Humphreys, “Evolution and History,” 353.
248.   See 309f. in this volume.
249.  See Ranulph Glanville, Objekte (Berlin, 1988). See Dirk Baecker, “­Ranulph 
Glanville und der Thermostat: Zum Verständnis von Kybernetik und Konfusion,” 
Merkur 43 (1989): 513–524.
250.  See also, with suspiciously demanding concepts such as mutuality or di-
alogue, Stein Bråten, “Systems Research and Social Sciences,” in Applied Gen­
eral Systems Research: Recent Developments and Trends, ed. George Klir (New York, 
1978), 655–685; id., “Time and Dualities in Self-Reflective Dialogical Systems,” 
in Applied Systems and Cybernetics: Proceedings of the International Congress on Ap­
plied Systems Research and Cybernetics, ed. George E. Lasker (New York, 1981), 3: 
1339–1348.

    Notes to Chapter 2
251.  In this context “behavior” means not only change of an internal state but 
change in the relationship between system and environment. See Humberto R. 
Maturana, “Reflexionen, Lernen oder ontogenetische Drift,” Delfin 2 (1983): 60–
71: “Behavior as a characteristic of all or some of its changes of state does not be-
long to the organism or living being. Behavior is rather a relationship between an 
organism or living being and an environment in which an observer excludes and 
observes it. In this sense, the nervous system as an integral part of an organism or 
living being does not generate behavior but merely takes part in the dynamics of 
changes in the state of the system that it integrates. For an observer, however, the 
nervous system participates in generating behavior to the extent that it takes part 
in changes in the state of the organism or the living being whose change in form 
or situation he observes and describes relative to an environment” (62).
252.  For causal attributions, this is obvious: the attribution of effects to causes 
is not itself a cause [Ursache], a prime cause [Urursache] of effects.
253.  It should be noted that in this connection we cannot speak of self-­
attribution/other-attribution because reference to the attributer himself must be 
avoided. The difference between internal/external can be used to refer to both the 
attributer himself and (by him) to other systems. The results must, in other words, 
be objectivizable, although consensus on attribution imposed on substantive grounds 
cannot be assumed.
254.  In contrast to “action theories,” I thus postulate no “objective” concept of 
action but naturally assume that at the level of first-order observation actions can 
be experienced and treated as objects, which does not contradict the so-called sub-
jective concept of action, which says only that actions have to be freely chosen (I 
say internally attributed), which in my parlance would mean that we have to ob-
serve the actor (as observer of his situation) if we wish to understand how he acts. 
I note this only to show that, contrary to the widespread reservations of action 
theoreticians, nothing is lost in transition from the level of first-order observation 
to that of second-order observation and that everything can be reconstructed, al-
beit in a more complex, structurally more diverse language.
255.  I reverse the usual order ego-alter as a reminder that I construct the com-
munication process from the position of the observer, starting with understand-
ing, and not in action-theoretical terms.
256.  “If you do what I want I’ll do what you want.”
257.  This has always been clear, particularly in the discussion of attribution 
problems in jurisprudence and political economy (in fact, in all the older re-
search). The attribution research in social psychology that started in the 1960s 
initially overrated the importance of the question, but we are indebted to it for 
having intensively investigated the links between cognition and motivation. I shall 
not offer any references; research in this field is vast, has numerous specialized 
strands of discussion, and can hardly be covered as a whole.
258.  Here lies a major difference from Talcott Parsons’s media theory, which fol-

Notes to Chapter 2    
lows from the theory of structural differentiation of the general action system and 
therefore conclusively defines the causes and number of possible media in cross-
tabulation form. But this, too, should not be understood to mean that each soci-
ety actually realizes the totality of all possible media. See Stefan Jensen, “Aspekte 
der Medien-Theorie: Welche Funktion haben die Medien in Handlungs­systemen?” 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie 13 (1984): 145–164
259.  Semantic and organizational equivalents will have to be sought above all 
in “ecclesiology.”
260.  See, e.g., Niklas Luhmann, Liebe als Passion: Zur Codierung von Intimität 
(Frankfurt, 1982).
261.  Once again, this does not affect the circumstance that opinions necessarily 
differ in psychic systems.
262.  Resolutely, for the media of interchange, Talcott Parsons, “On the Con-
cept of Value-Commitments,” Sociological Inquiry 38 (1968): 135–160. On what fol-
lows, see also Niklas Luhmann, “Complexity, Structural Contingencies and Value 
Conflicts,” in Detraditionalization: Critical Reflections on Authority and Identity, 
ed. Paul Heelas, Scott Lash, and Paul Morris (Oxford, 1996), 59–71.
263.  There is nothing approaching adequate research on word and concept. 
What we find presents itself as prehistory of the economics concept of value. 
See esp. Rudolf Kaulla, Die geschichtliche Entwicklung der modernen Wertheorien 
(Tübingen, 1906); Lujo Brentano, Die Entwicklung der Wertlehre (Munich, 1908); 
Fritz Bamberger, Untersuchungen zur Entstehung des Wertproblems in der Philoso­
phie des 19. Jahrhunderts. I: Lotze (Halle, 1924). An early history of the concept, 
which traces the shift from valeur (= force, vigeur, Lebenskraft, etc.) to utilité, and 
thus to comparative rationality is to be found in Abbé Morellet, Prospectus d’un 
nouveau Dictionnaire de commerce (1769; repr. Munich, 1980), 98ff. At any rate, a 
very general use of the value concept was already current in the second half of the 
eighteenth century. One speaks, e.g., of the value of purposes.
264.  This is the term used by Douglas R. Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach: An 
Eternal Golden Braid (Hassocks, Sussex, UK, 1979), 686ff.
265.  The widespread presentation of the value problem with aid of the ­subjective/
objective distinction hides this very problem: that it is always a matter of both un-
questioned assumptions and unresolved conflicts.
266.  Thus, but with awareness of the problem, Georg Henrik von Wright, The 
Logic of Preference (Edinburgh, 1963), 31ff.
267.  It is not correct to assert that the concepts of “values,” valeur, etc., were 
only then generalized beyond their economic context to be applied to cultural, 
moral, aesthetic aspects (as does, e.g., La langue française [Paris, 1976], s.v. valeur). 
We find many examples for its application to duties and pleasures, honor, life, 
health, etc., even in the eighteenth century and probably earlier. Only the univer-
salization of value reference is really new.
268.  The ideology concept as used in the nineteenth century, the argumenta-

    Notes to Chapter 2
tion concept in keeping with more recent usage. See esp. Chaïm Perelman and 
L. Olbrechts-Tyteca, Traité de l’argumentation: La nouvelle rhetorique (Paris, 1958).
269.  On “marking” in the linguistic semantic sense, see 137f. [with nn. 63 and 
64] above.
270.  The methodological counterpart to this practice of value communication 
lies in the difficulty of gaining a firm footing on questions concerning value atti-
tudes (however refined the planning). One only receives answers to questions; and 
different answers to different questions.
271.  See also, and on the failure of such an understanding in the American 
slavery conflict, Stephen Holmes, “Gag Rules or the Politics of Omission,” in 
Constitutionalism and Democracy, ed. Jon Elster and Rune Slagstadt (Cambridge, 
1988), 19–58.
272.  See Baruch Fischhoff, Paul Slovic, and Sarah Lichtenstein, “Labile Values: 
A Challenge for Risk Assessment,” in Society, Technology, and Risk Assessment, ed. 
Jobst Conrad (London, 1980), 57–66. On older studies about stability on the basis 
of susceptibility to disappointment, see also Ralph M. Stogdill, Individual Behav­
ior and Group Achievement (New York, 1959), 72ff. Old European thinking on this 
subject referred to it as akrasia (lacking command over oneself).
273.  See Blaise Pascal, Lettres provinciales, in id., Oeuvres, éd. de la Pléiade (Paris, 
1950), 427–678.
274.  The origins nevertheless go back to tribal societies, in the form of couple 
relationships transcending family structures, which were tolerated as exceptions 
and therefore ritualized—e.g., the famous uncle/nephew relationships or certain 
forms of male friendship. See Shmuel N. Eisenstadt, “Ritualized Personal Rela-
tions,” Man 96 (1956): 90–95; Kenelm O. L. Burridge, “Friendship in Tangu,” 
Oceania 27 (1957): 177–189; Julian Pitt-Rivers, “Pseudo-Kinship,” in the Interna­
tional Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, vol. 8 (New York, 1968), 408–413. The an-
cient Greek form of accepted and at the same time not accepted homosexuality 
probably expressed less a specific sentiment about sexual practices than the prob-
lem of the social acceptance of a regression of sociality to couple relationships.
275.  That the intensification of sociality in the form of couple relationships is a 
case of regression and requires special sanctioning by society is an unusual thought 
for modern culture, but a well-known state of affairs for sociologists. See esp. 
Philip E. Slater, “On Social Regression,” American Sociological Review 28 (1963): 
339–364; Vilhelm Aubert and Oddvar Arner, “On the Social Structure of the Ship,” 
Acta Sociologica 3 (1959): 200–219; Michael Rustin, “Structural and Unconscious Im-
plications of the Dyad and Triad: An Essay in Theoretical Integration: Durkheim, 
Simmel, Freud,” Sociological Review 19 (1971): 179–201. See also the preceding note.
276.  Now in ignorance of Romanticism, whose concept of irony had reflected 
precisely this improbability with a reservation for incommunicable subjectivity. 
Most people (especially Americans) presumably think of the behavior models pre-
sented by the novel when they hear the word “romantic.”

Notes to Chapter 2    
277.  On the historical background, see Luhmann, Liebe als Passion.
278.  On this discrepancy, which has apparently not impaired the mass con-
sumption of such illusions, see Bruno Péquignot, La relation amoureuse: Analyse 
sociologique du roman sentimental moderne (Paris, 1991).
279.  See Ulrich in Robert Musil, Der Man ohne Eigenschaften (Hamburg, 
1952), 558–559: “Lovers have nothing new to say to one another; and they know 
no recognition. For the lover recognizes nothing of the person he loves except that 
he is transported by her in indescribable fashion into inner activity. . . . This is 
why there is also no truth for lovers; it would be a cul-de-sac, an end, the death of 
thought” [trans. RB].
280.  See Alois Hahn, “Konsensfiktionen in Kleingruppen: Dargestellt am 
Beispiel von jungen Ehen,” in Gruppensoziologie: Perspektiven und Materialien, ed. 
Friedhelm Neidhardt, Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie, special 
ed. 25 (1983): 210–232; Roland Eckert, Alois Hahn, and Marianne Wolf, Die ersten 
Jahre junger Ehen (Frankfurt, 1989).
281.  We see already that regulating this problem by means of property requires 
another, different type of regulation: the political regulation of power. The separa-
tion of the media makes them dependent on one another.
282.  This should really be self-evident; after all, we cannot eat property. An-
thropological explanations fall short in this case and otherwise, and belong to the 
terminology that condenses as a consequence of the development of property. This 
is not necessarily a new insight; T. E. Cliffe Leslie writes, e.g., in his introduction 
to Emile de Lavelaye’s Primitive Property (London, 1878): “Property has not its 
roots in the love of possession. All human beings like and desire certain things, 
and if nature has armed them with any weapons are prone to use them in order 
to get and to keep what they want. What requires explanation is not the want or 
desire of certain things on the part of individuals, but the fact that other individu-
als, with similar wants and desires, should leave them in undisturbed possession, 
allot them a share, of such things. It is the conduct of a community, not the incli-
nation of individuals, that needs explanation” (xi; quoted from Elman R. Service, 
The Hunters [Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966], 21).
283.  See Michael Hutter, “Signum non olet: Grundzüge einer Zeichentheorie 
des Geldes,” in Rätsel Geld: Annäherungen aus ökonomischer, soziologischer und histo­
rischer Sicht, ed. Waltraut Schelkle and Manfred Nitsch (Marburg, 1995), 325–352.
284.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft 
(Frankfurt, 1988).
285.  Kenneth Burke, A Grammar of Motives (Cleveland, 1962), 355–356.
286.  See the comprehensive natural law discussion stemming from antiquity 
on the advantages of the nevertheless unjust shift from the original community of 
goods to differential property. On the end of this discussion in the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, see Niklas Luhmann, “Am Anfang war kein Unrecht,” in 
id., Gesellschaftsstruktur und Semantik, vol. 3 (Frankfurt, 1989), 11–64.

    Notes to Chapter 2
287.  This does not, of course, exclude decisions on buying and selling being 
regretted. The rationality of economic calculation has to do with this problem. Ul-
timately, however, no orientation can prevent subsequent regrets, because condi-
tions and opportunities are always in flux.
288.  Closer examination is needed of how psychic systems come to terms with 
this, especially how they make the necessary calculations. Initial findings indicate 
better than at school. See Terzinha Nunes Carraher, David William Carraher, and 
Analúcia Dias Schliemann, “Mathematics in the Streets and in Schools,” British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology 3 (1985): 21–29; Terezinha Nunes Carraher and 
Analúcia Dias Schliemann, “Computation Routines Prescribed by Schools: Help 
or Hindrance?” Journal for Research in Mathematical Education 16 (1985): 17–44; 
Jean Lave, “The Values of Quantification,” in Power, Action and Belief: A New So­
ciology of Knowledge? ed. John Law (London, 1986), 88–111.
289.  For made things in general, see, e.g., Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae 
I, q. 16 a.1 (Turin, 1952), 93.
290.  “Astonishment is of all other Passions the easiest rais’d in raw and unexpe-
rienced Mankind,” Shaftesbury writes (Characteristicks, 1: 264), thus also betray-
ing that this concept of art presupposes a hierarchical architecture of the world 
and a corresponding society in which uncritical reverence was due from bottom 
to top.
291.  See, e.g., Peter Bürger, Prosa der Moderne (Frankfurt, 1988).
292.  Following Barel, Le paradoxe et le système, 71–72, 185–186, 302–303, we 
might also say that art discovers, uncovers the potentializations of a society, that 
is to say, what realization of the definite has relegated to the status of the merely 
possible.
293.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Das Medium der Kunst,” Delfin 4 (1986): 6–15, 
repr. in “Ohne Titel”: Neue Orientierungen in der Kunst, ed. Frederick D. Bunsen 
(Würzburg, 1988, 61–71; id., Die Kunst der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995).
294.  In curious contradiction to the etymology of the word, which now no 
longer refers to a past origin (origo) but demands “novelty” for attribution to the 
artist. See, e.g., Lodovico Antonio Muratori, Della perfetta poesia italiana (1706; 
Milan, 1971), 1: 104ff.
295.  Matteo Peregrini came up with this formula to describe service at the 
princely court; see Peregrini, Difesa del savio in corte (Macerata, 1634), esp. 250ff.
296.  See Niklas Luhmann, Macht (Stuttgart, 1975).
297.  See the distinction between market choice and political choice in Geof-
frey Vickers, The Art of Judgement: A Study of Policy Making (London, 1965), 122ff.
298.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Selbstorganisation und Information im poli-
tischen System,” Selbstorganisation 2 (1991): 11–26.
299.  It has already been noted in the preceding section that this precondition 
is not met by a medium of value relations, and that such a medium can therefore 
not be successfully differentiated. We have to do with values everywhere.

Notes to Chapter 2    
300.  See Spencer-Brown’s “law of crossing”: “The value of a crossing made 
again is not the value of the crossing” (id., Laws, 2).
301.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, 2: 751.
302.  On problems with the corresponding expectations of literature opting for 
a morally positive position in the eighteenth century, see Niels Werber, Literatur 
als System: Zur Ausdifferenzierung literarischer Kommunikation (Opladen, 1992).
303.   See further 226f. in this volume.
304.  See Gotthard Günther, “Strukturelle Minimalbedingungen einer Theorie 
des objektiven Geistes als Einheit der Geschichte,” in id., Beiträge zur Grundlegung 
einer operationsfähigen Dialektik, vol. 3 (Hamburg, 1980), 136–182 (140ff.).
305.  This thought points to the problem of inflation, which endangers pre-
cisely this condition (and therefore the coding itself).
306.  In the terminology introduced above (p. 110), this means that the unity 
of the code serves as the blind spot that is the essential condition for observational 
operation. And it is only another version of the same state of affairs when we note 
that all referral of coded operations back to the unity of their own code makes this 
appear a paradox.
307.  Some­—e.g., the “double bind” theoreticians and Barel, Le paradoxe et 
le système, esp. 53ff.—see sufficient justification in this alone for the paradoxical 
grounding of social systems. Nevertheless, the logical necessity of distinguishing 
between types, levels, languages, and metalanguages is only a necessity of logic, 
and if logic itself cannot stay the course, this contributes little to proving the para-
doxical foundations of real systems.
308.  Although the logic used knows the principle of identity, the prohibition 
of contradiction, and the principle of the excluded middle, it does not know the 
principle of sufficient reason. And if it lacks this principle (or something in its 
place), it cannot help itself out with logical axioms but only with metaphysics.
309.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 9.
310.  The artificiality of this condition is apparent when one considers that the 
psychic schematism of willingness and unwillingness, not to mention its neuro-
physiological basis, does not satisfy it, and these are taken as qualitative distinc-
tions. The absence of unwillingness does not suffice to produce willingness.
311.  It should be obvious that interdependencies at the level of operations 
and programs are thus not excluded. Research can naturally be conducted bet-
ter with money than without. That interdependencies and dependencies can 
be realized together is to be explained by the distinction between coding and 
programming.
312.  Similarly, but from a transcendental theoretical point of view, see Ed-
mund Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenol­
ogy: An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy (German original, 1954; trans., 
Evanston, IL., 2000).
313.  The associated logical problems are noted under (1) in the text above.

    Notes to Chapter 2
314.  An in-depth analysis might discover in this a phenomenon of super­
position in the sense of Barel, Le paradoxe et le système, 103ff. The preference for 
connectivity that is given anyway is used a second time to make invisible the para-
dox that would arise if one had to indicate the difference of the positive and the 
negative value as a unity, as the same.
315.  In more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, “Wirtschaftsethik—als Ethik?” in 
Wirtschaftsethik und Theorie der Gesellschaft, ed. Josef Wieland (Frankfurt, 1993), 
134–147; id., “Die Ehrlichkeit der Politiker und die höhere Amoralität der Poli-
tik,” in Opfer der Macht: Müssen Politiker ehrlich sein? ed. Peter Kemper (Frank-
furt, 1993), 27–41.
316.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2 (Taschenbuchausgabe, 1998), 
chap. 5, § 14.
317.  So-called ethnomethodology has taken a particular interest in this, un-
dertaking research that has shown that this reflexivity cannot be used too often 
and above all not to establish ultimate causes. “Taking for granted” is indis-
pensable. See also Chua Berg-Huat, “On the Commitments of Ethnomethod-
ology,” Sociological Inquiry 44 (1974): 241–256. In contrast, I aim to show what 
is to be gained with the differentiation of symbolically generalized communica-
tion media.
318.  These different forms of reflexivity impose the separation of truths and 
value relations (or, in the terminology of the nineteenth century, questions of 
being and questions of validity). See also Niklas Luhmann, “Wahrheit und Ide-
ologie,” in id., Aufklärung, 1: 54–65.
319.  This is also the reason why these media depend on written records and for 
their full development on printing.
320.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 21.
321.  See Baecker, Information und Risiko.
322.  It is only for this reason that art criticism has become a specific profession 
in which praise of the work of art reflects to some extent on the person who has 
found out why it is praiseworthy; it is, moreover, a secure profession, because find-
ing fault with the work of art can also earn praise for the critic.
323.  On the beginnings of modern science and with regard to printing, see 
Steve Shapin, “Pump and Circumstances: Robert Boyle’s Literary Technology,” 
Social Studies of Science 14, no. 4 (1984): 481–520.
324.  It is remarkable that this is the very idea on which the von Neumann 
computer is based.
325.  See esp. Talcott Parsons, “Pattern Variables Revisited,” American Sociologi­
cal Review 25 (1960): 467–483.
326.  As widespread reservations about the universality claim of systems the-
ory show, even people alive today are often not up to this combinatorial prob-
lem, though Kant long ago worked exemplarily with “provided that” abstractions.
327.  See only Karl R. Popper, Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach 

Notes to Chapter 2    
(Oxford, 1972), 317ff. The fact that it is often disregarded at the level of truth theo-
ries, and justificatory elements (coherence, consensus, etc.) are built into the truth 
concept, shows, however, how new and how improbable this insight is.
328.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, § 13.
329.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Symbiotische Mechanismen,” in id., Aufklärung, 
3: 228–244; id., Macht, 60ff.; id., Liebe als Passion, esp. 137ff.; id., Systeme, 337ff.
330.  For a remarkable case study, see Harold Garfinkel, Michael Lynch, and 
Eric Livingston, “The Work of Discovering Science, Constructed with Materials 
from the Optically Discovered Pulsar,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences 11 (1981): 
131–158.
331.  See Alfred North Whitehead, Modes of Thought (1939; repr., New York, 
1968), 111ff.
332.  On the revaluation of sexuality since the mid-eighteenth century, see Ed-
ward Shorter, “Illegitimacy, Sexual Revolution and Social Change in Modern Eu-
rope,” Journal of Interdisciplinary History 2 (1971): 237–272; Aram Vartanian, “La 
Mettrie, Diderot and Sexology in the Enlightenment,” in Essays on the Age of En­
lightenment in Honor of Ira O. Wade (Geneva, 1977), 347–367.
333.  On the beginnings and on its foundations in printing, see David Foxon, 
“Libertine Literature in England 1660–1745,” The Book Collector 12 (1963): 21–36, 
159–177, 294–307.
334.  See, e.g., P. J. Montes, “Precedentes doctrinales del ‘estado de necessidad’ 
en las obras de nuestras antiguos teologos y jurisconsultos,” La Ciudad de Dios 142 
(1925): 260–274, 352–361.
335.  See Talcott Parsons, “Some Reflections on the Place of Force in Social 
Process,” in Internal War: Problems and Approaches, ed. Harry Eckstein (New 
York, 1964), repr. in id., Sociological Theory and Modern Society (New York, 1967), 
264–296.
336.  As the then usual term “fanaticism” suggests, this was an old problem of 
religion, especially acute in the later Middle Ages because of the rapid increase in 
visions (uncertified, but useful for Church and monastic politics, and open to in-
spection as corporeal reality).
337.  See Pascal, De l’esprit géométrique et de l’art de persuader, in id., Oeuvres, 
358–386 (369).
338.  See Parsons, Social Systems and the Evolution of Action Theory, ed. Jensen 
as Zur Theorie der sozialen Interaktionsmedien, esp. 211ff.; Talcott Parsons and Ger-
ald M. Platt, The American University (Cambridge, MA, 1973), 304ff. Also Rainer 
Baum, “On Societal Media Dynamics,” in Explorations in General Theory in Social 
Science, ed. Jan J. Loubser et al. (New York, 1976), 2: 579–608. David A. Baldwin, 
“Money and Power,” Journal of Politics 33 (1971): 578–614 (608ff.), while taking an 
otherwise quite critical view of the media concept, also sees this as an issue worth 
pursuing.
339.  For an example of inflation, see also Stefan Jensen, Systemtheorie (Stutt-

    Notes to Chapter 2
gart, 1983), 57: “Too many words (symbols) compared with too few ‘realia’ are cir-
culating—too much is spoken about love and too little love is practiced.”
340.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Vertrauen: Ein Mechanismus der 
Reduktion sozialer Komplexität (3rd ed., Stuttgart, 1989). See also Trust: Making 
and Breaking Cooperative Relations, ed. Diego Gambetta (Oxford, 1988).
341.  For a case study on the subject concerning the inflation of Kantian 
philosophy in the last decade of the eighteenth century, see Niklas Luhmann, 
“Theorie­substitution in der Erziehungswissenschaft: Von der Philanthropie zum 
Neuhumanismus,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 2: 105–194. Wolfgang Walter, 
“Verer­bung und Gesellschaft: Zur Wissenssoziologie des hereditären Diskurses” 
(diss., Bielefeld, 1989), discusses another example, attributable to a societally sug-
gested interest in individuals.
342.  Alban J. Krailsheimer, Studies in Self-Interest: From Descartes to La Bruyère 
(Oxford, 1962), 113, speaks of the effects of a “debasement of spiritual currency.” 
A fundamentalist countermovement then developed in Jansenism, Pietism, etc. 
For modern America, Parsons distinguishes inflationary trends (social activism) 
and deflationary trends (“fundamentalism”) in religion. See Parsons, Social Sys­
tems and the Evolution of Action Theory, ed. Jensen as Zur Theorie der sozialen Inter­
aktionsmedien, 212. For similar ideas with regard to modern morality, see Richard 
Münch, “Moralische Achtung als Medium der Kommunikation,” in id., Dynamik 
der Kommunikationsgesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), 214ff.
343.  For this reason, only general price increases can be taken as an infla-
tion index, because when money is accepted, it is not yet certain what it will be 
spent on.
344.  In the context of a historical case study on the basis of Parsons’s theoreti-
cal apparatus, see Mark Gould, Revolution in the Development of Capitalism: The 
Coming of the English Revolution (Berkeley, CA, 1987), esp. 54ff. and 230ff.: the 
English king overextended his power apparatus in the absence of a sufficient ad-
ministrative substructure, thus provoking the revolution.
345.  For a communication-theoretical treatment of this problem, see Hutter, 
“Signum non olet.”
346.  It may well be asked, however, whether this is not because of the histori-
cal accident that the territorial state emerged in Europe after the eleventh-century 
differentiation of the legal system, notably in the form of the canon law of the 
Roman Catholic Church and based on discovery of the sources of Roman civil 
law. See Harold J. Berman, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal 
Tradition (Cambridge, MA, 1983). Global confirmation of this special case has not 
yet been forthcoming.
347.  On the abstractions reacting to this, see Dirk Baecker, “Das Gedächtnis 
der Wirtschaft,” in Theorie als Passion, ed. id. (Frankfurt, 1987), 519–546.
348.  This is only another way of saying that after differentiating symbolically 
generalized communication media, society can no longer impose a supercode. But 

Notes to Chapter 2    
this does not exclude morality now being free to evaluate what it wants to, and 
how it wants to, indeed, it makes this possible.
349.  Originally, the metaphor of the circle had a cosmological meaning, sym-
bolizing the unity of movement and immutability. The seventeenth century 
sought to bring this symbol down to earth from the heavens, although the circula-
tion neither of the blood nor of money is strictly speaking circular.
350.  Lawyers who practice consequentialist decision-making, and nowadays 
that includes practically all of them, suffer here from sheer incomprehensible il-
lusions. What counts for the decision are not the actual consequences, but only 
those that the jurist would like to bring about or prevent with an informed deci-
sion. There are nevertheless moderate voices who wish to limit consequentialism 
to opening or closing decision-making possibilities in the legal system (and thus to 
regulating circulation of the symbol “legal validity”). See Bernard Rudden, “Con-
sequences,” Juridical Review 24 (1979): 193–201, and, giving way in this direction, 
Neil MacCormick, “Legal Decisions and Their Consequences: From Dewey to 
Dworkin,” New York University Law Review 58 (1983): 253–258.
351.  Magoroh Maruyama, “The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying 
Mutual Causal Processes,” General Systems 8 (1963): 233–241, and the ensuing re-
search into positive feedback, was an important point of departure. See also Alfred 
Gierer, “Generation of Biological Patterns and Form: Some Physical, Mathemati-
cal, and Logical Aspects,” Progress of Biophysics and Molecular Biology 37 (1981): 
1–47; id., “Socioeconomic Inequalities: Effects of Self-enhancement, Depletion 
and Redistribution,” Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik 196 (1981): 
309–331; id., Die Physik, das Leben und die Seele: Anspruch und Grenzen der Natur­
wissenschaft (4th ed., Munich, 1988), esp. 121ff.
352.  See further chap. 3, § 8, in this volume.
353.  See André Orléan, “La monnaie et les paradoxes de l’individualisme,” 
Stanford French Review 15 (1992): 271–295.
354.  See Floyd H. Allport, Institutional Behavior: Essays Toward a Re-­interpreting 
of Contemporary Social Organization (Chapel Hill, NC, 1933). It was not by chance 
that Allport moved on later to an idiosyncratic social-psychology theory that as-
sumes a distinction between “structure” and “event.”
355.  See Niklas Luhmann, “The Future Cannot Begin: Temporal Structures in 
Modern Society,” Social Research 43 (1976): 130–152.
356.  Bernard Anconi, “Apprentissage, temps historique et évolution écono­
mique,” Revue internationale de systémique 7 (1993): 593–612 (597–598), puts it 
more drastically: “Le système est toujours à la fin des temps,” but immediately 
concedes that this is not in contradiction to the openness of the future.
357.  See 145ff. above and, with more detail, Niklas Luhmann, “Soziologie der 
Moral,” in Theorietechnik und Moral, ed. id. and Stephan H. Pfürtner (Frankfurt, 
1978), 8–116.
358.  In the moral critique of modern times, this is where the reproach of hypo­

    Notes to Chapter 2
crisy is raised, which is naturally justified, but does not question that communica-
tion takes place in relation to the medium of morality. What is basically at issue is 
the utopian notion that people actually have to mean what they say.
359.  For an overview of the very wide-ranging forms, which diverge not only 
regionally but also between high and popular culture, see The Anthropology of Evil, 
ed. David Parkin (Oxford, 1985).
360.  Whether words like böse or “evil” are now used less frequently for this 
reason is a moot point and probably difficult to prove. See Alan MacFarlane, The 
Culture of Capitalism (Oxford, 1987), 98ff.
361.  “No man can justly censure or condemn another, indeed no man truly 
knows another,” Sir Thomas Browne writes in Religio Medici (1643; London, 1965), 
72. “Further no man can judge another because no man knows himself.”
362.  On this shift in the meaning of “morality” and for a very far-reaching re-
search complex, see, e.g., Marcel Thomann, “Histoire de l’idéologie juridique au 
XVIIIe siècle, ou: ‘Le droit prisonnier des mots,’” Archives de philosophie du droit 
19 (1974): 127–149.
363.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Ethik als Reflexionstheorie der Moral,” in id., 
Gesellschaftsstruktur, 3: 259–357; also the section of the universalization of morality 
in Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5..
364.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, 2: 975–976.
365.  In Hofstadter, Gödel, Escher, Bach, 688.
366.  See the comprehensive study by Karl-Heinrich Bette and Uwe Schimank, 
Doping im Hochleistungssport: Anpassung durch Abweichung (Frankfurt, 1995).
367.  E.g., Lenin at the Smolny Institute in St. Petersburg in 1917.
368.  See Luhmann, Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft.
369.  More detail in Niklas Luhmann, “Die Ausdifferenzierung der Religion,” 
in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 3: 259–357.
370.  We explicitly maintain this independence of externally directed (natu-
rally always communicative) efforts also for technology, and therefore also see 
more than applied science in modern technology. See chap. 3, § 9, in this volume. 
Numerous technological problems—from railroad construction to modern safety 
engineering—cannot be solved by “reading,” but have to rely on constructing and 
testing the very installations one wants to construct. It goes without saying that 
this requires scientifically trained personnel. But their training, too, is not research 
but education.
371.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Grundwerte als Zivilreligion: Zur wissenschaft­
lichen Karriere eines Themas,” Archivio di Filosofia 46, nos. 2–3 (1978): 51–71.
372.  On dating in the early seventeenth century, see Edgar Zilsel, “The Genesis 
of the Concept of Physical Law,” Philosophical Review 51 (1942): 245–279.
373.  On this branch of the development of ideas, see Niklas Luhmann, “Selb-
streferenz und Teleologie in gesellschaftstheoretischer Perspektive,” in id., Gesell­
schaftsstruktur, 2: 9–44.

Notes to Chapter 3    
chapter 3: evolution
1.  See Colwyn L. Morgan, Emergent Evolution (New York, 1923), or, for a mul-
titude of dimensions or variables of emergence, Anthony Wilden, System and 
Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange (2nd ed., London, 1980), 351ff. 
(375). For a more recent overview, see also Eric Bonabeau, Jean-Louis Dessalles, 
and Alain Grumbach, “Characterizing Emergent Phenomena,” Revue internatio­
nale de systémique 9 (1995): 327–346, 347–371.
2.  With respect to the “emergence” of self-organization, see E. Bernard-Weil, 
“Réévaluation des concepts d’auto-organisation et d’émergence à la lumière de la 
systémique ago-antagoniste,” Revue internationale de systémique 8 (1994): 315–335 
(316). Dialectical solutions, with their even more opaque logic, are also no help. We 
would do better to consider attempts to temporalize mathematical calculations.
3.  For overviews of the Anglo-Saxon branch of the discussion, see Tim Ingold, 
Evolution and Social Life (Cambridge, 1986), or Stephen K. Sanderson, Social Evo­
lutionism: A Critical History (Oxford, 1990).
4.  On “l’improbable probable,” see Edgar Morin, La méthode, vol. 1 (Paris, 
1977), 294ff. The already classical paradigm is the chemical improbability of DNA 
molecules.
5.  In the structuralist manner, a corresponding theory of the probability of the 
improbable could be constructed with the aid of the force concept. Universally 
distributed virtual force is doubled and differentiated into legitimate and nonle-
gitimate force. This is done not by social contract (Hobbes) but by evolution. In 
its legitimate form, force (today as state authority) serves to drive out illegitimate 
force. With this differentiation, force is thus characterized by the inclusion of ex-
clusion, and legitimacy is, from this point of view, not a value concept but this 
very inclusion of exclusion—a paradox whose resolution constitutes itself as state 
authority (or its functional equivalent). See also Dirk Baecker, “Gewalt im Sys-
tem,” Soziale Welt 47 (1996): 92–109.
6.  Magoroh Maruyama, “Postscript to the Second Cybernetics,” American Sci­
entist 51 (1963), 250–256.
7.  This is a quite common view. It ultimately goes back to Herbert Spencer’s 
famous formula of “change from a state of indefinite, incoherent homogeneity 
to a state of definite, coherent heterogeneity” (id., “What Is Social Evolution?” 
The Nineteenth Century 44 [1898]: 348–358 [353]). Comprehensive treatment is to 
be found in chaps. 14–17 on “The Law of Evolution,” of id., First Principles (5th 
ed., London, 1887), 307ff. For more recent views see, e.g., J. W. S. Pringle, “On 
the Parallel Between Learning and Evolution,” Behaviour 3 (1951): 174–215; Wal-
ter Buckley, Sociology and Modern Systems Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1967), 
50–51, 62ff.; Gerd Pawelzig, Dialektik der Entwicklung objektiver Systeme (Berlin, 
1970), 135ff.; Gerhard Lenski, “Social Structure in Evolutionary Perspective,” in 
Approaches to the Study of Social Structure, ed. Peter Blau (London, 1976), 135–153.

    Notes to Chapter 3
8.  E.g., Richard Newbold Adams, Energy and Structure: A Theory of Social 
Power (Austin, TX, 1975).
9.  This takes us back to the treatment of yes/no coding in language in chap. 2, 
132ff., in this volume.
10.  We are talking about cosmologies with the following characteristics: total 
creation by an author, contingency, dependence. The biblical texts give a much 
more complex picture. See Michael Welker, Schöpfung und Wirklichkeit (Neu-
kirchen-Vluyn, 1995). Taking this further, we could say that creation is the event 
(or registration) of the difference that can afterward begin to act creatively.
11.  Hegel argues quite the other way around, seeing a gain for piety in renun-
ciation of detailed final natures: “What is to the benefit of the one is to the disad-
vantage of the other, and is therefore inappropriate: the maintenance of life and 
the interests concerned with existence, which in the one case are furthered are in 
the other case just as much endangered and destroyed. There is a bifurcation in it­
self that, contrary to the eternal workings of God, finite things are raised to essen-
tial purposes” (Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion I, in Hegel, Werke, vol. 
16 [Frankfurt, 1969], 21–22). In the world history of the mind, this can only be a 
temporary shortcoming.
12.  See Johann George Sulzer, “Versuch über die Glückseligkeit veständi-
ger Wesen” (1754), in id., Vermischte Philosophische Schriften, vol. 1 (1773; repr., 
Hildesheim, 1974), 323–347. See also Kant’s Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie 
des Himmels (1755), esp. chap. 7. As early as the sixteenth century, we find, with a 
growing awareness of progress, the view that God, even though he had not created 
the world gradually, had at least revealed it step by step—not least the printing 
press, the two Americas, and artillery. See François de La Noue, Discours politiques 
et militaires (1587; repr., Geneva, 1967), 520ff. The change is now, however, believed 
only to have taken place in the mid-eighteenth century—see Arthur O. Lovejoy, 
The Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea (Cambridge, MA, 1936), 
242ff., and Wolf Lepenies, Das Ende der Naturgeschichte: Wandel kultureller Selbst­
verständlichkeiten in den Wissenschaften des 18. und 19. Jahrhunderts (Munich, 1976).
13.  Today, this has been abandoned both in biology and in the theory of soci-
ety in favor of a concept of occasional but abrupt structural changes now that we 
need no longer fear that this brings us too close to miracles of creation. See p. 270 
in this volume.
14.  On Darwin as a “historical methodologist,” see Stephen Jay Gould, “Evo-
lution and the Triumph of Homology, or Why History Matters,” American Scien­
tist 74 (1986): 60–69.
15.  See, e.g., Ingold, Evolution and Social Life, 12ff.
16.  For a history of evolution theories from a biological perspective, see Peter 
J. Bowler, Evolution: The History of an Idea (2nd ed., Berkeley, CA, 1989). For a 
systematic state-of-the-art presentation, see Stuart A. Kauffman, The Origins of 
Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolution (New York, 1993).

Notes to Chapter 3    
17.  Methodologically, this is now based on Guttmann-scalogram analysis, 
which is, however, never applied to society as a whole but only to special areas 
such as the division of labor, religion, political order, and law. For an overview, see 
Robert L. Carneiro, “Scale Analysis, Evolutionary Sequences, and the Rating of 
Cultures,” in Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology, ed. Raoul Naroll and 
Ronald Cohen (Garden City, NY, 1970), 834–871.
18.  Herbert Spencer, who was at the heart of these controversies, was both 
cautious and careless in this regard. See, e.g., the criticism of such assumptions in 
Spencer, Principles of Sociology, vol. 1 (3rd ed., London, 1885), 93ff., and id., First 
Principles, 517, with the assertion “that Evolution can end only in the establish-
ment of the greatest perfection and the most complete happiness.” A hundred 
years later, we can still accept this—albeit with the added remark: then it simply 
doesn’t end!
19.  Many controversies about evolution theory, which have in retrospect proved 
useless, have been inspired by this. See, e.g., L.T. Hobhouse, G. C. Wheeler, and 
Morris Ginsberg, The Material Culture and Social Institutions of the Simpler Peoples: 
An Essay in Correlation (1915; repr., London, 1965), 1ff. The criticism of the style 
of these controversies is also already half a century old. See, e.g., Leonhard Adam, 
“Functionalism and Neo-Functionalism,” Oceania 17 (1946): 1–25.
20.  See the discussions in Epochenschwellen und Epochenstrukturen im Diskurs 
der Literatur- und Sprachhistorie, ed. Hans Ulrich Gumbrecht and Ursula Link-
Heer (Frankfurt, 1985), or in Epochenschwelle und Epochenbewußtsein, ed. Reinhart 
Herzog and Reinhart Koselleck, Poetik und Hermeneutik, vol. 12 (Munich, 1987).
21.  For an example, see William T. Sanders and David Webster, “Unilinealism 
and Multilinealism, and the Evolution of Complex Societies,” in Social Archeol­
ogy: Beyond Subsistence and Dating, ed. Charles L. Redman et al. (New York, 1978), 
249–302.
22.  Ernst Heuss, “Evolution und Stagnation of Economic Systems,” in The 
Evolution of Economic Systems: Essays in Honour of Ota Šik, ed. Kurt Dopfer and 
Karl-F. Raible (London, 1990), 91–99 (93).
23.  See, e.g., Ingold, Evolution and Social Life, 102, who, in keeping with the 
tradition of the evolution concept seeks “to denote the continuous, directed and 
purposive movement to which the term originally and quite properly referred.” 
See the apposite criticism by Marion Blute, “Sociocultural Evolutionism: An Un-
tried Theory,” Behavioral Science 24 (1979): 46–59. See also Thomas Dietz, Tom R. 
Burns, and Frederick H. Buttel, “Evolutionary Theory in Sociology: An Examina-
tion of Current Thinking,” Sociological Forum 5 (1990): 155–171.
24.  However, it should at least be mentioned that the concept of evolution 
came into fashion owing to Spencer rather than Darwin. Darwin himself uses it 
only quite casually and at any rate not to name his own theory. Even so-called so-
cial Darwinism can hardly cite Darwin himself, especially not The Descent of Man 
(1871). In retrospect, see Darwinisme et société, ed. Patrick Tort (Paris, 1992).

    Notes to Chapter 3
25.  For transfer to the social sciences, see esp. Donald T. Campbell, “Blind 
Variation and Selective Retention in Creative Thought as in Other Knowledge 
Processes,” Psychological Review 67 (1960): 380–400; id., “Variation and Selective 
Retention in Socio-Cultural Evolution,” General Systems 14 (1969): 69–85; id., 
“On the Conflict Between Biological and Social Evolution and Between Psycho-
logical and Moral Tradition,” American Psychologist 30 (1975): 1103–1126 (a selec-
tion of mostly epistemologically oriented writings); and with regard to evolution 
changing cultural “rules,” Tom R. Burns and Thomas Dietz, “Cultural Evolu-
tion: Social Rule Systems and Human Agency,” International Sociology 7 (1992): 
259–281.
26.  Darwin himself held that the evolution of civilization cancelled nat-
ural selection. See Patrick Tort, “L’effet réversif de l’évolution: Fondements de 
l’anthropologie darwinienne,” in id., Darwinisme et société, 13–46. This would have 
to mean that civilization as a product of evolution now had to guarantee itself.
27.  See also Loet Leydesdorff, “The Evolution of Communication Sys-
tems,” International Journal of Systems Research and Information Science 6 (1994): 
219–230.
28.  See Julian S. Huxley, Evolution: The Modern Synthesis (1942; 3rd ed., Lon-
don 1974), 485, quoted from C. R. Hallpike, The Principles of Social Evolution 
(Oxford, 1986), 77: “we now realize that the results of selection are by no means 
necessarily ‘good’, from the point of view either of the species or of the progressive 
evolution of life. They may be neutral, they may be a dangerous balance of useful 
and harmful, or they may be definitely deleterious.”
29.  See, e.g., E. D. Cope, The Primary Factors of Organic Evolution (Chicago, 
1896), Elman R. Service, Cultural Evolutionism: Theory in Practice (New York, 1971), 
and G. Ledyard Stebbins, The Basis of Progressive Evolution (Chapel Hill, NC, 1969).
30.  See Lars Löfgren, “Knowledge of Evolution and Evolution of Knowledge,” 
in The Evolutionary Vision: Towards a Unifying Paradigm of Physical, Biological, and 
Sociocultural Evolution, ed. Erich Jantsch (Boulder, CO, 1981), 129–151. The sci-
entific elaboration of a theory of unpredictable changes requires the admission of 
self-reference in evolution theory as in systems theory.
31.  Such notions, too, are occasionally formulated with the concept of evolu-
tion. See, e.g., the idea of a “welfare-oriented evolutionary theory” in Edmund 
Dahlström, “Developmental Direction and Welfare Goals: Some Comments on 
Functionalistic Evolutionary Theory about Highly Developed Societies,” Acta 
Socio­logica 17 (1974): 3–21. The advance made by this version of the theory, to do 
it justice, is that static final states are no longer in question, but rather variables 
intended to indicate potential for development, such as learning ability, mobiliza-
tion of resources, and adaptive upgrading.
32.  See, e.g., Gisèle Umbhauer, “Evolution and Forward Induction in Game 
Theory,” Revue internationale de systémique 7 (1993): 613–626, on evolution of the 
economy.

Notes to Chapter 3    
33.  I argue that the form of system differentiation is of particular importance 
in this regard; see further also Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, esp. 883.
34.  Among biologists, Rupert Riedl has been foremost in stressing the need 
to clarify systems-theoretical premises of evolution theory. See Riedl, Die Ord­
nung des Lebendigen: Systembedingungen der Evolution (Hamburg, 1975), and “A 
­Systems-Analytical Approach to Macro-Evolutionary Phenomena,” Quarterly 
Review of Biology 52 (1977): 351–370.
35.  Loet Leydesdorff, “New Models of Technological Change: New Theories for 
Technology Studies,” in Evolutionary Economics and Chaos Theory: New Directions 
in Technology Studies, ed. id. and Peter van den Besselaar (London, 1994), 180–192 
(180).
36.  See Hans-Peter Müller and Michael Schmid, “Paradigm Lost? Von der 
Theorie sozialen Wandels zur Theorie dynamischer Systeme,” in Sozialer Wandel: 
Modellbildung und theoretische Ansätze, ed. id. (Frankfurt, 1995), 9–55 (31ff.); Mi-
chael Schmid, “Soziologische Evolutionstheorie,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 200–210 
(201ff.); Sanderson, Social Evolutionism, 224. However, the empirical reference of 
this attribution to action remains unclear, since one can scarcely claim that cer-
tain actions have evolutionary effects. Anthony Giddens (who is often cited in this 
connection) is more consistent insofar as he rejects an evolutionistic interpretation 
of his “structuration” theory.
37.  This is not fundamentally different if, with Ingold, Evolution and Social 
Life, esp. 104–105, 114ff., we distinguish between person as meaning-imparting, 
acting entity and individual as an entity in which a multitude of objective events 
take place as “the things that happen” (105), as “temporary vehicle for the pro-
jection of past into future” (106). Views on the importance of human beings for 
sociocultural evolution may differ; but the problem is whether evolution theory 
should make itself dependent at all, for the notion from which it takes its depar-
ture, on such a humanistic design.
38.  This is further discussed below in this chapter with reference to system 
differentiation.
39.  See pertinent remarks in C. H. Waddington, “The Principles of Archetypes in 
Evolution,” in Mathematical Challenges to the Neo-Darwinian Interpretation of Evo­
lution, ed. Paul S. Moorhead and Martin M. Kaplan (Philadelphia, 1967), 113–115.
40.  Herbert Spencer had already clearly seen this. See the chapter “The Multi-
plication of Effects,” in id., First Principles, 93ff.
41.  As formulated by Richad B. Norgaard, “The Coevolution of Economic 
and Environmental Systems and the Emergence of Unsustainability,” in Evolu­
tionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics, ed. Richard W. England (Ann Arbor, 
MI, 1994), 213–225 (220).
42.  See, e.g., Gregory A. Johnson, “Organizational Structure and Scalar 
Stress,” in Theory and Explanation in Archaeology, ed. Colin Renfrew, Michael J. 
Rowlands, and Barbara Abbott Segraves (New York, 1982), 389–421: “population 

    Notes to Chapter 3
is not necessarily the best measure of scale” (391–392); and see also 407. Neverthe-
less, the author, with no other theory of society at his disposal, continues to count 
individuals, families, and small groups as the point of departure for determining 
the size and the “scalar stress” of a society.
43.  See, e.g., Stephen Jay Gould, “Darwinism and the Expansion of Evolu-
tionary Theory,” Science 216 (1982): 380–387.
44.  E.g., Anatol Rapoport, “Mathematical, Evolutionary, and Psychological 
Approaches to the Study of Total Societies,” in The Study of Total Societies, ed. 
Samuel Z. Klausner (Garden City, NY, 1967), 114–143 (133ff.) sees possibilities for 
retreating from Darwin’s notion of “natural selection” with the aid of the mean-
ing concept. Similarly, Stephen Toulmin, Human Understanding, vol. 1 (Prince­
ton, NJ, 1972). If one argues more in the context of main-stream sociology, the 
almost complete neglect of external causes in the theories on historical develop-
ments is more striking. This has been increasingly criticized. Anthony D. Smith, 
The Concept of Social Change (London, 1973), 150ff., sees in this the reason for the 
controversy between historicism and evolutionism. Bernhard Giesen and Chris-
toph Lau, “Zur Anwendung Darwinistischer Erklärungsstrategien in der Soziolo-
gie,” Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 33 (1981): 229–256, and 
Michael Schmid, Theorie sozialen Wandels (Opladen, 1982), therefore propose re-
orientation with the help of a concept of external natural selection. But can this 
distinction be at issue at all?
45.  Untenably inferring endogenous causality from the unity of sociology’s 
subject matter, Emile Durkheim observes: “que les causes des phénomènes sociaux 
sont internes à la société.” He adds: “C’est bien plutôt à la théorie qui fait dériver 
la société de l’individu qu’on pourrait justement reprocher de chercher à tirer le 
dedans du dehors.” Durkheim, Les règles de la méthode sociologique (8th ed., Paris 
1927), 147–148.
46.  Mixed forms that transfer demographically tried and tested theory pat-
terns to social systems are then all the more problematic. This sort of theory for-
mation is particularly widespread in dealing with the evolution of organizations. 
See, e.g., Bill McKelvey and Howard Aldrich, “Populations, Natural Selection, 
and Applied Organizational Science,” Administrative Science Quarterly 28 (1983): 
101–128; W. Graham Astley, “The Two Ecologies: Population and Community 
Perspectives on Organizational Evolution,” ibid., 30 (1985): 224–241; Michael T. 
Hannan and John Freeman, Organizationale Ecology (Cambridge, MA, 1989); 
and Evolutionary Dynamics of Organizations, ed. Joel Baum and Jitendra Singh 
(New York, 1994).
47.  See Gerhard Roth, “Conditions of Evolution and Adaptation in Organ-
ism as Autopoietic Systems,” in Environmental Adaptation and Evolution, ed. 
D. Mossa­kowski and G. Roth (Stuttgart, 1982), 37–48; Hans Rademacher, “Zur 
Grammatik autopoietischer Systeme,” in Autopoiesis: Eine Theorie im Brennpunkt 
der Kritik, ed. Hans Rudi Fischer (Heidelberg, 1991), 53–66.

Notes to Chapter 3    
48.  Maturana accordingly distinguishes between the autopoietic organization 
and the structures of a system. However, I wish to avoid the term “organization” 
in this connection, because I want to use it differently.
49.  Thus salamanders with or without complicated sling-tongue. See David B. 
Wake, Gerhard Roth, and Marvalee H. Wake, “On the Problems of Stasis in Or-
ganismal Evolution,” Journal of Theoretical Biology 101 (1983): 211–224.
50.  See, e.g., Cope, Primary Factors of Organic Evolution, 172ff., and Service, 
Cultural Evolutionism, 31ff., for the one view, and Stebbins, Basis of Progressive Evo­
lution, 121, for the other.
51.  This argument is directed against an objection that is often raised, but is 
even from a purely methodological point of view quite nonsensical. For no con-
cept—neither autopoiesis nor action, neither control nor socialization, neither 
purpose nor organization—as concept provides the structural limitations within 
which what is indicated can be realized in any particular case. Apparently, the 
heat of the controversy about autopoiesis makes one forget that this is also not de-
manded of one’s own concepts. See inter alia Walter L. Bühl, “Politische Grenzen 
der Autopoiese sozialer Systeme,” in Autopoiesis: Eine Theorie im Brennpunkt der 
Kritik, ed. Hans Rudi Fischer (Heidelberg, 1991), 201–225.
52.  Gunther Teubner reacts to precisely this problem by attenuating the strin-
gency of the autopoiesis concept in “Hyperzyklus in Recht und Organisation: Zum 
Verhältnis von Selbstbeobachtung, Selbstkonstitution und Autopoiesis,” in Sinn, 
Kommunikation und soziale Differenzierung: Beiträge zu Luhmanns Theorie sozi­
aler Systeme, ed. Hans Haferkamp and Michael Schmid (Frankfurt, 1987), 98–128. 
Similarly, for biology, Gerhard Roth, “Autopoiese und Kognition: Die Theorie H. 
R. Maturanas und die Notwendigkeit ihrer Weiterentwicklung,” in Systeme erken­
nen Systeme: Individuelle, soziale und methodische Bedingungen systemischer Diag­
nostik, ed. Günther Schiepek (Munich, 1987), 50–74 (57–58). Our inquiries take 
another path. See also, deploying the concepts of “self-organization” and “structural 
coupling,” Rudolf Stichweh, “Selbstorganisation und die Entstehung nationaler 
Rechtssysteme (17.–19. Jahrhundert),” Rechtshistorisches Journal 9 (1990): 254–272.
53.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, 2: 816, on interactions envisaged as episodes, 
showing that episodization is possible only with the help of the distinction be-
tween interaction and society, and hence only in a society that is itself infinite.
54.  N. Katherine Hayles, “Making the Cut: The Interplay of Narrative and 
System, or What Systems Theory Can’t See,” Cultural Critique 30 (1995): 7–100, is 
thus right when she suggests that a transition could be useful to narrative patterns 
that can give an account of how autopoietic systems, and, among them, observ-
ing systems, set themselves as difference. But this solution does not get us very far, 
although it makes other means of establishing plausibility available and also per-
mits us to inquire into the historical situations in which the narration of autopoi-
etic evolution has been able to take root at all. But ultimately this merely brings us 
back to the question of who tells the tale.

    Notes to Chapter 3
55.  This is seldom said with sufficient clarity. But see, following Heidegger, An-
thony Giddens, “Time and Social Organization,” in id., Social Theory and Modern 
Society (Cambridge, 1987), 140–165.
56.  After an accident we know what we have experienced and why we behaved 
the way we did, just as if everything had happened under conscious control; or we 
know (but we know!) that we cannot remember clearly enough.
57.  See also Donald T. Campbell, “Neurological Embodiments of Belief and 
the Gaps in the Fit of Phenomena to Noumena,” in Naturalistic Epistemology, ed. 
Abner Shimony and Debra Nails (Dordrecht, 1987), 165–192 (175).
58.  Greek examples show that it is difficult to determine stable ancestors in 
the absence of writing. See Rosalind Thomas, Oral Tradition and Written Record in 
Classical Athens (Cambridge, 1989), esp. 155ff. See also Gerdien Jonker, The Topog­
raphy of Remembrance: The Dead, Tradition and Collective Memory in Mesopotamia 
(Leiden, 1995), esp. 213ff.
59.  Harold J. Berman, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal 
Tradition (Cambridge, MA, 1983), dates the change (after the break in the Roman 
civil law tradition) precisely to the second half of the eleventh century. Takeoff be-
came possible when a socially embedded system of jurisprudence coincided over 
the course of a few decades with chance events such as the rediscovery of the 
Roman Corpus Iuris Civilis [Code of Justinian], the Norman Conquest of England 
and imposition of royal law, and, above all, Church reform.
60.  The account of the development of Greek science in G. E. R. Lloyd, 
Magic, Reason and Experience: Studies in the Origin and Development of Greek Sci­
ence (Cambridge, 1979), although not at all conceived in this way, can very well 
be interpreted thus.
61.  See p. 208 in this volume.
62.  For an instructive example concerning local jurisdiction, see Charles Loy-
seau, Discours de l’abus des justices de village, tiré du Traité des offices de C.L.P. (Paris, 
1603).
63.  See Gould, “Darwinism and the Expansion of Evolutionary Theory”; 
Richard M. Burian, “Adaptation,” in Dimensions of Darwinism, ed. Marjorie 
Green (Cambridge, 1984), 287–314; Michael T. Hannan and John Freeman, Orga­
nizational Ecology (Cambridge, MA, 1989), 21ff. A widespread point of criticism 
amounts to an accusation of tautology (adaptation = survival = adaptation); but 
this could be dispelled.
64.  In this context, the concept of the evolutionary “niche” initially helped, 
but this merely shifts the issue, for now the distinction between niche and non-
niche becomes crucial for theory.
65.  For this example, see Theodosius Dobzhansky, “Chance and Creativity in 
Evolution,” in Studies in the Philosophy of Biology: Reduction and Related Problems, 
ed. id. and Francisco José Ayala (London, 1974).
66.  See, e.g., Bowler, Evolution, 340.

Notes to Chapter 3    
67.  See Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela, El arbol del conocimiento 
(Santiago de Chile, 1984), esp. 71ff.; trans. as The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological 
Roots of Human Understanding (Boston, 1992).
68.  See just Joseph A. Tainter, The Collapse of Complex Societies (Cambridge, 
1988).
69.  Anyone who argues that evolution is a process that enhances complexity 
must consequently refer to these phenomena as “devolution.” See Charles Tilly, 
“Clio and Minerva,” in Theoretical Sociology: Perspectives and Developments, ed. 
John C. McKinney and Edward A. Tiryakian (New York, 1970), 433–466. I prefer 
to restrict the thesis itself.
70.  See, e.g., Joseph H. Greenberg, Essays in Linguistics (New York, 1957), 56ff.
71.  On the basis of other theories, biologists also stress that complexity is epi-
genetically co-produced, but that the actual effect of evolution consists in the de-
velopment of system structures. See G. Ledyard Stebbins, “Adaptive Shifts and 
Evolutionary Novelty: A Compositionist Approach,” in Studies in the Philosophy 
of Biology: Reduction and Related Problems, ed. Francisco Ayala and Theodosius 
Dobzhansky (London, 1974), 285–306 (302ff.). See also id., The Basis of Progressive 
Evolution (Chapel Hill, NC, 1969).
72.  This holds for physical-chemical evolution and a fortiori for organic evolu-
tion. See Melvin Calvin, “Origin of Life on Earth and Elsewhere,” in The Logic of 
Personal Knowledge: Essays Presented to Michael Polanyi on His Seventieth Birthday 
(London, 1961), 207–231 (214).
73.  See Richard Levins, Evolution in Changing Environments: Some Theoretical 
Explorations (Princeton, NJ, 1968), 6.
74.  For biology, see Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould, “Punctuated 
Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism,” in Models in Paleobiology, ed. 
Thomas J. M. Schopf (San Francisco, 1972), 82–115. See also Kenneth E. Boulding, 
“Punctuationalism in Societal Evolution,” Journal of Social and Biological Struc­
tures 12 (1989): 213–223.
75.  See Talcott Parsons, Societies: Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 95ff.
76.  Michael Conrad discusses such a “postulate of ignorance” in “Rational-
ity in the Light of Evolution,” in Laws of Nature and Human Conduct, ed. Ilya 
Prigogine and Michèle Sanglier (Brussels, 1987), 111–211,
77.  The concept of decoupling has a similar function in Bernhard Giesen’s 
quite differently oriented theory of social change in id., “Code und Situation: Das 
selektionstheoretische Programm einer Analyse sozialen Wandels—illustriert an 
der Genese des deutschen Nationalbewußtseins,” in Sozialer Wandel: Modellbil­
dung und theoretische Ansätze, ed. Hans-Peter Müller and Michael Schmid (Frank-
furt, 1995), 228–266.
78.  See Heinz von Foerster, “On Self-Organizing Systems and Their Environ-
ments,” in Self-Organizing Systems: Proceedings of an Interdisciplinary Conference, 

    Notes to Chapter 3
ed. Marshall C. Yovits and Scott Cameron (Oxford, 1960), 31–48; Henri Atlan, 
Entre le cristal et la fumée (Paris, 1979).
79.  See, e.g., Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolution­
ary Process (Chicago, 1985).
80.  This should make it clear, but in view of innumerable misunderstandings 
and misinterpretations, I would take the precaution of noting that there is no ana­
logical inference involved in either the one direction or the other. This means that 
the fact that living systems evolve does not allow us to conclude that the societal 
system must also evolve. Such reasoning could be upheld at best in theories that 
maintain that society consists of living beings.
81.  Failure to take this sufficiently into account provoked the dispute over “so-
ciobiology.” We can spare ourselves this controversy without have to deny that like 
other environmental factors, genetic predisposition also affects society, inasmuch 
as it can disturb communication. In the system reference of living systems, “cul-
ture” can be regarded as the continuation of life by other (and probably dubious) 
means or as learned (as opposed to genetically determined) behavior. See, e.g., 
John Tyler Bonner, The Evolution of Culture in Animals (Princeton, NJ, 1980). All 
this may also provide “anthropologically” interesting insights. But it permits no 
conclusions about societal evolution.
82.  This reservation has led to objections that variation, selection, and resta-
bilization cannot be distinguished at all in societal evolution, because the one 
takes place only in meaningful reference back to the other. But this holds for 
meaning relations generally and does not exclude quite obviously meaningful 
distinctions.
83.  See, e.g., Hallpike, Principles of Social Evolution, chap. 2. The effect of con-
fusion about the relations between individual and society, blocking the way to a 
theory of societal evolution, is evident.
84.  Older examples include Albert G. Keller, Societal Evolution: A Study of 
the Evolutionary Basis of the Science of Society (2nd ed., New Haven, CT, 1931), 
and V. Gordon Childe, Social Evolution (London, 1951). And see esp. Donald T. 
Campbell, “Variation and Selection Retention in Socio-Cultural Evolution,” Gen­
eral Systems 14 (1969), 69–85; Robert A. LeVine, Culture, Behavior, and Personal­
ity (Chicago, 1973), 101ff.; Howard E. Aldrich, Organizations and Environments 
(­Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1979), 26ff.; John Langton, “Darwinism and the Behav-
ioral Theory of Sociocultural Evolution: An Analysis,” American Journal of Soci­
ology 85 (1979): 288–309; Christoph Lau, Gesellschaftliche Evolution als kollektiver 
Lernprozeß (Berlin, 1981). A review of this literature shows that the specification 
possibilities offered by systems theory are not used.
85.  Here we also encounter a much more general concept of evolution in terms 
of the explanation of synergetic effects, dissipative structures, etc.—in short, of 
very general processes of difference formation (deviation amplification) that can 
also be demonstrated in physical (i.e., non-autopoietic) systems—which should 

Notes to Chapter 3    
be noted at least in passing. This is not to deny that such a theory could also be ap-
plied to social systems; but it is not specific enough for the purpose.
86.  As far as I can see, this applies without exception to the nineteenth century, 
and still to Keller, Societal Evolution, 67ff., where we read: “The agent of variation 
is the individual” (68). Even evolutionary epistemology, which had developed at 
an early stage, asserts the chance inspiration of certain researchers. See, e.g., Wil-
liam James, “Great Man, Great Thought and the Environment,” Atlantic Monthly 
46 (1888), 441–459, or Georg Simmel, “Über einige Beziehungen der Selektion-
slehre zur Erkenntnistheorie,” Archiv für systematische Philosophie 1 (1895): 34–45 
(“among the innumerable, psychologically arising ideas are some that . . .” [39]). 
Even then, as noted above (p. 263), this explanation of variation contradicted the 
collective individualism of the population concept.
87.  See just Uwe Schimank, “Der mangelnde Akteursbezug systemtheoretischer 
Erklärungen gesellschaftlicher Differenzierung—Ein Diskussionsvorschlag,” 
Zeitschrift für Soziologie 14 (1985): 421–434; Michael Schmid, “Autopoiesis und so-
ziales System: Eine Standortbestimmung,” in Sinn, Kommunikation und soziale 
Differenzierung: Beiträge zu Luhmanns Theorie sozialer Systeme, ed. id. and Hans 
Haferkamp (Frankfurt, 1987), 25–50 (41–42); id., “Soziologische Evolutionsthe-
orie,” Protosoziologie 7 (1995): 200–210. Recourse to individuals now no longer 
indicates a determinable empirical reality but serves only to present action as a 
variable. “Action must be conceived of as changeable so that actors can become the 
vehicles of variation,” we read in the reverse perspective in Schmid, “Soziologische 
Evolutionstheorie,” 201.
88.  For a brief overview, see Ernst Mayr, Evolution und die Vielfalt des Lebens 
(Berlin, 1979), 47ff. The testing and harmonization required are also often called 
“selection,” but then not in a strictly evolution-theoretical sense of the term. See, 
e.g., Lancelot L. White, Internal Factors in Evolution (London, 1965), or Manfred 
Eigen, “Selforganization of Matter and the Evolution of Biological Macromole-
cules,” Die Naturwissenschaften 58 (1971): 465–523. The effect of this preselection 
in trying out variations is above all that evolutionary selection is itself curtailed 
and accelerated.
89.  See inter alia Josef Schumpeter, Kapitalismus, Sozialismus und Demokratie 
(Bern, 1946), 47ff.; Theodor Geiger, Aufgaben und Stellung der Intelligenz in der 
Gesellschaft (Stuttgart, 1949).
90.  This is recalled, albeit not in an evolution-theoretical but a “political” con-
text, by Helmut Schelsky, Die Arbeit tun die anderen: Klassenkampf und Priester­
herrschaft der Intellektuellen (Opladen, 1975).
91.  See particularly the important contribution by Jan Mukařovsky˘, “Das In-
dividuum und die literarische Evolution,” in id., Kunst, Poetik, Semiotik, German 
trans., (Frankfurt, 1989), 213–237.
92.  More detailed treatment in chap. 2, § 3, in this volume.
93.  Spencer-Brown’s calculus of forms in Laws requires only this operation of 

    Notes to Chapter 3
differentiating distinction; for this reason, it is not a logic but a mathematical the-
ory. To generate the form of a positive/negative distinction, much more complex 
observational relations are necessary, which cannot yet be predicted at the outset.
94.  Etymological references in Johannes Spörl, “Das Alte und das Neue im 
Mittelalter: Studien zum Problem des mittelalterlichen Fortschrittsbewußtseins,” 
Historisches Jahrbuch 50 (1930): 297–341, 498–524. See also Walter Freund, Moder­
nus und andere Zeitbegriffe des Mittelalters (Cologne, 1957).
95.  For general treatment, see Niklas Luhmann, Soziale Systeme: Grundriß 
einer allgemeinen Theorie (Frankfurt, 1984), 488ff. The position adopted in the text 
is to be distinguished from the widespread view that structural contradictions give 
rise to variation of the system—be it in the manner prescribed by dialectics or as 
a “variety pool” with still indeterminate development possibilities. See inter alia 
Oskar Lange, Wholes and Parts: A General Theory of System Behaviour (Oxford, 
1965), 1–2, 72ff.; Claude Lévi-Strauss, “La notion de structure en Ethnologie,” in 
id., Anthropologie structurale (Paris, 1958), 303–351 (342ff.); Talcott Parsons, “Some 
Considerations on the Theory of Social Change,” Rural Sociology 26 (1961)L 219–
239; Walter Buckley, Sociology and Modern Systems Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
1967), esp. 50ff.; Jon Elster, Logic and Society: Contradictions and Possible Worlds 
(Chichester, UK, 1978). There are quite conceivably structural conditions that 
provide greater stimulus than others to reject communications. But the structure 
itself cannot be called “contradictory” in either a logical or dialogical sense. It is 
used or not used operationally to convey connections; and only an observer can 
construct contradictions in this context.
96.  It is often claimed or assumed, however, that the opposite is true, that the 
coupling of variation and selection is characteristic of sociocultural evolution, and 
that this is where the “analogy” with biological evolution fails. See (although for 
the limited field of the evolution of science) L. Jonathan Cohen, “Is the Progress 
of Science Evolutionary?” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 24 (1973): 
41–61 (47–48); Stephen Toulmin, Human Understanding, vol. 1 (Princeton, NJ, 
1972); Nicholas Rescher, Methodological Pragmatism: A Systems-Theoretic Approach 
to the Theory of Knowledge (Oxford, 1977). Only more precise analysis of commu-
nicative operations could settle this difference of opinion.
97.  For a test of this thesis in the case of the invention of “constitutions” (ini-
tially impressive in their intention and method), see Niklas Luhmann, “Verfas-
sung als evolutionäre Errungenschaft,” Rechtshistorisches Journal (1990): 176–220.
98.  To give an example, the problem was initially solved in ancient Greek 
law in the form of a trial against the law in force, i.e., in the form of second-
order observation to settle the question whether the law was rightly or wrongly 
applied. See Polybius 12.16, and on late forms of an already routine treatment, Ul-
rich Kahrstedt, “Untersuchungen zu athenischen Behörden,” Klio 31 (1938): 1–32 
(19ff.); K. M. T. Atkinson, “Athenian Legislative Procedure and the Revision of 
Laws,” Bulletin of the John Rylands Library 23, no. 1 (1939): 107–150; A. R. W. Har-

Notes to Chapter 3    
rison, “Law-Making at Athens at the End of Fifth Century B.C.,” Journal of Hel­
lenic Studies 75 (1955): 27–35; W. G. Forrest, “Legislation in Sparta,” Phoenix 21 
(1967): 11–19. Only very gradually, but at the latest in Aristotle Rhetoric 1354a32ff., 
the difference between legislation and the administration of justice was given a 
new function, namely, to ensure that the course of justice did not depend on class 
or cronyism. This was not the sense of the original variation, however, but arose 
from consideration of its effects.
99.  I do not assume that this alone suffices to explain selection, in contrast to 
game-theoretic evolution theories, e.g., John Maynard Smith, Evolution and the 
Theory of Games (Cambridge, 1982).
100.  Of an abundant literature on segmentary societies, see, e.g., H. Ian Hog-
bin, “Social Reaction to Crime: Law and Morals in the Schouten Islands, New 
Guinea,” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 68 (1938): 223–262; Alfred 
R. Radcliffe-Brown, “On Joking Relationships,” Africa 13 (1940): 195–210; Max 
Gluckman, Custom and Conflict in Africa (Oxford, 1955); George M. Foster, “In-
terpersonal Relations in Peasant Society,” Human Organization 19 (1960): 3–15; 
Asen Abalikai, “Quarrels in a Balkan Village,” American Anthropologist 67 (1965): 
1456–1469; Sally F. Moore, “Legal Liability and Evolutionary Interpretation: Some 
Aspects of Strict Liability, Self-Help and Collective Responsibility,” in The Alloca­
tion of Responsibility, ed. Max Gluckman (Manchester, 1972), 51–107.
101.  For an example from a copious literature, see Kenelm O. L. Burridge, 
“Disputing in Tangu,” American Anthropologist 59 (1957): 763–780.
102.  See esp. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concept of 
Pollution and Taboo (London, 1966), 111ff.
103.  For the solutions found in Mesopotamia, see M. David, Les dieux et le 
destin en Babylonie (Paris, 1949); John G. Gunnell, Political Philosophy and Time 
(Middletown, CT, 1968), esp. 39ff.
104.  See n. 5 above.
105.  It must be admitted this is still difficult in face-to-face interaction. Apart 
from avoiding interaction, technical precautions can under certain circumstances 
provide a solution. A person who rolls his own cigarettes is safer from sponging 
than someone who pulls them out of a pack.
106.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, § 7.
107.  A case where the evolutionary emergence of autopoietic systems discussed 
on p. 77 above applies.
108.  See Euripides Suppliant Women, trans. Rosanna Warren and Stephen 
Scully (Oxford, 1995), 37.
109.  Under present-day conditions, this need not mean serving the interests 
of the upper class, as the “critical legal studies” movement in the United States as-
sumes. See also Austin Turk, “Law as a Weapon in Social Conflict,” Social Prob­
lems 23 (1976): 276–291. On the other hand, it is not untypical, especially in the 
countries of peripheral modernity, for members of the lower classes to be found 

    Notes to Chapter 3
in the role of defendant and members of the upper class in that of plaintiff. On 
arrangements for civil-law proceedings in Mexico, see Volkmar Gessner, Recht 
und Konflikt: Eine soziologische Untersuchung privatrechtlicher Konflikte in Mexiko 
(Tübingen, 1976), esp. 100.
110.  For a case study on the organizational level, see Alvin Gouldner, Pat­
terns of Industrial Bureaucracy (Glencoe, IL, 1954), and id., Wildcat Strike (Yellow 
Springs, OH, 1954). See also Eligio Resta, Conflitti sociali e giustizia (Bari, 1977).
111.  Systems that are “too small” from this point of view—whether families or 
organizations—are now subjected to “systems therapy,” which attempts to rear-
range their conflicts.
112.  This can be discussed from widely differing points of view—e.g., with re-
gard to the increase in undecidable controversies and the associated increase in 
consistency constraints in argumentation; or with regard to voluntarism with its 
contingency problems (Duns Scotus, William of Ockham); or with the aid of the 
so-called via negationis of proofs of the existence of God; or in relation to the dis-
solution of notions of perfection through the concept of actual infinity. We must 
be content with these pointers.
113.  The somewhat unusual term “limitationality” is intended to indicate that 
limited possibilities must be assumed if we wish to claim that the determination 
of truths or untruths reduces and not (for which there is some indication) enlarges 
the range of questions still to be examined. Only under this premise does it make 
sense, e.g., to demand the “falsifiability” of hypotheses.
114.  The radical change took place in the seventeenth century, when although 
the old prohibition of innovations was maintained for religion and politics, a posi-
tive evaluation of novelty asserted itself for everything that was intended to “please.” 
As François de Grenaille, La mode, ou Charactère de la religion, de la vie, de la con­
versation, de la solitude, des compliments, des habits et du style du temps (Paris, 1642), 
5, describes the dilemma: “Si la durée fait subsister toutes les parties du monde, la 
nouveauté les faict estimer.” On the corresponding upgrading of “surprise” in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries from [Antoine Gombaud] Méré [1607–1684] 
(with doubts) to Dominique Bouhours [1628–1702] and Montesquieu, see Erich 
Köhler, Esprit und arkadische Freiheit: Aufsätze aus der Welt der Romania (Frankfurt, 
1966), 267–268. For more detail, see Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 12.
115.  This, at any rate, was what interested Henry Adams: “He felt, like nine 
men in ten, an instinctive belief in Evolution, but he felt no more concern in Nat-
ural than in unnatural Selection” (The Education of Henry Adams [1907; Boston, 
1918], 225).
116.  It goes without saying that this is a theoretical abstraction.
117.  Talcott Parsons, Societies: Evolutionary and Comparative Perspectives (En-
glewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 42.
118.  It has already been noted in connection with introduction of the concept 
of symbolically generalized media (chap. 2, § 9) that this typically happens in the 

Notes to Chapter 3    
case of historically contingent acceptance of meaning proposals but not in the case 
of their rejection.
119.  Still, this possibility is likely to have gained greater probability from 
the fact that the mass media tend to report on deviations, establishing a pre-
condition for deviations to be perceived as normal. This may well facilitate their 
institutionalization.
120.  It is now undisputed in biology, too, that there are many selection-neutral 
mutations (which biologists often regard as deviating from Darwinian theory pat-
terns). See, e.g., Jack Lester King and Thomas H. Jukes, “Non-Darwinian Evolu-
tion,” Science 164 (1969): 788–798.
121.  I have spoken on p. 260 above of “forward induction.”
122.  See n. 96 above.
123.  Foremost among the authors to have associated this procedure with a sec-
ond cybernetics of positive feedback is Magoroh Maruyama, who states clearly: 
“A small initial deviation, which is within the range of high probability, may de-
velop into a large deviation of low probability (or more precisely into a large 
deviation which is very improbable within the framework of probabilistic unidi-
rectional causality” (id., “Toward Cultural Symbiosis,” in Evolution and Conscious­
ness: Human Systems in Transition, ed. Erich Jantsch and Conrad C. Waddington 
[Reading, MA, 1976], 198–213 [203]).
124.  Consider in comparison the cell as environment of (possible mutated) 
genes; here, too, it is acknowledged that evolution assumes a direction only thanks 
to regulation of this relationship. See Ernst Mayr, “Selektion und gerichtete Evo-
lution,” Die Naturwissenschaften 52 (1965): 173–180.
125.  For a more detailed presentation of this form of differentiation, see Luh-
mann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, § 13.
126.  See (taking the example of metallurgy) Colin Renfrew, The Emergence of 
Civilization: The Cyclades and the Aegean in the Third Millenium B.C. (London, 
1972), 28, 36ff.: “Innovations occur all the time in any society: new ideas which crop 
up rather haphazardly, rather like mutations in the organic world. They are not in-
dividually predictable. But what is crucial is the response to these innovations. If 
the innovation is rejected, there is no effective change. But if accepted it can be fur-
ther modified. . . . Changes or innovations occurring in one field of human activity 
(in one subsystem of a culture) sometimes act so as to favour changes in other fields 
(in other subsystems). The multiplier effect is said to operate when these induced 
changes in one or more subsystems act so as to enhance the original changes in the 
first subsystem” (28, 37). What factors discriminate in precisely this regard can be 
discovered only by concrete analysis of specific states of affairs.
127.  See Jan Assmann, Das kulturelle Gedächtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und poli­
tische Identität in frühen Hochkulturen (Munich, 1992).
128.  Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Ästhetik (Frankfurt, 
1970), 1: 215.

    Notes to Chapter 3
129.  For details, see Niklas Luhmann, Liebe als Passion: Zur Codierung von 
­Intimität (Frankfurt, 1982).
130.  See Gabriel Naudé, Considérations politiques sur les coups d’Etat (1639), cited 
from Science des princes, ou Considérations sur les coups d’état, 3 vols. (Paris, 1712).
131.  See the distinction between cumulative and noncumulative areas of soci-
etal change in Eric R. Wolf, “The Study of Evolution,” in Readings in Social Evolu­
tion and Development, ed. Shmuel N. Eisenstadt (Oxford, 1970), 179–191 (187ff.). 
The cumulative area is equated with that determined by technology.
132.  The state is peace, nothing other than “una identità e pace temporale delle 
cose; cioè un esser sempre la stessa essenza,” and its perfection consists precisely 
in this, according to Giovanni Antonio Palazzo, Discorso del governo e della ragion 
vera di Stato (Venice, 1606), 12–13.
133.  See Donald T. Campbell, “Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Cre-
ative Thought as in Other Knowledge Processes,” Psychological Review 67 (1960): 
380–400; id., “Variation and Selective Retention in Socio-Cultural Evolution,” 
General Systems 14 (1969): 69–85; Michael Schmid, Theorie sozialen Wandels (Op-
laden, 1982), 137.
134.  It is at least still considered necessary to reject it. See, e.g., Michael T. Han-
nan and John Freeman, Organizational Ecology (Cambridge, MA, 1989), 21–22.
135.  See Warren G. Bennis and Phillip E. Slater, The Temporary Society (New 
York, 1968).
136.  See, e.g., Thomas G. Harding, “Adaptation and Stability,” in Evolution 
and Culture, ed. Marshall D. Sahlins and Elman R. Service (Ann Arbor, MI, 
1960), 45–68.
137.  In more detail, see Keller, Societal Evolution, 287ff., and in more modern 
terms Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process 
(Chicago, 1987).
138.  On this distinction (but not on the evolution-theoretical basis), see Karl 
Mannheim, Konservativismus: Ein Beitrag zur Soziologie des Wissens, ed. David 
Kettler, Volker Meja, and Nico Stehr (Frankfurt, 1984).
139.  If we look for an explanation in the history of science, it might be that the 
dispute about evolution theory has long been fought out on the wrong fronts, for 
example, structure versus process, static versus dynamic, structural fundamentalist 
theories versus theories of social change; or that the theory of structural contradic-
tions was regarded by class theoreticians as a “conservative” attempt to avoid or at 
least tone down the only relevant topic, class war. This is hardly now of any interest.
140.  Richard Levins, Evolution in Changing Environments: Some Theoretical 
Explorations (Princeton, NJ, 1968), 108–109, writes of evolution as “progressive 
binding.”
141.  On a recent discussion of this subject, see Tom Baumgartner and Tom R. 
Burns, “Inflation as the Institutionalized Struggle over Income Distribution,” Acta 
Sociologica 23 (1980): 177–186.

Notes to Chapter 3    
142.  With the stress on functional differentiation, I advance a theory also com-
mon in biology: that diversity enhances the chance and frequency of variation.
143.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4.
144.  For universities, see Rudolf Stichweh, Der frühmoderne Staat und die 
euro­päische Universität: Zur Interaktion von Politik und Erziehungssystem im Prozeß 
ihrer Ausdifferenzierung (16.–18. Jahrhundert) (Frankfurt, 1991); for monasteries, 
Alfred Kieser, “From Ascetism to Administration of Wealth: Medieval Monaster-
ies and the Pitfalls of Rationalization,” Organization Studies 8 (1987): 103–123; for 
craft guilds, Alfred Kieser, “Organizational, Institutional, and Societal Evolution: 
Medieval Craft Guilds and the Genesis of Formal Organizations,” Administrative 
Science Quarterly 34 (1989): 540–564.
145.  A similar thought is to be found in Michael Fullan and Jan J. Loubser, “Ed-
ucation and Adaptive Capacity,” Sociology of Education 45 (1972): 271–287 (281–282).
146.  Edward A. Ross, Sin and Society: An Analysis of Latter-Day Iniquity (Bos-
ton, 1907), 40.
147.  I am paraphrasing Maruyama, “Toward Cultural Symbiosis.”
148.  See further Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 4, § 14.
149.  See Karl E. Weick, Sensemaking in Organizations (Thousand Oaks, CA, 
1995).
150.  See § 11 in this chapter.
151.  The relation of evolution theory to dialectic, and thus to Hegel’s theory of 
history, requires more thoroughgoing examination. It should be mentioned that 
the concept of form marks a distinction and thus shows the connection between 
the two sides of the distinction to be necessary. Selection therefore necessarily suc-
ceeds variation, restabilization necessarily succeeds selection. But this does not 
mean that a corresponding process is necessary. Nor does it mean that within this 
process only distinctions that are constituted as an “opposition” induce motion. 
These premises are tenable only if we postulate something like “mind” that from a 
higher (later) position can put something merely existing into the form of a “lack” 
in order to cure this lack in itself.
152.  That evolution causes evolution is now widely recognized. See, e.g., Erich 
Jantsch, The Self-Organizing Universe: Scientific and Human Implications of the 
Emerging Paradigm of Evolution (Oxford, 1980), esp. 217ff. This is to be distin-
guished from self-reference at the theory level, which means that insights into 
evolution can bring evolution theory to understand itself as the result of evolu-
tion. On this “autological” element in an evolution theory with a claim to uni-
versality, see Löfgren, “Knowledge of Evolution and Evolution of Knowledge.” 
Reason, however, judges such circularity with severity, because it has to defend 
its own historical privilege of self-justification. See Hans-Michael Baumgartner, 
“Über die Widerspenstigkeit der Vernunft, sich aus der Geschichte erklären zu 
lassen: Zur Kritik des Selbstverständnisses der evolutionären Erkenntnistheorie,” 
in Wandel des Vernunftbegriffs, ed. Hans Poser (Munich, 1981), 39–64; id., “Die in-

    Notes to Chapter 3
nere Unmöglichkeit einer evolutionären Erklärung der menschlichen Vernunft,” 
in Evolutionstheorie und menschliches Selbstverständnis, ed. Robert Spaemann, Peter 
Koslowski, and Reinhard Löw (Weinheim, 1984), 55–71.
153.  See Stebbins, Basis of Progressive Evolution, , 117: “The hypothesis that liv-
ing systems have evolved in the manner just outlined carries with it the corollary 
that the ability to evolve by means of mutation and genetic recombination, guided 
by natural selection, must have itself evolved gradually from the ability to change 
only by frequent and irregular chemical reactions.”
154.  See Jean-Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet de Lamarck, Philosophie zoolo­
gique (1809; repr., Weinheim, 1960).
155.   Ibid., 1: 82ff.
156.  I add “it would appear,” because we cannot be quite sure whether genetics 
has said the last word on this subject.
157.  See Revue internationale de systémique 7, no. 5 (1993).
158.  The literature offers a multitude of expressions with similar meaning. 
Drawing on linguistic usage in paleontology and biology, Evolution and Cul­
ture, ed. Sahlins and Service, 25, 69ff. speaks of “adaptive advances” or “dominant 
types.” Talcott Parsons speaks of “evolutionary universals”; see esp. Parsons, “Evo-
lutionary Universals in Society,” American Sociological Review 29 (1964): 339–357, 
repr. in id., Sociological Theory and Modern Society (New York, 1967), 490–520. In 
James S. Coleman, “Social Inventions,” Social Forces 49 (1970): 163–173, we find 
“social inventions.” In all cases, it is a question of advantages that are based on 
restrictions.
159.  As we have seen, this distinguishes theories of evolution from theories of 
progress.
160.  The latter double possibility, in relation to the environment, defines the 
concept of “dominant type” in Julian S. Huxley, Evolution: The Modern Synthesis 
(1942; 2nd ed., London, 1963).
161.  This insight goes back to Alexander A. Goldenweiser, “The Principle of 
Limited Possibilities in the Development of Culture,” Journal of American Folk-
Lore 26 (1913): 259–290.
162.  See the chapter on “The Survival of the Mediocre” in Hallpike, Principles 
of Social Evolution, 81ff.
163.  And often even simple technical inventions have to be improved. That 
the commercial success of the railroad was to be achieved only by opening it up 
to passenger traffic, and that of the telephone only by developing it into a means 
of two-way communication, making it possible to speak and listen with the same 
apparatus, was seen only some time after the inventions had been made.
164.  Alfred S. Romer, The Vertebrate Story (Chicago, 1959), 93–94, illustrates 
this procedure (called Romer’s principle) with reference to lungfish, which, where 
flooding conditions are changeable, have to return to the water across dry stretches 
of land, thus gradually qualifying themselves for life on land.

Notes to Chapter 3    
165.  See 157f. in this volume.
166.  Fritz Heichelheim, “Die Ausbreitung der Münzgeldwirtschaft und der 
Wirtschaftsstil im archaischen Griechenland,” Schmollers Jahrbuch 55 (1931): 229–
254 (238), speaks of an “abrupt” spread once the minting of small-denomination 
coins of guaranteed value had begun. See also Michael Hutter, “Communication 
in Economic Evolution: The Case of Money,” in Evolutionary Concepts in Contem­
porary Economics, ed. Richard W. England (Ann Arbor, MI, 1994), 111–136.
167.  See Ernst Mayr, “The Emergence of Evolutionary Novelties,” in Evolu­
tion After Darwin, ed. Sol Tax, vol. 1 (Chicago, 1960), 349–380. Gerhard Vollmer, 
“Die Unvollständigkeit der Evolutionstheorie,” in id., Was können wir wissen? vol. 
2 (Stuttgart, 1986), 1–38, 24ff., speaks of “double functions” (indispensable for 
evolution).
168.  This formulation in Stephen Jay Gould, “Darwinism and the Expansion 
of Evolutionary Theory,” Science 216 (1982): 380–387 (383).
169.  According to Robert MacAdams, The Evolution of Urban Society: Early 
Mesopotamia and Prehispanic Mexico (London, 1966), 41. On the origin of the con-
cept, see L. Cuénot, L’adaptation (Paris, 1925).
170.  In the case of China and comparison with England (the same generally 
applies for Europe in the early Middle Ages), see Hosea Ballou Morse, The Gilds 
of China: With an Account of the Gild Merchant or Co-hong of Canton (London, 
1909).
171.  J. B. S. Haldane, The Causes of Evolution (New York, 1932), 153, quoted 
from George G. Simpson, “The Concept of Progress in Organic Evolution,” Social 
Research 41 (1974): 28–51 (46).
172.  See The Invention of Tradition, ed. Eric Hobsbawn and Terence Ranger 
(Cambridge, 1983).
173.  See Goldenweiser, “Principle of Limited Possibilities”; Pitirim A. Sorokin, 
Social and Cultural Dynamics, vol. 4 (New York, 1941), 76ff. In biological evolu-
tion theory, we find a similar discussion of the extent to which a phenotype al-
ready achieved limits the possibilities of further variation (law of homologous 
variation).
174.  On the concept of equifinality, see, e.g., on older biological bases, Ludwig 
von Bertalanffy, “Zu einer allgemeinen Systemlehre,” Biologia Generalis 19 (1949): 
114–129 (123ff.); id., Problems of Life (New York, 1960), 142. The same thought is 
already to be found in Emile Boutroux, De la contingence des lois de nature (8th 
ed., Paris, 1915), 13. See also W. Ross Ashby, “The Effect of Experience on a Deter-
minate Dynamic System,” Behavioral Science 1 (1956): 35–42. Talcott Parsons, too, 
builds it into his concept of evolutionary universals in a double evolutionary and 
structural sense: “I shall designate as an evolutionary universal any organizational 
development sufficiently important to further evolution that, rather than emerg-
ing only once, it is likely to be ‘hit upon’ by various systems operating under dif-
ferent conditions” (Parsons, Sociological Theory and Modern Society, 491).

    Notes to Chapter 3
175.  See Christian Meier, Die Entstehung des Politischen bei den Griechen 
(Frankfurt, 1980), 57ff.
176.  See, e.g., Wilhelm Berger, “Am Punkt der Vollendung: Technikphilos-
ophie nach Martin Heidegger und Gotthard Günther,” in Gotthard Günther—
Technik, Logik, Technologie, ed. Ernst Kotzmann (Munich, 1994), 33–54 (33–34). 
Hans Jonas, Das Prinzip Verantwortung: Versuch einer Ethik für die technologische 
Zivilisation (Frankfurt, 1979), also speaks of “technological civilization,” but 
never­theless sees latitude in the society thus described for an ethically motivated 
countermovement.
177.  See The Social Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the 
Sociology and History of Technology, ed. Wiebe E. Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, and 
Trevor J. Pinch (Cambridge, MA, 1987). On the picture at the organizational (and 
personnel) level, see Henry Etzkowitz, “Academic-Industrial Relations: A Soci-
ological Paradigm for Economic Development,” in Evolutionary Economics and 
Chaos Theory: New Directions in Technology Studies, ed. Loet Leydesdorff and Peter 
van den Besselaar (London, 1994), 139–151.
178.  Nathan Rosenberg, Perspectives on Technology (Cambridge, 1975), 5; in 
more detail, 260ff.
179.  See Gerald Wagner, “Vertrauen in Technik,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 23 
(1994): 145–157.
180.  For an overview, see Friedrich Rapp, Analytische Technikphilosophie 
(Freiburg, 1978), 30ff.
181.  Arnold Gehlen, Die Seele im technischen Zeitalter (Hamburg, 1957); Ernst 
Kapp, Grundlinien einer Philosophie der Technik (1877; Düsseldorf, 1978).
182.  This also holds, and particularly so (but not only) for the modern tradi-
tion—largely saving us the search for a theoretically elaborated conceptuality. In 
Wolfgang Krohn, “Die Verschiedenheit der Technik und die Einheit der Tech-
niksoziologie,” in Technik als sozialer Prozeß, ed. Peter Weingart (Frankfurt, 1989), 
15–43 (15), we read: “At the heart (of contemporary literature on technology, N.L.) 
is the concept of the artifact, which as tool, machine, or robot is the means for at-
taining non-technical goals.”
183.  See Wilfried Seibicke, Technik: Versuch einer Geschichte der Wortfamilie um 
τέχνη in Deutschland vom 16. Jahrhundert bis etwa 1830 (Düsseldorf, 1968), 99ff. 
The current term Technologie in German is a loan from English “technology” and 
has nothing to do with this tradition. The clear conceptual contours of Technologie 
have thus also been lost. But we can perhaps say that Technologie has to do with the 
application of techniques to the production and utilization of energy.
184.  See inter alia Manfred Mai, “Technikblindheit des Rechts—Technikigno-
ranz der Juristen?” Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie 13 (1992): 257–270.
185.  See, e.g., Hans Freyer, Theorie des gegenwärtigen Zeitalters (Stuttgart, 1955); 
id., Gedanken zur Industriegesellschaft (Mainz, 1970); Friedrich Georg Jünger, Die 
Perfektion der Technik (Frankfurt, 1953); Gehlen, Die Seele im technischen Zeital­

Notes to Chapter 3    
ter; Helmut Schelsky, Der Mensch in der wissenschaftlichen Zivilisation (Opladen, 
1961); Martin Heidegger, Die Technik und die Kehre (Pfullingen, 1962).
186.  For a succinct overview, see Bernward Joerges, “Soziologie und Maschin-
erie—Vorschläge zu einer ‘realistischen’ Techniksoziologie,” in Technik als sozialer 
Prozeß, ed. Peter Weingart (Frankfurt, 1989), 44–89 (esp. 48ff. on Weber, Marx, 
Sombart, and Freyer).
187.  See Herbert Breger, Die Natur als arbeitende Maschine: Zur Entstehung des 
Energiebegriffs in der Physik, 1840–1850 (Frankfurt, 1982). In addition, the relation 
between energy and economics would have to be considered, which is of funda-
mental importance, e.g., for Freud’s theory of a psychic energy budget.
188.  There is naturally no denying that the distinction continues to makes 
sense in the everyday world. A farmer who decided to plant one of his fields with 
jacket potatoes would be making a category error.
189.  The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography (Boston, 1918), 339–340.
190.  In addition to Social Construction of Technological Systems, ed. Bijker et 
al., see also Alain Gras, Grandeur et dépendance: Sociologie des macro-systèmes tech­
niques (Paris, 1993).
191.  One way of addressing this issue today is under the cautionary heading of 
“chaos.” Technical performance and mathematical calculations inevitably involve 
imprecision, which in the long term generates deviations from the envisaged course.
192.  It is also obvious how very much technological development depends on 
market development, i.e., on an environment in which we can buy everything we 
need and therefore have it at our disposition (if not in stock).
193.  See also Niklas Luhmann, “Technology, Environment and Social Risk: A 
Systems Perspective,” Industrial Crisis Quarterly 4 (1990); 223–231.
194.  See chap. 1, § 9.
195.  See, e.g., Robert B. Glassman, “Persistence and Loose Coupling in Living 
Systems,” Behavioral Science 18 (1973): 83–98. The same applies for social systems 
and even for organizations. See also Karl E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Or­
ganizing (Reading, MA, 1969), trans. under the title Der Prozeß des Organisierens 
(Frankfurt, 1985), esp. 163ff.; id., “Management of Organizational Change Among 
Loosely Coupled Elements,” in Change in Organizations: New Perspectives on The­
ory, Research, and Practice, ed. Paul S. Goodman et al. (San Francisco, 1982), 375–
408. Older cybernetics (e.g., W. Ross Ashby) spoke of “ultrastability.”
196.  From quite different, network theoretical and social-constructivist per-
spectives, see also John Law, “Technology and Heterogeneous Engineering: The 
Case of Portuguese Expansion,” in Social Construction of Technological Systems, ed. 
Bijker et al., 111–134 (131): “‘nature’ reveals its obduracy in a way that is relevant 
only to the network when it is registered by the system builders.”
197.  Perhaps in the sense of time-space distantiation—a concept that Anthony 
Giddens likes to use, albeit only to characterize modernity; see id., The Conse­
quences of Modernity (Stanford, CA, 1990), esp. 14–15, 17ff.

    Notes to Chapter 3
198.  It will be recalled that one can, of course, eliminate the resulting similari-
ties by means of added distinctions (in this case, communications media).
199.  Not necessarily, it must be conceded, when we compare the wealth of 
ideas produced by Greek intellectuals, mathematicians, and philosophers with 
their very limited technical realization (architecture, theater building, the tunnel 
of Eupalinos [on Samos], military machines, sometimes with forms of calculation 
that are now unknown).
200.  Usually, we speak not of signs but of symbols. Basically, neither term is 
suitable if we stick to their traditional meanings. This, too, shows the extent of the 
change. Perhaps we should speak of forms.
201.  Karl E. Weick writes that “obtrusive controls require more observables 
than are ordinarily present with new technologies” (id., “Technology as Equi-
voque: Sensemaking in New Technologies,” in Technology and Organizations, ed. 
Paul S. Goodman and Lee S. Sproull et al. [San Francisco, 1990], 1–44 [34]).
202.  Norman Clark and Calestous Juma, Long-Run Economics: An Evolution­
ary Approach to Economic Growth (New York, 1987), e.g., use the concepts of in-
novation and technological change synonymously.
203.  See, e.g., Kurt Klagenfurt, Technologische Zivilisation und transklassische 
Logik: Eine Einführung in die Technikphilosophie Gotthard Günthers (Frankfurt, 
1995), 19 (“technologische Zivilisation”). See also Gotthard Günther—Technik, 
Logik, Technologie, esp. 33–34.
204.  Claus Offe, “Die Utopie der Null-Option: Modernität und Modernisier-
ung als politische Gütekriterien,” in Die Moderne—Kontinuität und Zäsuren, ed. 
Johannes Berger, Sozialen Welt, special issue no. 4 (1986): 97–117 (104).
205.  Although not under this name, which came into fashion only in the nine-
teenth century. See Solidarität, ed. Giuseppe Orsi et al., Rechtsphilosophische 
Hefte, 4 (Frankfurt, 1995). In the old European semantics, philia/amicitia.
206.  On the danger/risk distinction, see detailed treatment in Niklas ­Luhmann, 
“Risiko und Gefahr,” in id., Aufklärung 5: 131–169; id., Soziologie des Risikos (Ber-
lin, 1991), esp. 9ff. See also Klaus Peter Japp, Soziologische Risikotheorie: Funktionale 
Differenzierung, Politisierung und Reflexion (Weinheim, 1996), 61ff.
207.  See (still in the sense of larger regional complexes) James D. Thompson, 
“Technology, Polity, and Societal Development,” Administrative Science Quarterly 
19 (1974): 6–21.
208.  This question had already been discussed in the nineteenth century. See 
W. Stanley Jevons, The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the 
Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal-Mines (1865; 3rd ed., 1906, repr., 
New York, 1965), esp. 158ff.
209.  The preconditions and limits to economic analysis are shown in Richard L. 
Gordon, An Economic Analysis of World Energy Problems (Cambridge, MA, 1981).
210.  Such problems of co-evolution are examined on the basis of concrete case 
studies in Luhmann, Gesellschaftsstruktur.

Notes to Chapter 3    
211.  It should be made clear that it is not a matter of the general importance of 
“culture” for societal evolution. I have already stated my position on p. 248 above. 
Nor is it a matter of the development of cultural artifacts per se, for example, 
markings that we would today call styles. On this subject (using the term “evolu-
tion,” but without evolution-theoretical apparatus), see esp. Margaret W. Conkey, 
“Style and Information in Cultural Evolution: Toward a Predictive Model of the 
Paleolithic,” in Social Archeology: Beyond Subsistence and Dating, ed. Charles L. 
Redman et al. (New York, 1978), 61–85.
212.  Nineteenth-century writers spoke rather of “cultural evolution” and dis-
tinguished this from the evolution of populations; see, e.g., Edward B. Tyler, 
Primitive Culture, 2 vols. (London, 1871).
213.  See Heinz von Foerster, “Das Gleichnis vom blinden Fleck: Über das 
Sehen im allgemeinen,” in Der entfesselte Blick: Symposion, Workshops, Ausstellung, 
ed. Gerhard Johann Lischka (Bern, 1993), 14–47.
214.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Wie lassen sich latente Strukturen beobachten?” 
in Das Auge des Betrachters—Beiträge zum Konstruktivismus: Festschrift Heinz von 
Foerster, ed. Paul Watzlawick and Peter Krieg (Munich, 1991), 61–74.
215.  For an example, see Luhmann, Liebe als Passion.
216.  A good case study on this is Aldo Schiavone, Nacita della Giurisprudenza: 
Cultura aristocratica e pensiero giuridico nella Roma tardo-repubblicana (Bari, 1976).
217.  See the chapter on “seed-bed” societies in Talcott Parsons, Societies: Evolu­
tionary and Comparative Perspectives (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966), 95ff.
218.  A brilliant presentation of this problem is to be found in the “condensed 
description” of a burial ritual and its disturbance by ideas in Clifford Geertz, The 
Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays (New York, 1973), trans. under the title 
Dichte Beschreibung: Beiträge zum Verstehen kultureller Systeme (Frankfurt, 1983), 
96ff. Another example: the embarrassment the philosopher causes the singer in 
Plato’s Ion, who still seeks to represent a shaman culture based on emotion, pos-
session, rapture. Remarkably, it is the philosopher who takes a skeptical view of 
written culture. See also Heinz Schlaffer, Poesie und Wissen: Die Entstehung des äs­
thetischen Bewußtseins und der philosophischen Erkenntnis (Frankfurt, 1990).
219.  For important research on this, see Walter J. Ong, The Presence of the 
Word: Some Prolegomena for Cultural and Religious History (New Haven, CT, 
1967); id., “Communications Media and the State of Theology,” Cross Currents 19 
(1969): 462–480; id., Interfaces of the Word: Studies in the Evolution of Consciousness 
and Culture (Ithaca, NY, 1977); id., Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the 
Word (London, 1982). See also chap. 2, § 5, in this volume.
220.  Parsons, Societies , 51–52, speaks of “craft literacy.” On the societal role 
of the “scribe” in Mesopotamia, see also Jonker, Topography of Remembrance: they 
gradually take on the cultivation of the social memory and thus regulate the rela-
tion between remembering and forgetting.
221.  Shmuel Noah Eisenstadt has pointed this out on more than one occa-

    Notes to Chapter 3
sion; see, e.g., id., “Social Division of Labor, Construction of Centers and Insti-
tutional Dynamics: A Reassessment of the Structural-Evolutionary Perspective,” 
Proto­soziologie 7 (1995): 11–22 (16–17).
222.  See Joan Marie Lechner, The Renaissance Concepts of the Commonplaces: An 
Historical Investigation of the General and Universal Ideas Used in All Argumentation 
and Persuasion (1962; repr. Westport, CT, 1974); Ong, Presence of the Word, 79ff.
223.  Such doubts are already apparent—e.g., in William of Ockham—before 
the advent of the printing press. In the sixteenth century, they then develop into 
the literary form of the paradox, i.e., the undissolved unity of opposing views. On 
this prehistory of the Renaissance love of paradox, see A. E. Malloch, “The Tech-
nique and Function of the Renaissance Paradox,” Studies in Philology 53 (1956): 
191–203.
224.  On this background to what was in its time the very impressive “dialec-
tic” of Petrus Ramus, see Walter J. Ong, Ramus: Method, and the Decay of Dia­
logue: From the Art of Discourse to the Art of Reason (Cambridge, MA, 1958). In 
substance, it is about a method for sequencing binary distinctions, which needs to 
be looked at more closely, especially today.
225.  See esp. the tracts on various subjects by Bartholomäus Keckermann in 
id., Opera omnia (Geneva, 1614).
226.  See Robert Black, “Ancients and Moderns: Rhetoric and History in 
­Accolti’s Dialogue on the Preeminence of Men of His Own Time,” Journal of the 
History of Ideas 43 (1982): 3–32, and, more comprehensively, also Elisabeth Göss-
mann, Antiqui und Moderni im Mittelalter: Eine geschichtliche Standortbestimmung 
(Munich, 1974).
227.  On this much discussed turn, see, e.g., Richard F. Jones, Ancients and 
Moderns: A Study of the Rise of the Scientific Movement in Seventeenth-Century 
­England (1936; 2nd ed., St. Louis, 1961); Herschel Baker, The Wars of Truth: Studies 
in the Decay of Christian Humanism in the Earlier Seventeenth-Century (1952; repr., 
Gloucester, MA, 1969), esp. 79ff.
228.  This argument is typical of Quentin Skinner and his school. On meth-
odology, see Quentin Skinner, “Meaning and Understanding in the History of 
Ideas,” History and Theory 8 (1969): 3–53; id., “Motives, Intentions and the Inter-
pretation of Texts,” New Literary History 3 (1972): 393–408; also, e.g., James Farr, 
“Conceptual Change and Constitutional Innovation,” in Conceptual Change and 
the Constitution, ed. Terence Ball and J. G. A. Pocock (Lawrence, KS, 1988), 13–34; 
id., “Understanding Conceptual Change Politically,” in Political Innovation and 
Conceptual Change, ed. Terence Ball, James Farr, and Russell L. Hanson (Cam-
bridge, 1989), 24–49.
229.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Verfassung als evolutionäre Errungenschaft,” 
Rechts­historisches Journal 9 (1990): 176–220.
230.  For more detail, see in this volume chap. 2, § 5, and Luhmann, Gesell­
schaft, vol. 2, chap. 6.

Notes to Chapter 3    
231.  It is noteworthy, moreover, how long this was overlooked, and how reg-
ularly the reader was addressed and called upon to express himself, even, indeed 
particularly, in the first hundred years following the invention of printing. That 
this expectation was retained even as late as the eighteenth century in the concept 
of “public opinion” is striking proof of the radical nature of the change, which 
eluded attention because of the persistence of expectations applicable strictly to 
oral communication in interactive situations.
232.  Participation in modern (i.e., American) journals’ anonymous peer re-
view system provides a good test; reviewers occasionally (but rarely) guess an au-
thor correctly, almost always based on chance knowledge.
233.  Studies in the history of concepts have examined only “evidence,” but it is 
probably not necessary to point out that light and vision imagery and hence tradi-
tional epistemology have played a role. See W. Halbfaß, “Evidenz,” in Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, vol. 2 (Stuttgart, 1972), cols. 829–834.
234.  See p. 61 in this volume.
235.  This is, incidentally, one of the reasons why a Paul de Man’s text-linguis-
tic deconstructivism presents itself as “rhetoric.” For this means open to autology.
236.  On this stylistic theme, already discussed at the time, see Louis van Delft, 
Le moraliste classique: Essai de définition et de typologie (Geneva, 1982), 235ff.; ­Niklas 
Luhmann, “Ethik als Reflexionstheorie der Moral,” in id., Gesellschaftsstruktur, 3: 
358–447 (390ff.).
237.  See, e.g., Claude Buffier, Traité des premières véritéz et de la source de nos 
jugemens (Paris, 1724); Thomas Reid, An Inquiry into the Human Mind and Essays 
on the Intellectual Powers of Man, in id., Philosophical Works (8th ed., 1895, repr., 
Hildesheim, 1967), 2: 742–803. Also the fashionably long-winded Jean-Baptiste de 
Boyer, marquis d’Argens, La philosophie du bon-sens, ou Réflexions philosophiques 
sur l’incertitude des connoissances humaines, 3 vols. (1737; The Hague, 1768).
238.  See Jean-Baptiste Morvan de Bellegarde, Réflexions sur le ridicule, et les 
moyens de l’éviter, où sont représentez les moeurs et les différens caractères des personnes 
de ce siècle (1696; 4th ed., Paris 1699); Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd earl of Shaftes-
bury, An Essay on the Freedom of Wit and Humour (1709), in id., Characteristicks of 
Men, Manners, Opinions, Times (2nd ed., 1714; Farnborough, UK, 1968), 1: 57–150.
239.  That this is not recalled in later linear historiography but has to be re-
constituted for it is shown in numerous individual studies in Kommunikation und 
Differenz: Systemtheoretische Ansätze in der Literatur- und Kunstwissenschaft, ed. 
Henk de Berg and Matthias Prangel (Opladen, 1993).
240.  See Kenneth Burke, The Rhetoric of Religion: Studies in Logology (1961; 
Berkeley, CA, 1970), epilogue.
241.  Roman civil law handed down in the “digests” is remarkable in both re-
gards. It builds on standard decisions, which can very well hold their own, but judg-
ments often conclude with grandiloquent dictums or general explanatory phrases, 
which were then learned and handed down in the (oral) training system of the Mid-

    Notes to Chapter 3
dle Ages. This gave rise to new consistency concerns, which kept legists and decre-
tists busy but had little to do with the simultaneous changes in legal practice. For 
material, see, e.g., Rudolf Weigand, Die Naturrechtslehre der Legisten und Dekretisten 
von Irnerius bis Accursius und von Gratian bis Johannes Teutonicus (Munich, 1967).
242.  See Jack Goody, “Literacy, Criticism, and the Growth of Knowledge,” in 
Culture and Its Creators: Essays in Honor of Edward Shils, ed. Joseph Ben-David and 
Terry N. Clark (Chicago, 1977), 226–243 (esp. 234).
243.  This takes place against the background of a revival of antique skepticism 
from the second half of the sixteenth century on. See Richard H. Popkin, The His­
tory of Scepticism from Erasmus to Descartes (2nd ed., New York, 1964), esp. on the 
dissolution of the distinction between dogma and skepticism by Hartley, Henry 
Home (Lord Kames), Condillac, and Condorcet, 153; Henry G. van Leeuwen, The 
Problem of Certainty in English Thought (2nd ed., The Hague, 1970). And see also 
important essays in Benjamin Nelson, Der Ursprung der Moderne: Vergleichende 
Studien zum Zivilisationsprozeß (Frankfurt, 1977).
244.  An important contribution to this is a change in the opposing concept. 
Francis Bacon no longer distinguishes between dogma and skepticism (which 
leads to confirmation of dogma) but between dogma and experience (which leads 
to rejection of dogma): “Those who have handled sciences have been either men 
of experiment or men of dogmas” (Bacon, Novum Organum [1620] 1.95, in id., 
Works, vol. 4 [London, 1860], 92).
245.  See Mario G. Losano, Sistema e struttura nel diritto, vol. 1 (Turin, 1968), 
97ff.; Friedrich Kambartel, “‘System’ und ‘Begründung’ als wissenschaftliche 
und philosophische Ordnungsbegriffe bei und vor Kant,” in Philosophie und 
Rechtswissen­schaft: Zum Problem ihrer Beziehungen im 19. Jahrhundert, ed. Jürgen 
Blühdorn and Joachim Ritter (Frankfurt, 1969), 99–113. Only against this back-
ground can we comprehend that and how the system concept was reestablished, in 
the context of a new understanding of science, as construction of a manifold from 
a single perspective, esp. by Johann Heinrich Lambert (see id., Texte zur Systema­
tologie und zur Theorie der wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnis, ed. Geo Siegwart [Ham-
burg, 1988]) and then with broader impact by Kant.
246.  Shaftesbury, Characteristicks, 1: 290.
247.  Distinguishing between social structure and terminology and their conse-
quences would be helpful in resolving the much discussed question of whether the 
French Revolution changed anything or not (see, e.g., R. Reichardt and E. Schmitt, 
“Die Französische Revolution—Umbruch oder Kontinuität,” Zeitschrift für histo­
rische Forschung 7 [1980]: 257–320).
248.  On the development of such reflection theories, see further Luhmann, 
Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, § 9.
249.  See Bernhard Barbar, “Toward a New View of the Sociology of Knowl-
edge,” in The Idea of Social Structure: Papers in Honor of Robert K. Merton, ed. 
Lewis A. Coser (New York, 1975), 103–116.

Notes to Chapter 3    
250.  On the concept of “distal knowledge” developed by Egon Brunswick, 
see Donald T. Campbell, “Natural Selection as an Epistemological Model,” in 
A Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology, ed. Raoul Naroll and Ronald 
Cohen (Garden City, NY, 1970), 51–85.
251.  See David Roberts, Art and Enlightenment: Aesthetic Theory after Adorno 
(Lincoln, NE, 1991).
252.  On this, see esp. Stephen Holmes, The Anatomy of Antiliberalism (Cam-
bridge, MA, 1993). However, the easy time one has of it with these figures is no 
proof that liberalism itself cannot be deconstructed, too—provided that we refrain 
from wanting to “overcome” it.
253.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5
254.  As a precaution, I should note that this question would also have to be 
examined for stratified societies with regard to the possibility of the subsystem 
nobility evolving independently. Given the lack of adequate studies, I venture no 
judgment and, unlike in the case of some functional systems, cannot draw on re-
search in progress.
255.  See, e.g., Georg Simmel, “Über eine Beziehung der Selektionslehre zur 
Erkenntnistheorie,” Archiv für systematische Philosophie 1 (1895): 34–45. Many scat-
tered remarks by Charles S. Peirce also belong in this context, e.g., in “The Archi-
tecture of Theories” (1891), in Writings of Charles S. Peirce: A Chronological Edition, 
vol. 8: 1890–1892 (Bloomington, IN, 2010).
256.  See Stephen Toulmin, “The Evolutionary Development of Natural Science,” 
American Scientist 57 (1967): 456–471; id., Human Understanding, vol. 1 (Princeton, 
NJ, 1972); James A. Blachowitz, “Systems Theory and Evolutionary Models of the 
Development of Science,” Philosophy of Science 38 (1971): 178–199; Donald T. Camp-
bell, “Evolutionary Epistemology,” in The Philosophy of Karl Popper, ed. Paul Arthur 
Schilpp (La Salle, IL, 1974), 1: 412–463; id., “Unjustified Variation and Selective Re-
tention in Scientific Discovery,” in Studies in the Philosophy of Biology, ed. Francisco 
Jose Ayala and Theodosius Dobzhansky (London, 1974), 133–161. For an overview, 
see also Evolutionary Epistemology, Rationality, and the Sociology of Knowledge, ed. 
Gerard Radnitzky and W. W. Bartlett (La Salle, IL, 1987).
257.  For more detail, see Niklas Luhmann, Die Wissenschaft der Gesellschaft 
(Frankfurt, 1960), on evolution, 549–615.
258.  An early discussion on reasons (taxonomic structure, hedonistic action con-
cept) that could induce economics to reject evolution theory is to be found in Thor-
stein Veblen, “Why Is Economics Not an Evolutionary Science?” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 13 (1898): 373–397. The real reason would have been that people still 
had enough confidence in the market’s capacity for taking rational decisions.
259.  See inter alia Armen A. Alchian, “Uncertainty, Evolution, and Economic 
Theory,” Journal of Political Economy 58 (1950): 211–221, repr. in id., Economic 
Forces at Work (Indianapolis, IN, 1977), 15–35; also Edith T. Penrose, “Biologi-
cal Analogies in the Theory of the Firm,” American Economic Review 42 (1952): 

    Notes to Chapter 3
804–819; Joseph Spengler, “Social Evolution and the Theory of Economic Devel-
opment,” in Social Change in Developing Areas: A Reinterpretation of Evolution­
ary Theory, ed. Herbert Barringer, George I. Blanksten, and Raymond W. Mack 
(Cambridge, MA, 1965), 243–272.
260.  The largely dominant theoretical development seeks instead to manage by 
reducing rationality demands. See esp. Herbert A. Simon, Models of Man, Social 
and Rational: Mathematical Essays on Rational Human Behavior in a Social Setting 
(New York, 1957).
261.  Richard Nelson and Sidney Winter have concerned themselves most in-
tensively with this version of the theory. For a summary, see Nelson and Winter, 
An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change (Cambridge, MA, 1982).
262.  See the contributions to Organizational Evolution: New Directions, ed. 
Jitendra V. Singh (Newbury Park, CA, 1990). For developments in population 
ecology, see also Michael T. Hannan and John Freeman, Organizational Ecology 
(Cambridge, MA, 1989), and Evolutionary Dynamics of Organizations, ed. Joel 
Baum and Jitendra Singh (New York, 1994).
263.  See, e.g., Clark and Juma, Long-Run Economics; Explaining Process and 
Change: Approaches to Evolutionary Economics, ed. Ulrich Witt (Ann Arbor, MI, 
1992); Geoffrey M. Hodgson, Economics and Evolution: Bringing Life Back into 
Economics (Ann Arbor, MI, 1993); Evolutionary Economics and Chaos Theory: New 
Directions in Technology Studies, ed. Loet Leydesdorff and Peter van den Besselaar 
(London, 1994); Evolutionary Concepts in Contemporary Economics, ed. Richard W. 
England (Ann Arbor, MI, 1994); Giovanni Dosi and Richard R. Nelson, “An In-
troduction to Evolutionary Theories in Economics,” Journal of Evolutionary Eco­
nomics 4 (1994): 153–172.
264.  On recourse to Lamarck, see Revue internationale de systémique 7, no. 5 
(1993).
265.  See Huntington Cairns’s little-known The Theory of Legal Science (Cha-
pel Hill, NC, 1941), esp. 29ff.; also Niklas Luhmann, “Evolution des Rechts,” in 
id., Ausdifferenzierung des Rechts (Frankfurt, 1981), 11–34; Ernst-Joachim Lampe, 
­Genetische Rechtstheorie: Recht, Evolution und Geschichte (Freiburg, 1987) (on the 
anthropological basis); Gunther Teubner, Recht als autopoietisches System (Frank-
furt, 1989), 61ff. (with reference to recent literature, which, however, uses the evo-
lution concept in very different ways).
266.  The brief, stalled reconstruction of late-Marxist “Staatsableitungen” 
(“derivations of the state”) in Philippe von Parijs, Evolutionary Explanation in So­
cial Science: An Emerging Paradigm (London, 1981), 174ff., can at best serve as 
evidence for the typical grounds for theory development: the failure of more de-
manding preceding theories. See also, with close reference to the theory of society, 
Hannes Wimmer, Evolution der Politik: Von der Stammesgesellschaft zur modernen 
Demokratie (Vienna, 1996).
267.  In chap. 2, § 5.

Notes to Chapter 3    
268.  However, this example shows that we may not necessarily presuppose the 
separation of media codings as an evolution-proof achievement. Consider, above 
all, the effects of mass media, especially television, on the administration of justice 
by the courts. Like certain earlier cases (e.g., the Rodney King beating trial), the 
spectacular proceedings against O. J. Simpson lead one to think that their impact 
on American jury trial practice can hardly be overestimated.
269.  See Robert C. Palmer, “The Origins of Property in England,” Law and 
History Review 3 (1985): 1–50; id., “The Economic and Cultural Impact of the Ori-
gin of Property, 1180–1220,” ibid., 375–396.
270.  At least according to Klaus Disselbeck, “Die Ausdifferenzierung der Kunst 
als Problem der Ästhetik,” in Kommunikation und Differenz: Systemtheoretische 
­Ansätze in der Literatur- und Kunstwissenschaft, ed. Henk de Berg and Matthias 
Prangel (Opladen, 1993), 137–158. In other contexts, see also Niklas Luhmann, Die 
Kunst der Gesellschaft (Frankfurt, 1995), esp. 256ff.
271.  See Michael Schudson, Discovering the News: A Social History of American 
Newspapers (New York, 1978).
272.  See Rudolf Stichweh, Der frühmoderne Staat und die europäische Univer­
sität: Zur Interaktion von Politik und Erziehungssystem im Prozeß ihrer Ausdifferen­
zierung (16.–18. Jahrhundert) (Frankfurt, 1991).
273.  See Berman, Law and Revolution.
274.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, for comprehensive treatment 
of this topic.
275.  See Norgaard, “Coevolution of Economic and Environmental Systems.”
276.  The theory of history has taken a particular interest in this demarcation. 
For a subjective, Neo-Kantian understanding of history, see Robin G. Colling-
wood, The Idea of History (Oxford, 1946); for an overview, see also Ingold, Evolu­
tion and Social Life, 74ff.
277.  See esp. Heinz von Foerster, “Prinzipien der Selbstorganisation im sozialen 
und betriebswirtschaftlichen Bereich,” in id., Wissen und Gewissen: Versuch einer 
Brücke (Frankfurt, 1993), 233–268 (247ff.).
278.  See also Dirk Baecker, “Nichttriviale Transformation,” Soziale Systeme 1 
(1995): 100–117.
279.  See Immanuel Wallerstein, The Modern World-System: Capitalist Agricul­
ture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (New 
York, 1974).
280.  See Max Weber, “Die protestantische Ethik und der ‘Geist’ des Kapitalis-
mus,” Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik 20 (1904): 1–54, and 21 (1905), 
1–110, to cite only the text that set off a vast discussion.
281.  See, e.g., John A. Hall, Powers and Liberties: The Causes and Consequences 
of the Rise of the West (Berkeley, 1986); Michael Mann, States, War and Capitalism: 
Studies in Political Sociology (Oxford, 1988).
282.  See Berman, Law and Revolution.

    Notes to Chapter 3
283.  I am deliberately avoiding speaking of “interaction” [Wechselwirkung], be-
cause this would mix the two theoretical figures, and, what is more, compel ab-
straction from time.
284.  See Palmer, “Origins of Property in England” and “Economic and Cul-
tural Impact of the Origin of Property.”
285.  By no means all advanced civilizations developed this time distinction that 
was so important for Europe. It is also worth recalling that the Greek word aiōn orig-
inally meant something like “vitality”—see Enzo Degani, ΑΙΩΝ da Omero ad Aris­
totele (Padua, 1961). In the Renaissance, this meaning surfaced once more. “Chi ha 
tempo ha vita,” Giovanni Botero writes in Della ragion di Stato (1589; Bologna, 1930), 
62; here, however, with reference to the necessity of gaining time for disposing wisely 
over the circumstances. Remaining identical in the succession of events and circum-
stances therefore does not necessarily have the religious connotation of aeternitas.
286.  Consider the cosmological, by no means only moral, dimension of this 
first event, this first, history-making difference between before and after. This in-
cidentally also explains—however incomprehensible it may be for the modern 
age, with its individual morality—why this original sin was perforce inherited, as 
expressed in the German term Erbsünde [Erbe, “inheritance” + Sünde, “sin”] (cf. 
Mark Twain’s Letters from the Earth).
287.  See Reinhart Koselleck, “Geschichte,” in Geschichtliche Grundbegriffe, 
vol. 2 (Stuttgart, 1975), 593–717.
288.  See, e.g., Georg Simmel, Das individuelle Gesetz, ed. Michael Landmann 
(Frankfurt, 1968).
289.  The term “reenter” is used here in Spencer-Brown’s sense in Laws, 56–57.
290.  Ibid., 61.
291.  On causality see, e.g., Francis Heylighen, “Causality as Distinction Con-
versation: A Theory of Predictability, Reversibility, and Time Order,” Cybernet­
ics and Systems 20 (1989): 361–384. I would also point out that Maxwell’s demon, 
which reverses entropy into negentropy, has to have a memory, because it has to 
remember how it sorted when it continues to sort.
292.  This criticism of storage theories also appears to have gained ground in 
neurobiological and psychological memory research. See the contributions 
in  Gedächtnis: Probleme und Perspektiven der interdisziplinären Gedächtnisforsc­
hung, ed. Siegfried J. Schmidt (Frankfurt, 1991). In contrast, the social sciences 
and cultural studies appear to be upholding the storage concept despite Halbwa-
chs [see n. 298 below]. See just Aleida Assmann and Jan Assmann, “Das Gestern 
im Heute: Medien und soziales Gedächtnis,” in Die Wirklichkeit der Medien: Eine 
Einführung in die Kommunikationswissenschaft, ed. Klaus Merten et al. (Opladen, 
1994), 114–140.
293.  See Heinz Förster, Das Gedächtnis: Eine quantenphysikalische Untersuc­
hung (Vienna, 1948). And see also Jonker, Topography of Remembrance, 36: “the 
collective picture of the past can take shape only through a collective forgetting.” 

Notes to Chapter 3    
Moreover, collective forgetting is even less explicable in terms of individual psy-
chology than collective remembering.
294.  See Bernard Ancori, “Temps historique et évolution économique,” Revue 
internationale de systémique 7 (1993): 593–612 (602ff.).
295.  See Heinz von Foerster, “Gegenstände: Greifbare Symbole für (Eigen-)
Verhalten,” in id., Wissen und Gewissen: Versuch einer Brücke (Frankfurt, 1993), 
103–115.
296.  See also Heinz von Foerster, “Was ist Gedächtnis, daß es Rückschau und 
Vorschau ermöglicht,” in id., Wissen und Gewissen, 299–336.
297.  Spencer-Brown, Laws, 60–61, deals with the “oscillator function” only 
with reference to the distinction of marked/unmarked in the context of second-
order equations. For a semantic theory of memory, we must extend the concept 
of oscillation to every distinction used for observation, also to those between two 
marked items, such as nobility and people or castles and churches or cathedral 
churches and city churches. For their part, the two-sidedly marked distinctions 
presuppose an unmarked space, since observing is possible only in a world that al-
ways remains unmarked.
298.  Famous for this is the distinction between individual memory and col-
lective memory in Maurice Halbwachs, Les cadres sociaux de la mémoire (1925; 2nd 
ed., Paris, 1952), and id., La mémoire collective (Paris, 1950).
299.  See, e.g., James Fentress and Chris Wickham, Social Memory (Oxford, 
1992). There is naturally no denying that this also exists, but it should be kept in 
mind that, unlike Fentress and Wickham, I regard communication, not as trans-
mission, but as a special type of autopoietic reproduction.
300.  “Every sentence must already have a meaning; affirmation cannot pro-
vide it, for what it affirms is the meaning. And the same holds for negation, etc.” 
(Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus logico-philosophicus 4.064, in id., Schriften, vol. 1 
[Frankfurt, 1969], 31).
301.  In the sense of Michel Serres, Genèse (Paris, 1982), 146ff.—there in oppo-
sition to social contract topics requiring consensus.
302.  See Mary Douglas, How Institutions Think (Syracuse, NY, 1986), 69ff.; Jan 
Assmann, “Lesende und nichtlesende Gesellschaften,” Almanach (des Deutschen 
Hochschulverbandes) 7 (1994): 7–12. See also 162f. above.
303.  For the present day, see also Les lieux de mémoire, ed. Pierre Nora, 3 vols., 
with subvolumes (Paris, 1984).
304.  For early Mesopotamia, see Jonker, Topography of Remembrance.
305.  Ibid., 95ff.
306.  The historical analysis of memory now also operates with this concept. 
See esp. Jan Assmann, Das kulturelle Gedächtnis: Schrift, Erinnerung und politische 
Identität in frühen Hochkulturen (Munich, 1992).
307.  This has already been dealt with in § 10 of this chapter, on the evolution 
of ideas, pointing to writing as a condition of this separation.

    Notes to Chapter 3
308.  More detail in Niklas Luhmann, “Kultur als historischer Begriff,” in id., 
Gesellschaftsstruktur, 4: 31–54.
309.  Exceptions must be conceded for the seventeenth century. Vol. 4 of the 
Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie (Basel, 1976), s.v. Kultur, cols. 1309 –10, 
mentions Pufendorf. Another example is Baltasar Gracián, El discreto (1646; Bue-
nos Aires, 1960), XVIII, “De la cultura y aliño,” 56ff.
310.  Parsons’s proposal to take account of culture as a constitutive condition of 
action relates to the concept of action and serves in the elaboration of a theory that 
from a methodological point of view makes only analytical claims.
311.  See in the first place Pierre Bourdieu and Jean-Claude Passeron, La repro­
duction: Eléments pour une théorie du système d’enseignement (Paris, 1970). The en-
suing American discussion has unfortunately been concerned almost only with 
institutional correlates. See, e.g., Paul DiMaggio, “Social Structure, Institutions 
and Cultural Goods: The Case of the United States,” in Social Theory for a Chang­
ing Society, ed. Pierre Bourdieu and James S. Coleman (Boulder, CO,1991), 133–155.
312.  See Jonker, Topography of Remembrance, 105 and passim.
313.  Accordingly, the memory theory was to a large extent a revival of antique 
thought; it thus reminded itself of the once well-known technique of remember-
ing. See Frances A. Yates, The Art of Memory (Chicago, 1966).
314.  See Patrick H. Hutton, “The Art of Memory Reconceived: From Rhetoric 
to Psychoanalysis,” Journal of the History of Ideas 48 (1987): 371–392.
315.  This formulation in Matei Călinescu, “From the One to the Many: Plural-
ism in Today’s Thought,” in Zeitgeist in Babel: The Postmodernist Controversy, ed. 
Ingeborg Hoesterey (Bloomington, IN, 1991), 156–174 (157).
316.  See Niklas Luhmann, “Was ist der Fall, was steckt dahinter? Die zwei Sozi-
ologien und die Gesellschaftstheorie,” Zeitschrift für Soziologie 22 (1993): 245–260.
317.  Cf. Mannheim, Konservatismus. Asmann and Assmann, “Das Gestern im 
Heute,” 117, also suggests replacing the concept of tradition by the (analytically 
more flexible) concept of social memory.
318.  “Similarity is an institution,” Douglas even says in How Institutions Think, 
55.
319.  See, e.g., Dirk Baecker, “Das Gedächtnis der Wirtschaft,” in Theorie als 
Passion, ed. id. (Frankfurt, 1987), 519–546; Niklas Luhmann, “Das Gedächtnis der 
Politik,” Zeitschrift für Politik 42 (1995): 109–121; id., “Zeit und Gedächtnis” (MS, 
1995).
320.  See Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, 9–10.
321.  See Jean-François Lyotard’s well-known book La condition postmoderne: 
Rapport sur le savoir (Paris, 1979), which has been much discussed.
322.  Notably St. Augustine, but only for the distant time horizon that in the 
past as in the future disappears in occulto. See Augustine, Confessions 11.17–22, 
where the “being” of nonactual time horizons leads back with remaining doubts 
to the circumstance that “ex aliquo procedit occulto, cum ex futuro fit praesens, 

Notes to Chapter 3    
et in aliquod recedit occultum, cum ex praesenti fit praeteritum [ . . . but such 
as proceeds out of some unknown secret, when out of the future, the present is 
made, and returns into some secret again, when the past is made out of the pres-
ent]” (Saint Augustine’s Confessions, trans. William Watts, Loeb Classical Library 
[London, 1912], 247), where (implicitly) the hidden status of the origin and disap-
pearance of time (tempus) could be seen as a sort of wild card of eternity in time.
323.  See Philip G. Herbst, Alternatives to Hierarchies (Leiden, 1976), 88.
324.  On this lapse of the premises of classical European metaphysics, see fur-
ther Luhmann, Gesellschaft, vol. 2, chap. 5, 4–8.


Index
This index is based on the index to the original German edition, Die Gesellschaft der 
Gesellschaft. Band 1 (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag, 1997).
Acceptance, 43
Acceptance/rejection, 135, 137, 138–139, 173, 
190–191, 277
Accident. See Chance
Action, 45, 180–181, 200–204, 262
Action theory, 14–15, 31, 45
Actuality and potentiality, 21–22, 25–26, 27
Actuality, 23
Adaptation, 55, 262, 265, 268–269, 284, 324, 
342
Admiratio, 85, 407n223
Advanced civilizations. See Stratification
Aesthetics, 210
Affected parties, 323
Agreement, 42n109
Agriculture 306–307
Alphabet, 309
Alternatives, 284
Ambiguity, 52, 87
Ambivalence. See Ambiguity
Amplification, 194–195
Anticipatory reactions, 123
Art, 93, 209–211, 231, 290
Art criticism, 225n322
Artificial intelligence, 181
Attribution, 74, 200–204
Authenticity, 101, 143–144, 165–166
Author, 180
Authority, 81, 164, 174, 185, 188, 202
Autology, 1, 11, 26, 31, 78, 83, 104, 110, 118, 
330
Autonomy, 29, 59, 134, 224, 236, 245, 298
Autopoiesis, 18, 32–35, 39, 42, 53, 74, 78–79, 
103, 183–184, 115, 117, 122, 131–132, 137, 
264, 338
Banks, 294
Beautiful/ugly, 29, 227, 338–339
Before/after, 23, 266, 346, 348
Beginning, 267, 358
Beginning and end, 266
Being/non-being, 133, 254, 357
Belatedness, 65, 156
Binary coding, 62, 132–133, 134–138, 215–227, 
233, 276–277, 339–341
Blind spot, 110, 118, 258, 326–327
Boundary, 38–39
Causal technology, 217
Causality, 52, 56, 74, 94, 180, 201, 248, 253, 
264, 271, 286, 302, 317, 344–345
Censorship, 187
Center/periphery, 283, 295, 301
Chance, 32, 67, 134, 142, 189, 225, 258–259, 
263, 265, 270–271, 275–276, 279, 284–
285, 303–304, 310, 336–337
Church, 296
Cinema. See Film
Circulation, 234–235
Co-evolution, 325–326, 328, 338
Cognition, 68–73
Coinage, 197, 268, 307
Collective consciousness, 42
Common sense, 549
Communication, 1, 15–16, 34, 35–40, 41–49, 
113–249
Comparison, 17, 93–94, 248–249, 355–357
Complexity, 5–6, 77–83, 249, 269–270, 279, 
294, 305–312
Complexity, enhancement through 
reduction, 306

 
  Index
Computer, 66–67, 180–187, 249–250, 320–
321
Condensation/confirmation, 38, 82n190
Conditioning, 72, 138, 193
Conditions of possibility, 166
Conflict repression, 280
Conflicts, 190–191, 278, 279–282
Consciousness, 42–43, 44, 51, 56–57, 71n163, 
329–330
Consensus, 6, 7–9, 42, 64, 65, 122
Consensus and dissent, 242–243
Conservatism, 293, 299
Consistency, 30, 152, 161, 178, 333
Constructivism, 12, 13, 53n128, 90, 237, 337
Context, 14
Contingency, 25, 79, 82, 86, 95, 126, 282, 334
Contingency formulae, 282
Contract, 213, 308
Contradiction, 286
Corporations, 296–297
Creatio continua, 254
Creation, 11, 18, 85, 101, 251–256, 282, 315
Criteria, 226, 323, 339
Criticism, 5, 13, 109–110, 165, 191, 235, 275, 
284, 298, 329
Critique. See Criticism
Crossing, 24, 27, 29, 82, 134, 216, 225, 299
Culture, 87, 94–95, 98–99, 248–249, 
324n211, 354–358
Danger, 322–323
Deception, 135
Decisions, 95
Deconstruction, 335
Democracy, 224
Demographic growth, 87
Determinate/indeterminate, 144
Deviation, 273, 282–282
Deviation amplification, 94, 253, 263, 285–
286, 345
Dialectic, 335
Dialogue, 172
Différance (Derrida), 38
Differences in rank. See Stratification
Differentiation forms, 294–295, 300–301, 311
Diffusion, 310–311
Digitization, 55, 71, 215
Dissemination media, 120–121, 162, 187–191, 
311–312
Dissipative structures, 94, 111
Distinctions, 20–23, 25–35, 161–162, 350–
352, 357–358
Disturbance, 321
Divination, 140, 142, 144, 157–158, 170
Divisions into epochs, 255–256, 312, 336. See 
also Stage models
Dogmatics, 333
Double closure, 40
Double contingency, 127, 199, 201, 239
Duplication rules, 218
Dynamic stability, 23, 118, 160, 260, 297–
298, 340
Ecology, 55, 67, 73–77, 108–109, 269, 293, 
342
Economy, 337–338, 340–346, 343
Economy/household, 199
Education, 246–247
Eigenbehavior. See Eigenvalues
Eigenvalues, 9, 130, 131, 188, 237
Electronic media, 180–186
Element, 32
Element and relation, 78–79
Emergence, 77–78, 251, 274
Empires, 84–85, 170, 187, 344
Empirical knowledge, 13–14, 225
Energy, 315, 322
Enlightenment, 5, 179, 329
Entropy, 252, 324
Epochal divisions, 257–258, 311–312. See also 
Stage models
Equifinality, 284, 307, 310–311
Equilibrium, 292–293, 297
Error, 135–136
Eternity, 346
Ethics, 100, 214, 223, 239, 245
Events, 23–24, 36–37, 64–65, 80–81, 160
Evidence, 330, 331, 332
Evolution, 28, 59, 69, 76, 79, 110, 121, 124, 
158–159, 214, 251–358
Evolutionary advances, 305–312
Expectations, 238, 253
Experience, 200
Explanation, 11–12, 15–16
Externalization, 38–39, 237, 295
Fanaticism, 229
Fashion, 231–232
Fictionality, 161, 166–167, 169, 210
Film, 183

Index    
Fluctuations, 111
Forgetting, 349–352, 355. See also Memory
Form, 22–24, 27, 29–34, 117–118, 128, 384, 385
Freedom, 118, 257
French Revolution, 308, 334
Friendship, 196
Functional differentiation, 17–18, 75–76, 
86–87, 91–92, 108–109, 214, 222, 294, 
296–301, 358
Future, 19–20, 71–72, 238, 322–324
Genealogies, 168, 268
Global system, 10
Globalization. See World society
God, 26, 47, 85, 91–92, 133n52, 141, 145, 170, 
253–254, 280, 288–289, 291, 294, 297
Grammar, 132
Guidance media, 217
Guilds, 309
Heterarchy,187–188
Hierarchy, 187, 242–243
Historical process, 347
History, 164, 255, 285, 343–350
History as process, 256–257
Horizon, 26, 85–86, 88
Human being, 6–7, 69, 83, 115, 179
Humanism. See Humanity
Humanity, 315–316, 319
Humor, 101, 287
Hypercomplexity, 80
Hypocrisy, 239n358
Ideas, evolution of, 324–336
Identification, 351
Identity, 19, 51
Ideology, 1, 106, 110, 205
Ignorance, 14–15, 35, 76, 109, 140, 143, 181, 
188, 270, 318
Implausible evidence, 6
Improbability, 127, 132, 138, 146, 190–193, 
214–215, 251–253, 258, 274, 286, 345
Improbability of communication, 113–114
Inclusion, 91, 239
Inclusion and exclusion, 97–98
Inclusion of exclusion, 4, 322, 257
Incongruent perspectives, 11, 17
Individual, 2–3, 111, 126, 146, 149, 173, 177–
179, 241, 262, 263, 342
Individualism, 67, 334
Inflation, 295, 340
Inflation/deflation, 230–232, 243
Information, 19, 36–37, 44–45, 49, 113–114
Information and utterance, 39, 44–45, 53, 
70–71, 113, 114, 125, 141, 155, 183, 184, 325
Innovation, 29f, 175–176, 277, 283, 285, 293–
299, 321, 328, 333, 336–337
Input/output, 31, 57
Integration, 188
Intellectuals, 95, 275
Intensive/extensive reading, 175
Intention, 45
Interaction/society, 287–288
Interests, 340
Interpenetration, 60, 227
Interrupting the circle, 68, 89, 134, 200
Interruption of interdependence, 311
Intervention, 318
Intransparency, 40, 58, 59, 80
Intrasystemic indeterminacy, 33, 52, 56, 78, 
87
Inviolate level. See Values
Invisible hand, 255, 256, 283, 111
Irritation, 58–59, 63, 66–67, 70, 72, 108, 127, 
271, 304
Justice, 282
Knowledge, 70–72, 195–197
Known/unknown, 139, 142–143, 151
Language, 20, 60–64, 122, 123–138, 269–
270, 276
Law, 96, 98, 176, 179, 201, 213, 220, 226, 
236, 268, 281–282, 308, 338, 341, 344
Legitimacy, 252 n5, 282
Levels, distinguishing between, 40–42, 46, 
106
Limitationality, 282
Limited possibilities, 310–311
Logic, 113, 172, 199, 219–220, 251, 255, 
276n93, 298
Loose/strict coupling, 117, 118, 119–220, 128, 
132, 160, 191, 209, 211–212, 241–242, 253, 
317–318. See also Medium/form
Love, 201, 206–207, 217, 220–221, 223–226, 
231, 290–291, 297, 319
Machines, 68–69, 320–321
Marked/unmarked, 85, 89

 
  Index
Market, 317n192
Marking, 137
Mass media. See Printing
Meaning, 18–28, 55, 82–83, 119–120, 273
Meaningful, 20–21, 23–25
Medical care, 246–247
Medium/form, 28, 116–119, 156, 160
Memory, 18–19, 19, 39, 65, 69, 119, 130, 162–
163, 163, 171, 178–179, 217, 282, 327, 330, 
339, 348–358
Methodological individualism, 15, 35
Methodology, 13–18
Mind, 218, 257, 301n151
Miracles, 254
Modernity, modernization, 91–92, 343
Money, 207–209, 231, 345
Monsters, 254
Morality, 138–51, 170, 190–191, 194, 214–215, 
222–223, 234, 239–245, 296–297 328, 332
Morality, coding of, 139, 146–147, 222–223, 
239–244
Morality and printing, 328
Morality and religion, 144–149, 170–171
Motives, 240
Motives and purposes, 101, 106
Movement, 255–256
Mystery, 85, 89
National languages, 176–177
Natural law, 190, 242, 297, 314, 317
Natural selection, 56, 256, 259, 263–265, 
268, 287, 292, 337
Nature, 99–101, 301, 314–318, 322, 333, 354
Necessity, 282
Needs, 228
Negation, 20n51, 21, 133–134, 136–137, 187, 
195, 220, 245, 257–258, 277, 338
Newness. See Innovation
Nobility, 100, 178, 268–269, 279–280, 312
Nonknowledge. See Ignorance
Non-meaning, 21, 23
Non-negatability, 282
Nonsense. See Non-meaning
Objects, 28, 30, 37, 54, 353
Obscenity, 228
Observation, 35–36, 49–50, 69, 104, 110
Observation, first and second-order, 49, 83, 
87–88, 148, 168, 173, 188, 203, 224–225, 
230, 291
“Obstacles épistémologiques” (Bachelard), 6
Offices, 197–198
Old/new, 283–284
Ontology, 255
Operational closure, 34, 38, 44–45, 49–67, 
53, 54, 70, 72, 74, 75–76 265, 325, 338
Oral/written, 42, 122, 130, 150–155, 161, 162–
163, 165–166, 167–169, 171–172, 176–179, 
181, 327
Organization, 75–77, 95, 111, 229–230, 296–
297, 299–300 321–321
Origin, 26, 164, 178, 255–256, 258, 266, 302
Originality. See Origin
Ornaments, 353
Oscillation, 19, 134–135, 351–353, 357–358
Paradox, 4, 25–28, 41–42, 48–49, 65, 78–80, 
85–86, 89–90, 104–105, 108–111, 132, 145–
146, 150, 160n127, 207, 216, 219, 224, 251, 
255, 258, 270, 299, 326, 331
Past/future, 23, 86, 162, 351–353, 357
Peace, 292
Perception, 56–57, 68–69, 227–229
Perception of being perceived, 57, 124
Perfection, 248, 254, 283, 290
Person, 59–60, 147n103
Philia, 196, 199, 206
Philosophy, 327
Physical force, 228–229, 525n5, 281
Planning, 260–262, 299
Plausibility, 191, 222, 330–335, 335
Pluralism, 90, 103, 110, 323
Pluralistic ignorance, 122, 237
Political power/rule, 281–282
Political system, 96, 213, 228, 233, 282, 338
Polycontexturality, 13, 46, 149
Population, 255, 263–264 272–273, 292, 
294, 335
Positive feedback. See Deviation 
amplification
Positive law, 77, 297
Possibility. See Potentialization
Postmodernism, 331, 335
Potentialization, 21, 82, 166, 259, 319
Power, 212–214, 223–228, 231, 281, 289–290, 
339–340
Prayer, 254
Preadaptive advances, 236, 302, 309, 335
Preference codes, 61, 215, 218–219, 221, 222, 
246

Index    
Preferences, 103, 111, 204, 209, 217, 221
Present, 22, 23, 162, 238, 266, 267, 350–351
Printing, 87, 119, 121, 148–149, 154, 172, 174–
180, 187, 214, 239, 327, 328–329, 331, 333
Procedure, 102
Process/structure, 37n93
Processual reflexivity, 223
Profession, 111
Profit, 290, 297
Programs, 217–218, 226f
Progress, 256, 260–261, 335
Property, 197–198, 201, 226, 281
Protest, 323
Prudentia, 144
Public opinion, 187, 189, 308
Purposes, 101
Quasi-objects, 141, 163, 353
Randomness. See Chance
Rationality, 99–112
Rationality and evolution theory, 336
Rationality continuum, 100–102, 105, 110
Reading, 164–165, 318
Reality, 5, 11, 13–16, 50–51, 57, 65–66, 72, 82, 
100, 104, 107–108, 131, 152, 161, 166, 173, 
183–184, 186, 195, 210, 282, 291, 317, 325, 
332, 349, 351, 357
Reason, 109–110, 190–191, 301n152
Reason of state, 297
Recursion, 19–20, 37–38, 52–53, 57, 80, 
81–82, 87, 123, 125, 127–128, 130, 156, 
190,193, 201, 233, 237, 252, 267, 325, 350, 
352
Redescription, 40, 48, 69
Reduction of complexity, 83, 307, 317
Redundancy, 30, 37, 70, 78, 80, 121, 128, 151, 
155–156, 165, 214, 219, 254
Redundancy/variety, 23, 78, 138, 163, 254, 
320
Reentry, 14, 19, 21–22, 27, 40, 53, 54, 105–
108, 110, 347, 348
Reflection theories, 219
Regional differentiation, 96–98
Relativism. See Pluralism
Religion, 100, 121, 138–146, 148–150, 151–152, 
170–171, 174, 177, 198, 202, 210, 232, 236, 
240–242, 246–247, 254–255, 279, 282–
283, 288–291, 295, 297, 314, 341, 346
Religion and morality, 144–145, 148, 170, 198
Repetition, 37, 38, 58, 80, 82, 128, 349, 351–352
Representation of the world, 87
Reproduction, 53, 189, 223, 245, 262, 264–
265, 267, 273–274, 278, 292–293, 302, 
324 327, 338 342–343
Requisite variety, 56, 59, 70
Respect/disrespect, 239–240, 241
Responsibility, 76
Restabilization, 252, 258–259, 272–274, 281, 
283–284, 292–300, 300–312, 325, 329–331, 
336, 338, 340, 342, 344–345, 358
Revelation, 171, 346
Revolution, 293, 346
Rhetoric, 48, 87, 100, 168, 171, 172, 194, 223, 
328, 330–331
Rich/poor, 219, 222
Ridiculousness, 332
Risk, 140–141, 146, 173, 189, 271, 313, 316, 
319, 321–324, 339
Ritual, rites, 139, 141–142, 161, 173, 289, 327, 
353
Robustness, 76, 317
Romanticism, 166, 179, 315, 332
Rule of law, 213
Sacralization, 152
Sacrifice, 139
Scarcity, 207–208, 284, 282
Schemata, 61, 64, 330, 331
Science, 205, 313–315, 343
Scripts, 61, 330
Secondary coding, 220
Secrets, 138–146. See also Mystery
Security, 25
Segmentary differentiation, 68, 92, 95, 140, 
164, 196, 279, 288, 295, 300, 312
Selection, 258–259, 264–265, 272–310, 325, 
329–329, 344–345, 358
Self, 49
Self-description, 11, 47, 54, 78, 105–106, 122, 
197, 269, 332, 342, 347
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 4, 142
Self-generated uncertainty, 72, 162
Self-gratification, ban on, 229
Self-observation, 45–47, 49, 69, 70, 78, 107, 
184, 199, 332
Self-organization, 32, 50, 74, 77, 87, 126, 
134, 259, 304, 341
Self-reference, 4, 22, 29, 53–54, 77, 81, 125, 
134, 179, 200, 297, 348

 
  Index
Self-reference and other-reference, 19, 22, 
28, 39, 46, 49, 52–53, 67, 106–107, 111, 
139, 334, 339
Semantics, 119, 172, 188, 325–327
Semiotics, 44, 107
Sexuality, 228–229
Signs, 107, 124–128, 320
Simultaneity, 23, 30, 43, 64, 82, 128–129, 152, 
153, 159, 163, 263, 266–267, 319, 320, 343
Simultaneity of the non-simultaneous, 256
Sincerity, 101, 135–136, 186, 207
Size, 79
Skepticism, 3, 102, 330–331, 333
Social contract, 7, 190
Social movements. See Protest
Social system, 40–48
Society, 40–48
Sociobiology, 265, 273n81
Sociology, 1–5, 15–16, 356
Solidarity, 5, 7–8, 35, 121, 196, 322–324
Soul, 9, 240, 297
Sound/meaning, 128, 153–154
Space, 151, 189–190
Special providence, 254
Specialization, 260
Species/genera, 94, 254–255
Stability/instability, 242–243
Stage models, 256, 272. See also Epochal 
divisions
State, 268, 294, 344–345
Statistics, 333
Stratification, 95, 281, 283–284, 309, 311–312, 
332, 336
Structural coupling, 32, 49–67, 74, 126, 180, 
227, 229–230, 269–271, 322, 329
Structure, 119, 260–261, 264–265
Style, 297
Subconscious, 110
Subcultures, 288
Subject, 314–315
Sublime, 144
Success media, 120–123
Surface/depth, 182. See also Divination
Surplus possibilities. See Meaning
Suspicion of manipulation, 184
Symbiotic symbols, 227–229
Symbolic/diabolic, 192
Symbolic generalization, 62, 147
Symbolically generalized communication 
media, 121–122, 190–238, 289, 291
Symbols, 141, 173–174, 191–193
Synchronization, 129
System/environment, 9, 18–19, 27, 28–40, 
44, 108–109, 262–267
System differentiation, 67–68, 75, 86, 325–
328
System rationality, 107–109
Systems theory and evolution theory, 260–
271, 343–344
Systems therapy, 282n111
Taboo, 138–139
Tact, 287
Technology, 220, 234, 247n370, 312–324
Technicization, technicity. See Technology
Telecommunications, 180–186
Teleology, 248–249
Television, 88, 183
Territorial concept of society, 6, 9–10
Text, 155–166, 289, 329–330
Theater, 341
Theodicy, 170
Theology, 280, 328
Thing (res), 24, 26, 146n98
Time, time dimension, 24, 43, 64–65, 72, 80–
82, 85–86, 118, 129–130, 134–135, 159–167, 
221, 239–240, 253, 267–267, 302, 346–347
Tolerance, 242
Topics/functions, 39
Tradition, 97, 178, 310, 327–328, 356
Trance, 20, 151, 170
Transcendence, 139, 289
Transmission, 116, 120, 272, 293
Trust, 135, 188, 198, 230–231, 237
Truth, 203–207, 289–290
Understanding, 36–37, 42, 137, 192, 267
Universal/particular, 98
Universality/specification, 148, 209–210, 
225, 247, 335
Universities, 341
Unmarked state/space, 21, 133, 139, 182, 276
Unmoved mover, 255
Unstable criteria, 297
Utterance. See Information
Utterance and understanding, 267
Validity, 205
Values, 137, 204–206, 221–228, 231–232, 
242–245, 247, 249, 282, 331

Index    
Variables, 14–15
Variation, 258–259, 272–291, 300–305
Variation/selection, 272
Virtual reality, 20, 182
Welfare state, 295, 338
What/how questions, 11–12, 314
Witchcraft, 281
World, 19–22, 24–26, 30, 47, 50–52, 72–73, 
82, 84–85, 127, 133–134, 161, 166–167, 
210–211, 319
World society, 40, 83–99, 182, 323
World time, 85–86, 88
Writing, 36, 38, 42, 46, 121, 130, 142–146, 150–
173, 178, 188–189, 194–196, 248, 279–280, 
288, 300, 303, 306, 327–330, 333, 353–354
Zeitgeist, 356

Cultural Memory  in the Present
Alessia Ricciardi, After La Dolce Vita: A Cultural Prehistory of Berlusconi’s Italy
Daniel Innerarity, The Future and Its Enemies: In Defense of Political Hope
Patricia Pisters, The Neuro-Image: A Deleuzian Film-Philosophy of Digital Screen 
Culture
François-David Sebbah, Testing the Limit: Derrida, Henry, Levinas, and the 
Phenomenological Tradition
Erik Peterson, Theological Tractates, edited by Michael J. Hollerich
Feisal G. Mohamed, Milton and the Post-Secular Present: Ethics, Politics, Terrorism
Pierre Hadot, The Present Alone Is Our Happiness, Second Edition: Conversations 
with Jeannie Carlier and Arnold I. Davidson
Yasco Horsman, Theaters of Justice: Judging, Staging, and Working Through in 
Arendt, Brecht, and Delbo
Jacques Derrida, Parages, edited by John P. Leavey
Henri Atlan, The Sparks of Randomness, Volume 1: Spermatic Knowledge
Rebecca Comay, Mourning Sickness: Hegel and the French Revolution
Djelal Kadir, Memos from the Besieged City: Lifelines for Cultural Sustainability
Stanley Cavell, Little Did I Know: Excerpts from Memory
Jeffrey Mehlman, Adventures in the French Trade: Fragments Toward a Life
Jacob Rogozinski, The Ego and the Flesh: An Introduction to Egoanalysis
Marcel Hénaff, The Price of Truth: Gift, Money, and Philosophy
Paul Patton, Deleuzian Concepts: Philosophy, Colonialization, Politics
Michael Fagenblat, A Covenant of Creatures: Levinas’s Philosophy of Judaism
Stefanos Geroulanos, An Atheism that Is Not Humanist Emerges in French Thought
Andrew Herscher, Violence Taking Place: The Architecture of the Kosovo Conflict
Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, On Historicizing Epistemology: An Essay

Jacob Taubes, From Cult to Culture, edited by Charlotte Fonrobert and  
Amir Engel
Peter Hitchcock, The Long Space: Transnationalism and Postcolonial Form
Lambert Wiesing, Artificial Presence: Philosophical Studies in Image Theory
Jacob Taubes, Occidental Eschatology
Freddie Rokem, Philosophers and Thespians: Thinking Performance
Roberto Esposito, Communitas: The Origin and Destiny of Community
Vilashini Cooppan, Worlds Within: National Narratives and Global Connections 
in Postcolonial Writing
Josef Früchtl, The Impertinent Self: A Heroic History of Modernity
Frank Ankersmit, Ewa Domanska, and Hans Kellner, eds.,  
Re-Figuring Hayden White
Michael Rothberg, Multidirectional Memory: Remembering the Holocaust in the 
Age of Decolonization
Jean-François Lyotard, Enthusiasm: The Kantian Critique of History
Ernst van Alphen, Mieke Bal, and Carel Smith, eds., The Rhetoric of Sincerity
Stéphane Mosès, The Angel of History: Rosenzweig, Benjamin, Scholem
Pierre Hadot, The Present Alone Is Our Happiness: Conversations with 
Jeannie Carlier and Arnold I. Davidson
Alexandre Lefebvre, The Image of the Law: Deleuze, Bergson, Spinoza
Samira Haj, Reconfiguring Islamic Tradition: Reform, Rationality, and Modernity
Diane Perpich, The Ethics of Emmanuel Levinas
Marcel Detienne, Comparing the Incomparable
François Delaporte, Anatomy of the Passions
René Girard, Mimesis and Theory: Essays on Literature and Criticism, 1959–2005
Richard Baxstrom, Houses in Motion: The Experience of Place and the Problem of 
Belief in Urban Malaysia
Jennifer L. Culbert, Dead Certainty: The Death Penalty and the Problem of 
Judgment
Samantha Frost, Lessons from a Materialist Thinker: Hobbesian Reflections on 
Ethics and Politics
Regina Mara Schwartz, Sacramental Poetics at the Dawn of Secularism:  
When God Left the World
Gil Anidjar, Semites: Race, Religion, Literature
Ranjana Khanna, Algeria Cuts: Women and Representation, 1830 to the Present

Esther Peeren, Intersubjectivities and Popular Culture: Bakhtin and Beyond
Eyal Peretz, Becoming Visionary: Brian De Palma’s Cinematic Education of the 
Senses
Diana Sorensen, A Turbulent Decade Remembered: Scenes from the Latin American 
Sixties
Hubert Damisch, A Childhood Memory by Piero della Francesca
José van Dijck, Mediated Memories in the Digital Age
Dana Hollander, Exemplarity and Chosenness: Rosenzweig and Derrida on the 
Nation of Philosophy
Asja Szafraniec, Beckett, Derrida, and the Event of Literature
Sara Guyer, Romanticism After Auschwitz
Alison Ross, The Aesthetic Paths of Philosophy: Presentation in Kant, Heidegger, 
Lacoue-Labarthe, and Nancy
Gerhard Richter, Thought-Images: Frankfurt School Writers’ Reflections from 
Damaged Life
Bella Brodzki, Can These Bones Live? Translation, Survival, and Cultural Memory 
Rodolphe Gasché, The Honor of Thinking: Critique, Theory, Philosophy
Brigitte Peucker, The Material Image: Art and the Real in Film
Natalie Melas, All the Difference in the World: Postcoloniality and the Ends of 
Comparison
Jonathan Culler, The Literary in Theory
Michael G. Levine, The Belated Witness: Literature, Testimony, and the Question of 
Holocaust Survival
Jennifer A. Jordan, Structures of Memory: Understanding German Change in Berlin 
and Beyond
Christoph Menke, Reflections of Equality
Marlène Zarader, The Unthought Debt: Heidegger and the Hebraic Heritage
Jan Assmann, Religion and Cultural Memory: Ten Studies
David Scott and Charles Hirschkind, Powers of the Secular Modern: Talal Asad 
and His Interlocutors 
Gyanendra Pandey, Routine Violence: Nations, Fragments, Histories
James Siegel, Naming the Witch
J. M. Bernstein, Against Voluptuous Bodies: Late Modernism and the Meaning of 
Painting
Theodore W. Jennings, Jr., Reading Derrida / Thinking Paul: On Justice

Richard Rorty and Eduardo Mendieta, Take Care of Freedom and Truth Will Take 
Care of Itself: Interviews with Richard Rorty
Jacques Derrida, Paper Machine
Renaud Barbaras, Desire and Distance: Introduction to a Phenomenology of 
Perception
Jill Bennett, Empathic Vision: Affect, Trauma, and Contemporary Art
Ban Wang, Illuminations from the Past: Trauma, Memory, and History in Modern 
China
James Phillips, Heidegger’s Volk: Between National Socialism and Poetry
Frank Ankersmit, Sublime Historical Experience
István Rév, Retroactive Justice: Prehistory of Post-Communism
Paola Marrati, Genesis and Trace: Derrida Reading Husserl and Heidegger
Krzysztof Ziarek, The Force of Art
Marie-José Mondzain, Image, Icon, Economy: The Byzantine Origins of the 
Contemporary Imaginary
Cecilia Sjöholm, The Antigone Complex: Ethics and the Invention of Feminine Desire
Jacques Derrida and Elisabeth Roudinesco, For What Tomorrow . . . : A Dialogue
Elisabeth Weber, Questioning Judaism: Interviews by Elisabeth Weber
Jacques Derrida and Catherine Malabou, Counterpath: Traveling with Jacques 
Derrida
Martin Seel, Aesthetics of Appearing
Nanette Salomon, Shifting Priorities: Gender and Genre in Seventeenth-Century 
Dutch Painting
Jacob Taubes, The Political Theology of Paul
Jean-Luc Marion, The Crossing of the Visible
Eric Michaud, The Cult of Art in Nazi Germany
Anne Freadman, The Machinery of Talk: Charles Peirce and the Sign Hypothesis
Stanley Cavell, Emerson’s Transcendental Etudes
Stuart McLean, The Event and Its Terrors: Ireland, Famine, Modernity
Beate Rössler, ed., Privacies: Philosophical Evaluations
Bernard Faure, Double Exposure: Cutting Across Buddhist and Western Discourses
Alessia Ricciardi, The Ends of Mourning: Psychoanalysis, Literature, Film
Alain Badiou, Saint Paul: The Foundation of Universalism
Gil Anidjar, The Jew, the Arab: A History of the Enemy

Jonathan Culler and Kevin Lamb, eds., Just Being Difficult? Academic Writing in 
the Public Arena
Jean-Luc Nancy, A Finite Thinking, edited by Simon Sparks
Theodor W. Adorno, Can One Live after Auschwitz? A Philosophical Reader, 
edited by Rolf Tiedemann
Patricia Pisters, The Matrix of Visual Culture: Working with Deleuze in Film 
Theory
Andreas Huyssen, Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory
Talal Asad, Formations of the Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity
Dorothea von Mücke, The Rise of the Fantastic Tale
Marc Redfield, The Politics of Aesthetics: Nationalism, Gender, Romanticism
Emmanuel Levinas, On Escape
Dan Zahavi, Husserl’s Phenomenology
Rodolphe Gasché, The Idea of Form: Rethinking Kant’s Aesthetics
Michael Naas, Taking on the Tradition: Jacques Derrida and the Legacies of 
Deconstruction
Herlinde Pauer-Studer, ed., Constructions of Practical Reason: Interviews on Moral 
and Political Philosophy
Jean-Luc Marion, Being Given That: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness
Theodor W. Adorno and Max Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment
Ian Balfour, The Rhetoric of Romantic Prophecy
Martin Stokhof, World and Life as One: Ethics and Ontology in Wittgenstein’s Early 
Thought
Gianni Vattimo, Nietzsche: An Introduction
Jacques Derrida, Negotiations: Interventions and Interviews, 1971-1998, ed. 
Elizabeth Rottenberg
Brett Levinson, The Ends of Literature: The Latin American “Boom” in the 
Neoliberal Marketplace
Timothy J. Reiss, Against Autonomy: Cultural Instruments, Mutualities, and the 
Fictive Imagination
Hent de Vries and Samuel Weber, eds., Religion and Media
Niklas Luhmann, Theories of Distinction: Re-Describing the Descriptions of 
Modernity, ed. and introd. William Rasch
Johannes Fabian, Anthropology with an Attitude: Critical Essays
Michel Henry, I Am the Truth: Toward a Philosophy of Christianity

Gil Anidjar, “Our Place in Al-Andalus”: Kabbalah, Philosophy, Literature in Arab-
Jewish Letters
Hélène Cixous and Jacques Derrida, Veils
F. R. Ankersmit, Historical Representation
F. R. Ankersmit, Political Representation
Elissa Marder, Dead Time: Temporal Disorders in the Wake of Modernity 
(Baudelaire and Flaubert)
Reinhart Koselleck, The Practice of Conceptual History: Timing History, Spacing 
Concepts
Niklas Luhmann, The Reality of the Mass Media
Hubert Damisch, A Theory of /Cloud/: Toward a History of Painting
Jean-Luc Nancy, The Speculative Remark: (One of Hegel’s bon mots)
Jean-François Lyotard, Soundproof Room: Malraux’s Anti-Aesthetics
Jan Patočka, Plato and Europe
Hubert Damisch, Skyline: The Narcissistic City
Isabel Hoving, In Praise of New Travelers: Reading Caribbean Migrant Women 
Writers
Richard Rand, ed., Futures: Of Jacques Derrida
William Rasch, Niklas Luhmann’s Modernity: The Paradoxes of Differentiation
Jacques Derrida and Anne Dufourmantelle, Of Hospitality
Jean-François Lyotard, The Confession of Augustine
Kaja Silverman, World Spectators
Samuel Weber, Institution and Interpretation: Expanded Edition
Jeffrey S. Librett, The Rhetoric of Cultural Dialogue: Jews and Germans in the 
Epoch of Emancipation
Ulrich Baer, Remnants of Song: Trauma and the Experience of Modernity in Charles 
Baudelaire and Paul Celan
Samuel C. Wheeler III, Deconstruction as Analytic Philosophy
David S. Ferris, Silent Urns: Romanticism, Hellenism, Modernity
Rodolphe Gasché, Of Minimal Things: Studies on the Notion of Relation
Sarah Winter, Freud and the Institution of Psychoanalytic Knowledge
Samuel Weber, The Legend of Freud: Expanded Edition
Aris Fioretos, ed., The Solid Letter: Readings of Friedrich Hölderlin
J. Hillis Miller / Manuel Asensi, Black Holes / J. Hillis Miller; or, Boustrophedonic 
Reading

Miryam Sas, Fault Lines: Cultural Memory and Japanese Surrealism
Peter Schwenger, Fantasm and Fiction: On Textual Envisioning
Didier Maleuvre, Museum Memories: History, Technology, Art
Jacques Derrida, Monolingualism of the Other; or, The Prosthesis of Origin
Andrew Baruch Wachtel, Making a Nation, Breaking a Nation: Literature and 
Cultural Politics in Yugoslavia
Niklas Luhmann, Love as Passion: The Codification of Intimacy
Mieke Bal, ed., The Practice of Cultural Analysis: Exposing Interdisciplinary 
Interpretation
Jacques Derrida and Gianni Vattimo, eds., Religion


