 
1 
Towards a Semantic Web for Culture   
 
Kim H. Veltman 
Maastricht McLuhan Institute 
PO Box 616 
Maastricht MD 6200, Netherlands  
k.veltman@mmi.unimaas.nl 
 
 
 
Contents 
1. Introduction 
1.1. World Wide Web 
1.2. Sowa’s Knowledge Representation 
1.3. Five Issues  
1.4. Greek Principles    
1.5. Causes, Substance, and Accidents  
2.   Substance to Function 
2.1 Ontology to Systematics 
3.   Definitions 
3.1. Semiotics and Linguistics 
4.   Words versus Concepts  
5. Relations 
5.1. Formal Relationships     
5.2. Form-Categorical Relationships  
5.3. Material Concept Relationships 
 
 
5.3.1. Generic or Abstraction  
 
 
 
5.3.2. Partition    
5.3.3. Opposition or Complementary  
5.3.4. Functional Relationship or Syntax  
6.   Relations, Universals and Particulars 
7. Dynamic Meaning  
7.1. Cultural and Historical Dimensions of Knowledge 
7.2. Recent Developments   
8. Semantics   
8.1. Relational Databases 
8.2. Semantic Web and Semantic Networks 
9. Practical Consequences  
10. Conclusions 
 
Appendices 1. Changing World Views  
              2. From Inanimate Being to Mineralogy and Chemistry 
              3. Mineral Classification Systems 
  4. From Animate Being to Taxonomy 
              5. Perreault’s Classifications of Relations 
 

 
2 
Abstract  
Today’s semantic web deals with meaning in a very restricted sense and offers static 
solutions. This is adequate for many scientific, technical purposes and for business 
transactions requiring machine-to-machine communication, but does not answer the 
needs of culture. Science, technology and business are concerned primarily with the latest 
findings, the state of the art, i.e. the paradigm or dominant world-view of the day. In this 
context, history is considered non-essential because it deals with things that are out of 
date.   
 
By contrast, culture faces a much larger challenge, namely, to re-present changes in ways 
of knowing; changing meanings in different places at a given time (synchronically) and 
over time (diachronically). Culture is about both objects and the commentaries on them; 
about a cumulative body of knowledge; about collective memory and heritage. Here, 
history plays a central role and older does not mean less important or less relevant. 
Hence, a Leonardo painting that is 400 years old, or a Greek statue that is 2500 years old, 
typically have richer commentaries and are often more valuable than their contemporary 
equivalents. In this context, the science of meaning (semantics) is necessarily much more 
complex than semantic primitives. A semantic web in the cultural domain must enable us 
to trace how meaning and knowledge organisation have evolved historically in different 
cultures.  
 
This paper examines five issues to address this challenge: 1) different world-views (i.e. a 
shift from substance to function and from ontology to multiple ontologies); 2) develop- 
ments in definitions and meaning; 3) distinctions between words and concepts; 4) new 
classes of relations; and 5) dynamic models of knowledge organisation. These issues 
reveal that historical dimensions of cultural diversity in knowledge organisation are also 
central to classification of biological diversity.    
 
New ways are proposed of visualizing knowledge using a time/space horizon to 
distinguish between universals and particulars. It is suggested that new visualization 
methods make possible a history of questions as well as of answers, thus enabling 
dynamic access to cultural and historical dimensions of knowledge. Unlike earlier media, 
which were limited to recording factual dimensions of collective memory, digital media 
enable us to explore theories, ways of perceiving, ways of knowing; to enter into other 
mindsets and world-views and thus to attain novel insights and new levels of tolerance. 
Some practical consequences are outlined.        
 
 
 
The problem of whether the machine is alive or not is, for our purposes semantic and we 
are at liberty to answer it one way or the other as best suits our convenience. As Humpty 
Dumpty says about some of his more remarkable words: “I pay them extra and make 
them do what I want.” 
Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings1 

 
3 
1. Introduction 
 
The dictionary tells us that semantics is the science of meaning. Hence we would expect 
that a semantic web would introduce new dimensions of meaning to the Internet and the 
World Wide Web. There is little evidence of this at the moment. When Tim Berners Lee 
first outlined his vision of a semantic web at WWW 7 (Brisbane, 1997), he focussed on 
using logic to ensure which things were true and which things were not, in order that one 
could trust what was being shared. The following year at WWW8 (Toronto, 1998), this 
aspect of reliability was underlined. The semantic web was presented as synonymous 
with a web of trust. In the course of the next years (1999-2001) there was increasing 
emphasis on acronyms2 and on trust with respect to transactions. 
 
 
1.1. World Wide Web  
 
In the early days of the WWW, there was always a sense of concern whether their 
solutions would be taken up by the major players and have a fundamental impact on the 
industry. By WWW 2002 (Honolulu), those fears had largely evaporated. The major 
players especially IBM, Sun, AT&T, HP and Microsoft were all there. The context of the 
semantic web had now taken a new turn. There was so much discussion of new acronyms 
such as Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP),3 Universal Description, Discovery and 
Integration (UDDI)4 and Web Service Definition Language (WSDL) also known as Web 
Services Description Language (WSDL),5 that a newcomer would have been forgiven for 
thinking that they had mistakenly come to a conference on EDI (Electronic Data 
Interchange),6 rather than the World Wide Web. 
 
At WWW 2003 (Budapest), industry was a little further in the background and the 
emphasis had shifted once again from transactions to scheduling. The semantic web was 
now about solving problems of complex appointments. Indeed, as Jim Hendler went 
further to explain: the semantic web offers complete solutions “to all the problems that 
we never knew we had.” The semantic web was presented as if it were some extremely 
complex concept of physics or higher mathematics where one, almost desperately, 
needed to find a simple example in order to make the problem accessible.  
 
Figure 1. One of the original block schemas to describe the semantic web in 1997.  
 
 

 
4 
Parallel with these developments was a diagram to explain how the semantic web was to 
be achieved. Understandably, in its earliest versions in 1997, it was quite primitive 
(figure 1).7 The essential idea was quite clear. One began with a basis of Standard 
Generalized Markup Language (SGML) and eXtensible Markup Language (XML), 
which provided structure or syntax. On top of this was a layer for the Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) that promised to provide semantics or meaning. 
Alongside there would be SGML, XML and RDF applications, a Protocol for Internet 
Content Selection (PICS) and privacy features (P3P). 
 
 
Each year, new features were added to the ever growing “layer cake.” By XML 2000 this 
was called the “Semantic Web Wedding Cake”8 (figure 2). Even so problems remained in 
deciding how much XML would accomplish and to what extent one needed to relegate 
functionalities to RDF. The minor detail that precise contents of RDF had not yet been 
defined made this challenge more elusive.  
 
These details, it was explained would soon be resolved using Schemas. So XML schemas 
and RDF Schemas entered the limelight briefly. Meanwhile, the fundamentals of the cake 
also shifted from SGML and XML to Unicode plus Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI).9 
Many in the WWW community were unaware that within the Internet Society (ISOC), 
Larry Masinter10 had disbanded the original Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF URI) 
committee because the challenges of URIs were too formidable.11  
 
As it became clear that XML and RDF were mainly about sharing information efficiently, 
the O(ntology) word entered the scene to address difficulties with meaning. Ontologies 
became the order of the day. The virtues of Ontology Inference Language (OIL)12 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The semantic web wedding cake model used to explain the structure of the 
semantic web as developed by World Wide Web Consortium.13  

 
5 
were extolled and as the limits of these virtues came into focus, America came to the 
rescue with DARPA Advanced Modelling Language (DAML). Now DAML +OIL was 
the new acronym to explain how meaning was, or at least would be, addressed. Those 
rash enough to raise questions about precisely how this fitted together were quickly 
pointed towards the OWL, not of Minerva, but rather in the sense of Web Ontology 
Language (WOL spelled OWL).14 
 
Tim Berners Lee had always insisted on the role of first order logic as an underlying 
framework for the semantic web. By 2002, experts of the day claimed instead that 
description logic was the key to the progress of OWL.15 At the WWW 2003 (Budapest) 
conference there was a chasm between followers of first order logic and description logic. 
Fortunately the day was saved because the wedding cake (figure 2) spoke only generally 
of an ontology vocabulary on top of which there were those reassuring words, logic, 
proof and trust. Even more fortunately, no one was so rude as to ask what had happened 
to the elusive concept of meaning, which the 1997 diagram had linked neatly with RDF. 
Nor did anyone ask why the dimension of meaning keeps being pushed up the layers of 
the cake to a level that is not yet working.   
 
One informal explanation why meaning has been downplayed16 is that logical meaning is 
the only objective dimension of meaning; that all other meaning is subjective and 
therefore unimportant. In this view, the semantic web rightfully limits itself to the realms 
of logic. In science, technology and business this claim leads to pragmatic results.    
 
A more serious reason offered unofficially by Tim Berners Lee, is that the full range of 
meaning is ultimately too elusive a field; that given the limitations of machines, one can 
only hope to tackle dimensions that can be expressed in formal logical terms. If so then 
the only meaning that can be conveyed in machine-to-machine communication is in terms 
of what John Sowa calls semantic primitives (figure 3). One of the problems is that 
different disciplines have very different terminology for even these basic terms (figure 6). 
 
If we accepted these explanations at face value, this essay would be limited to a brief 
survey of how aspirations for a semantic web in a deeper sense have failed because of the 
limitations of logic and machines. We would need to conclude that a semantic web which 
deals only tangentially with meaning might more accurately be called the transactions 
web (EDI redivivus) or the logic web.  
 
Logic solves many challenges of machine-to-machine communication and may offer an 
admirable solution for some dimensions of science and technology and basic transactions, 
which are essential for business. Our concern, however, is with the needs of culture 
where human-to-human and human-to-machine-to-human challenges go far beyond these 
simple logical criteria. We shall show that while the study of semantics in a strict sense is 
just over a century old, the study of meaning goes back at least two and a half thousand 
years. An awareness of this history and especially of contributions made in the past 
century is essential a) to understand the needs of users in the cultural fields and b) to 
recognize potential solutions that could increase dramatically the scope and depth of the 
semantic web.  

 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Five semantic primitives according to John Sowa (2000).17 
 
1.2. Sowa’s Knowledge Representation 
 
In one of John Sowa’s many articles we find a very clear reference to five logical 
principles or semantic primitives that play a central role in today’s semantic web (figure 
3). These five semantic primitives are frequently seen as the starting point and the final 
goal of meaning within the semantic web. 
 
Sowa’s major book on Knowledge Representation provides an excellent survey of 
classical contributions to logic by Aristotle, the role of Porphyry’s tree of being, which he 
calls the first semantic network, contributions of Leibniz, Kant, Peirce and Whitehead. 
Interestingly enough, Sowa ends with Whitehead as if effectively nothing has happened 
since about 1925.   
 
Sowa is very important because he is typically cited by developers of the semantic web 
and the World Wide Web community as a whole as one of the fundamental sources with 
respect to knowledge organisation.18 From the viewpoint of those concerned with cultural 
and historical dimensions of knowledge, however, there are a number of serious 
omissions and shortcomings in Sowa’s approach.  
 
From a general, historical viewpoint Sowa covers logic (traditionally called dialectic), 
which is only one of the seven liberal arts (and sciences). Historians of culture need to 
consider all seven of the liberal arts (figure 27) and a long history, whereby the seven 
liberal arts and sciences gradually evolved into the many disciplines of the modern world.  
 
1.3 Five Issues not Covered by today’s Semantic Web 
 
More specifically, Sowa19 and the pioneers of today’s semantic web overlook at least five 
basic issues relating to the history of knowledge organization, knowledge representation 
and meaning.   
A first issue relates to world views and changing paradigms. Sowa, and the pioneers of 
the semantic web, in the best traditions of the Artificial Intelligence (AI) community, 
Primitive  
Informal Meaning  
English Example  
Existence  
 
Something exists.  
There is a dog.  
Coreference 
 
Something is the same as something.  
The dog is my pet.  
Relation  
 
Something is related to something.  
The dog has fleas.  
Conjunction 
 
A and B.  
The dog is running, and the dog is barking.  
Negation  
 
Not A.  
The dog is not sleeping.  
 

 
7 
focus on the existence of things in terms of their substance, much the way Aristotle did. 
Accordingly, their data structures and databases focus on what a thing is (its substance), 
and do not allow for a gradual historical shift from substance to function. As a result the 
AI and semantic web communities create data structures that assume a single world-view. 
Every thing is presented as if this is the way “it is” ontologically, rather than providing 
frameworks whereby what a thing “is”, what it means, and how it relates to other things, 
change as the framework changes. This dimension is needed a) to explore the interplay 
between facts and the frameworks or world-views used to explain them and b) to explain 
an historical shift from a quest for a single ontology to a need for multiple ontologies. 
Needed is an approach where entities can evolve in meaning.     
 
Second, Sowa’s approach, which is used by the semantic web community, assumes that a 
definition is only about existence (what a thing “is”). This overlooks distinctions, which 
have been made between ostensive, nominal and real distinctions by experts in 
knowledge organisation of the past century.    
 
Third, the champions of the semantic web typically believe that their challenges are 
strictly in terms of natural language; the assumption being that if only one collects all the 
words used then one understands all that is happening linguistically. This overlooks a 
series of developments in the past century whereby terminologists distinguish carefully 
between everyday usage of words and scientific or professional concepts; between 
natural language and terminology.   
 
Fourth, Sowa reduces the notion of relation to a (semantic) primitive of something being 
related to something else. This focus on the logical dimension overlooks distinctions, 
which have emerged in the 20th century between subsumptive, determinative and ordinal 
classes of relations. Sowa is not alone. The pioneers of computer science have expanded 
the power of the computer by abandoning many earlier distinctions. Needed is an 
approach to semantics that places it in a larger context of semiotics, lexicology, 
lexicography, semasiology and onomasiology.    
 
Fifth, Sowa and those in the semantic web, focus on finding one, unequivocal, logical, 
static definition for each term. Cultural terms have local, regional, national and 
international variants, which change over time. Data structures and databases of static 
terms are therefore not useful to the cultural community. We need databases to reflect 
that meaning changes both temporally (whence etymology) and spatially, even within a 
culture (e.g. national, regional and local differences) and especially between cultures. For 
this reason traditional quests for dictionaries to provide exact equivalents in different 
languages have given way to new strategies that entail mappings, walkthroughs, and 
bridges among words and concepts. Present day semantic web models are still in terms of 
traditional dictionaries. Needed are models, which reflect an historical shift from 
traditional dictionaries (in terms of what something is) to modern versions of dictionaries 
that map between meanings without reducing them to a simplest common denominator. 
Needed is an approach that is multi-lingual and multi-cultural.  
 

 
8 
Figure 4. Five issues that need to be integrated into a cultural semantic web.    
 
This paper explores the historical context and development of these five issues (figure 4) 
to show why an integration of these dimensions is crucial for a cultural semantic web. 
These five issues point to a sixth issue with which we cannot deal in detail. Digital 
communication is not simply another step in the tradition of a new medium adopting the 
content of its predecessors. Once materials are digital they can be translated back to other 
media without difficulty. Potentially, a digital text can be output as a printed text, as oral-
audio text or, using stereo-lithography, even as cuneiform text.20 Implicit in this insight is 
a sixth challenge: How can we create a more comprehensive semantic web with 
information systems that both reveal these new potentials and allow us to recognize 
explicitly the differences (both qua strengths and limitations) of earlier media?   
 
There are also other issues. We know that the rise of combinatory logic linked cognitive 
science with semantics. This separated perceptual and conceptual dimensions, focussing 
so much on mental dimensions that a recent survey of trends could ask: Does represent-
ation need Reality?21 Future models need to explain the physical world and to bridge 
physical and mental worlds.22 The details of this challenge are beyond the scope of our 
paper.   
 
There are also other issues which we cannot address such as deeper linguistic dimensions 
of semantics.23 Nor can we explore the deeper arguments between artificial intelligence 
and cognitive science where “the issue of semantic interpretation is probably the riskiest 
quagmire on the terrain of the philosophy of AI.”24  
 
A full treatment of these issues would take us far beyond the bounds of an article. It 
would need to address the history of major systems of knowledge organisation around the 
world, integrating the profound contributions of Indian philosophy and science;25 those of 
China;26 those of the Mayans and other cultures of the world. Hence, we shall limit 
ourselves to an outline of key developments in the Western tradition to understand the 
central importance of the five above issues for a semantic web in the domain of culture.  
 
The first of these issues has a complex history with its origins in Antiquity at the time of 
Plato and Aristotle, which we need to examine in order to understand links between 
causes, substance and accidents (section 1.4-5). An excursus will outline a shift towards 
language and mathematics that led to both a chain of being and the emergence of modern 
disciplines of knowledge to reveal that relationships between facts and world-views are 
historically and culturally defined (Appendix 1-4). Understanding these shifts helps to 
understand a shift from substance to function (section 2).  
 
1) World views and paradigms    
 
2) Types of definition  
 
3) Words versus concepts  
 
4) Classes of relations       
 
5) Dynamic meaning. 

 
9 
 
This leads to a review of twentieth century distinctions between different kinds of 
definitions (issue 2 in section 3); between words and concepts (issue 3 in section 4); and 
classes of relations (issue 4 in section 5). We shall outline how new distinctions between 
universals and particulars can add clarity to future knowledge organization (section 6), 
before continuing with dynamic models of knowledge (issue 5 in section 7).  In light of 
this we shall review briefly the history of semantics as a field in order to reassess 
activities relating to the semantic web today (section 8), to explore some practical 
consequences (section 9) and to draw conclusions (section 10).      
 
Since those with scientific, technical or business training often perceive the past as 
distracting, or even as an unnecessary detour from contemporary issues, detailed 
historical discussions have been relegated to appendixes. For culture, these historical 
dimensions are crucial in order to appreciate the rise of different ways of knowing; 
alternative ways of understanding the world. Since every culture focuses on some aspects 
of knowledge and ignores others, history is essential to understand both the sources of 
our views and the limitations of the frameworks or worldviews with which we present 
them. As such it offers one of the most effective means of going beyond an attitude 
where we measure others solely by our own solution.  
 
1.4  Greek Principles    
 
It has been said that the whole of Western philosophy is a series of footnotes on the work 
of Plato and Aristotle.27 Plato focussed on the importance of universals. Aristotle 
focussed on the importance of particulars. Universals entail a deductive, top-down world 
of theory. Particulars entail an inductive, bottom-up world of practice. These  
ideas of universals and particulars arose at a time when oral knowledge was shifting to 
hand-written knowledge. Almost two and half millennia later, the shift from printed to 
digital, multi-medial and multi-modal knowledge is introducing new possibilities in 
knowledge organization. Returning briefly to these origins will help to understand 
contemporary challenges.   
 
This is all the more crucial because our present day approach to the semantic web 
assumes that we can simply deal with data and facts without paying attention to the 
medium in which they are presented. Significantly, a central goal of the computer 
community since the time of Claude Shannon, and especially since the evolution of 
Standard Generalised Markup Language (SGML) in the 1970s, and more recently 
eXtensible Markup Language (XML), has been an assumption that can one separate 
neatly the content of a text from the ways in which it is presented. If these ways of 
presentation are linked integrally with different media, this dimension needs to be 
considered in the further development of SGML and XML models.    
 
Aristotle’s concepts of causes, substance, and accidents produced a framework for 
Western philosophy and approaches to knowledge. In the centuries thereafter, 
philosophers focussed their energies on language and mathematics. This gave rise to the 

 
10 
trivium (grammar, dialectic and rhetoric) and quadrivium (geometry, arithmetic, 
astronomy and music), now known as the seven liberal arts.  
 
With the revival of Aristotle, especially in the twelfth century, attention turned increase-
ingly to particulars in the context of Aristotle’s categories of being, which led to many 
disciplines of knowledge as we know them today. The centuries that followed saw further 
study of material and form categorial relations, which entailed a gradual shift from 
substance to function.  
 
The twentieth century brought new studies of Aristotle’s basic categories, namely, his 
accidents. Thinkers such as Ranganathan and Dahlberg28 linked form-categorical 
relations to syntax. Perreault introduced classes of relations. Closer study of these classes 
in the context of Aristotle’s distinctions sheds new light on problems of universals and 
particulars, and opens new avenues for the growth of knowledge. To achieve this we need 
networks to provide systematic, multilingual access to knowledge through Distributed 
Electronic Dynamic Resources. Thus a study of and new access to past knowledge can 
shape advances in knowledge organization. Our cumulative memory and heritage points 
to evolving, dynamic models of knowledge and ways of knowing. .  
 
1.5. Causes, Substance, and Accidents  
 
Socrates, generally recognized as one of the fathers of Western philosophy, became 
famous for his Socratic questioning, which appeared to raise questions about everything, 
but focused on questions of: Why? Socrates’ best student, Plato applied his approach to 
the realm of metaphysics focusing on the why of universals. Plato’s best student, 
Aristotle further developed this approach to include the why29 of particulars. One of 
 
 
  
 Figure 5. Aristotle’s Four Causes. 
 
Universals - Genus    
 
(Not in Space-Time) 
 
    - Species 
 
Causes (Determinative Relations) Description  
 
 
  
Example 
 
Final Cause   
 
Goal (Telos), Purpose  
 
Function of House  
Formal Cause 
 
Essence, Substance, Definition 
Head Bricklayer1
 
 
------------------------------------Space-Time Horizon------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Particulars-Individuals  
 
(In Space-Time)   
 
Material Cause 
 
Suffering (Processes)1  
 
Bricks, Stones 
Efficient Cause  
 
Action     (Operations)  
 
Carpenter  
 

 
11 
 
Figure 6. Parallels between logical categories, material concept relationships, verbs. 
 
Aristotle’s major contributions was to distinguish between four kinds of Why? which he 
called the four causes,30 namely, the final, formal, material and efficient causes. These 
have inspired over two millennia of discussions on determinative relations and debates 
concerning determinism versus freedom. 
 
Aristotle’s final and formal causes pertain to the realm of universals,31 whereas efficient 
cause and material cause are in the realm of particulars and individuals under the space-
time horizon32 (figure 5). Hence two causes are outside of time, whereas two are time-
bound. Implicit in this framework is an approach that requires and needs a bridge 
between the theory of universals and the practice of particulars. This need has led both to 
the exploration of subsumptive relations: type/kind, whole/part and subject/property and 
the creation of what has come to be known as the chain of being. 
 
Aristotle’s focus on causes, particularly final and formal causes, led him to see meta-
physics as more important than physics. Whereas his teacher, Plato, focused on the 
metaphysics of universals, Aristotle was also interested in the metaphysics of particulars. 
This led Aristotle to ask his best student, Alexander the Great, to bring back samples and 
souvenirs from his journeys through Asia Minor to countries surrounding India. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Aristotle’s four categories of being and his ten basic categories (substance and 
nine accidents).  
Logic 
  
    Being  
Identity  
Inclusion  
Exclusion         Intersection        
Computer Science   Existence            
 
Coreference 
Negation          Conjunction  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Philosophy  
   Substance   
Accidents  
Abstraction/ 
Opposition       Function  
   
 
 
 
Partition  
 
Grammar  
   is   
 
is/has  
             is a/ 
 
is not 
           is about 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is a part of    
 
Library Science     Equivalence  
                            Hierarchical  
 
           Associative 
      Being  
 
 
 
 
 
1. Substance  
 
 
 
1.   Inanimate (air, water, stones etc.)   
 
2. Quantity 
2. Animate   (plants, animals) 
 
 
3. Quality 
 
 
       
3. Mental      (human) 
 
 
 
4. Relation 
4.  Divine      (spiritual) 
 
 
 
5. Place 
6. Time 
7. Position 
8. State 
9. Action 
10. Passion (Affection).1 

 
12 
 
 Figure 8. Aristotle’s accidents, Dahlberg’s basic categories and Perreault’s relations.33 
 
At the level of universals, this meant that Aristotle began to explore a) a number of basic 
categories of (abstract) formal relationships, which evolved into logic and b) the material 
concept relationships including abstraction (genus, species, individuals), although he did 
not describe them as such and did not associate them directly. 
 
It is striking that slightly different names for his logical terms are now associated with the 
semantic primitives34 of first-order logic (e.g. existence, co reference etc. First order logic 
also has a fifth semantic primitive, relation that will be discussed in section five).  At the 
level of individuals, Aristotle’s contributions went far beyond his insistence on relating 
universals (genus and species) to individuals (particulars). He defined four categories of 
being and ten basic categories consisting of substance and nine basic accidents (figure 7). 
In his Categories, Aristotle also made a fundamental claim:   
 
No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation; it is by the 
combination of such terms that positive or negative statements arise. For every 
assertion must, as is admitted, be either true or false, whereas expressions which 
are not in any way composite such as 'man', 'white', 'runs', 'wins', cannot be either 
true or false.35 
 
In other words, truth only enters into the picture when words are combined and related to 
one another and claims are made concerning their relation. Implicit in this claim also is 
that the principles of logic are reflected in the functions of language through grammar 
(i.e. through material functional relationships in syntax). We shall see that this basic idea 
plays an important role in 20th century developments in knowledge organization (see 
below section 5.3.4 ff.).  
 
These four categories of being and ten basic categories for knowledge remain valid today 
although there have been shifts in name and meaning. For instance, today a combination 
of a being category with one of Aristotle’s ten categories is still one of the starting points 
for generating subject categories. Substance-Accident is now often called Content-Form 
(and usually in reverse order as form and content). Action is now associated with 
operation(s),36 while suffering or passion (in the sense of to undergo, L. patior) is 
associated with process(es). Dahlberg has called Substance, Entities, and has classed 
Aristotle’s nine accidents under properties, activities and dimensions (figure 8). 
Aristotle  
Being-Substance    
Accidents 
 
Content 
 
Form 
Substance 
(Concrete Objects)  
(Abstract Principles)  
 
Dahlberg  
Entities    
 
Properties     Activities 
           Dimensions 
 
Quantity  
Action     (Operation)  
Space  
 
 
Quality               Suffering (Process) 
Time  
 
 
Relation        
State     
 
Position  
 
Perreault:    
Subsumptive  
 
 
Determinative  
Ordinal 
 
 
Relations 
 
 
 
Relations  
 
Relations 

 
13 
In retrospect, if we use Dahlberg’s headings in combination with Perreault’s 
classification of relations, the magnitude and limits of Aristotle’s approach are readily 
brought into focus. Aristotle’s concern with causes led to the study of activities and 
determinative relations. This causal concern was intertwined with his concern to define 
essence, substance, quiddity (literally the whatness of a thing) through concepts such as 
entelechy (namely, the final goal towards which an object tends, e.g. an acorn towards an 
oak tree). The insistence on quiddity required a bridging from general substance to 
particular substance and thus inspired the study of subsumptive relations. It led also to his 
study of properties and accidents concerning dimensions, now called ordinal relations 
(figure 8, cf. figure 22).   
 
In the seventeenth century, when Francis Bacon suggested that philosophers and 
scientists should abandon study of final causes, i.e., the ultimate why question; the formal  
cause as Aristotle had understood it, was transformed largely into a definition of How? 
rather than Why? Thereby, the quest for understanding the quiddity of things, their What? 
also diminished. Lists of all properties were no longer the order of the day. Instead 
attention turned to another of Aristotle’s nine accidents as a key to understanding, namely 
relation. But whereas Aristotle had focused purely on the comparative relation (e.g. larger 
than, higher than, i.e. πρός τί), subsequent thinkers explored the potentials of relation in 
general. Cassirer has recounted this story in his Substance and Function (cf. section 2).37 
A long-term consequence of this focus on relations has been a compression from four 
major areas, namely entities-properties-activities-dimensions to three subsumptive-
determinative-ordinal relations.38 To understand why such categories are of vital 
importance for current challenges in knowledge organization and the quest for a semantic 
web, a further excursus on historical categories of knowledge is needed (Appendix 1).  
 
2. Substance to Function  
 
 
These enormous changes in knowledge organization were accompanied by a general shift 
from simple definition of substance to a concern with function and relation. Cassirer, in 
his fundamental study, From Substance to Function39 has provided a masterful account 
how the Aristotelian world-view that focused on Why? and What?, in the sense of 
essence and quiddity, gradually evolved into the world-view of early modern science that 
focused on quantitative aspects of the What? and concentrated on questions of How? 
Aristotle would have asked: What is (the essence of) a pump? Leonardo da Vinci and 
subsequent scientists increasingly asked: How does a pump work, function?  Not 
surprisingly, the Renaissance saw the rise of How to do it books as an important genre. 
Instead of defining objects, there was increasing attention to their function and thus to the 
relations and connections between them.    
 
In terms of categories of being (figure 30), this entailed a basic shift in attention from the 
Godly and the Human to a focus on the Alive and especially the Lifeless. As a result, 
categories of action and suffering relating to Human and Alive, were increasingly 
replaced by active operations and passive processes. The universe, which Aristotle had 
conceived as a living Organon, became transformed into what Dijksterhuis has elegantly 
described as the Mechanization of the World Picture.40  

 
14 
 
Gradually, as Koyré has shown, the static notion of a finite universe shifted to a notion of 
an infinite universe.41 This world which stretched towards the infinitely large as 
telescopes developed, stretched also towards the infinitely small as microscopes evolved 
gradually into electron tunnelling microscopes and other high-resolution devices. In the 
process, as Toulmin42 has outlined, the timeless, eternal model of the Greeks gave way to 
spatial-temporal models.43 Static knowledge led to models of dynamic knowledge.  
 
Ever since the Ancient Greeks, natural philosophers had assumed that they were finding 
ways to describe the physical world of matter,44 beginning with basic elements such as 
earth, air, fire and water. In the 1770s and 1780s Priestley and Lavoisier demonstrated 
that none of these was an element per se.45 In the course of the next century, the 
discovery of the elements of the periodic table, which laid the foundations of modern 
physics and chemistry, completed the shift from substance to function that Cassirer 
described. The development of electromagnetism, field theory, and subsequent studies at 
the atomic and sub-atomic levels, further transformed physics into high-energy physics as 
we know it today. What had begun as a study of the material world thus became a study 
of energy and forces at levels invisible to the eye. As a result many of the categories in 
today’s Physics and Astronomy Classification (PACS)46 would have meant nothing to the 
Greeks. Meanwhile, the systematic study of nature continued with respect to both 
inanimate and animate forms and led to a gradual shift from static claims concerning 
knowledge to evolutionary, dynamic models (Appendix 2 and 3).   
 
Ironically, the present day champions of the semantic web are frequently unaware of this 
historical context. They continue to assume that words, topics and disciplines are fixed 
and unchanging, not unlike thinkers prior to the time of Linneaus, who assumed that 
knowledge and its categories were fixed and static. Until we develop dynamic data 
structures and databases to address these dynamic dimensions of knowledge, we cannot 
hope to understand how contemporary categories have evolved, let alone develop 
frameworks to stimulate their future evolution.  
   
2.1. Ontology to Systematics   
 
In Aristotle’s work, the ordering of knowledge was linked with philosophy and 
specifically with metaphysics. Ontology became the science or study of being. By the 
early eighteenth century ontology had become “that department of metaphysics that 
relates to the being or essence of things or to being in the abstract.”47 Classification as an 
“act of classifying or arranging of classes to common characteristics or affinities”48 
emerged at the turn of the nineteenth century.49 Classification sometimes had the 
meaning of “assignment to the proper class,” implying that these classes reflected 
universal laws of nature. Shortly afterwards, De Candolle (1813) developed the idea of 
taxonomy as “classification, especially in its relation to its general laws or principles.”50 
By 1888, this had led to systematics as a “subject or study of systems, especially 
classification.”51 (cf. Appendix 4). Since then, fundamental work on the nature of 
definitions, on relations and on knowledge organization have transformed traditional 
notions of meaning. A survey of this history of definitions of definition and relations will 
help us to understand some of the major advances of knowledge organisation of the past 

 
15 
century. We shall then show how the space-time horizon can be used to further these 
insights before showing how these efforts entail a much richer understanding of 
semantics (i.e. meaning) than envisaged in present versions and visions of the semantic 
web.    
 
3. Definitions 
 
To understand more fully the parameters of meaning, now known as semantics, we need 
to examine the sources of meaning in definitions and relations. At first sight, the problem 
appears trivial: to find the meaning one simply looks at its definition. On closer 
inspection, definition itself has a long history and continues to evolve. As noted earlier, 
Plato and Aristotle introduced basic principles of definition. Definition, in logic became 
the "action of defining or stating exactly what a thing is or a word means."52 Note that, at 
this stage, definition could refer to a thing or to a word, but entailed no method whereby 
the relationship of a word to a thing or an object was clearly fixed. 
 
In mediaeval scholasticism, the schoolmen claimed that: "A word stands for a thing by 
means of thoughts/concepts" (Vox significat rem mediantibus conceptibus).53 A word 
(vox) now mediated between a concept (conceptus) and an object (res) in a triadic 
relationship (figure 13). In mediaeval (as in classical) logic, definition of a word was 
closely connected with the definition of terms, three of which in combination (major, 
minor and middle term) formed a syllogism.54 Thus the triadic relationship in the 
mediaeval definition of words was hardly a co-incidence.  
 
The mediaeval definition-triangle may appear as convincing as it is compact: a concept in 
the mind is mediated by a word to link with an object. But since the mind of every person 
is different and is not defined in this process, what initially poses as a logical claim is 
actually deeply rooted in implicit psychological dimensions. Using this triangle there is 
no way of determining how or the extent to which the thought of person A is different 
than the thought of person B with respect to a word for an object.   
 
Meanwhile, the Middle Ages also introduced the idea of dictionaries. In English, the 
13th-century Dictionarius of John of Garland is the first recorded use of the term to mean 
word list.55 Robert Cawdrey's A Table Alphabeticall (1604) is generally accepted as the 
first English dictionary.56 At the time dictionary, onomasticon and thesaurus tended to be 
synonymous. Through the advent of etymology (1725), time entered the study of 
language just decades before it entered into the study of conceptions of nature.57  
 
By the late eighteenth century, the obvious answer to overcoming problems of definition 
seemed to lie in the creation of comprehensive dictionaries and thesauri. There was an 
elusive dream that if only we could collect all the usages and arrive at the same 
definition, then we would all know precisely what was meant and ambiguity would 
disappear. This led to a series of monumental dictionaries for the major languages of the 
world, Grimm’s for German, Larousse for French and the Oxford Dictionary for English, 
which remain of fundamental importance today.  
 

 
16 
Even so, the results were less neat than one might have hoped. Important words often 
have five, ten or even more meanings. Then there are many kinds of dictionaries: e.g. 
specialist dictionaries for given fields; technical dictionaries; regional and local 
dictionaries. These challenges led to work on two fronts: a) in semiotics and linguistics; 
b) terminology (cf. section 4 below).  
 
3.1. Semiotics and Linguistics  
 
In the fields of semiotics and linguistics, thinkers returned to the mediaeval definition 
triangle. Curiously enough, although the names of the sides changed slightly, the basic 
mediaeval triangle continued to dominate their approaches throughout the 20th century. 
For instance, the philosopher and semiotician, Charles Peirce, saw a threefold58 relation 
between a) a Representamen: the form which the sign takes (not necessarily material); b) 
an Interpretant: not an interpreter but rather the sense made of the sign; and c) an Object: 
to which the sign refers.59 This version has been taken over almost directly in Italian 
semiotics.60  
 
Elsewhere, in the semiotics of Peirce, this became the semiotic triangle in which the 
terms and their position changed slightly but the approach remained the same. In Peirce’s 
scheme, the mediaeval concept (conceptus) remained the same but moved from the lower 
right to the top. Word (vox) became symbol and thing (res) became an object (figures 9-
10). In De Saussure, this became the triangle of signification with a Sign (e.g. a signifier), 
concept (or signified), and a thing referred to C (significatum or referent, figure 11).61 In 
Ogden and Richards’ seminal Meaning of Meaning (1923), this construction  
 
became the triangle of reference62 and the terms and positions were again altered 
slightly to become: thought or reference, referent and symbol respectively (our 
figure 12). In Lerat, this became Sign (terme), Concept (notion) and Object (objet, 
our figure 13). The triangle of meaning was alternatively called a semiotic 
triangle or a semantic triangle. Other names for the ingredients of the triangle also 
exist, namely Signs (terms, tags); Concepts (descriptions, definitions, 
connotations, intensions) and Significata (referents, denotations, extensions, 
objects).63  
 
The French tradition of Lerat relates this triangle to a standard description of notion, 
object, term, as developed in ISO 1087 (1990). According to this view, the Saussurian 
tradition has put an end to the notion of nomenclature in the simple sense and, following 
the hypothesis of Sapir-Whorf, one accepts the assumption that each language slices and 
organises reality in a different manner.64 By implication, there can be no meaningful 
reduction to only one natural language.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
 
Figures 9. Meaning triangle from Mediaeval logic; 1o) Semiotic triangle in Peirce;  
11) Triangle of reference in Ogden; 12) Triangle of signification in De Saussure; 13) 
Lerat (ISO 1087)65 and 14) Dahlberg’s concept triangle. (Diagrams N. Baerten). 
 
 

 
18 
 
Figure 15. Organon model from Karl Bühler, Sprachtheorie, Jena, 1934, p. 28. 
Unabridged reprint, 1982, G. Fischer (UTB), Stuttgart.66   
 
4. Words versus Concepts (Natural Language versusTerminology)  
 
Not all linguists accepted De Saussure’s assumptions and claims about language. In 
Germany, Karl Bühler directly challenged his approach by drawing attention to the role 
of deixis67 (known in philosophy as indexicality) in language, namely the role played by 
pointing at objects (cf. ostensive definition, p. 19 below). Bühler argued that a linguistic 
sign is a) a Symptom, insomuch as it expresses the interiority of the sender; b) a  Signal, 
insomuch as it calls on the receiver, and c) a Symbol, insomuch as it refers to objects and 
subjects of reality.68   
 
This led him to claim that language had three distinct functions, namely: expression, call, 
and representation.69 While Bühler’s approach recognized the role of psychology in all 
communication, it went beyond the Anglo-Saxon and French traditions by insisting that 
meaning was also intimately connected to direct links with the reality of the physical 
world. 
 
Meanwhile, in Austria, the fundamental work of Wüster70 on terminology, inspired 
further work in Germany by Diemer71 and Dahlberg,72 who claimed that such triangles 
could also be understood ontologically. Whereas the starting point of the linguists had 
been words in general, the starting points of Wüster, Diemer and Dahberg, were 
concepts: i.e. denoted technical terms. In the English language realm one did not know 
concepts and equalized them later as technical terms. But terms are only one part of a 
concept as will be shown in the next paragraph. While Dahlberg’s triangle (figure 14) 
appears very similar to those discussed above, in fact, it introduced four significant 
differences.  
 
First, whereas Peirce and his followers had started from a thought, which was psycho-
logical and thus not open to objective scrutiny, Dahlberg’s point of departure was an item 

 
19 
of reference, called „the referent“ and a concept (of such a referent which can be 
anything, an object, a property, an activity, a topic, something abstract, even something 
not existing) comes into being, if the necessary statements on a referent have been made, 
yielding its essential characteristics which are synthesized – so to speak – into a verbal 
form, a name, a technical term, a code. Thus referent, characteristics and name or term 
are the formal elements of a concept, whereas the material elements are the stated 
characteristics, the contents of a concept. Thus Dahlberg called a concept a “knowledge 
unit” – since the statements on the referent show what is known about it and accordingly, 
called its characteristics “knowledge elements.” 
 
Since in philosophy one discerns (at least) three kinds of definitions, namely the 
ostensive, the nominal and the real definition, Dahlberg shows that by using her concept 
triangle one can clearly show, that an ostensive definition uses only the points A and C, 
i.e. the referent A is denoted by the term C ostensively, i.e. by pointing to it. A nominal 
definition73 comes into being, if one omits the referent A and explains the term C only by 
giving descriptive characteristics without reference to A. However, the real definition 
comprises all the formal and material elements of a concept, which means that one can 
effectively work in knowledge organization only with this latter form of a definition.74 
 
Third, Dahlberg shows that by the generation of a concept in the way described above, at 
the same time a definition of a concept is established. And since a referent A can include 
e.g. either a multitude or some species or a single, individual item, one would not only 
generate different kinds of concepts, but also its respective different kinds of definitions. 
(See also Fig. 37 in the notes in which the relationships of A, B and C with regard to All, 
Some or a Single referent is demonstrated diagrammatically). 75 
 
Fourth, as will be seen in the next section, Dahlberg showed that different concept 
relationships can generate corresponding kinds of definitions.76 This transforms the scope 
of what a definition is and implies a fundamentally new approach to the future of 
dictionaries.  
     
5. Relations  
 
As noted earlier relation was one of Aristotle’s accidents but he used the term in a 
restricted sense to mean comparison: e.g. bigger than, smaller than etc. The Oxford 
English Dictionary (OED) provides a more complex definition that clearly builds on 
Aristotle, defining relation as a: “feature or attribute if things which is involved in 
considering them in comparison or contrast with each other; the particular way in which 
one thing is thought of in connexion with another, any connexion, correspondence or 
association which can be conceived as naturally existing between things.”   
 
In English, relation also has many other meanings including “the action of relating in 
words.”  In the logical tradition and subsequently in the computing world, relation 
became one of the five semantic primitives77 (cf. figure 3). Meanwhile in the field of 
knowledge organization as developed by Dahlberg there are three main classes of 

 
20 
relations or relationships: a) formal (also called relation in general); b) form-categorical 
and c) material concept relationships.  
 
5.1. Formal Relationships     
 
In first order logic, relation is the fifth semantic primitive. In Dahlberg’s approach a 
formal relationship is the class that defines the other four basic logical categories of 
Identity, Inclusion, Intersection, Exclusion. Formal relationships provide the abstract 
categories under which other relations occur.  
 
 
5.2. Form-Categorical Relationships  
 
Form-Categorial relations entail statements involving Aristotle’s ten categories 
(substance plus nine accidents).78 These relations at the level of characteristics 
correspond in terms of abstract form to the formal or logical identity relation.  
 
5.3. Material Concept Relationships 
 
Questions of Why? dominated Aristotelian metaphysics. What? questions dominated 
Aristotle’s philosophy and logic. This led studies of quiddity and of material relations/ 
relationships, namely, abstraction, partition, opposition and function, each of which has 
their parallels in formal relationships as inclusion (co-reference), exclusion (negation) 
and intersection (conjunction) respectively (figure 6).  
 
5.3.1. Generic or Abstraction Relations 
 
Abstraction relations are of basic interest for our purposes because they are attempts to 
classify knowledge at different levels of abstraction: e.g. water, air, land in order to 
subdivide animals according to animals in the sea (fish), on land and in the air (birds), 
and to subdivide these in turn into different kinds such as eagle and sparrows. 
 
5.3.2. Partition Relationships   
 
The basic distinction between abstraction and partition has its roots in classical logic in 
the concepts of division (divisio) and partition (partitio). The many different names given 
to abstraction and partition by specialists in different professions (figure 16) is a tribute to 
their widespread importance.79 What Wüster80and Dahlberg81 called Generic/Abstraction 
and Partition, Perreault called Type/Kind and Whole/Part; Shreider and82 Bean83 called 
Hyponomy/hyperonymy and Meronomy. Pribbenow, refers to both meronymy and 
mereology. Following Tversky,84 she sees this as the general heading with two classes, 
namely, taxonomy (i.e. divisio) and partonomy (i.e. partitio).85 Meanwhile, Smith86 and 
Mylopolous87 referred to them as Generalisation and Aggregation. Such differences also 
confirm the problems of specialization that lead to redundant termino-logy and underlines 
the need for a more systematic, interdisciplinary approach to knowledge organization. 
 

 
21 
 
 
Figure 16. Two basic relations introduced from classical logic and their variant names in 
different disciplines and professions.  
 
Meanwhile, partition, which identifies the parts of a body, a plant88 or an object, became 
a basis for all the descriptive sciences (botany, biology, life sciences and earth sciences) 
and also for many aspects of dictionary definitions: e.g. a man has a head, two arms and 
two legs etc. In medicine, this partitive approach is now considered to be a basis for 
semantic networks.89   
 
 
5.3.3. Opposition or Complementary Relations  
 
In its narrowest sense the opposition relation is the equivalent of negation at the logical 
level. In its broader sense, the opposition relation becomes a complementary relation with 
a series of six other terms, ranging in their precision and thus resisting clear definition 
(cf. figure 17). The first, contradictory, is effectively a synonym for opposition and as 
such is again the equivalent of exclusion or negation at the logical level. Contrariety is 
nearly the same but, as the example clean-dirty shows, ambiguity enters via knowing, or 
more precisely, not knowing, the precise parameters or degrees which define where clean 
stops and dirty begins. Duality is a clearer either-or situation, but as the example 
Northpole-Southpole shows, duality can be negation of identity without entailing 
negation of the other’s existence. Complementarity extends this negation of identity 
without entailing negation of existence, beyond either/or, as in above, 
 
 
Figure 17. Categories relating to exclusion and intersection. 
Divisio  
 
 
Partitio  
 
 
Logic 
Generic/Abstraction  
Partition 
 
 
Wüster, Dahlberg 
Tree structure   
 
Beam Structure 
 
“ 
 
  “ 
Type/Kind 
 
 
Whole/Part 
 
 
Perreault 
Hyponomy/hyperonymy 
Meronomy 
 
 
Shreider, Bean 
Taxonomy 
 
 
Partonomy 
 
 
Tversky, Pribbenow 
Generalisation  
 
Aggregation  
 
Smith, Mylopolous 
Hierarchical 
 
 
Hierarchical   
 
Library Science/Info. Science 
Broader/Narrower 
 
Broader/Narrower 
 
Library Science/Info. Science 
is a/has a  
 
  
is a part/has a part 
 
Computer Science 
(Inheritance: Parent-Child) 
(Inheritance: Parent-Child) 
Computer Science 
Exclusion  
 
 
 
 
Intersection   
    
Negation     
 
 
 
 
Conjunction    
 
Contradictory (harmony-disharmony)  
Complementarity (above, middle, below, etc.) 
Contrariety     (clean, dirty)  
 
Analogy               (model-reality) 
Duality           (Northpole-Southpole)  
Homology 
     (arm of man- wing of bird)   

 
22 
 
Figure 18. A first and second level of material function or syntax relations. 
 
below, middle etc. Analogy and homology bring into play comparisons while leaving 
open the criteria for degree: e.g. how similar, to what degree, by which criteria etc. 
Nonetheless, the final three of these terms entail intersection or conjunction at the 
abstract level. In some senses these relations are the most fascinating because they 
introduce potentials for unexpected comparisons and insights. On the other hand, until 
parameters of exclusion and intersection are more carefully defined, they elude 
quantification.    
 
5.3.4. Functional Relationship or Syntax Relations 
 
Earlier (p. 12) we cited a fundamental insight of Aristotle that words in isolation cannot 
create affirmations and that positive or negative statements require combinations of such 
terms in order to achieve statements that can be checked with respect to their truth value. 
Dahlberg has explored this problem in connection with a fourth material relation of 
function or syntax: “Whenever two concepts are put together in a syntactic relationship 
they are said to form a functional relation-ship.”90 At a first level this deals with the 
questions: Who? did What? and as such entails combinations of substance and accidents 
(figure 18). These can be of different types: a) entities and activities; b) entities with an 
intransitive verb + predicate; c) entities with a transitive verb +object. At a second level 
this also entails purpose, conditions, time, place, persons and objects, thus corresponding 
to the questions Why?, How?, When?, Where?, Who? and What? In grammatical terms, 
this entails the addition of adjectives, nouns, subordinate and conditional clauses.91  In 
her analysis of the scope of the function or syntax relation, Dahlberg shows that it 
generates seventeen kinds of questions, which she relates to basic categories and partially 
also to the kind of questions posed by Lull in his Great Art of 1274 (cf. figure 39 in the 
notes).92     
 
The idea that combinations of such questions could be mechanized was introduced by 
Raymond Lull in his Great Art (1274). Perreault93 has claimed that this approach points 
directly to the calculating machines of Leibniz in the 17th century, Babbage in the 19th; to 
Being       + 
Actions  
 
Question 
Level 1 
Who?  
did  
 
 
What? 
Substance +     Accidents  
 
 
Entities     +    Activities  
 
 
Subject     + 
Intransitive Verbs  
+Predicate 
Nouns      +  Transitive Verbs  
+ Object 
Level 2 
 
     + 
Purpose 
 
Why? 
 
     + 
Conditions 
 
How? 
 
     + 
Time   
 
When? 
 
     + 
Place   
 
Where? 
 
     + 
Persons  
 
Who? 
 
     + 
Objects  
 
What? 

 
23 
the Enigma, Bombe, Colossus and ENIAC machines in the first half of the 20th century 
and to the distributed supercomputers of today.  
 
What interests us is to note how Lull’s idea of systematic questions has yet to be fully 
adopted. Libraries typically offer access via author catalogues (Who?) and title 
catalogues (What?). In addition, libraries such as the Herzog August Bibliothek in 
Wolfenbüttel, offer access chronologically (When?) and via locations of publication 
(Where?). Search engines such as Artefacts Canada have begun to use such questions for 
searching.94 Systematic access using the six basic questions and their variants would 
greatly expand the scope and the precision of searching. Prototypes for this are being 
developed in a System for Universal Media Searching (SUMS).95 
 
Although syntax in this definition addresses the problem of meaning qua sentences as a 
whole, it does not yet cope with the meanings of words at the individual level. Clearly the 
challenge of meaning occurs at numerous levels and needs a multi-leveled approach. We 
need new ways to visualize such differences.   
 
One of the fundamental implications of Dahlberg’s insights is that concepts are not to be 
equated with words. Concepts and their terms are carefully gathered clusters of words 
that define their relationships. A very simple example is the concept of water as a fluid 
which, in chemical terms, is two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen. Here fluid is a so-
called broader term. But there are many other approaches to define water as a fluid. It 
follows that all attempts to attain knowledge through simple “natural language” word 
counts, may contain much valuable information about practical usage, but cannot solve 
the challenges of the conceptual approach. Thus, projects such as CYC and Wordnet 
cannot bring us much closer to rich meaning and understanding.    
 
In the case of cultural objects the situation is more complex still. To take an almost banal 
example: while the universal concept of beer is relatively easy to define (e.g. according to 
its ingredients), the particular definition of beer changes radically in different countries, 
regions and locally from one town to the next. Since these local variations are essentially 
linked with the unique characteristics of a given town that set it apart from other towns 
and make it worthwhile as a tourist attraction, a new quest became apparent: how to give 
access to diversity at the local, regional, national, international and global levels without 
destroying uniqueness at all the levels. 
 
Hence, whereas the 19th century still dreamed of a single, comprehensive, omni-valent, 
dictionary that provided universal definition and encompassed all words in a language, 
the 20th century began with a growing recognition that etymological (i.e. historical), 
specialist and professional dictionaries, colloquial and slang dictionaries, regional and 
local dictionaries have their place, and ended with a conviction that the real challenge lay 
in creating bridges between them through mappings, walkthroughs and other ploys from 
the meta-data world: bridges between levels of definitions in different languages and 
dialects. Only thus can the true riches of historical and cultural dimensions be kept intact 
and fostered. 96 
 

 
24 
 
Figure 19. Dahlberg’s four kinds of definition that stem from different material relations, 
and correspond also to basic logical categories (or semantic primitives, cf. figure 3).  
 
What had initially seemed as a quest for a global dictionary and/or a revised edition of the 
universal encyclopaedia, is emerging as a need for new kinds of Distributed Electronic 
Dynamic Resources. European IST projects such as IMASS have begun to consider some 
of these challenges.97 Hence there is a new quest for global networks to link equivalents, 
synonyms and near matches in a way that foster differences rather than dictate uniform 
responses. Such insights have contributed to efforts such as Accès Multilingue au 
Patrimoine (AMP), which insist on a need for mapping between conceptual terms in 
order to maintain subtle differences rather than forcing them into narrow uni-lingual, 
onto-logical straight-jackets.98     
 
6. Relations, Universals and Particulars  
 
All of this has fundamental implications for our understanding of what a definition is. As 
we have suggested earlier, a naïve definition is in terms of what something is, in the sense 
of its substance. In Dahlberg’s approach, definition is potentially expanded into at least 
four categories99 (figure 19). Interestingly enough, we have no dictionaries or thesauri 
with this level of distinctions. To appreciate the implications of this approach it is useful 
to link Dahlberg’s headings, Perreault’s relations and the space-time horizon (figures 20-
21).   
 
Figure 20. Dahlberg’s headings, Perreault’s basic relators100 and subheadings (cf. fig. 7). 
Kind of Definition  
Verb    
1. Abstraction  
is a 
2. Partition  
 
is a part of  
3. Opposition   
is not 
4. Function 
 
is about.  
Dahlberg  
Entities  
 
 
Activities  
 
Dimensions 
 
Perreault  
Subsumptive   
 
Determinative    
Ordinal 
   Type/Kind  
 
    Active 
 
    Conditional 
   Whole/Part  
 
    Limitative                 Comparative 
   Subject/Property 
 
    Destructive  
    Positional 
 
Substance/Accident       Interactive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Passive  

 
25 
 
Figure 21. Perreault’s Subsumptive Relations with respect to Universals and Particulars.   
 
Perreault101 established his schema of different classes of relations as a device for using  
relationships in classificatory, syntactical expressions especially for the Universal 
Decimal Classification (UDC). He proposed that all relations can be classed under four 
headings: general, subsumptive, determinative and ordinal. General relations entail: 
alternation, conjunction, reciprocal, converse and negative and relate to both the basic 
logical categories (figure 3) and to what Dahlberg terms the opposition or complementary 
relation. Of interest at this point are the relations classed under subsumptive, determi-
native and ordinal (figure 20) and their subdivisions (cf. Appendix 5).  
 
Perreault’s distinctions help us to see the age-old debate between Plato’s universals and 
Aristotle’s individuals in a new light. In retrospect, Plato was interested in subsumptive, 
type/kind and whole/part relations, which dealt with universals. By contrast, Aristotle 
was particularly interested also in subsumptive, subject/property relations relating to 
particulars and individuals. Plato’s universals are not in space-time, whereas Aristotle’s 
particulars, below the space-time horizon, are in space and time. Plato’s universals are 
eternal: Aristotle’s particulars are spatio-temporal (figure 21). Plato’s universals 
constitute the world of theory: Aristotle’s particulars are in the world of practice. At the 
level of theory, there are parameters. At the level of practice, there are measurements. 
Theoretically, “man” is a living being with a range between two feet as a pigmy and eight 
feet as a proverbial Texan. Practically, one individual is 2’8” whereas another individual 
is 7’2”. 
 
The universal is static and can readily be reduced to mechanistic metaphors. The 
particular is growing (or decreasing) and is more readily amenable to organic metaphors. 
To ensure the progress of science, it thus made sense to separate the organic, changing, 
(subjective) aspects of subjects from the mechanical, unchanging, (objective) elements of 
objects. Cassirer has documented this chapter in the history of thought in his masterful 
Individual and the Cosmos.102 It took some centuries to recognize that removing the 
subjective, also removes the subject, the user, the person towards whom and for whom 
our inventions are theoretically directed. Hence, simply eliminating subjects does not 
remove the deeper challenges of subjectivity, a challenge that Polanyi brought back into 
focus with his basic book on Personal Knowedge. 
Subsumptive Relations 
 
 
 
 
Universals- General   
(Not in Space-Time) 
 
Genus/Species   
 
Whole/Part 
 
Opposition  
 
Function  
Type/Kind 
------------------------------------Space-Time Horizon-------------------------------------------- 
Particulars-Individuals  
(In Space-Time)  
 
 
Subject/Property  
 
Substance/Accident   (Whole/Part)  
Opposition  
 
Function 

 
26 
 
Figure 22. Universals and Particulars in Light of Perreault’s Relations.  
 
At the level of universals, all of Aristotle’s accidents and some of Perreault’s 
relations apply. For instance, universals have ordinal comparative relations, but not 
conditional or positional relations (figure 22). The concept of a bird has parameters re: 
maximum and minimum size, but cannot have a measureable size. Nor does it have a 
state of excitement or particular position on a tree at any given time in the way that the 
particular, individual, two-month old robin in my garden does. Concepts above the space-
time horizon can be visualized at a level of abstraction different from individuals. They 
cannot be photographed. Those below the space-time horizon can be photographed. At 
the level of particulars, all of Aristotle’s accidents and Perreault’s relations apply. Needed 
is a reorganization of knowledge that links knowledge at the particular level with 
corresponding, more general, knowledge at the universal level, and reflects these 
different kinds of visualisation.  
 
Although Aristotle would very probably have agreed that this is an excellent idea, prior to 
the advent of high-powered, networked computers the quest to create this number of 
relations was completely infeasible. The advent of digital media enables a transformation 
of our relations among entities, properties, activities and dimensions, up and down the 
different levels of subsumption, to arrive at a re-organisation of knowledge.  
 
Closer study of these classes of relations helps us to understand why there has been such 
confusion, debate and misunderstanding in the course of the centuries. At the level of an 
individual one can also speak of whole/part: e.g. John Doe has a head, two arms etc. We 
need hundreds and sometimes thousands of observations of such whole/parts or 
components of particulars to understand whole/parts at the level of universals, which in 
turn is a basis for deciding a generalized or universal type/kind. In other words, there is a 
clear hierarchy in the subsumptive categories. 
Universal- General  
 
 (Not in Space-Time) 
 
Relations: Subsumptive  
 Determinative  
 
Ordinal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Comparative  
 
Entities 
 
    
 (Activities) 
 
            (Dimensions)  
   Type/Kind (is a) 
Genus/Species  
 
 
 
  
  
   Whole/Part (has a)   
 
 
        
------------------------------------Space-Time Horizon-------------------------------------------- 
 
Particulars-Individuals 
 (In Space-Time) 
  
Subsumptive  
 
Determinative   
   
Ordinal 
   (Whole/Part)  
 
Active   
 
 
Conditional 
   Subject/Property 
 
Limitative 
 
             Comparative 
 
Substance/Accidents 
Destructive 
              
Positional 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Interactive 
 
 
 
 
Passive  

 
27 
 
Does knowledge then lie primarily in the inductive gathering of individual facts about 
particulars or does it lie more in the deductive summaries of these lists? The answer is 
both and yet interestingly enough persons often argue that it is one or the other. As a 
result some, especially in the Anglo-Saxon tradition, link the whole/part at the individual 
level directly with the type/kind at the universal level. 
 
Others, especially in the German tradition, distinguish between a particular whole/part, 
which includes the measurements of a specific individual and a general whole/part, which 
entails the parameters of a universal concept.103Unfortunately, our databases today 
usually do not distinguish between these different approaches. Needed are methods of 
database modeling, metadata and knowledge visualization that allow us to see clearly 
which level of whole/part is under discussion; that allow us to see where we are in the 
subsumptive list, e.g. vertical y- axis.  
 
Kant spent a lifetime insisting on the primacy of space and time in an attempt to clarify 
differences between what we can know at various levels. He claimed that ultimately 
knowledge with certainty is limited to the spatio-temporal domain of particulars. Since 
then, philosophers including Popper have continued to clarify these distinctions. We can 
observe 1000 white swans, but that does not prove that there are no black swans in 
Australia or in exotic parks. Hence, the certain knowledge of particulars can lead us to 
tentative knowledge of a spectrum at the level of universals.104 The universals that 
seemed absolute categories to the Ancients, have reduced themselves to parameters, 
themselves defined by the extent and limits of our knowledge.  
  
At the macro-level, knowledge of these parameters is often straightforward. In the case of 
products, it is relatively easy to create parts catalogues that define all the parts of a 
machine and their relation to one another. Photographing, describing and defining an 
individual man at the scale of the everyday physical world is fairly simple. At the micro- 
and nano-level this quest becomes much more elusive (see section 7.2 below). 
 
7. Dynamic Knowledge and Meaning 
 
Our space/time horizon introduces a theoretical framework where universals are not in 
space/time, whereas particulars are in space/time. We need to remember, however, that 
this framework itself changes with time as our knowledge of universals and particulars 
increases or changes. In this sense, Immanuel Kant was right: all our knowledge is in 
space and time. Hence, later versions will need to go much further, for two fundamental 
reasons. First, they will need to reflect cultural and historical dimensions of knowledge. 
Second, they will need to reflect recent developments.    
 
7.1. Cultural and Historical Dimensions of Knowledge  
 
If knowledge were merely a paradigm in the sense of Thomas Kuhn,105 then the 
systematic, historical study of a cumulative corpus of knowledge could readily be 
substituted by (fashionable) themes,106 or indeed perhaps only fashionable memes would 

 
28 
be worthy of study.107 Such a position would very conveniently absolve experts in 
artificial intelligence and other new disciplines from the burdens of mastering millennia 
of human knowledge; burdens which could risk introducing modesty and other 
inconveniences. Our brief survey of major trends in knowledge collection, organization 
and classification points to fundamentally different conclusions.  
 
Notwithstanding extinction of some species, destruction through wars, the vagaries of 
civilizations and changing categories, the cumulative dimension of scientific knowledge 
is indisputable. The constantly growing species of plants of which we are aware is but 
one striking case in point (figure 32). The same case could be made equally in the animal 
or mineral kingdoms. There is a cumulative dimension to the corpus of scientific learning 
even if occasional shifts in the explanatory framework for that corpus, when described as 
paradigm shifts, seem disjunctive and non-continuous. In the case of cultural knowledge, 
this cumulative dimension is even more fundamental as witnessed by the constant growth 
of libraries and museums.  
 
There is also an extraordinary way in which awareness of biological diversity is 
integrally linked with cultural diversity (Appendix 4): that different cultures are a key 
both to awareness of biological diversity and a key to their future, sustainable 
development. Simply to create databases of our latest views on knowledge cannot answer 
the challenges facing the planet and its inhabitants. Unless we record and preserve the 
cultural and historical variations in all their complexity, we cannot understand our past or 
present, nor shall we have a proper framework to understand the future.   
 
To take a simple example: As we have seen, there were many attempts in the past to 
visualise the (great) chain of being that linked the lifeless, alive, human and godly. This 
led to hierarchies from the mineral, through animal and vegetable to the human. In the 
twentieth century there was new attention to the “being” categories,108 which extended 
them to include the products of human effort as homo faber and homo ludens as these are 
beings created by man and society. Today some might wish to separate these products 
from lists of being. However, in order to understand earlier centuries we must maintain a 
key to their ways of looking at and organising the world. Creating our own modern 
classification is not enough to understand how, and more significantly why, earlier 
cultures had very different ways of organsing knowledge. 
 
Thus we need bridging and mapping devices that allow us to move dynamically through 
different languages, different levels of vocabularies, different chronologies (in the sense 
of time systems), different cartographical methods and policies (such that we can see how 
maps of a country such as Poland not only change with time but also differ from those of 
Russia or Germany for the same area). Such dynamic lists of knowledge will allow us to 
trace changes of interpretation over time, have new insights and help us to discover new 
patterns in knowledge.   
 
 
 
 

 
29 
 
7.2. Recent Developments   
 
There is a second fundamental reason why such dynamic models of knowledge are 
necessary. The ability to define objects changes with their scale. It is easy to define a man 
as having a head, two arms and two legs. However, at the micro-level, it is much more 
difficult to observe how many hairs Joe Doe has, how many red blood cells etc. At the 
nano-level and the atomic-level, boundaries are constantly changing, and the very idea of 
defining and counting each particular cell is usually no longer useful.      
 
In Antiquity, there was a clear distinction between the Godly- Human-Alive-Lifeless. 
During the Renaissance, as Cassirer has shown, it made sense to distinguish clearly 
between subject and object. This distinction produced the idea of objective knowledge 
that led to many scientific and other insights. It also introduced seeming dichotomies 
between man and his world, between man in relation to machines, and between man and 
his knowledge. For a while it appeared that these challenges could simply be met with yet 
another simple technological “fix”.  
 
A younger generation is beginning to recognize that much more fundamental solutions 
are needed: abandoning or at least complementing our mechanistic metaphors for 
Human-Computer-Interaction 
(HCI) 
with 
organic 
metaphors, 
approaches 
and 
interactions.109  How these new organic insights can be integrated into our interfaces with 
machines, hardware, software and with knowledge itself is an enormous challenge for the 
next generation and is certain to bring many new insights.  
 
If, however, we were subsequently to switch to such a new set of metaphors and 
completely abandon our earlier models as if they were merely an outdated paradigm, then 
we would merely be throwing away many dimensions of the cumulative insights of the 
past centuries. If evolution is embracing not replacing, then the challenge is both to 
develop new sets of metaphors and maintain the insights brought by previous sets.     
 
The big picture thus confirms both a remarkable continuity of ideas and also the 
surprising extent to which the media that we use to approach and to understand the world, 
define how we organize, and even how we define, knowledge. In retrospect, Aristotle’s 
enormous leap forward in recording details of particulars and individuals only became 
possible when oral culture shifted to hand-written culture. As Giesecke110 has shown, 
another leap forward came with the advent of printing. This again fundamentally changed 
how the Renaissance defined, ordered and shared its knowledge.  
 
Each of these earlier innovations implied replacement. Hence the shift from oral to 
written culture led ultimately, as Ong has argued, to a Decline of Dialogue.111 The shift 
from written to print culture, as McLuhan showed,112 brought a new emphasis on linear, 
analytic thinking.113 The shift to digital media is much more than another new technology 
that will eventually replace what came before. It offers a new key to translating any 
medium into any other medium interchangeably. Hence, we can now take an oral or a 
printed work and translate them into digital form, but we can equally take a digital 
expression and translate it back into printed, written or oral form. For the first time in 

 
30 
history, we have a medium that allows us to move into new modes of expression and also 
allows us to reconstruct earlier modes of communication, thereby recreating the different 
perceptions of these earlier methods. This is one of the underlying reasons why 
reconstructions are rapidly becoming a new industry.     
 
There has always been a paradox that persons further away in time from events, often 
know much more about them. Hence, thanks to the encyclopaedic efforts of Pliny, 
Vitruvius and later the Alexandrian school, the Romans had a better survey of Greek 
culture than the Greeks themselves. In many ways, Renaissance humanists, who profited 
from both the Arabic contributions and more rigorous tools of historiography, had a 
better knowledge of the Greeks than the Romans. 
 
Today over 2500 years after the events, the cumulative effects of studies in history, 
archaeology, philology, geography and other disciplines has led to a detailed knowledge 
never possible at the time for Socrates, Plato or Aristotle. As a case in point, John 
Traill114 (Victoria College, Toronto), has collected more information about names of 
persons in Athens, than any Athenian in Antiquity. The Perseus project led by Gregory 
Crane115 even if it does not always reflect the frontiers of research in the field, makes 
accessible even to non-specialists a wider range of information about the Greek world 
than Aristotle or Plato had at their disposal in the Platonic Academy. This new vision of 
the Greeks ranges from their colonies in Spain at Ampurias, through Sicily and the coasts 
of Turkey and Syria to include the shores of the Black Sea. 
 
There are still problems of recognizing such contributions in the academic world.116 We 
are still judging the contributions of the present using methods familiar from the past. Yet 
the future clearly lies in such new methods.117 The real challenge is to go far beyond 
simple access to knowledge of the past and use new digital media to keep alive awareness 
of different historical and cultural modes of perception, different ways of experience, 
different ways of thinking, visualizing not just facts but rather how such facts relate to 
different belief systems, different ways of knowing, mindsets, mentalités, world-views, 
and Weltanschauungen.  
 
There are additional reasons for taking up in a new way the encyclopaedic quest that go 
far beyond obvious arguments concerning the advancement of knowledge. In taking such 
an historical, cultural path, we become aware specifically how cultures class, organise 
and arrange differently the physical world, the man-made world, persons, interactions, 
just about everything that exists. We have a practical means of seeing different world-
views, a new tool for fostering and increasing our sense of the other, a new path towards 
tolerance. 
 
It is a topic of the day to dismiss everyone who looks at the world differently than 
ourselves with terms such as “terrorist” or “enemy of the people.” There is an ongoing, 
more subtle and broader danger about being troubled by and dismissive of the “foreign,” 
the “strange” or simply the “other;” by the person with a different language, dialect, 
clothes, appearance. But to dismiss them is hardly the way to tolerance, understanding 

 
31 
and deep-seated mutual respect. We need new ways to nurture and foster respect for 
diversity. 
 
Once upon a time, Europe lived under the illusion that it was the centre of multiple 
empires, whereby it could carve up the world. We are waking up to a world where 
Europe is less than 5% of the world’s population. Unless we find new ways to share 
understanding and respect, we shall be reduced to an insignificant minority in a world 
that is angry about our past, or worse, impatient with us for having no serious advice in 
the present and for being without visions for the future.       
 
8. Semantics  
 
In the foregoing sections we have traced developments in definition and relation and 
suggested that this has major implications for the future of dictionaries, thesauri and 
knowledge organization. In addition, we outlined ways in which the introduction of a 
space-time horizon can bring further clarity into our understanding of universals and 
particulars. At this point it is useful to survey briefly key developments in semantics over 
the past centuries in order to assess where we stand today.   
 
The quest to understand the meaning of words is probably as old as language, for without 
meaning there can be little understanding and even less communication. As noted earlier 
(section 3), in the field of logic, the meaning of words was traditionally linked directly 
with the definition of definition.118 Only gradually did a quest for the study of meaning 
become linked with a more general quest to understand the meaning of signs. Some 
scholars trace the origins of semiotics back to the early 17th century.119 Other have traced 
this quest to understand signs back to Vico’s New Science (1725)120 but this is debated.121 
It was not until the second quarter of the 19th century that sematology as the “doctrine of 
the use of signs (especially words) in relation to thought and knowledge” emerged as an 
independent subject.122For instance, Smart in his Outline of Sematology (1831) noted: “If 
we might call the whole of instruction which acquaints us with τά φΰσέιά by the name of 
Physiology and that which teaches us τά πρακτικά, Practicology, all instruction for the 
use of τά σηματα or the signs of our knowledge might be called sematology.”123 
 
A half century later, A. H. Sayce, in his Introduction to the Science of Language (1880), 
referred to “the physiology and sematology of speech (phonology and semasiology),” as 
if sematology and semasiology were effectively synonyms. Meanwhile,  there were 
related efforts such as those of Victoria, Lady Welby, who aimed at a science of significs. 
By 1934, Karl Bühler saw sematology as the basis for “a general theory of symbols,”124 
which he saw as opposed to the semiology of De Saussure.125 Although sematology 
produced a certain amount of study,126 it was overshadowed by its near synonym, 
semasiology.127      
 
Meanwhile, Bloomfield (1895), had introduced the word, semantics, as “relating to 
signification or meaning.”128 Michel Bréal (1897) published a major book (Essai de 
sémantique. Science des significations),129 which was translated into English by Mrs H.  
 

 
32 
Figure 23. Semantics and related sciences in the early 20th century.130   
 
Cust in 1900. The Athenaeum (1901) noted that “as applied to language, psychology is 
not easily distinguishable from semiotics and semasiology.”131   Even so, semantics soon 
blossomed as part of a new complex of sciences (figure 23) that included semiotics, 
lexicology, lexicography, semasiology and onomasiology (cf. onomasticon132 and 
onomastics133 which are much older) and has subsequently led to more specialized fields 
such as cognitive diachronic semasiology.134 
 
In retrospect the fascination with semantics and semiotics in the early decades of the 20th 
century was part of a more complex landscape of semiotic trends (figure 24),135 which 
had an implicit and sometimes explicit common goal of understanding symbols and 
symbolism. Ogden and Richards’ famous Meaning of Meaning (1923) had as its subtitle: 
A Study of the Influence of Language upon Thought and the Science of Symbolism. 
Interestingly enough that same year saw the first volume of Cassirer’s monumental 
Philosophy of Symbolic Forms (1923, 1924, 1931) which had as its subtitle: 
Prologomena to a future Philosophy of Culture.136  
 
As noted above, Bühler’s sematology had the same goal of producing a science of 
symbols, and is the more interesting because his notions of sender and receiver in the 
1930s, foreshadow Shannon’s137 work on information theory and Wiener’s138 
cybernetics. The past fifty years have seen many more contributions to semantics139 with 
respect to linguistics, logic, philosophy, psychology, and information theory.140 Yet, 
paradoxically the quest to achieve automated forms of communication especially in the 
second half of the twentieth century also led to a great simplification of the problems and 
serious dumbing-down with respect to solutions.  
 
In the 1940s, Claude Shannon, who worked with Vannevar Bush on the ENIAC 
(Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), chose Boolean logic141 as his point of 
departure. Boolean logic reduced logic to choices between three logical operators: and, or 
and not. In terms of the semantic primitives these operators dealt effectively with 
Exclusion, simplistically with Inclusion and only in a very limited way with Intersection  
(cf. figure 6). In terms of basic questions this provided some treatment of Who? and 
What?, ignoring entirely Where?, When?, How? and Why?    
Semantics 
  Science that studies the content (meaning) side of linguistic signs 
Semiotics 
  Science of general properties of sign systems 
 
Lexicology        Science that studies vocabulary of language also called Lexical Semantics 
Lexicography    Science of dictionaries and their creation   
Semasiology      Branch of semantics that seeks meaning departing from expression side of language; 
 
             Development and changes of the meanings of words.  
Onomasiology   Branch of semantics which departs from a meaning side of language and  
   asks what expressions exist in other languages.   

 
33 
 
Figure 24. Basic semiotic trends in Europe (1920s -1930s) according to Roland Posner  
 
In the 1950s, Curry and Feys developed typed combinatory logic.142 This introduced a 
distinction between three levels of language: 1) Phenotype, which describes natural 
language as order of words; 2) Genotype, which expresses grammatical invariants and 
structures and 3) the Cognitive level which deals with lexical predicates as represented by 
semantic cognitive schemes. This linked cognitive science with the study of meaning and 
semantics.143It also separated perceptual and conceptual dimensions.144 At the same time, 
it focussed so much on mental dimensions that a recent survey of trends could ask: Does 
representation need Reality?145 This poses a further challenge of remembering that our 
models need to explain the physical world and to bridge physical and mental worlds.146 
 
In the 1980s, the influential work of Langacker established the foundations of a new 
cognitive grammar.147 This introduced a distinction between nominal predications to 
designate things (i.e. nouns) and relational predications used for states (a-temporal 
relations) and processes (adjectives, adverbs, prepositions and verbs).  In terms of basic 
questions this established a distinction between Who? and What? (nouns) and relations 
entailing Where?, When?, How? and Why? (adjectives, adverbs, prepositions and verbs). 
On the positive side this prompted new attention to relations using verbs: the emerging 
field of troponymy. On the other hand, it obscured the very clear relations which had 
been established between division and partition (figure 16).     
   
Since the 1980s traditional distinctions have been even further eroded. For instance, 
Eduard Hovy, 148one of the authors of the influential, Word Net recently noted (2002):    
 
We define an ontology rather loosely as a set of terms, associated with definitions 
in natural language (say English) and, if possible, using formal relations and 
constraints, about some domain of interest, used in their work by humans, data 
bases and computer programs. We view a set of semantic relations organized into 
collections and perhaps related in a generalization hierarchy as a special instance 
of an ontology.149  
 
These definitions are important because they establish new links between ontology and 
semantics that help to account for the meteoric rise of these two concepts in the past 
decade. Christiane Felbaum (2002), also linked with Wordnet, provides an even more 
general notion of semantic relations: “If one examines the lexicalized concepts in relation 
Structuralism   
 
 
Jakobson  
Functionalism   
 
 
Mathesius and Mukarovský  
Philosophy of Symbolic Forms 
Cassirer 
Umwelt Research  
 
 
von Uexküll 
Structural Description   
 
Carnap  
Sematology   
 
 
Bühler  
Significs  
 
 
 
Mannoury  
Glossematics    
 
 
Hjelmslev 

 
34 
to one another, it becomes clear that they differ in systematic ways that are character-
izable in terms of similarities and contrasts. These consistent differentiations among 
concepts are what we call semantic relations.” 150 Interpreted narrowly this definition 
would mean that semantics has nothing to do with who or what a thing is, what it means. 
Rather, semantic relations would be limited to differentiations in terms of similarities and 
contrasts.151      
 
Meanwhile those in Library and information science have focussed on equivalence 
(use/used for); hierarchical (broader term/narrower term) and associative or affinitive 
relations (related terms). In this context, Why? questions (cause-effect) become linked 
specifically to associative relations.152      
 
The net result of these developments of the past decades is that an enormous corpus of 
work prior to 1950 has effectively been forgotten or deliberately ignored by the pioneers 
of the semantic web. We noted earlier that even John Sowa, a highly respected figure in 
the artificial intelligence and programming community in an article on “Ontology, 
Metadata, and Semiotics”153 refers to five semantic primitives (figure 3), four of which, 
relate directly back to the premises of Aristotelian logic. Indeed, as a result of our survey 
of definitions and relations (sections 3-6) we are now in a position to provide an update to 
Ogden and Richard’s meaning of meaning, especially concerning efforts towards a 
semantic web and semantic networks.   
 
8.1. Relational Databases 
  
In light of the above it is clear that the entity relationship model154 as originally 
introduced by Peter P. Chen (1976)155 lacked the complexity of the examples outlined 
above. Some would claim that this was deliberate, the assumption being that detailed 
distinctions could subsequently be fitted in at the modeling level. Even so, many early 
versions156 of the entity-relationship model were limited to entities and activities, with 
inheritance in terms of parent-child, with no distinction between abstraction (divisio) and 
partition (partitio) as introduced by classical logic (figure 16) and thus no distinction 
between intransitive (is) and transitive verbs (has).157   
 
Fortunately, the past two decades have seen enormous advances through the advent of the 
Natural Language Information Analysis Method (NIAM) and Object Role Modelling 
(ORM), whereby there has been a gradual integration or at least bridging of what once 
seemed opposed data models, namely, conceptual and logical (e.g. relational, object-
relational, hierarchical) data models.158 Even so we still need a model or implementation 
whereby the different, (vertical) levels of material relations, i.e. subsumption and 
(horizontal) levels of formal relations, i.e. determinative and ordinal are more 
systematically linked with respect to the space-time horizon.   
 
8.2. Semantic Web and Semantic Networks159 
 
In theory, one might have expected that these challenges would have been solved by the 
Internet. In practice, the Internet, which began in the late 1960s as a response to military 

 
35 
concerns with continued communications in times of disaster, was transformed in the 
early 1990s by the evolution of the World Wide Web as a means for sharing first 
scientific and increasingly all kinds of knowledge (Tim Berners Lee and Robert Cailliau). 
Within a decade the web exploded from a small community of scientists and scholars to 
over 200 million persons. Since 2000, notwithstanding rhetoric of dot.com busts, there 
have been more than 480 million additional users. Aside from obvious challenges of 
scale, this introduced new challenges: how to distinguish between reliable knowledge of 
a small scientific and scholarly community in the context of a large qualitative range and 
vast quantitative amounts of information produced by persons ranging from simple 
enthusiasts to sinister individuals and groups with both clear and hidden agendas.   
 
By 1997, Tim Berners Lee had outlined the need for a semantic web or web of trust, 
where there was not just access to information, but also access to different layers of 
knowledge. The idea was noble. Unfortunately, few technologists were aware that the 
term semantic is just over a century old and that it entails very different agendas, ranging 
from very narrow definitions in factions of the AI community to one that potentially 
embraces all human knowledge and experience. 
  
Some technologists especially in the field of artificial intelligence wish to restrict the 
definition of semantics160 to the “meaning of instructions, commands and transactions” as 
used by machines. This potentially takes us back to the level of abstract form (logic). 
While this approach is theoretically extremely precise, the quote from Wiener at the 
outset of this paper confirms that in these circles the term semantic is often rather elastic 
in its meaning. 
  
Some proponents of the semantic web wish to focus specifically on transactions. 
Business consultants and analysts with an eye on profits in the next quarter are 
undoubtedly right about the economic potentials of automated, on-line transactions. It 
already functions in the case of ordering books at Amazon or other items at E-Bay. 
Ironically, after more than two decades, the methods of Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI) have still not become a standard.  
 
On-line transactions assume that money moves while persons remain in the same place. 
By contrast, tourism assumes that persons move in order to make money move. If we 
recall that 12% of the world’s economy ($3.5 trillion annually)161 is now tourism, then 
the economic potentials of systems that improve access to our cultural diversity in such a 
way that they also stimulate our desire to discover those differences in person, and make 
both persons and money move and interact are clearly far greater than simple transactions 
of on-line billing.  
 
Semantic, in the sense of ARPA’s Interspace project,162 is something quite different 
again. Their latest efforts in the context of Medspace,163 to create a semantic approach to 
the whole of Medline, apply to medicine aspects of Perreault’s relations, notably 
subsumptive, type/kind and whole/part.164  
 

 
36 
If we stand back and look at transactions in terms of Dahlberg’s original (Ur) categories 
we quickly see that transactions represent a tiny aspect of activities and ignore most 
aspects of entities, properties and dimensions. Formal logic relations and subsumptive 
relations also cover very small bits of the big picture. For the most part the semantic web 
as it is treated today is merely a bandwagon for technologists re-inventing the wheel with 
a collection of buzzwords, without qualms about overlooking that these problems of 
meaning have been addressed seriously by thinkers for the past 2,500 years. 
 
Prior to the late 19th century the quest for meaning, now called semantics,165 would have 
been called a quest for syntax. As we have shown (section 5.3.4), syntax, in the sense of 
formal relations accounts for the richness and complexity of human language. In light of 
the above, it is perfectly possible to speak of syntactic (re: structure as in grammar) and 
semantic (re: meaning as in grammar or logic) interoperability. It is even possible to 
speak of mapping syntactic dependencies onto semantic relations,166 but great care is 
needed to distinguish whether the terms are being used in the sense of grammarians, 
librarians, computer scientists, or in some other sense.  
 
The good news is that there is an immense amount of activity being devoted to these 
topics that goes far beyond the scope of a single paper. Of central importance are the 
contributions within the International Society of Knowledge Organisation (ISKO)167 
founded by Dr. Dahlberg; the American Society for Information Science and Technology 
(ASIS&t),168 especially their Special Interest Group on Classification Research (SIG-CR) 
and, of course, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions 
(IFLA).169  Two individuals connected with these communities, Carol A. Bean and 
Rebecca Green, have recently edited two important books, which provide an excellent 
survey of recent developments with respect to relationships and their semantics.170 This 
work deserves to be studied more closely by the semantic web community.  
 
The big picture, as we have suggested earlier, is about much more than simply translating 
existing resources from analog into digital form. It requires a rethinking and restructuring 
of what has been done so far in the realm of dictionaries and thesauri. This can begin at a 
very practical level. Many controlled vocabularies such as the Inventaire générale des 
monuments et des richesses artistiques de la France have been developed but are not 
generally available. Multilingual access to such resources would be an excellent first step.  
 
Subsequently, we need new distributed repositories to distinguish between ostensive, 
nominal and real definitions and to distinguish between different kinds of definitions re: 
substance (is a), accidents (has a), subsumptive relations (e.g. is a species etc, is a part 
of); opposition (is not); and functional (especially determinative and ordinal) relations (is 
about). We need to combine universal, subsumptive relations (type/kind, whole/part) with 
particular, subsumptive relations (subject/property, substance /accidents). Such relations 
need to be aligned with the space-time horizon such that we can distinguish between 
general, quantitative parameters of universals (e.g. a bird of species x has a wing span 
between 10-15 cm) above the space/time horizon and quantitative dimensions of 
particulars below the space/time horizon (e.g. the sparrow in the garden is 11.3 cm.).   
 

 
37 
A next step will be to map between different versions of these universal, subsumptive 
relations: e.g. an American classification or thesaurus and a Chinese, Indian or European 
one. Preliminary versions of such attempts will inevitably resemble virtual reference 
rooms, with digital equivalents of classification systems, dictionaries, encyclopaedias, 
book and library catalogues.171 Gradually these can evolve into a Distributed European 
Electronic Resource (DEER) with three basic components: a) virtual reference rooms; 
 b) virtual libraries as distributed repositories and c) a forum for collaborative research 
and creativity. Such a DEER can lead to more ambitious efforts on a global scale in the 
form of a World Distributed Electronic Resource (WONDER).   
 
9. Practical Consequences 
 
A number of practical consequences have already been outlined or implied in the 
previous three sections (6-8). Potentially, these consequences have serious implications 
for the semantic web wedding cake as it now stands (figure 2). Quite understandably, the 
World Wide Web (WWW) community has focussed on the web. As a result the 
cornerstones of the semantic web are Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) and Unicode 
(the bottom layer of the wedding cake). On top of this are layers to create self-describing 
documents, above, which are data layers for ontology vocabulary and logic and finally 
rules for proof and trust. The good news is that this produces an excellent self-contained 
system. With respect to the needs of culture, the bad news is that, aside from a small 
percentage of born digital objects, the vast majority of culture is outside this closed 
electronic system.  
 
A glib solution would be to limit the semantic web strictly to digital objects, in which 
case only cultural objects, which have been digitised and digitally-born cultural objects 
would be part of the system. Needed, however, is something that takes the system beyond 
this simple self-referentiality.  
 
One approach would be to refine the concept of URIs in order to distinguish between 
those which entail 1) strictly born-digital materials and those which entail references to 
and/or claims about 2) particular physical objects that have analog originals in the 
physical world; 3) particular non-physical, intangible objects, that have originally been 
documented in analog form (e.g. music, dance), and 4) universal objects or concepts, 
which again have originally been documented in analog form. 
 
       Wedding Cake URI 
 
 
Universal  
 
Particular  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Virtual Reference  
Virtual Libraries  
 
 
Figure 25. The wedding cake’s URI vis à vis universals and particulars (cf. figure 2). 

 
38 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
DEER/WONDER  
 
 
AAA 
 
 
 
Figure 26. Main elements of an initial Distributed European Electronic Resource (DEER), 172  
which offers a model for a future World Distributed Electronic repository (WONDER).    
 
Those in category 1 would be treated as they are being treated today. Those in categories 
2-4 would need to be linked with the real world.173 In addition, all objects in categories 2 
and 3 could be linked with a unique object that had a series of subsumptive, 
determinative and ordinal relations. In like manner, universals in category 4 could be 
linked to a smaller range of these relations. These universals can then be linked with 
virtual reference rooms, and the particulars can be linked directly to virtual libraries 
(figures 25-26, cf. figure 22).  
 
The virtual reference room will show how this universal is related to terms (in 
classification systems, thesauri and world-views); definitions (in dictionaries); 
explanations (in encyclopaedias); titles (in library catalogues, book catalogues and 
bibliographies) and partial contents (in abstracts, indexes and reviews (e.g. IBZ, 
Intenationale Bibliographie der Zeitschriftenliteratur). In the long term, the virtual 
reference room can supplant the ontology vocabulary layer of the wedding cake: the one 
enormous difference being that the virtual reference room provides multilingual access to 
ontologies, which reflect different cultures at a given time and trace their evolution over 
time.  
VIRTUAL REFERENCE ROOM - 
comprising, interfaces, discovery tools and navigation systems for portraying e-culture 
and for searching and retrieval of content. Including 
 
1, Terms  
 
Claasifications, Thesauri, World Views) 
2. Definitions  
 
Dictionaries 
3. Explanations   
Encyclopaedias  
4. Titles   
 
Catalogues  
5. Partial Contents  
Abstracts, Indexes, Reviews 
FORA FOR COLLABORATIVE 
RESEARCH and CREATIVITY – 
 a virtual space where users can 
communicate and exchange ideas 
and content – a virtual Agora. 
Including 
 
 
Virtual Reality  
 
Augmented Reality  
 
Video Conferencing  
Virtual Annotations 
Collaboratories  
VIRTUAL LIBRARIES and MEMORY 
INSTITUTIONS as DISTRIBUTED 
REPOSITORIES- 
A network of distributed repositories for 
preservation and access of digital cultural 
content. Including 
 
       6.    Full Contents  
7. Internal Analyses 
8. External Analyses  
9. Restorations 
10. Reconstructions 
 
DEER/WONDER  

 
39 
 
This link between the wedding cake and a virtual reference room increases access to 
reference materials and has much wider consequences on at least three fronts. First, as we 
have noted, the semantic wedding cake uses logic as its basis and is thus limited to Who? 
and What? concerning existence, identity etc. (cf. figure 3). Hence, today’s semantic web 
follows the limitations imposed on Western thinking when the logic section of the 
medieaval trivium triumphed over grammar and rhetoric (Appendix 1). The virtual 
reference room expands access to knowledge via a full range of questions including: 
Who?, What? Where?, When? How? And Why?. This expands semantics (meaning) 
beyond existence (who or what a thing is and has) to include why, how, where and when 
a thing is.     
 
Second, whereas todays’ semantic web focusses on static definitions, our approach 
includes different types of definition: distinctions between words and concepts (between 
natural language and terminology); a more systematic treatment of relations and the need 
for dynamic meaning. 
 
Third, since today’s semantic web focuses solely on logic, it is limited strictly to today’s 
answers: today’s world view. The link with a virtual reference allows an expanded 
number of questions and answers to be seen in terms of different world-views. To return 
to the example of cartography mentioned earlier (section7.1), today’s semantic web 
assumes that there can be only one “objective” map of Poland. Links with a virtual 
reference room, allow us to deal with Polish, Russian, and German maps of the same 
territories that differ considerably at any given time and also change over time.174  
 
That which applies to cartography applies to words and concepts generally. To take a 
relevant, contemporary example: it is instructive to recall that copyright, which is now so 
emphasized by the United States was almost systematically denied by that same country 
less than a century ago. The semantic web must do more than give access to today’s 
definitions of copyright. It must show us how such concepts change radically in different 
places and times. To do so it must create data structures and databases that allow us to see 
relations between facts, claims, and world-views (including philosophical, theological, 
political and ideological systems).         
 
This virtual reference room serves as an introduction to a virtual library in the form of 
distributed repositories, which contains not only primary literature in the form of full 
texts, but also secondary literature in the form of internal analyses, external analyses, 
restorations and reconstructions. In terms of the web this implies an increasing distinction 
between primary (literature) sites which simply contain “content” in the form of digital 
texts, paintings etc. and those which are secondary (literature) sites, in the sense that they 
provide annotations, commentaries and interpretations of the original material. 
 
These distinctions again have wider consequences for the semantic wedding cake, 
because they imply a shift in its basic orientation and goals. As we keep noting, the 
commitment to logic leads today’s semantic web to focus solely on what can be proven 
logically. This has extremely useful consequences for business: it is necessary to have 

 
40 
proof of the identity of the person receiving goods in order to have legitimate claims that 
they pay for those goods. However, to reduce the web to this would be to reduce it to a 
new version of bills and bank statements: a mechanical web for machine transactions. 
 
If the World Wide Web is go beyond transactions and simple messaging systems (e-
mails, chat rooms, etc.175), and evolve into a web for human communication then 
considerably more is needed. We need tools to prove176 and areas to distinguish between 
a) what needs to be proved (science, business); b) what needs to be carefully supported 
and defended with evidence and reasons (enduring knowledge, law) and c) what does not 
require proof (personal knowledge).  
 
We need spaces that reflect Pascal’s insight that “the heart has its reasons, which reason 
does not know” (“Le coeur a ses raisons que la Raison ne connait pas”) or La 
Rochefoucault’s aphorism: “Who lives without folly is not as wise as he thinks” (“Qui vît 
sans folie n’est pas si sage qu’il croit”). In so doing, we expand enormously the scope of 
the semantic web from the mechanical realm of machines to the organic realms of life 
and humanity. In so doing, we expand the scope of semantic from a strict logical meaning 
(i.e. identity, inclusion, exclusion, etc.), to the realm of the meaningful, which is central 
to the human condition.       
   
With respect to enduring knowledge, by following through the distinctions between 
universals and particulars as described in figure 22, it becomes possible to see how much 
could be known about an object, which can then be compared to what is known. In short, 
this approach points to templates, whereby we can begin to discern lacunae in existing 
knowledge. This approach thus becomes an inadvertent aid with respect to the logic, 
proof and trust layers of the cake. Claims about an object where many of the basic 
characteristics are missing, will be less trustworthy than those where all these 
characteristics are known and their sources documented.             
 
 
In the case of categories 2-4, through a simple proviso that these links between URIs and 
objects should link back to the originals on which they are based one introduces a further 
aid with respect to aspects of the logic layer and trust layer of the wedding cake. A simple 
example with help make this clear. A web site that refers to Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona 
Lisa in the Louvre should provide a direct link to the Louvre’s digital version of that 
painting. By so doing one solves in large part the existence and identity dimensions of the 
logic layer.177   
 
Creators of websites will of course be at liberty to refer to other copies and versions, 
legitimate or pirate, but in the absence of a direct link their claims will be idle. This direct 
electronic link will effectively function in much the same way that a pedigree does in the 
world of professional breeders. Without a pedigree, without a proof of a direct link, 
claims of identity will be unclear and thus also at a lower level of trust.      
 
If the web is only about information on the web, then there is a great challenge in 
determining the logic (existence, identity, co-reference, relation, conjunction, negation); 
proof and trustworthiness of items. As the web becomes increasingly about the physical 

 
41 
world, then it becomes essential to develop unequivocal links with that physical world. 
This can occur thorough built in sensors and/or through various degrees and levels of 
remote sensing: e.g. a video camera which checks whether the logical existence a 
painting (Mona Lisa is in Room x in the Louvre) still holds true at a given hour of a 
specific day (something below the time/space horizon).  
 
 
If we ignore the number of layers of the wedding cake and stand back to ask about 
fundamental characteristics of the World Wide Web (WWW) in its present state, three 
basic functions stand out. First, there is the identity and (self-) description of “objects,” 
which can be subdivided into a) objective facts and b) subjective interpretations of those 
facts. Second, there are pointers to that knowledge in the form of metadata and ontologies 
(classification systems, thesauri). Third, there are tools for annotating (e.g. W3’s 
Annotea), which are about adding comments and potentially new knowledge to the 
existing corpus.  
 
Implicit in this process is a gradual evolution of these three functions. The identity and 
description of digital objects needs to be aligned with trends towards digital libraries and 
virtual memory institutions as distributed repositories to assure preservation and access to 
enduring knowledge. The ontology efforts of the wedding cake need to be aligned with 
trends towards a virtual reference room. The annotation and commentary dimensions 
need to be expanded into fora for collaborative research and creativity. As these three 
evolve they will absorb some layers of the wedding cake. Meanwhile, the essential 
features of the cake that remain will serve as yeast in linking the three worlds of 
reference, description and new description which we have identified as fundamental for a 
future Distributed European Electronic Resource (DEER) and a long term World 
Distributed Electronic Resource (WONDER, figure 26).   
 
10. Conclusions 
 
The quest for truth and meaning is as old as civilisation itself. In Western civilisation, this 
quest experienced a serious step forward through the debate that emerged between Plato’s 
theoretical concept of universals versus Aristotle’s practical particulars or individuals. 
The advent of writing that came into fashion at the time of Plato and Aristotle, introduced 
concepts of substance, accidents and causes that helped define to the contours of Western 
knowledge for the next millennia.    
 
The centuries immediately after Plato and Aristotle established priorities that focussed on 
language and mathematics and emerged as the trivium (grammar, dialectic and rhetoric) 
and quadrivium (geometry, arithmetic, astronomy and music) to combine as the seven 
liberal arts. These eventually formed the undergraduate curriculum of the mediaeval 
university. The revival of Aristotle culminated with the Summas of Saint Thomas 
Aquinas in Paris. From this vision of Aristotle revived emerged theology, law and 
medicine as post-graduate subjects and many of the basic disciplines as we still know 
them today. 
 

 
42 
On the positive side this tradition of dialectic (logic), established distinctions between 
abstraction (divisio) and partition (partitio), which have subsequently evolved into 
Perreault’s subsumptive relations. Other efforts in logic also increased understanding of 
form(al) relations, while work in grammar led to insights into material relations qua 
syntax or function. 
 
On the negative side, these advances brought fundamental shifts in the kinds of questions 
asked. The rise of the quadrivium, which led to early modern science, brought a shift and 
narrowing of questions from Why? to How? The rise of trivium, with a gradual triumph 
of dialectic (logic) over grammar and rhetoric, led to a focus on Who? and What? Hence, 
advances in knowledge narrowed the scope of meaning, from the realms of cause and 
purpose (Why?) to the realms of existence (Who?, What?) and function (How?). To state 
the case dramatically and paradoxically: the limitations of today’s semantic web are 
indirectly consequences of historical shifts in knowledge organisation, particularly those 
in the period 1250-1650.   
 
These limitations do not pose a problem in the field of business where the logical 
categories of semantic primitives (figure 3) are very useful. As long as one deals with 
simple transactions, then logic is enough. So the strength of the present day semantic web 
is that it focuses on present day problems. The weakness of today’s semantic web is that 
it does not offer an historical framework that would make it useful for culture. Semantics 
needs to be seen in the context of a series of related sciences (figure 23).   
 
This paper claims that to make the semantic web useful for the cultural realm, five issues 
need to be addressed: 1) changing world views (such as the shift from substance to 
function); 2) inclusion of different types of definition; 3) distinctions between words and 
concepts (i.e. between natural language and terminology), 4) new links between classes 
of relations and 5) dynamic meaning. Earlier encyclopaedic efforts have focused on a 
history of answers. Underlying this there is a history of questions which potentially 
entails an expansion of the range of questions to include Who?, What?, Where?, When?, 
How? and Why? and their systematic combinations that can be used for new methods of 
access.  
 
Plato and Aristotle’s basic categories, aligned with Perreault’s general, subsumptive, 
determinative and ordinal relations, and the space-time horizon, clarify long-standing 
debates with respect to universals and particulars and open new horizons for future 
knowledge organisation.  
 
There is a need for networked, distributed, dynamic, multilingual, historical and cultural 
access to knowledge. There is a need for systems that take us through different kinds of 
relations; that distinguish between whole/part at both the universal and the particular 
levels; that allow us to see how definitions of terms change spatio-temporally (local, 
regional, national, international). Needed are new knowledge visualization tools to make 
this visible through three-dimensional and multi-dimensional knowledge spaces: to 
visualize clearly whether we are in the mineral, vegetable, animal, or human/societal 

 
43 
realm. This will enable us to explore other ways of perceiving; different ways of 
knowing, different mindsets and world-views.      
 
At WWW 2003 (Budapest), Jim Hendler, explained that the semantic web offers 
complete solutions to all the problems that we never knew we had. As we have shown, 
scholars have spent the past two and half millennia identifying real problems entailed 
with meaning and significance, distinctions between words and concepts, problems of 
multiple languages. It would be wise to expand our quest for a semantic web by 
answering such challenges. If so the semantic web will tackle central concerns of 
humanity rather than incidental questions of hypothetical scheduling which any good 
secretary solves on a daily basis. 
 
Digital media178 thus invite a new, cumulative access to cultural heritage with respect to 
dynamic knowledge, new overviews and understanding of how perceptions, theories and 
world-views differ, how meanings change temporally and spatially and introduce further 
chapters in the evolution of knowledge. A semantic web that integrates these challenges 
would take us towards a Distributed European Electronic Resource (DEER),179 with three 
basic components: a) virtual reference rooms; b) virtual libraries in the form of 
distributed repositories; c) a forum for collaborative research and creativity180 and 
gradually the same on a world scale (WONDER).   
 
When computers were invented, their purpose was computing in the sense of number-
crunching. This goal expanded to include texts, images, media, and multi-media, as 
computers became memory devices for content. As always there are dangers that the 
tools designed to help us, become an end in themselves: merely providing solutions for 
the problems, which they create. However, as we have shown there are also other 
possibilities for semantic computers and the semantic web: to view content through 
mindsets and world-views different than our own; to look at known content in unknown 
ways; to see synthetic patterns of meaning: not just as random memory devices, but as 
tools for interpretation: to expand our horizons from narrow logical categories to the 
entire range of meaningful human experience.    
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This paper outlines the needs of an historian of science and culture, who has followed 
more closely than most humanists, the evolution of the Internet and the World Wide Web 
over the past three decades. It has benefited from lively discussion with many pioneers of 
the web including Douglas Engelbart, Ted Nelson, Leonard Kleinrock†, John Postel†, 
Mark Weiser, Larry Masinter, John Gage, Robert Cailliau, Tim Berners Lee, and Ora 
Lassila. I am grateful to each of them for expanding my understanding of both potentials 
and limitations of today’s web.   
 
The paper is dedicated to Dr. Ingetraut Dahlberg whose pioneering work has been an 
inspiration for the past twenty years. Her deep understanding of the historical dimensions 
of knowledge organisation deserves far greater attention. I am deeply grateful to her for 
carefully reading the text and offering valuable corrections and suggestions. I am grateful 

 
44 
to my friend, Professor Michael Giesecke, for the stimulation he has provided concerning 
the role of printing in the re-organisation of knowledge. I thank my colleague and friend, 
Dr. Eric McLuhan, for stimulating my thoughts with respect to Aristotle’s causes. I am 
grateful to my colleague, Johan van der Walle; my doctoral student, Nik Baerten (who 
also produced figures 9-14) and my former assistant, Alexander Bielowski for kindly 
reading the text and offering helpful suggestions and criticisms. I am grateful to Suzanne 
Keene and Francesca Monti for helping define the vision for a DEER. I thank Vasily and 
Alexander Churanov for helping with SUMS prototypes. 
 
I thank Traugott Koch and the four reviewers for their very constructive criticisms, which 
have helped considerably to clarify the issues. I thank Steve Hitchcock reading the text, 
suggesting minor improvements and for translating the .doc format into pdf format.  
Finally I am grateful to Dean Paul Tummers and the Faculty of Cultural Sciences of the 
University of Maastricht for providing me with time to develop these ideas in peace. 

 
45 
Appendix 1. Changing World Views   
 
Figure 27. Three (Language) Arts (Trivium) and Four (Mathematical) “Sciences” 
(Quadrivum) comprising the Seven Liberal Arts.181 
 
A 1.1 Language and Mathematics  
  
As Havelock182 and others have made us aware, the shift from an oral culture of the pre-
Socratics183 to a written culture at the time of Plato, changed in fundamental ways the 
relation of thoughts, spoken and written words; the relation of words and numbers and 
even definitions of knowledge itself. According to the Bible, the “word” (logos) was 
linked with powers of the Divine from the time of creation. Thereafter, this creative logos 
as typically linked with the spoken and later with the written word (which continued to be 
read out loud until at least the fourth century). The spoken word in this sense was the 
domain of communicators such as a shaman, high priest, prophet, bard and epic poet. As 
a result, the study of the structure of words in language as interpretation of words,184 now 
known as grammar, was intimately connected with study of effects of the spoken word in 
language, now known as rhetoric. With the advent of the written word, logos also became 
the domain of the professions of philosopher and the scholar, especially with respect to 
Dialectic, or Logic, which focussed on analysis, dissection and specialization. 
 
By contrast, Grammar and Rhetoric, which were concerned with interpretation, focussed 
on synthesis and integration. Marshall McLuhan in a wide-ranging doctoral dissertation 
traced the history of this tension between grammar and dialectic from Antiquity through 
to the seventeenth century in order to show how the trivium of grammar, dialectic and 
rhetoric changed dramatically over the centuries.185     
 
Eric McLuhan186 has argued that dialectic, as the analytical, silent word, brought a shift 
in the definition of formal cause to mean a blueprint: i.e. an emphasis on a static, rational, 
dispositio to the detriment and eventual exclusion of the irrational, fluid and creative 
aspects of inventio, elocutio and decorum traditionally entailed in epic, oral versions of 
words (logos).187 In all this, the champions of the silent word, the philosophers and 
dialecticians, gradually silenced the voices of grammarians and rhetoricians. In the 
process the champions of the silent, non-secret and subsequently public arts, increasingly 
minimized the importance of magic and other secret arts. Ultimately all three subjects of 
Language 
Trivium 
Words  
Grammar  
 
Structure of Language   
Dialectic (Logic)   
Meaning of Language 
Rhetoric  
 
Effects of Language 
 
Mathematics 
Quadrivium 
Numbers 
Arithmetic 
 
Discrete Quantity 
Figures  
Geometry 
 
Continuous Quantity  
Music   
 
Applied Discrete Quantity 
Astronomy 
 
Applied Continuous Quantity 
 
 

 
46 
the trivium were reduced in status to become merely the trivial arts in the face of 
mathematics and the sciences. 
 
These simple shifts of disciplines had profound consequences on both questions and 
semantics (meaning). In Aristotle’s time when philosophy focused on the four causes, 
semantics, the meaning of things entailed all six kinds of questions but emphasized Why? 
questions. One would have expected this to continue with the rise of the trivium 
(grammar, logic and rhetoric). In practice, as we have noted, the logicians were often 
pitted against the grammarians and rhetoricians and ultimately gained the upper hand. 
The triumph of logic meant that problems of truth became limited to Who? and What? 
questions (existence, identity, co-reference, relation, conjunction and negation). The gain 
was the emergence of a small area of reality where one could determine truth. The loss 
was a) that Where? When? How? and Why? questions faded into the background and b) 
that semantics and meaning became limited almost exclusively to Who? and What? 
Exceptional philosophers fought these limitations. Kant spent a lifetime trying to re-
instate questions of When? And Where? (time and space). Yet in a sense Western 
philosophy has never recovered from the shift in disciplines that led to the triumph of 
logic. A fundamental challenge for the semantic web is to extend the scope of semantics 
(meaning) from Who? and What? to the full range of questions including: Where? When? 
How? and Why?      
 
Some have argued that the origins of numbers and arithmetic were intimately connected 
with the advent of the alphabet in the third millennium B.C.188 In any case, the advent of 
the written alphabet in the 5th Century B.C. brought new prominence to number and new 
emphasis on Aristotle’s category of quantity. Aristotle and his successors distinguished 
between discrete quantity (arithmetic) and continuous quantity (geometry) as well as their 
applied forms, music and astronomy. These four subjects became known as the 
quadrivium. The combination of the trivium and quadrivium became known as the seven 
liberal arts (figure 27). Subjects such as geography (Where?) and chronology (When?) 
remained auxiliary sciences.   
 
Plato’s Academy in Athens remained an important source for Western learning for a 
millennium. The rise of Christianity from the first century onwards and especially after 
the conversion of Constantine (c.312 A.D.)189 saw increasing emphasis on Plato’s 
approach with respect to the metaphysics of universals. The neo-Platonist, Plotinus, 
changed the position of the Academy from scepticism to a new religious view.190  
 
Aristotle had identified four kinds of being, namely, lifeless, alive, human and godly. The 
neo-Platonists were concerned with identifying the steps in this hierarchy between 
substance and via material, animate, sensitive and rational levels to the human. Here 
Plotinus played an important role. His student Porphyry (3rd century A.D) in his 
commentary on Aristotle’s Categories, created the so-called Tree of Porphyry, a 
classification system based on the dichotomy of classes, which John Sowa called the first 
semantic network, in the sense of a diagrammatic set of links (figures 28a-b).191 
Porphyry’s successors, Iamblichus, Proclus and Pseudo-Dionysius developed these 
views.  

 
47 
Porphyry and the neo-Platonists combined Aristotle’s basic ideas of a) classification 
(genus, species, individuals); b) categories and c) assumptions that man was at the centre 
of creation. This combination lent itself admirably to the goals of the Christian Church. A 
constraint of this approach was that it did not immediately foster study of how genus, 
species and individual applied to other levels of being.  
 
 
A1.2 Chain of Being to Disciplines   
 
Lovejoy has masterfully told the story of how the neo-Platonic tradition led to the idea of 
a Great Chain of Being.192 With the closing of the Platonic Academy (529 AD) 193 by the 
Emperor Justinian, the Platonic dominance slowly faded. Even so hierarchies of being 
continued to play a central role for at least another millennium. One of the most 
intriguing of these attempts was Raymond Lull (c. 1235-c.1316), a Franciscan friar, who 
adapted Porphyry’s tree into a mechanical method for generating questions and answers 
in his Great Art (Ars magna, 1274).194  We have noted elsewhere (section 7) how Lull’s 
attempt to classify all questions pertaining to knowledge remains of interest today. 
 
The revival of classical learning and especially Aristotle began sporadically in the 
Carolingian era (800+) and gained increasing momentum with the initiatives of Abbot  
Suger (Saint Denis, c.1142) and Abbot Peter the Venerable (Cluny), who inspired prog-
rammes of translations of the classics and major texts.195 This introduced a new chapter 
in the European consciousness, whereby one studied even the ideas of those to whom one 
was opposed: e.g. the Koran.196 This mindset increased the scope of learning. 
 
The rediscovery of the Aristotelian heritage made clear that what had seemed as an 
either/or choice between universals and particulars was actually a challenge of how one 
relates the two. Thus it was that reconciling universals and particulars became a burning 
question of the High Middle Ages and played a major part in discussion from the time of 
Hugh of Saint Victor and Abelard through to Thomas Aquinas. Meanwhile, Christian 
thinkers such as Saint Augustine had developed parallels between the Book of God 
(Bible) and the Book of Nature:  
 
It is the divine page that you must listen to; it is the book of the universe that you 
must observe. The pages of Scripture can only be read by those who know how to 
read and write, while everyone, even the illiterate, can read the book of the 
universe.197  
 
Thus nature was for the illiterate what the Bible was for the literate. In the sixth century, 
Pope Gregory the Great made another comparison, that pictures were for the illiterate 
what the Bible was for the literate.198 In the course of the next millennium both nature 
and visual images, and increasingly visual images of nature, became domains of the 
literate and cornerstones to a new scientific literacy. Ironically, as general literacy 
increased and more persons had access to the Bible, it was Nature in its new scientific 
forms that became the new domain of the scientifically literate.  
 

 
48 
 
 
Figures 28a-28b.  The tree of Porphyry in the version of Peter of Spain (1239), 199 and in 
a fresco of the library at Schussenried, near Ulm, Germany.200 Sowa has called 
Porphyry’s tree the first semantic web.  
 
 
 
Supreme Genus   
 
Substance  
Differentiae 
 
Material  
 
Immaterial   
Subordinate Genera 
 
 
Body  
 
 
 
Spirit 
Differentiae  
 
Animate  
 
 
Inanimate  
Subordinate Genera  
 
 
Living  
 
 
Mineral 
Differentiae  
 
Sensitive  
 
 
Insensitive 
Proximate genera  
 
 
Animal  
 
 
Plant 
Differentiae  
 
Rational  
 
 
Irrational  
 
Species  
 
 
Human   
 
Beast 
 
 
Individuals 
 
 
Socrates Plato Aristotle 

 
49 
 
Figure 29. The three parts of Vincent of Beauvais’ Speculum Maius and the apocryphal 
fourth part.201   
 
The comparison between the Book of Scripture and the Book of Nature became much 
more important in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries through authors such as Hugh of 
St. Victor (1096-1141),202 who distinguished between three stages: thought (with which 
we see God in nature), meditation (with which we see God within ourselves), and 
contemplation (with which we see God as if face to face),203 and Saint Bonaventure  
(1221-1274),204 ideas which were developed in the natural theology of Ramon Sibuda (fl. 
1430s), which inspired Montaigne’s Apology of Raymond Sebond, Galileo’s famous 
metaphor that the Book of Nature was written in the language of mathematics205 and 
culminated in the Natural Theology of Paley in the 19th century.       
 
In the thirteenth century, these ideas were developed by both the Dominicans and the 
Franciscans. The Dominican, Vincent of Beauvais (c.1190-1264),206 made a compendium 
of all knowledge at the time in his Greatest Mirror (Speculum maius, figure 29). 
Although still very much written with a religious goal, the first book contained a 
compendium of the natural world in “thirty-two books and 3718 chapters,” and dealt with 
“theology, psychology, physiology, cosmography, physics, botany, zoology, mineralogy,  
agriculture.”207 His younger contemporaries Albert the Great (1206-1280), and Thomas 
Aquinas (c.1225-1274), continued this quest for a synthesis of all known knowledge. 
 
Meanwhile, Franciscans such as Robert Grosseteste,208 one of the founders of Oxford 
university, focused on the importance of experience and experiment in natural 
philosophy, ideas which his student, Roger Bacon took further. At the time, two major 
approaches to knowledge were emerging. One, championed by some Franciscans, 
focussed on inner spiritualism, claiming that knowledge was faith and prepared the way  
for an Augustinian revival after 1270 that included Plotinian and neo-Platonic strands. 
 
A second approach, championed by the Dominican, Albert the Great and then his student, 
Thomas Aquinas, resulted in a summation or Summa of all knowledge in 100 volumes. In 
retrospect, the essence of these results can be reduced to the idea that the way to truth lies 
not only in theory or practice, but in a combination of both.209 Even so, the thrust of 
Aquinas’ work emphasized an Aristotelianism that relied on logic and tended to equate 
knowledge with reason. 
 
Pope Clement IV (Viterbo) wanted to find a middle path between the Platonism of the 
Franciscans and Aristotelianism of the Dominicans.210 In 1265,211 he commissioned 
Roger Bacon to write the Greatest Work (Opus Maius), which gave an epistemological 
1. Nature  
(Speculum naturale)  
 
 
2. History  
(Speculum historiale)  
 
3. Instruction  
(Speculum doctrinale)  
 
 
4. (Moral) 
(Speculum morale) 

 
50 
 
Figure 30. Aristotle’s four categories of being and basic disciplines of knowledge. 
 
as well as a theological basis for a new emphasis on visual veracity through visual 
representation. Whereas Bacon's predecessors had seen the visible as merely a stepping- 
stone towards the invisible, Bacon claimed that the visible played a crucial role in this 
understanding. Indeed, he claimed, that an exact knowledge of scientific phenomena was 
pre-requisite for an understanding of the spiritual sense that lay buried within. This led to 
a new coupling between theoretical quantity and practical measurement. 
 
In the Greek approach, geometry (continuous quantity) and arithmetic (discrete quantity) 
remained independent subjects. One of the consequences of the approach outlined by 
Bacon and his contemporaries was the rise of a practical geometry that linked 
geometrical forms with measured arithmetical quantities in both surveying and 
astronomy. In the short term these activities remained largely pragmatic. But by the 
sixteenth century as the metaphysical frameworks of Aristotle and Ptolemy were fully 
recovered, and required new orders of precise instrumentation that led to the development 
of universal measuring devices such as the proportional compass and the sector, this led 
to a new synthesis of theory and practice, a gradual shift from the Why? to the How? and 
the origins of early modern science. 
 
From the eleventh through the sixteenth centuries, the focus of learning also shifted as 
universities in a modern sense emerged in Bologna, Paris, Padua, Oxford and spread 
throughout Europe. The liberal arts became the basis for undergraduate education, while 
law (Bologna), medicine (Padua) and theology (Paris) became the key subjects in post-
graduate studies.  
 
Increasingly, this focus on the godly and the human expanded to include the alive and the 
lifeless under the heading of natural philosophy, which subsequently evolved into modern 
scientific and other disciplines (figure 30). These disciplines are of interest for us because 
they were starting points for many of the early classification systems of book publishers 
and libraries and remain the basis for major systems such as the Library of Congress and 
Dewey Systems today. Samurin212 has traced these developments in his monumental 
work on the history of classification systems. 
  
A1.3 Astronomy and Physics  
 
Of all the disciplines in the seven liberal arts, astronomy played a special role. Initially it 
served as the practical application of continuous quantity, i.e. geometry. Already in 
Babylonian times, as the chief method for determining events such as eclipses and 
Lifeless (Inanimate) 
Alive (Animate)  
Human   
 
Godly 
 
 
 
Mineral  
 
Vegetable, Animal 
Human  
 
Divine  
Natural Philosophy 
Medicine 
 
Law 
 
 
Theology 
Mineralogy 
 
Botany, Biology   
 
 
 
Humanities  
Earth Sciences   
Life Sciences 
 
Arts 
 
 
Theology, Religion  
 

 
51 
equinoxes, it had a role as the first of the predictive sciences. Plato’s Timaeus confirms 
the close links between astronomy and cosmology. It is said that Plato commissioned 
Euclid to write his Elements in order to provide these cosmological ideas with a proper 
mathematical basis. This helps explain why the subsequent, apocryphal books of Euclid 
focussed on description and construction of the five Platonic solids, which later became a 
major theme in Renaissance science and art through linear perspective.  
 
Study of the heavens was seen as a key to understanding the earth. Accordingly, Ptolemy 
(fl. 150 AD) became author of key works on astronomy (Almagest) and geography, 
which led to a tradition of creating terrestrial and celestial orbs in tandem. While the 
Greek approach emphasized the importance of observation in creating models of the 
universe, it led to a method of saving appearances.213 The Arabic tradition introduced 
new concerns for measurement, instruments and observations but it was not until the 
advent of the telescope and the efforts of Tycho Brahe at the turn of the 17th century that 
these observations reached a precision that allowed Kepler and Galileo to find 
confirmation for what Copernicus had proposed in 1543. 214 
 
The nexus of scientists surrounding Brahe, Kepler and Galileo was of crucial importance 
because these same persons building on Mediaeval Arabic and Latin traditions,215 
developed the new instruments for surveying the earth that led to trigonometry and 
logarithms; and the instruments whereby physics and mechanics became the basis for a 
new world view. By the eighteenth century one tended to contrast the predictive sciences 
(astronomy, physics) and the descriptive sciences (biology, botany etc). Physics, which in 
the Aristotelian tradition had been linked with organic metaphors, emerged as the basis of 
what became the mechanical sciences.      
 
The contributions of Kepler and Galileo brought a shift from the Ptolemaic to the 
Copernican worldview. Kuhn described this as a paradigm shift as if there were a 
discontinuity between the two systems. This is true with respect to the systems explaining 
the phenomena, but not qua the phenomena themselves. A change in the framework did 
not destroy the continuity and cumulative gathering of reliable observations. Copernicus, 
Kepler and Galileo could not have achieved their insights without the knowledge that the 
Ptolemaic tradition had accumulated. We need new systems, which help us to trace a) the 
cumulative nature of a scientific corpus of facts, while at the same time identifying b) key 
moments when a new explanation brings a disjuncture in how these facts are seen as 
relating to each other.     
 
Today’s semantic web focuses on facts and assumes that the contemporary world-view of 
Western science is all that counts. A semantic web for culture needs to trace the evolution 
of different world views in order to help us understand how the questions we ask and the 
facts that emerge are profoundly influenced by these world views. Facts are not enough. 
We need to understand what Aby Warburg called Orientation in terms of world-views, 
Weltanschauungen, cosmologies and cosmogonies.   

 
52 
Appendix 2.  From Inanimate Being to Mineralogy and Chemistry  
  
In Antiquity, Theophrastus (372-287 B.C.) and Pliny (77 A.D.) classified minerals 
mainly in terms of practical uses. Geber (721 - 803) proposed a classification of minerals 
based on the external characters and on some physical properties such as fusibility, 
malleability and fracture. Physical classification was developed by Avicenna (980-1037), 
Agricola (1494-1555), and greatly developed in the early nineteenth century by Werner 
and Mohs and Huay (1801). Weiss (1780-1856) introduced the seven crystal systems 
(1815) and Mitscherlich discovered isomorphy (1819) and polymorphy (1824). Berzelius 
(1819) proposed a chemical classification, which was taken much further by Dana216 in 
his classification; Rose, who produced a chemical-morphological mineral system; E.S. 
Dana (1892) and by von Groth. 
 
After 1913, when the first structures of minerals were determined, the structural criterion 
for classification was taken into account. This chemical-plus-structural classification was 
applied to individual branches and eventually to the domain of minerals by H. Strunz 
(1941), which remains one of the basic classifications today (figure 31). J. Lima-de-Faria 
(1983) proposed a structural classification of minerals, which has led to structural 
systematics and five main categories of structures: 1) atomic; 2) group; 3) chain, 4) sheet 
and 5) framework according to their dimensionality (cf. Appendix 1).  
 
The development of these breakthroughs in crystallography and chemistry through 
Dalton, Gay-Lussac, Avogadro and Mendeleev in the 1860s and 1870s217 went hand in 
hand with the breakthroughs in physics that led to the classification of the elements and 
the development of the periodic table.218 As a result, chemistry also shifted from a strictly 
physical subject into atomic levels whereby it became closely linked with the study of 
gases, and also developed its own classification systems.219 There are now specialized 
classifications for organic chemistry.220 
Figure 31. Basic categories of the Strunz Classification of Minerals.221 
I Elements  
II Sulfides  
III Halogenides  
IV Oxides and Hydroxides  
V Nitrates, Carbonates and Borates  
VI Sulfates, Chromates, Molybdates and Tungstates  
VII Phosphates, Arsenates and Vanadates  
VIII Silicates  
Tectosilicates  
Phyllosilicates  
Inosilicates  
Cyklosilicates  
Sorosilicates  
Nesosilicates  
Unclassified Silicates  
IX Organic Compounds  
 
 

 
53 
Appendix 3.   History of Mineral Classification Systems by the Commission on 
Classification of Minerals. See: http://www.dst.unipi.it/ima/commissi/CCM2.html 
  
“It is well known that the classification of minerals has changed throughout the 
ages the criterion of classification following the development of the mineralogical 
science. The criterion was first based on practical purposes, then on physical 
properties, later on chemical properties. Mineral classification today is largely 
structural, when the relation and hierarchy between minerals are based on 
structure similarity.  
The ancient classification of minerals was mainly based on their practical uses, 
minerals being classified as gemstones, pigments, ores, etc., according to 
Theophrastos (372-287 B.C.) and to Plinius (77 A.D.). In the middle ages Geber 
(Jabir Ibn Hayyaan, 721 - 803) proposed a classification of minerals based on the 
external characters and on some physical properties such as fusibility, maleability 
and fracture. This physical classification was developed by Avicenna (Ibn Sina, 
980-1037), Agricola (1494-1555) and A.G.Werner (1749-1817), published by his 
student, L. A. Emmerling (1799). This system was substantially refined by F. 
Mohs (1773-1839) as Natural-History System of Mineralogy (Dresden, 1820), 
and used in the first editions of the System of Mineralogy by J.D. Dana (since 
1837). With Werner the physical classification attained its maturity, and was 
generally adopted at the end of the XVIII century. However, it became far too 
complicated. For instance, Werner mentioned 54 varieties for colour. 
A.F.Cronstedt (1722-1765) seems to be the first to have outlined a classification 
whereby the chemical properties were taken first, followed by the physical 
properties. R. J. Hauy (1743-1822), in Traité de Minéralogie (1801), presented a 
mineral classification based on the nature of metals or, as he would say now, the 
nature of cations. With the development of chemistry the chemical properties 
became more and more important, and J.J.Berzelius (1779-1848) in 1819 
proposed a chemical classification of minerals. He recognized that minerals with 
the same non-metal (anion or anionic group) had similar chemical properties and 
resembled one another far more than minerals with a common metal. He 
considered minerals as salts of anions and anionic complexes: F-, Cl-, Br-, I-, O2-, 
S2-, Se2-, Te2-, NO3-, CO32-, BO33-, SO42-, PO43-, SiO44-, BO43-, that is to 
say, as chlorides, sulphates, silicates, etc., and not as minerals of zinc, copper, etc. 
(1814, 1824). At this time Christian Samuel Weiss (1780-1856) introduced the 
seven crystal systems (1815) and Mitscherlich discovered isomorphy (1819) and 
polymorphy (1824). J.M.Dana, the founder of Dana System of Mineralogy, 
strongly contributed to the development of the chemical approach (1850, 1854, 3-
rd and 4-th editions). With this knowledge, Gustav Rose (1798-1873) combined 
chemistry, isomorphy and morphology to produce a chemical-morphological 
mineral system: I - Elements, II - Sulfides, III - Halides, and IV - Oxygen 
compounds, divided into simple and complex oxides, as carbonates, phosphates, 
silicates, borates, sulfates. The highest standard of this classification was achieved 
in the System of Mineralogy by E. S. Dana (1892) and in five editions of 
Tabellarische Übersicht der Mineralien nach ihrer Kristallographisch-chemischen 
Beziehungen (1874, 1882, …1921) by P. v. Groth (1843-1927), that made this 

 
54 
classification widely accepted. After 1913, when the first structures of minerals 
were determined the structural criterium for classification was taken into account. 
The first classifications of this type, which take in consideration the distribution 
of bonds in a structure, are that of silicates proposed by Machatschki (1928), 
Naray-Szabo (1930) and developed by Bragg (1930). This chemical-plus-
structural classification has been applied to many other branches of mineralogy 
such as fluoraluminates (Pabst, 1950), aluminosilicates (Liebau, 1956), silicates 
and other minerals with tetrahedral complexes (Zoltai, 1960), phosphates (Liebau, 
1966; Corbridge, 1971), sulfosalts (Makovicky, 1981, 1993), borates (Strunz, 
1997).H. Strunz introduced a chemical-structural classification of the entire 
domain 
of 
minerals 
(Mineralogische 
Tabellen, 
1941), 
followed 
by 
A.S.Povarennykh with a modified classification (1966 in Russian, 1972 in 
English). The chemical-structural classification of H.Strunz has gone through a 
number of editions, and is currently in the process of being refined in the light of 
recent crystal-structure determinations. In the current system, minerals are divided 
into 10 major compositional classes (1) elements, 2) sulfides, 3) halides, 4) 
oxides, 5) nitrates, carbonates, 6) borates, 7) sulfates, 8) phosphates, 9) silicates, 
10) organic compounds) which are subdivided into divisions, families and groups 
on the basis of chemical composition and crystal structure. The paragenetic 
classification (Kostov, 1975) is based not only on chemical and structural 
pecularities of minerals, but also on the geochemical similarities of their main 
cations as well as on their morphology. The structural classification of minerals 
was first proposed by J. Lima-de-Faria in 1983. It corresponds to the application 
of the general structural classification of inorganic compounds (Lima-de-Faria & 
Figueiredo, 1976) to minerals, which are an integral part of them. The most 
general approach to the structural systematics is based on the analysis of the 
strength distribution in crystal structures and of the directional character of the 
bonds. There are atoms that are more tightly bounded, and these assemblages are 
called structural units. They are considered as the main basis for the structural 
classification of minerals. Thus there are five main categories of structures: 
atomic or close-packed, group, chain, sheet and framework according to their 
dimensionality. This approach to the analysis of the crystal structures was 
approved by IUC Commission on Crystallographic Nomenclature (Lima-de-Faria 
et al., 1990). Hawthorn in 1984 and 1985 also proposed a structural classification 
of minerals based on the polymerization of coordination polyhedra. Lima-de-
Faria, in 1994, applied the structural classification to the most common minerals 
(about 500 minerals organized in 230 structure types). Detailed structural 
classification of silicates was elaborated by F.Liebau (1985).  
References on the subject:  
- Systematics of Crystal Structures and Crystallochemical Classification of Minerals: In: 
Advanced Mineralogy V.1 (Marfunin A.S., ed.), Springer Verlag, Berlin,1994.p.147-167. 
- Lima-de-Faria J. Structural classification of mineral, an Introduction. Kluwer Acad., 
1994, 346 p. 
- Strunz H. Chemical-structural mineral classification. Principles and summary of system. 
Neues Jahrbuch fur Mineralogie, Monatshefte, 1996, H.10, 435-445.” 
 

 
55 
Appendix 4. From Animate Being to Taxonomy  
 
In Antiquity, after Aristotle, Theophrastus (371-286 BC) has been called the most 
important botanist;222 Pliny surveyed the known world in his Natural History, 
Dioscorides (c. 40-90), provided objective descriptions of 600 plants,223 which continued 
to be known in the Middle Ages, and sparked renewed studies in the Renaissance.   
 
In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries there was a sharp rise in the discovery of 
new species (figure 32), partly because of the rise of printing, partly through the rise of 
botanical gardens at universities beginning with Padua in 1543. This massive rise in new 
species continued in the 1600s and especially in the 1700s as explorers became ever more 
systematic in their exploration of the earth. Linnaeus had no less than nineteen students 
on the voyages of Captain Cook and other explorers.224 
 
Beginning with his System of Nature (1735), Carl Linnaeus225 introduced a fundamental 
contribution to the development of modern taxonomy through a binomial naming system 
and by including a number of categories above the traditional genus and species as 
introduced by Aristotle and developed by Neo-Platonists such as Porphyry (figure 33). 
Linnaeus’ system was initially static, but he gradually abandoned this idea that species 
were fixed and invariable. 
 
The late 1700s saw the rise of more systematic collections at royal gardens in France 
(Potager du Roi),226 and in England (Kew Gardens,227 which now contains over seven 
million reference specimens.228  Jussieu (1707-1836) established the major subdivisions 
of the plant kingdom, while Cuvier (1769-1832) established major embranchments, now 
known as phyla, for the animal kingdom.229 The 18th century also saw the rise of natural 
systems of classification by Adamson, Jussieu, and in the nineteenth century by Bentham 
and Hooker working at Kew.230 Linnaeus had consciously created an artificial system of 
classification. These advances introduced the idea that classifications of the world were 
classing nature and reality itself.  
 
 
Figure 32. Ancient authors and key moments in publication of new species after 1500.231 
Year  
 
Author  
 
 
Number of Species   
 
320-285 BC 
Theophrastus  
 
 
500 
40-80     AD 
Dioscorides  
 
 
6001  
1532 
 
Otto Brunfels  
 
 
800  
1551 
 
Adam Lonicer 
 
 
879  
1552 
 
Hieronymus Bock 
 
240  
1552: 
 
Rembertus Dodonaeus  
 
884  
1586 
 
Jacques Dalechamp  
 
3,000+  
1623 
 
Caspar Bauhin 
 
 
6,000+ 
2003 
 
Kew Gardens  
 
 
13,733+1 
 
 

 
56 
Figure 33. Levels in Linnaeus’ classification of humans232 (Cf. Porphyry in figures 28 a-
b).   
 
The early twentienth century saw a fundamental advance in the life sciences of botany 
and biology through D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson’s Growth and Form (1917) wherein 
he demonstrated that form and structure were intimately connected with function. For 
instance, since weight cubes as volume doubles, there are natural limits to the amount 
that a legged animal can grow and still support itself. At an anecdotal level this explained 
why elephants cannot jump proportionately further than grasshoppers. At a fundamental 
level it confirmed that scale is not arbitrary: it plays a central role in determining 
function. These insights created a bridge between the predictive sciences, and descriptive 
sciences (beschreibende Wissenschaften), and technical sciences.233  
 
The nineteenth century, introduced the idea of evolution (cf. section 5), through the ideas 
a) that species have their own histories (phylogeny) and b) that species have variable 
populations (rather than ideal types as Aristotle claimed). The earliest systems were 
timeless in the sense that they assumed classification was something static. In Britain, Sir 
John Hunter (1728-1793) stressed the relationship between structure and function in all 
kinds of living creatures and fostered the study of comparative anatomy through his 
collection.234 Meanwhile, on the continent, the study of fossils and embryos led via 
scientists such as Treviranus (1776-1837) and Tiedemann (1781-1861) to a science of 
ontogeny. Karl Ernst von Baer (1792-1876), after studying Comparative Anatomy and 
Ontogeny with Dollinger at Würzburg, directly examined the physiological and 
anatomical development of embryos and fetuses in many different species of mammals, 
birds, fishes, and invertebrates in his History of the Evolution of Animals (1828, 1837).235 
Through the work of von Baer, phylogeny emerged as “the genesis and evolution of the 
phylum or racial evolution of an animal or plant type (as distinguished from ontogenesis, 
the evolution of the individual)”.236 These ideas of phylogeny were further developed by 
Ernst Haeckel in his General Morphology (1866), which Darwin (1872) cited, referring 
to phylogeny as “the laws of descent of all organic beings.”237  
 
Von Baer went on to compare the development of an individual with the development of 
a species. These insights were remembered as von Baer’s law, whereby “ontogeny is the 
recapitulation of phylogeny,”238 and were restated more explicitly and forcefully by Ernst 
Haeckel (1866).239 The latter 19th and the early 20th centuries applied these ideas naïvely 
to the development of cultures and civilizations and then went on to apply them mistak-
enly and tragically to racial questions. While the extreme comparisons of phylogeny-
Kingdom:   
Animalia  
Phylum: 
      Chordata 
Subphylum:    Vertebrata 
     Class: 
       Mammalia 
           Subclass:           Theria 
                  Infraclass:       Eutheria 
                       Order:            Primates 
                            Suborder:        Anthropoidea 
                                  Superfamily:   Hominoidea 
                                       Family:          Hominidae 
                                             Genus:           Homo sapiens      
                                                   Species:                     

 
57 
ontology have since been challenged they have introduced an important temporal 
dimension into models of development. Haeckel’s ideas, for instance, served as a starting 
point for Piaget’s developmental psychology and genetic epistemology. 
 
Engler and Prantl’s Natural Plant Families (1887-1915) further developed such 
evolutionary ideas. Their assumption that simple equals primitive meant that one started 
with primitive and evolved towards the complex. This remained a standard work until 
about 1980.240 Subsequent evidence from the study of fossils as well as anatomy 
suggested that the reverse could also be true: “that many seemingly simple structures 
evolved from more complex structures via reductions.”241 This led to a general reorga-
nisation of the discipline as taxonomy and systematics emerged as independent fields.242 
There are now conferences on the history of classification,243 databases for taxono-
mists;244 there is a world taxonomist database,245 and global taxonomy initiative.246 At the 
same time, the traditional term, ontology, was introduced by computer scientists as 
another name for what was previously termed “classification” in the sense of “classifi-
cation system.” Now it became relativized to such a degree that a search for multiple 
ontologies in December 2003 yielded over 42,000 hits in Google.  
 
Once one abandoned the assumption that classification was merely passive recording of 
an existing static order, classification emerged as a science, which had to define its own 
methods. Hereby, the scope of classification expanded from definition of individual 
classes to include relations between these classes: a study of substance and function. 
 
Aristotle and Linnaeus attempted to classify living things in terms of two kingdoms, 
namely plants and animals. Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) added the protist kingdom (1866) 
and also introduced the monera kingdom, although these were not immediately accepted 
by the entire community.  
 
Herbert F. Copeland (1902-1968) championed the protist Kingdom (protistica) for all the 
nucleated microorganisms. Robert H. Whitaker (1959)247 suggested that fungi should be 
raised to the level of kingdom and proposed (1969)248 that the two kingdoms should be 
expanded to five, as namely: Monerans, Protists, Fungi, Plants and Animals (figure 
34).249 The development of DNA analysis in the 1980s led some to propose a six-
kingdom model (figure 35).  In the past generation, this had led to new systems by 
Cronquist250 and Takhtajan251; fields such cladistics (Hennig),252 the rise of systematics, 
which has been called expressing relationships,253 molecular systematics254 (Palmer),255 
and biosystematics.256 
 
In the course of the past centuries it has become increasingly clear that there are a series 
of criteria for deciding these developments, including homology,257 analogy, parallelism, 
and convergence.258 Hierarchy is now a topic in itself.259 Study of similarity now occurs 
on a number of different fronts including: morphological (structures using homology, 
analogy), cellular, biochemical, genetic, chromosomal and embryological.260 Other 
problems with definition of species have also been recognized. At least 22 definitions of 
species have been identified,261 which in turn has led to a taxonomy of species 
definitions.262 Work in ethno-biology and the study of folk systematics has revealed that  

 
58 
 
Figures 34-35. View of the five kingdoms of life according to Benjamin Cummings and 
of the six kingdoms of life according to G. Ramel.263 
 
 
Kingdom When Evolved 
Structure  
Photosynthesis 
Prokaryotes:-  
 
 
Bacteria 
3 to 4 billion years ago 
Unicellular 
Sometimes 
Archaea 
3 to 4 billion years ago 
Unicellular 
No 
Eukaryotes:-   
 
 
Protista 
1.5 billion years ago 
Unicellular  
Sometimes 
Fungi 
1 billion years ago 
Unicellular or Multicellular 
No 
Animalia 
700 million years ago 
Multicellular 
No 
Pl
t
500
illi
M lti
ll l
Y

 
59 
so-called primitive people develop classifications of species, which are much closer qua 
results to the latest scientific methods than was previously assumed. In many cases local 
cultures have identified complexities not recoded by standard science. 
 
Interestingly and paradoxically, research into biodiversity has provided new rationales 
and incentives for cultural diversity.264 Hence, the study of ways to classify nature is 
taking us back to study more closely the different cultures, which allow us to classify 
nature in different ways. Implicit in this realization, is that simply making computerized 
lists of the latest scientific versions of our classifications is not enough. We need to 
record alternatives in other cultures, both minor and major, if we are to develop 
something more than a one-eyed view of diversity. Moreover, we need to study historical 
changes and developments in systems of classification systems. We need etymologies not 
just for single words and concepts but also for the way we class ideas.      
 
All this points to a fundamental shift in how we think about software architectures for the 
semantic web. In the fields of artificial intelligence, cognitive science and computer 
science there are many debates about the ontological robustness of a given frame of 
reference or world view. Some argue that it is simply a question of defining the 
constraints of a domain or deciding whether it is objective or subjective. Our review of 
historical knowledge systems confirms that there is a rather different challenge: how to 
create world-views that evolve and interact with one another.    
 
If the first half of the 20th century saw the rapid development of atomic and quantum 
theory, the second half of the century saw the unraveling of DNA (cf. Watson and Crick, 
1953)265 and more recently the advent of nano-level studies, which continue to transform 
our understanding of the physical and life sciences. DNA studies are, for instance, now 
affecting the classification of birds.266 
 
 
We have already noted how developments in physics and chemistry transformed them 
from a pre-occupation with the physical world of matter, to a study of immaterial 
dimensions such as gases, energy, and forces. As a result the mechanization of the world 
picture, which scholars of the 20th century associated with early modern science, needs 
revision. Atomic and sub-atomic research has removed the seeming oppositions between 
material and immaterial, between inanimate and animate. Indeed, where only a century 
ago mechanical metaphors dominated our views of science, today an incredible growth in 
the scope and the increasingly central importance of the life sciences means that 
metaphors of growth, scale, symbiosis are gradually defining our models of all reality.267  
 
Natural science, which once reduced nature to a machine (cf. de la Mettrie,268 
Vaucanson269), is becoming alive in a new sense. In the process the need for new 
classification systems that reflect new insights and realities and at the same time allow us 
to trace the complexities of historical and cultural changes in knowledge is becoming 
fundamentally important. If we cannot record and conserve cumulatively even our 
changing views and insights on our world, if we cannot gather our own contributions, 
what hope is there of recording and conserving the world itself? 

 
60 
Appendix 5. Perreault’s Classification of Relations  
 
Subsumptive   
 
 
 
Type/Kind 
 
 
Principle/Manifestation  
Genus/Species 
 Species/Organisation  
  
 
Whole/Part 
Organism/Organ 
 
Composite/Conclusions 
 
Matrix/Particles 
Subject/Property 
 
Substance/Accident   
 
Possessor/Possession 
 
Accompanance 
 
Determinative  
Active  
Productive  
 
 
Causing 
 
 
Originating/Source  
 
Limitative 
 
 
Restrictive 
 
 
Orienting, Establishing Frame of Reference, Point of View 
 
Destructive 
 
Injuring 
 
Suppressing, Eliminating  
Curing 
Interactive 
 
 
Concordant 
 
Differing 
 
Contrary  
Passive 
 
Produced 
 
Limited 
 
Destroyed 
 
Ordinal  
Conditional  
 
State 
 
Attitude 
 
Energy 
Comparative  
 
Degree 
 
Size 
 
Duration 

 
61 
 
Identical 
 
Similar, Analogous 
 
Dissimilar  
Positional 
 
Figurative 
 
Spatial 
 
Temporal 
 
Toward 
 
At 
 
Any 
 
                                                           
Notes  
 
Given the problem of changing addresses of web sites, the author has provided keywords 
for searching the site in Google in the event that the present address be changed in future. 
 
1 Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, 1New York. Houghton Mifflin, 
1950; Reprint, New York: Da Capo Press 1988, p. 32.  
2 At this point an interjection is necessary: In school we used to learn that acronyms were 
rather questionable entities only to be used sparsely and always to be explained before 
using in a regular text. Technologists and especially computer scientists have always had 
a reputation for flaunting those rules slightly. In World Wide Web circles the situation 
much worse: without acronyms one cannot survive. A special dose of patience is thus 
requested of the reader for the next three pages as we review key developments of the 
past six years using their terms in order to show why the present solutions leave much to 
be desired. Thereafter we shall proceed to the main body of this paper to show that the 
study of meaning, now called semantics, has a very long history, and modern 
developments, which the champions of the semantic web would do well to discover.    
3  SOAP under World Wide Web Consortium.  
   See: http://www.w3.org/TR/SOAP/ 
4  UDDI.  
   See: http://www.uddi.org/ 
5  WSDL under World Wide Web Consortium.  
   See: http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl 
6  The ABC of EDI. 
    See: http://www.edi.wales.org/feature4.htm#ABC.Cf. http://www.edi-
information.com/html/ec_edi_101.html 
and the EDIFACT pages. 
7  W3 under architectural blocks. 
   See: http://www.w3.org/TR/Arch-blocks.gif 
8 RDF and XML Tutorial.  
  See: http://lsdis.cs.uga.edu/SemWebCourse/RDF.ppt 
9 URI under World Wide Web Consortium.  
  See: http://www.w3.org/Addressing/. Also sometimes called Universal Resource 
Indicators or Universal Resource Identifiers (URI). 
10 URI under Larry Masinter.  

 
62 
                                                                                                                                                                             
    See: http://larry.masinter.net/. 
11 IETF. Uniform Resource Identifiers (URI) Working Group. 
    See: http://ftp.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/uri/ 
12 On-To Knowledge. 
    See: http://www.ontoknowledge.org/index.shtml 
13 W3C Layer Cake.  
    See: http://www.w3.org/2001/09/06-ecdl/slide17-0.html. 
      Cf. http://www.isr.umd.edu/~selberg/Thesis/JournalPaper.pdf 
14 Owl Web Ontology Language. Reference. 
    See: http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/ 
15 In the interests of precision it is useful to quote directly: 
OWL DL (where DL stands for "Description Logic") was designed to support the 
existing Description Logic business segment and to provide a language subset that 
has desirable computational properties for reasoning systems. The complete OWL 
language (called OWL Full to distinguish it from the subsets) relaxes some of the 
constraints on OWL DL so as to make available features which may be of use to 
many database and knowledge representation systems, but which violate the 
constraints of Description Logic reasoners.  
NOTE: RDF documents will generally be in OWL Full, unless they are 
specifically constructed to be in OWL DL or Lite 
     Owl Web Ontology Language. Reference. 
     See: http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/ 
16 A pragmatic and more cynical reason is because the semantic web had become a 
buzzword and a fashionable trend whereby a small group of insiders can assure their 
careers.  
For some there is no problem: whereas the web was mostly a web of markup, the 
semantic web is a web of data. This elegant answer overlooks the fact that data is 
transmission and not about meaning.  
 See: http://ilrt.org/people/cmdjb/talks/uob-cs-semweb/ .   
 This is based on a slide from Tim Berners Lee headed Web of Data. 
 See: http://www.w3.org/2003/Talks/05-gartner-tbl/slide22-0.html 
17 Sowa (2000) as in notes 27, 145 above. 
18 From discussions at the developers day at WWW 10 (Amsterdam, 2000) it became 
clear that a number of the developers had no clear idea of the grammatical meanings of 
subject and object, let alone distinctions between transitive and intransitive verbs. When 
questions were raised on these points, John Sowa was cited. The matter was then 
dismissed or rather ignored, except that subject and object have now entered into the 
introductory texts for the semantic web. Cf. the W3C Primer: Getting into RDF & 
Semantic Web using N3 
     See: http://www.w3.org/2000/10/swap/Primer 
19 Sowa’s book is generously dedicated to five great knowledge engineers: Aristotle, 
Leibniz, Kant, Peirce and Whitehead as if nothing had effectively happened since 1920. 
Peirce and De Saussure are mentioned in passing as the fathers of semiotics with no 
mention how semiotics and semantics were connected with a series of other disciplines at 
the time (figure 33). More significantly nothing is said of Bühler’s efforts to counter De 
Saussure through sematology, which has its roots in the eighteenth century, nor of Wüster 

 
63 
                                                                                                                                                                             
who established modern terminology as an independent field, and whose work via 
Diemer and Dahlberg led to organisations such as the German Society for Classification 
and the International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO). Similarly, 
contributions in linguistics, library and information science (e.g. Perreault, Bean) and 
database design (e.g. Mylopoulos, McGuiness) are not mentioned.  
 
Sowa is not alone. The same problem is evident in Mark Stefik’s, Introduction to 
Knowledge Systems (1995), has an opening chapter on semantics as the meaning of 
symbols, and distinguishes eloquently between a numbers of kinds of semantics for 
programming and representation languages, namely reference semantics, truth semantics, 
proof semantics, denotational semantics, interface semantics and reasoning control 
semantics. He further identifies three kind of semantics for natural languages: logical 
language semantics, action semantics and intensional (sic) semantics. He refers to Hayes 
(1974) but again makes no reference to any of the key figures in the development of 
semantics, semiotics, let alone lexicology, lexicography, semasiology and onomasiology 
(cf. figure 32). 
20 Cf. the author’s “Electronic Media and Visual Knowledge,” Knowledge Organisation, 
Wurzburg, Vol. 20 (1993), No. 1, pp. 47-54. 
21 Conference in Vienna May 14-16 1997.  
   See: http://www.univie.ac.at/cognition/conf/ntcs97/ 
22 For an historical discussion see: "Visualization and Perspective. Visualizzazione e 
prospettiva" Leonardo e l'eta della ragione,  eds. Enrico Bellone e Paolo Rossi, (Scientia, 
Milan, 1982), pp.185-210 (English), pp. 211-224 (Italian). 
23 Reviewer two has kindly noted some classic works in this area, namely: George 
Lakoff, Women, Fire and Dangerous Things, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1987; David C. Blair, Language and Representation in Information Retrieval, 
Amsterdam, New York: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1990; Susan Leigh Star, Sorting 
Things Out, Classification and its Consequences, Cambridge Mass..: MIT Press, 1999. 
Reviewer two also draws attention to the later work of Wittgenstein.     
24 William J. Clancey, “The frame of reference problem in cognitive modeling,”  In 
Proceedings The Eleventh Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,1989,  
pp. 107-114, Ann Arbour. 
    See: http://cogprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/archive/00000296/ 
25 E.g. Debiprasad Chattopadhaya, History of Science and Technology in Ancient India, 
Calcutta: Firma KLM Private Ltd, 1991. Especially volume II: Formation of the 
Theoretical Foundations of Natural Science.   
26 Joseph Needham, Science and Civilisation in Ancient China, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1953-. Cf. Science and Civilisation in China Series. 
    See: http://www.nri.org.uk/scc.htm 
27 Alfred North Whitehead, Process and Reality, New York: MacMillan Company, 1929, 
p. 63:  
The safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that 
it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato. I do not mean the systematic scheme of 
thought which scholars have doubtfully extracted from his writings. I allude to the 
wealth of general ideas scattered through them. 
   Cited in The Wit and Wisdom of Alfred North Whitehead. 

 
64 
                                                                                                                                                                             
   See: http://www.alfred.north.whitehead.com/ANW/WitWisdom/witwis2.htm 
28 Ingetraut Dahlberg developed these ideas in many of her publications of which we cite 
only a few here: Grundlagen universaler Wissensordnung: Probleme und Möglichkeiten 
eines universalen Klassifikationssystems des Wissens, Hrsg. von der Deutschen 
Gesellschaft für Dokumentation e. V. (DGD), Frankfurt/Main. Pullach bei München: 
Verlag Dokumentation, 1974, especially pp. 100-167. These ideas are further developed 
in: “Concept and Definition Theory,” Classification Theory in the Computer Age, Albany 
New York, November 1988, pp. 12-24 and in “Conceptual Structures and 
Systematization,” International Forum on Information and Documentation, vol. 20, no. 
3, July 1995, pp. 9-24.   
29 To be sure Aristotle also asked questions concerning: What?, Who?, Where? When? 
and How?. But these were subordinate to his interest in Why? 
30 Aristotle, Metaphysics, I.3.25-30 (983a); V.2.25, 30 (1013a). From Aristotle, The 
Complete Works, ed. W. D. Ross, Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
31 Some claim that final, formal and efficient causes pertain to universals. See: Eric 
McLuhan, “On Formal Cause,” Unpublished Manuscript, July 2003, due to be published 
by Fordham University. If one defines material cause in terms of what would be needed 
as opposed to what is used, then material cause can also be linked to universals. 
It is interesting to note how these four causes can be linked to different kinds of questions 
outlined by Dahlberg, 1995, as in note 24, her figure 11: 
Final   
For what purpose? 
Formal  
Why?  
Material  
By what?  
Efficient  
By which means? 
We shall return to this later. 
32  It is interesting to note that some of the latest work by Deborah McGuiness et al, An 
Environment for Merging and Testing Large Ontologies is also moving in this direction. 
   See: ksl.stanford.edu/people/dlm/papers/kr2000-chimaera.ppt 
Dahlberg has suggested a variant version of these basic categories in “Conceptual 
Structures 
and 
Systematization,” 
International 
Forum 
on 
Information 
and 
Documentation, vol. 20, no. 3, July 1995, p. 13, [her] fig. 9:  
 
 
 
principles  
Entities 
immaterial objects  
 
 
Material objects  
 
 
 
quantities  
Properties  
qualities  
 
 
relations 
 
 
 
operations 
Activities  
states 
 
 
processes 
 
 
time 
Dimensions  positions 

 
65 
                                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
space 
34 These semantic primitives are taken up by Peirce in his semiotics, as noted by John 
Sowa in Ontology, Metadata and Semiotics.  
  See: http://users.bestweb.net/~sowa/peirce/ontometa.htm. Peirce claims that there are 
five semantic primitives: Existence, Coreference, Conjunction, Negation and Relation. 
As will become clear in this essay, this overlooks that the other semantic primitives are 
also formal relations. 
35 Aristotle, Categories, Translated by E. M. Edghill, Section 1, Part 4.  
    See: http://www.classicallibrary.org/aristotle/categories/1.htm#4 
36 In the computer world operations are typically called events. 
37 Aristotle’s category of substance, which Dahlberg called entities, became linked in 
Perreault’s model with subsumptive relations. What Dahlberg called Activities became 
determinative relations and her Dimensions became ordinal relations. Of the properties 
(figure 5, cf. figure 28), quantity shifted to dimensions, and along with quality became 
part of ordinal relations.  
Technically speaking Aristotle had no “activities” or “dimensions.” Even so his notion of 
the four causes (material, efficient, formal and final) were incorporated by Perreault as 
determinative relations. Aristotle’s accident of quantity presaged the notion of 
dimensions. 
38 In simple terms, the retreat from final causes and quiddity effectively made qualitative 
properties accidental in a more trivial sense.  
39 Ernst Cassirer, Substanzbegriff und Funktionsbegriff. Untersuchungen über die 
Grundlagen der Erkenntniskritik. Darmstadt 1910. 
40 E. J. Dijksterhuis, The Mechanization of the World Picture, Oxford University Press 
(Oxford, 1961). Original: E.J. Dijksterhuis, De mechanisering van het wereldbeeld. 
Amsterdam, Meulenhoff, 1950. 
41 Alexander Koyré, From the closed world to the infinite universe, Baltimore. London: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957. 
42 Stephen Toulmin, The discovery of time, Penguin Books: Harmondsworth, 1967. 
43 Through the advent of etymology (1725), time entered the study of language just 
decades before it entered into the study of conceptions of nature. OED cites Watts Logic 
(1725) which defines etymology as “tracing a word to its original. To be sure in the 
Middle Ages, Isidore of Seville had written the Etymologia but this was more a fanciful 
interpretation of the roots of words through association than a proper philological study. 
For a study of the growing awareness of time in science see Stephen Toulmin, The 
Discovery of Time, op. cit 
44 Another of Stephen Toulmin’s books, The Architecture of Matter aptly reflects this 
tradition in its title. 
45  Elements and Atoms: Case Studies in the Development of Chemistry. 
      See: http://webserver.lemoyne.edu/faculty/giunta/EA/CONTENTS.HTML 
46  The 2003 PACS classification scheme. 
     See: http://publish.aps.org/eprint/gateway/pacslist 
47 Oxford English Dictionary (henceforth OED). E.g. Bailey, 1721 defined ontology as 
“an account of being in the abstract.” In Perreault’s terms this would be subsumptive 
relations.   
48 OED. 

 
66 
                                                                                                                                                                             
49 Burke (1790) spoke of classification of citizens, Abernethy (1804) referred to a 
classification of tumours. OED.   
50 Ibid 
51OED. Nature reported that “Huxley’s classification in 1867 marked an epoch in the  
systematics of birds.” 20 Dec., 1888, 177/2.  
52 OED. As early as 1645 definition was defined as “that which refines the pure essence 
of things from the circumstance.” OED. 
53 Signs and Signification 
    See: http://www.arts.uwa.edu.au/LingWWW/LIN102/2K3/NotesOld/signs.html.  
    Cf. James Bernard Murphy, Language Communication Representation in the Semiotic 
of John Poinsoti, Dartymouth College.  
    See: http://www.thomist.org/journal/1994/944aMurp.htm. 
54 According to the OED, in Logic a term was defined as: 
Each of the two things or notions which are composed or between which 
some relation is apprehended or stated, in an act of thought or (more 
commonly) each of the words or phrases relating those in a verbal 
statement specifically in relation to a proposition each of the two elements, 
viz., subject and predicate which are connected by a copula; in relation to 
a syllogism, the subject or predicate of any of the propositions 
compositing it, forming one of the three elements (Major term, Minor 
term, Middle term).  
55  Infoplease under Early English Dictionaries  
     See: http://www.infoplease.com/ce6/ent/A0857754.html 
56  Ask Yahoo under Who wrote the first dictionary. 
     See: http://ask.yahoo.com/ask/19990608.html 
57 As noted in note 39, the OED cites Watts Logic (1725), which defines etymology as 
“tracing a word to its original.”  
58 In his semiotics, Peirce also had a binary version of meaning or signification as a 
relation between two things: a form and an object that form stands for or signifies. In the 
work of Ferdinand de Saussure this binary became a so-called Saussurian relation where 
a signifier (signifiant) stands for a signified (signifié).  Cf. Signs ans Signification. 
     See: http://www.arts.uwa.edu.au/LingWWW/LIN102/2K3/NotesOld/signs.html 
59 In this context it was frequently called a semiotic triangle. Cf. David Chandler, 
Semiotics for Beginners. 
     See: http://www.aber.ac.uk/media/Documents/S4B/sem02.html#semiotic_triangle 
60  
 
    Figure 36. Italian semiotics triangle based on Peirce.  
    Il triangolo semiotico di Peirce. La Semiosi 
    See: http://www.gramma.it/semiotica/lezioni/lezione02.html 
61  Course in General Linguistics. 
     Cf. http://courses.nus.edu.sg/course/elljwp/CIGL.htm 

 
67 
                                                                                                                                                                             
62  C. K. Ogden and I.A. Richards, The Meaning of Meaning, 1923, 8th Ed. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace & World. Cf. San Diego:  Harvest/HBJ Book, 1989, p.11. 
     Cf. Ogden & Richards's The Meaning of Meaning and Its Influence on Burke's Early 
Thought - A Sketch. See: http://www.missouri.edu/~engjnc/burke/ogden.html   
63 Fred Riggs, Onomatics and Terminology II. Notes and Bibliography 
     See: http://webdata.soc.hawaii.edu/fredr/6-oat7c.htm 
64  As in note 70. 
     See: http://www.termisti.refer.org/theoweb2.htm 
Aujourd'hui, le champ de la terminologie est nettement investi par des linguistes 
formés à la démarche saussurienne, laquelle a censément mis fin à la vision de la 
langue comme une "nomenclature". On pense aujourd'hui que la langue donne 
une forme à la substance du sens et l'on adhère généralement à l'hypothèse de 
Sapir-Whorf selon laquelle les locuteurs de chaque langue découpent, organisent 
la réalité de manière différente. En ce sens, il peut paraître désuet de donner une si 
grande place au concept (ou notion), sorte d'idée néo-platonicienne érigée au rang 
de bienfait technique sur lequel fonder la communication interlinguistique.... S'il 
nous a semblé bon de conserver cette référence, c'est parce que l'approche 
conceptuelle, quoique criticable, demeure une bonne manière d'introduire la 
problématique de l'équivalence et des réseaux notionnels, sans pour autant 
renoncer à une approche descriptive des différences entre les langues. 
65 Cf. Systèmes de notions. L’approache Viennoise. 
    See: http://www.termisti.refer.org/theoweb2.htm 
66 Organon Modell von Karl Bühler.  
    See: 
http://culturitalia.uibk.ac.at/hispanoteca/Lexikon%20der%20Linguistik/o/organon.htm 
67 Karl. Bühler, Die Sprachtheorie. Die Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache, Jena, 1934. 
For links with G.W.F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, 1807, Frankfurt, 20 Bde, 
1970. p. 84ff.  
  Cf. Stefan Rabanus (Marburg)   
  See:  http://www.stefan.rabanus.com/seminare/Einf_II/folien/Deixis.pdf 
  Markus Hundt, Vorlesung: Grammatik und Pragmatik. Deixis bei Karl Bühler. 
  See: 
http://rcswww.urz.tu-
dresden.de/~kjakob/inhalt/folien_grammatik/material/Folien_ZVII/Deixis_ZVII.doc 
   Cf. Character II in Nottingham Course: 
   See: http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/english/teaching/dramdisc/CharacterII.doc 
   Cf. Gillian Brown,” A note on deixis, point of view and the English verbs: depart and 
leave,” Cambridge.  See: http://www.rceal.cam.ac.uk/Working%20Papers/brown.pdf. 
68 Organon Modell as in note 66. 
  See: 
http://culturitalia.uibk.ac.at/hispanoteca/Lexikon%20der%20Linguistik/o/organon.htm:  
„Organonmodell 
der 
Sprache 
[griech. 
órganon 
‘Werkzeug’. 
- 
Auch: 
Dreifundamentenschema, Funktionsschema]. Von K. Bühler (1934) im Rahmen 
seiner Sprachtheorie entworfenes allgemeines Sprach- bzw. Zeichenmodell, das sich 
auf Platons Metapher der Sprache als Organon, d. h. als ‘Werkzeug’, stützt, mittels 
dessen „einer - dem andern - über die Dinge“ etwas mitteilt. Entsprechend diesen 

 
68 
                                                                                                                                                                             
drei 
Funktionen 
des 
sprachlichen 
Zeichens 
unterscheidet 
Bühler 
drei 
zeichenkonstituierende Faktoren: 
 
  
(a) 
Das sprachliche Zeichen ist „Symptom“, insofern es die „Innerlichkeit des 
Senders ausdrückt“ (= Ausdrucksfunktion der Sprache 
 
  
(b) 
es ist „Signal“, insofern es an den Empfänger appelliert (Appellfunktion 
der Sprache), 
 
  
(c) 
es ist „Symbol“, insofern es sich auf Gegenstände und Sachverhalte der 
Wirklichkeit bezieht  (=Darstellungsfunktion der Sprache).“  [Bußmann, S. 549] 
69 Ibid:  
Bühler spricht von den folgenden drei »semantischen Funktionen des 
(komplexen) Sprachzeichens. Es ist Symbol kraft seiner Zuordnung zu 
Gegenständen und Sachverhalten, Symptom (Anzeichen, Indicium) kraft seiner 
Abhängigkeit vom Sender, dessen Innerlichkeit es ausdrückt, und Signal kraft 
seines Appels an den Hörer, dessen äußeres oder inneres Verhalten es steuert wie 
andere Verkehrszeichen.« (Bühler 1934/1978, 28) Bühler fügt unter Bezugnahme 
auf eine seiner früheren Arbeiten hinzu: »Dreifach ist die Leistung der 
menschlichen Sprache, Kundgage, Auslösung und Darstellung. Heute bevorzuge 
ich die Termini: Ausdruck, Appell und Darstellung« (ebd.).“ 
[Rolf, Eckard (Hrsg.): Illokutionäre Kräfte. Grundbegriffe der Illokutionslogik. Opladen: 
Westdeutscher Verlag, 1997, S. 124 Anm. 12]. 
70 Eugen Wüster, Einführung in die allgemeine Terminologielehre und terminologische 
Lexikographie, New York, Springer, 1979, 2 vol.  
   Cf. Abrégé de terminologie multilingue. Bibliographie. 
   See: http://www.termisti.refer.org/theoweb9.htm#W. 
   Cf. ProCom '98. PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION AND KNOWLEDGE  
   TRANSFER. Marking the Centenary of Eugen Wüster's Birth 
   Vienna, 24-26 August 1998 
   See: http://linux.infoterm.org/termnet-e/proceedings/procom98.htm. 
71 Cf. Alvin Diemer and I. Frenzel (eds.), Philosophie, Frankfurt: Fischer, 1980.  
72 For background on the evolution of thesaurus development in Germany, cf. Ingetraut 
Dahlberg, “Thesaurusforschung in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Die Anfänge des 
DGD-Komitees für Klassifikations- und Thesaurusforschung.  
   See: http://www.phil-fak.uni-duesseldorf.de/infowiss/frames/baust/Mandahlb.html 
73 According to the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1978. Another example would be a 
caryatid defined as “a draped female figure used instead of a column as an architectural 
support.  
74 Implicitly this means that dictionaries of the future will need to distinguish between the 
kinds of definitions they contain. If this were done then many of the debates about What? 
in the Aristotelian sense of “what is” would quickly be diminished. Ideally they would 
also be able to reflect how different cultures may treat these relations differently.    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
69 
                                                                                                                                                                             
75  
Steps 
in 
differentiation 
 
Steps 
in 
construction 
All Referents of a 
given kind 
Some Referents  
of a given kind 
Single Referent 
A Referential 
 
 
Genus 
General Referent 
Species 
Special Referent of 
a General One 
Individual (Individuum) 
Individual referent of a 
special one 
B Predicational 
Essential  
Characteristics 
Essential + 
Accidental 
Characteristics 
 Essential + 
Accidental” 
Individualising 
Characteristics 
C Representational 
General Terms  
(Ordinary 
language) 
Special Terms 
Technical 
Language 
Names/Proper Names 
A+B+C 
General concepts 
Special concepts 
Individual Concepts 
Figure 37. Dahlberg’s (1995, figure 11) generic diagram (generic characteristics and their 
concepts). 
76 Dahlberg, as in note 24, 1995, pp. 17-18  
77 John F. Sowa, Ontology article, op.cit.  
   See: http://users.bestweb.net/~sowa/peirce/ontometa.htm 
78 Dahlberg, as in note 24 above. 
79 The above list covers only the most common variants. For instance, Felbaum (in 
Green, bean, Myaeng, Semantics of Relationships, 2002, op. cit.) introduces a specific 
term troponymy to deal with manner relations in verbs.  
80 Eugen Wüster, Einführung in die Allgemeine Terminologielehre und Terminologische 
Lexikographie, Wien: Springer, 3rd ed. 1991. This results from Wüsters lectures at the 
Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Wien in 1972 – 74.   
See: http://coral.lili.uni-bielefeld.de/EAGLES/WP5/termdeliv97/node65.html 
For further references to the work of Wüster see Terminology Forum: Bibliography and 
Library of the Theory and Practice of Terminology Science.  
 See: 
http://www.uwasa.fi/comm/termino/bibtheo.html; 
cf. 
http://www.iim.fh-
koeln.de/dtp/literatur.html 
81 Dahlberg, as in note 24 above. 
82 The term meronomy is said to have been introduced by the Russian paleobotanist, 
Sergei Meyen (cf. Alexei A. Sharov, “Analysis of Meyen's Typological Concept of 
Time.” See:  http://www.gypsymoth.ento.vt.edu/~sharov/biosem/time/time.html) and 
 developed with his friend, the mathematician, Julius Shreider. Cf. Yuli (Julius) 
 Schreider, On Systems and Models. 
     See: http://www.gypsymoth.ento.vt.edu/~sharov/biosem/schreidr/schreidr.html).  
     S.V. Meyen, “Taxonomy and Meronomy,” Methodological Problems in Geological 
Sciences, Kiev: Naukova Dumka, 1877 (Orig. in Russian).    

 
70 
                                                                                                                                                                             
83 Olivier Bodenreider, Carol Bean, “Relationships Among Knowledge Structures: 
Vocabulary Integration within a subject domain.” In: Relationships in the Organisation of 
Knowledge, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001, pp. 81-98. 
       See: http://etbsun2.nlm.nih.gov:8000/publis-ob-offi/pdf/2001-kluwer-rels-ob-Ft.pdf 
        Cf.: http://enya.chungnam.ac.kr/board/work/all_abstract.htm 
84 B. Tversky, “Objects, Parts and Categories,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 113, 1984, pp. 169-193. Cf. B. Tversky “Where partonomies and taxonomies 
meet,” In: S.I. Tsolhatzidis, (ed.), Meanings and Prototypes: Studies in Linguistic 
Categorization, New York: Routledge, 1990. pp. 334-344. 
85 Simone Pribbenow, “Meronymic relationships: From Classical Mereology to Complex 
Part-Whole Relationships”, The Semantics of Relationships, ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. 
Bean, Sung Hyon Myaeng, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, p. 36. She 
further distinguishes between basic mereology, extensional mereology and classical 
(extensional) mereology, (pp. 40-43).    
86 John Miles Smith, Diane C. P. Smith, “Database abstractions: aggregation and 
generalization,” ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS), Volume 2,  Issue 2 
 (June 1977), pp.105 – 133. See:  
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=320544.320546&dl=GUIDE&dl=ACM&idx=J777
&part=periodical&WantType=periodical&title=ACM%20Transactions%20on%20Datab
ase%20Systems%20(TODS). 
87 J. Mylopoulos, A. Borgida, M. Jarke, M. Koubarakis, “Telos: Representing Knowledge 
about Information Systems,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 8(4), October 
1990, pp. 325-362. 
88 Although Linnaeus used anatomical characteristics he relied also on cultural 
characteristics. His student Blumenbach emphasized the role of anatomic characteristics 
in classification. Cf. Contexts -- Science -- Physical Anthropology. 
    See: http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jlynch/Frank/Contexts/physanth.html 
89 Anita Burgun, Olivier Bodenreider, Methods for exploring the Semantics of the 
relationships Between Co-Occuring UMLS Concepts, Medinfo, Amsterdam:IOS Press, 
2001, pp. 171-175. 
    See: http://etbsun2.nlm.nih.gov:8000/publis-ob-offi/pdf/2001-medinfo-ab.pdf 
90 Dahlberg, Conceptual Structures, as in note 24 above, p. 12.  
91 Substance     Accidents = PROPERTIES 
Intransitive/Transitive 
Entities    
Properties         
 
 
Activities 
       Dimensions    Predicate/Object  
 
Material Quantity Action, Operations  
 
 
 
       Space  
  
Quality        
 
 
Suffering, Processes   Time  
Relation State     (Presence, Having)  
 
  
 
       Lage (Position in Dimension) 
a) Entity  
 
 
 
 
+ Activity 
b) Subject 
 
 
 
 
+ Intransitive Verb 
 
+ Predicate 
c) Noun  
 
 
 
 
+ TransitiveVerb  
        
+ Object 
d) Noun  
 
 
 
 
+Adjective 
+ TransitiveVerb +Adverb+ Object 
e)  
 
 
 
+ Subordinate Clause 
 
+ Subordinate Clause 
f)  
 
 
 
 
+ Conditional Clause 
 
+ Conditional Clause 
 
Figure 38. Another view of Aristotle’s categories as the basis for material relations of 
function or syntax. 

 
71 
                                                                                                                                                                             
92 Questions 
 
 
Categories  
 
 
Latin Questions  
1. What if? 
 
Possibility  
 
 
utrum? 
2. What?  
 
Nature, essence 
 
Quid? 
3. From what? 
 
Material stuff, essence 
de quo? 
4. Why?  
 
Causality, reason  
 
quare? 
5. How big? 
 
Quantity, size? 
 
quantum?  
6. How good? 
 
Quality 
 
 
quale? 
7. When? Since when? Time   
 
 
quando? 
8. Where? From where? Place   
 
 
ubi? 
9. How? In which way? Modality  
10. By which Means  
Instrumentality  
11. By What? 
 
Potentiality, capacity   
12. How generated? 
Genesis 
13. By whom? 
 
Originator, producer 
14. With whom?  
Accompanied by, together with 
15. For what purpose? 
Finality 
16. How occuring   
Occurrence, in parallel, in connection   
17. Under which conditions? Condition 
Figure 39. Dahlberg’s list of seventeen questions related to categories and Latin questions 
found in Raymond Lull’s Ars Magna (1274). 
93 Perreault, op.cit. 
94 Artefacts Canada uses What?, Where?, Who?, When? and How?.  
See: http://daryl.chin.gc.ca/Artefacts/e_MasterLayout.cgi 
The Lucent database includes Who? What? Why? and Where?.  
See: http://www.lucent.com/minds/infotheory/who.html  
95 See: mmilinux.unimaas.nl  under username sums and password summa. One of the 
fundamental ideas underlying SUMS is that novice users should be guided through these 
questions starting with Why? and How? to focus the search, then Where? and When? to 
further define the search? and then proceeding to What? and Who?  
96As Ingetraut Dahlberg (personal communication) notes: 
The analytical tables of facts (e.g. concepts and classes of concepts) must also 
contain all the possible concepts (in the form of facets, just as Ranganathan had 
built his faceted Colon Classification system) by which synthetic patterns of true 
statements on referents can be constructed. Somewhere in your paper this ought to 
be said. And here our good Kant with his analytical and synthetic judgments 
could also be brought into the picture! 
97 I-MASS.  
    See: www.i-massweb.org/public/workpackages/ project%20presentationvs1.doc 
    Cf. also MOSES (MOdular and Scalable Environment for the Semantic web) 
    See: http://www.hum.ku.dk/moses/index2.htm.  
   Then there are the EU Grid projects under Gridstart. Cf. Mark Parsons, IST Grid 
Research - Inventory, Roadmap and Market Analysis  
    See: 
www.gridstart.org/CM_documents/cm_one/plenary/ 
GRIDSTART%20Roadmap%20&%20Inventory%20-%20M%20Parsons.ppt) 
(MOSES) 
Modular scaleable Management tools for the Knowledge Grid  
(GRACE) 
Distributed Search and Categorization Engine for Grid  

 
72 
                                                                                                                                                                             
(COG)  
Grid Ontologies of modeling of Data in dispersed locations. 
(SELENE)  
Bridge Between Semantic Web and P2P in E-Learning 
(GRASP)  
Advanced Infrastructure for ASP based on Grid technologies  
98 AMP newsletter under Ministère de la Culture, France. 
   See: http://www.culture.gouv.fr/culture/mrt/numerisation/fr/f_01.htm. 
   On this subject see also: Marc van Campenhoudt, Abrégé de terminologie Multilingue,  
   See: http://www.termisti.refer.org/theoweb1.htm#intro 
which contains: Marc Van Campenhoudt, Le Réseau Notionnel Interlinguistique. Réseau 
notionnel, intelligence artificielle et equivalence en terminologie multilingue: essai de 
modélisation. Centre de recherche TERMISTI. Institut supérieur de traducteurs et 
interprètes, Bruxelles. Communication aux IVes journées scientifiques du réseau L.T.T. 
Lyon, 25-30 septembre 1995. d'après Van Campenhoudt (1994) 
     See: http://www.termisti.refer.org/rni.htm. 
99 Others have identified further kinds of definitions. For instance, Reviewer one has 
kindly drawn attention to Robert Audi, ed., The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, 
New York: Cambridge University  Press, 1995. Reviewer one also recommends B. 
Karpatschof, Human Activity. Contributions to the Anthroplogical Sicences from a 
Perspective of Activity Theory, Copenhagen: Dansk Psychologisk Forlag, 2000. As the 
reviewer also rightly notes a fuller treatment of this subject would need to discuss the 
history of concepts (Begriffsgeschichte). In this context the reader is advised to consult 
the Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte Founded by Erich Rothacker (now in its 45th volume) 
and the Historische Wörterbuch der Philosophie. 
Cf. http://www.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/philosophy/series/archiv.htm. 
A more comprehensive study would also need to follow the Lessico Intellettuale Europeo 
e storia delle Idee an Istituto del Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche led by Professor 
Tullio Gregory (Sapienza, Rome). 
Cf. http://www.iliesi.cnr.it/index.htm.  
While extremely important the details of these undertakings would take us far beyond the 
scope of this paper.    
100 Perrault’s relators were purely syntactically meant. In the Mediaeval period these 
would have been called synkategoremata.  
101 J. Perreault, "Categories and Relators", International Classification, Frankfurt, vol. 
21, no. 4, 1994, pp. 189-198, especially p. 195. Cf. Professor Nancy Williamson (Faculty 
of Information Studies, University of Toronto) who lists these in a different order under 
the heading Types of Associative Relationships:   
 
1.  Whole-part 
 
2.   Field of study and object(s) studied 
 
3.  Process and agent or instrument of the process 
 
4.  Occupation and person in that occupation 
 
5.  Action and product of action 
 
6.  Action and its patient 
 
7.  Concepts and their properties 
 
8.  Concepts related to their origins 
 
9.  Concepts linked by causal dependence 
 
10. A thing or action and its counter-agent 
 
11. An action and a property associated with it 

 
73 
                                                                                                                                                                             
 
12. A concept and its opposite.  
102 Ernst Cassirer, Individuum und Kosmos in der Philosophie der Reinassance; Leipzig 
und Berlin, 1927; Reprint: Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philosophy, New 
York; Dover, 2000   
103 Saint Thomas Aquinas effectively had this insight in his Commentary on the 
Metaphysics of Aristotle, trans. J. P. Rowan, Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1961, 
Book V, Lesson 2, Paragraph 764.  
104 Some would insist that even this is far too optimistic and represents a positivistic view 
of the 18th or a neo-positivist view of the 19th and early 20th centuries. They would argue 
that almost everything is so troubled by interpretation and bias, which can only be partly 
overcome by constructivism, constructionism, and/or deconstructionism, that clarity and 
knowledge are things of the past. This view has the enormous advantage that one is then 
free to judge on matters where one is not an expert, indeed even in areas where one 
effectively knows nothing.   
105 Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1962. 
106 Cf. Gerald Holton, Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought, Harvard: Harvard 
University Press, 2nd ed., 1988. 
107 Cf. those in the third culture and the edge, e.g. Professors Minsky, Dennett, and 
Blackmore under Edge.   
     See: http://www.edge.org/ 
108 As Dahlberg, 1974, as in note 24, pp. 101-104, has also shown, being characteristics 
lead on the one hand to material content characteristics and on the other hand to formal 
being characteristics. The formal determinations of being can be categorized (according 
to Aristotle’s accidents and a proposal by Professor Diemer) as follows (Figure 40): 
 
Being an object 
 
Being a type, a part, a system 
Being a carrier 
 
Having properties, having a disposition, a mode, aspects, values, being equipped,   
            having needs 
Being a process 
 
Being worked on, having process-moments, having a beginning and an end, 
Having a 
            course, having a duration, being in a change 
Having a relationship 
 
Having an order, an orientation (spacial, timely), having a determination 
 
(active, passive, dependent, final, interactive) etc. 
Such characteristics have been termed by Dahlberg ‚characteristics of form‘. They can 
also constitute Form Concepts.“ 
 
Figure 40. Being characteristics and their components according to Dahlberg. 
Much work has been done on each of these but there are few systems, which allow us to 
visualize how we go systematically from one to the other. One important example is the 
Information Coding Classification (ICC) in which the parts of a knowledge field are its 
subdivisions  

 
74 
                                                                                                                                                                             
     Cf. ICC - Information Coding Classification. 
      See: http://index.bonn.iz-soz.de/~sigel/ISKO/ICC/ICC.html. 
109 See the doctoral thesis of my student, Nik Baerten, From the Mechanistic to the 
Organic World-Picture. New Interactions and user Interfaces, Maastricht, 2004. Baerten 
associates the organic with forms that are fluid, dynamic, and not bound by the subject-
object distinction.  
110 Michael Giesecke, Der Buchdruck in der frühen Neuzeit. Eine historische Fallstudie 
über die Durchsetzung neuer Informations- und Kommunikationstechnologien. 
Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, 1998. 
111 Walter Ong, Ramus, Method and the Decay of Dialogue, Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1958. 
112 Marshall McLuhan. The Gutenberg Galaxy: the Making of Typographic Man, 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1962. 
113 Using television as an example, McLuhan also made some inspired guesses where the 
new electronic media were heading. What he could not foresee as someone still living in 
an analog world, that the implications of digital were far more fundamental.    
114 John S. Traill under U of Toronto Faculty Biographies.  
     See: http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/classics/bios/jtra.html 
115 Perseus Digital Library  
     See: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/ 
116 Only a decade ago Harvard University refused to count Professor Crane’s electronic 
work in considering him for tenure. Even today, digital contributions have not yet 
attained the stature of analog publications. 
117 For a science-fiction view cf. Michael Crichton, Timeline, New York: Ballantine 
books, 1999, pp. 141-142. 
118Etymology, in its original sense in English (Fraunce, 1588) was linked with the 
“interpretation of a word.” OED. 
119 Namely in the semiotic of John Poinsot 1632.  
     See: http://www.thomist.org/journal/1994/944aMurp.htm 
120 Jürgen Trabant, Neuer Wissenschaft von alter Zeichen: Vicos Sematologie, Frankfurt: 
Suhrkamp, 1995. 
121 Thomas A Sebeok, “From Vico to Casirer to Langer”, in Giambattista Vico and 
Anglo-American Science, ed. Marcel Danesi, Berlin: Mouton de De Gruyter, 1995, pp. 
159-170.  
Cited in Thomas A Sebeok, “Semiotics and Biological Science, Initial Conditions, Signs 
Bridges Origins,” Global Semiotics, Bloomington: Indiana Univeristy Press, 2001, pp. 
59-73. Cf. http://www.colbud.hu/main/PubArchive/DP/DP17-Sebeok.pdf. 
122 OED. 
123 Cited in OED. Cf. B. H. Smart, Beginnings of a New School of Metaphysics: Three 
Essays in One Volume: Outline of Sematology.---MDCCCXXXI. Sequel to Sematology.--
MDCCCXXXVII. An Appendix, Now First Published. London: John Richardson, 1839. 
1st ed. 8vo.  
124 Karl Bühler, Sprachtheorie, Jena: Fischer, 1934 p. 34. 
125  For a discussion of this in relation to Gombrich who does not mention Bühler see: 
Klaus Lepsky, “Art and Language: Ernst H. Gombrich and Karl Bühler’s theory of 

 
75 
                                                                                                                                                                             
language’ in: Richard Woodfield (ed.), Gombrich on Art and Psychology, Manchester: 
Manchester Univeristy Press, 1996.  
     See: http://davinci.ntu.ac.uk/gombrich/leonardo/intro.htm 
126 Carl S. L. Collin, A Bibliographical Guide to Sematology, Lund, 1914.   
     Cf. Herbert Ernst Wiegand, Lieratur zur Lexikologie.  
     See: http://www.uni-heidelberg.de/institute/fak9/gs/sprache2/hew_lex.htm.  
     Cf. CR BSL 21, 1918-1919 
     See: http://perso.club-internet.fr/flo.blanc/SLP/21.html 
Josef Reinius, On Transferred Appelations of Human Beings, Chiefly in English and 
German. Studies in Historical Sematology. I. (all published) Diss. Gbg (Uppsala) 1903.   
Jan Wolenski, “From intentionality to formal semantics (From Twardowski to Tarski),”   
      See: http://www.masda.vxu.se/~per/IVC743/intentionaltarski.pdf 
1993b   John James Van Nostrand and Sematology: Another neglected figure in 
American semiotics.  In Karen Haworth, John Deely, and Terry Prewitt (editors),  
Semiotics 1990, 224-240. New York: Lanham 
127 For a more recent treatment cf. Section 6.6 Relating syntax and semasiology.  
      See: http://www.burgoyne.com/pages/bdespain/grammar/gram066.htm#P1 
which forms part of:  Bruce D. Despain, A Paraphrastic Grammar of English, A 
Scientific and Logical Approach to the Science of Syntax, Salt Lake City, 2002.  
     See: http://www.burgoyne.com/pages/bdespain/grammar/gramtoc.htm 
128 OED cites American  Journal of Philology, XVI, 1895, p. 412. 
129 Michel Bréal, Essai de Sémantique. (Science des significations), Paris 
: Hachette,1897. 
      See: http://www.chass.utoronto.ca/epc/langueXIX/breal/breal_sem.htm 
130 See: http://www.uni-bonn.de/~dbuncic/14ung/semantik.pdf 
131  OED. 
132  OED reminds us that an onomasticon as a “vocabulary or alphabetical list of proper 
names especially of persons” goes back to the 15th century  and that in 1730 Hume 
referred to: “Thesaurus’s, Lexicons,  Glossaries, Onomasticons” as if they effectively 
were synonyms.   
133  OED defines it as “relating to or connected with a name or names so with the naming 
of something.” In 1609 it was used as a synonym for Nomenclators. A comment in the 
Contemporary review of 1880 suggests that as a science onomastics was not always 
perceived as having a strong foorting: “the system which rests on onomastic vocabularies 
of a highly imaginative philosophy.”  
134 Andreas Blank, “Words and Concepts in Time: towards Diachronic Cognitive 
Onomasiology,”Metaphorik:de. Under Metaphorik.de 01/2001 under Research Center for 
Semiotics RCS under The “Zeitschrift für Semiotik Abstracts”. 
     See: http://www.metaphorik.de/01/blank.htm 
135 Roland Posner, “From Russian formalism to glossematics:European Semioticians 
between World Wars I and II", Zeitschrift für Semiotik, Berlin, vol. 6. no. 4, 1984.  
     See: http://angli02.kgw.tu-berlin.de/semiotik/english/ZFS/Zfs84_4_e.htm 
     Professor Tito Orlandi has extremely interesting sites on:  
Semantics Semiotics 
     See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/iasulez/biblio/noth03.html#linsem 
Meaning 

 
76 
                                                                                                                                                                             
     See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/iasulez/biblio/noth02.html#typsem 
Sign 
     See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/iasulez/biblio/noth01.html#typsem 
Symbol 
     See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/iasulez/biblio/noth05.html#typsem 
Cf. Professor Tito Orlandi 
    See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/ 
136  Cf. Eine Rezension von Eberhard Fromm. „Prolegomena zu einer künftigen 
Kulturphilosophie“ 
      See: http://www.berliner-lesezeichen.de/lesezei/blz99_10/text19.htm 
137 For context re: Claude Shannon under Lucent Technologies: 
     See: http://www.lucent.com/minds/infotheory/who.html. 
C. E. Shannon, ``A mathematical theory of communication,'' Bell System Technical 
Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379-423 and 623-656, July and October, 1948. 
      See: http://cm.bell-labs.com/cm/ms/what/shannonday/paper.html 
138 Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics. Control and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1948.  
139 One of the essential problems with semantics is that it is a linguistic term and misued 
in our context. However, since most people do not know anything about the theory of 
concepts, i.e. knowledge units, they remain with the linguistic understanding. This is 
excusable and we will not be able to do away with the term „Semantic Web“ but we 
should make it clear that in order to work in the field of knowledge organization we are 
dealing with concepts, conceptual relationships, concept systems, etc. 
140  In Tito Orlandi website: 
See: http://rmcisadu.let.uniroma1.it/~orlandi/iasulez/biblio/noth03.html#linsem 
1. Linguistic 
 
2. Logical 
 
3. General 
 
4. Philosophical   
Semiotics, Language theory  
 
5. Anthropological  
Malinowski (1925), Firth Contextualism 
 
 
 
 
Semiotic anthropology (Ardener, ed. l971, Singer l984).  
 
6. Psychological  
Osgood et al. (l957; Osgood l 976)  
 
 
 
 
Psychosemiology (Krampen l979b) 
 
7. Information Theory MacKay (l 969) 
 
 
Figure 41. Categories of Semantics and Related Fields according to Tito Orlandi. 
141 Boolean logic diagrams are themselves a simplification of Euler’s diagrams. For Euler 
and Quantified Expressions 
See: www.rci.rutgers.edu/.../Deduction/ EulerDiags.html 
Cf. Venn Diagram Survey for their relation to Euler Diagrams. 
See: http://www.theory.csc.uvic.ca/~cos/venn/VennEulerEJC.html 
For relations to set theory,  
See: noppa5.pc.helsinki.fi/ koe/boole/boolea.html 
For a further discussion cf. the section on diagrams in the Stanford Encylopaedia of 
Philosophy. 
See: plato.stanford.edu/ entries/diagrams/  
142 H. Curry and R. Feys, Combinatory Logic, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1958.  

 
77 
                                                                                                                                                                             
143 For a thoughtful essay on this subject cf. Mihailo Antović, “The Position of Semantics 
within Contemporary Cognitive Science,” UDC 81'37:165.19: in: Facta Universitatis, 
Series Linguistics and Literature, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 415-424. 
   See: http://facta.junis.ni.ac.yu/facta/lal/lal2003/lal2003-06.pdf  
For linguistics and cognitive science 
   See: http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Subjects/virtual_linguistics.html 
144 S. Pribbenow, “Meronymic relationships”, in Semantics as in note 8, p. 39. 
145 Conference in Vienna May 14-16 1997.  
   See: http://www.univie.ac.at/cognition/conf/ntcs97/ 
146 For an historical discussion see: "Visualization and Perspective. Visualizzazione e 
prospettiva" Leonardo e l'eta della ragione,  eds. Enrico Bellone e Paolo Rossi, (Scientia, 
Milan, 1982), pp.185-210 (English), pp. 211-224 (Italian). 
147 R. W. Langacker, Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 1987, (Volume 1: Theoretical  Prerequisites) . 
148 For Further publications  
  See: http://www.isi.edu/natural-language/people/hovy/publications.html 
149 Eduard Hovy “Comparing Sets of Semantic Relations in Ontologies,”  The Semantics 
of Relationships, ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. Bean, Sung Hyon Myaeng, Dordrecht: 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, p.92. he adds: 
“We view a domain model as an ontology that specializes on a particular domain of 
interest.” 
150 Christiane Felbaum. On the Semantics of Relations, “The Semantics of Relationships, 
ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. Bean, Sung Hyon Myaeng, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 2002, p.23. 
151 To be sure there are exceptions to this trend. Jouis (2002) distinguishes between 
elementary semantic types of entities (Boolean, individualizable, mass, distributive, 
collective and place); Formation operators for compound types; fundamental static 
relations and fundamental dynamic relations. Cf. Christophe Jouis, “Logic of 
Relationships,” The Semantics of Relationships, ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. Bean, Sung 
Hyon Myaeng, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, especially pp. 129-130. 
152 Christopher Khoo, Syin Chan, Yun Niu, “The Many Facets of the Cause-Effect 
Relation,” The Semantics of Relationships, ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. Bean, Sung 
Hyon Myaeng, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002, especially pp. 51-70; cf. 
pp. 46, 55. 
153 Presented at ICCS'2000 in Darmstadt, Germany, on August 14, 2000. Published in B. 
Ganter & G. W. Mineau, eds., Conceptual Structures: Logical, Linguistic, and 
Computational Issues, Lecture Notes in AI #1867, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2000, pp. 55-
81.John F. Sowa, Ontology Metadata and Semiotics. 
    See: http://users.bestweb.net/~sowa/peirce/ontometa.htm. 
For a more detailed understanding of his work see: John F. Sowa, Knowledge 
Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Computational Foundations, Brooks/Cole 
Publishing Co., Pacific Grove, CA, 2000. 
For a fuller bibliography cf. John F. Sowa. 
     See: http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/index.htm 
154 Entity Relation Data Modelling. 
     See: http://www.ils.unc.edu/~denns/inls256sp01/notes/ernotes.html 

 
78 
                                                                                                                                                                             
155 Peter P. Chen: The Entity-Relationship Model - Toward a Unified View of Data. ACM 
TODS 1(1): 9-36(1976). Sowa has also noted these limitations.Cf., op. cit., p. 423. 
156 Of course as figure 24 makes clear, computer scientists such as John Mylopoulos 
building on Smith and Smith have long since introduced this level of distinction into their 
database systems.   
157 Consequently the basic grammatical distinction between a predicate (as in the 
sentence Henry is a man) and an object (as in the sentence Henry killed the chicken) also 
disappeared.     
In terms of Dahlberg’s basic distinctions (cf. figure 7) the original entity-relationship 
model of Chen focused on entities and thus overlooked most properties, activities and 
dimensions. Because the model focused only on level one, the entity relationship model 
was initially able to record only some aspects of questions about Who? is, has, does 
What? Because it omitted level two it did not deal with purpose, conditions, time, place, 
persons and objects, and thus did not deal with the questions Why?, How?, When?, 
Where?, or Who? and What? (with respect to ancillary persons and objects, figure 40b). 
In grammatical terms, this meant it did not deal with adjectives, nouns, subordinate and 
conditional clauses as outlined in figure 40d-f. Some proponents of the semantic web 
have assumed that entity relationships solve the challenges of relationships, syntax and 
meaning. Clearly it might be helpful if they looked more closely at the long history of 
knowledge organization that is the subject of this paper.    
158 Tony Halpin, “Object-Role Modelling (ORM/NIAM),” Handbook on Architecture of 
Information Systems, eds. P. Bernus et al., Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1998.  
    See: http://www.orm.net/pdf/springer.pdf 
Cf. also the doctoral thesis of H. Bakker, Object-oriented modeling of Information 
Systems, the INCA Conceptual Object Model, FdAW, Rijskuniversiteit Limburg, 
Maastricht: Published by Author, 1995.    
159 For standard writings on semantic networks from the Ai viewpoint cf. CSE 676: 
KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION. Fall 2001)  
     See: http://www.cs.buffalo.edu/~rapaport/676/F01/syl.html:  
Martins, 
João 
Pavão 
(2001), 
Knowledge 
Representation 
(unpublished 
manuscript), Sects. 6.1-6.2, 6.4-6.8  
Quillian, M. Ross (1967), "Word Concepts", B&L: 97-118.  
Schank, Roger C., & Rieger, Charles J., III (1974), "Inference and the Computer 
Understanding of Natural Language", B&L: 119-139.  
Woods, William A. (1975), "What's in a Link: Foundations for Semantic 
Networks", B&L: 217-241.  
McDermott, Drew (1976), "Artificial Intelligence Meets Natural Stupidity", in 
John Haugeland (ed.), Mind Design: Philosophy, Psychology, Artificial 
Intelligence (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981): 143-160.  
160 The ACM Digital library has 200 references under Semantics of programming 
languages. Under ACM Portal See: 
http://portal.acm.org/results.cfm?query=CCS%3A%22F%2E3%2E2%22&coll=GUIDE&
dl=ACM&CFID=12408722&CFTOKEN=21886016 
161 Tours.com under Travel Statistics and Trends. 
     See: http://www.tours.com/travelstats.php 
162 Interspace Summary. 

 
79 
                                                                                                                                                                             
     See: http://www.canis.uiuc.edu/projects/interspace/index.html 
163 Medical Interspace Projects.  
     See: http://www.canis.uiuc.edu/projects/medspace/index.html 
164 Without careful filters, attempts to include these particular, subsumptive classes 
directly would contravene patient confidentiality and raise personal privacy concerns. 
Even so, we can imagine a framework whereby information at the level of particulars – a 
banal example would be the heart rate and temperature of cancer patients over time – 
could be gathered, even automatically, to provide knowledge about parameters at the 
level of universals. In contrast to Plato’s universals, which were purely intellectual 
exercises, these universals would be summations or more precisely generalisations as 
parameters or limits based on concrete observations of particular, individual, patients. 
165 Cf. Pat Hayes. Under MIT Cognet 
    See: http://cognet.mit.edu/MITECS/Entry/hayesp. 
    Re: semantic networks cf. UMBC CMSC771 Spring'00 .  
    See: http://www.cs.umbc.edu/www/courses/graduate/771/spring00/syllabus.shtml 
For an Introduction to these themes see the author’s: “Challenges for a Semantic Web,” 
Semantic Web Workshop 2002. Proceedings of the International Workshop on the 
Semantic Web 2002 (at the Eleventh International World Wide Web Conference), 
Hawaii, May 7, 2002, Honolulu, Hawaii, pp. 16-22. Position paper also published 
electronically. 
    See: http://semanticweb2002.aifb.uni-karlsruhe.de/proceedings/Position/veltmann.pdf. 
Reprinted in Cultivate Interactive, Issue 7, June 2002  
    See: http://www.cultivate-int.org/issue7/semanticweb/ ).   
See also the author’s: “Syntactic and Semantic Interoperability, New Approaches to 
Knowledge and the Semantic Web," New Review of Information Networking, 
Cambridge: Taylor Graham, Volume 7, 2001, pp. 159-183. 
166 Pablo Gamallo, Marco Gonzalez, Alexandre Agustini, Gabriel Lopes, and Vera S. de 
Lima 
Abstract, 
Mapping 
Syntactic 
Dependencies 
onto 
Semantic 
Relations.  
    See: 
www-sop.inria.fr/acacia/WORKSHOPS/ECAI2002-OLT/ 
Proceedings/Gamallo.pdf 
167 See for example a very useful article by Uta Priss, “Alternatives to the ‘Semantic 
Web’: Multi-Strategy Knowledge Organisation” in: The Seventh International ISKO 
Conference. Granada, Spain, 3-6 July 2002 and the journal Knowledge Organisation.   
168 ASIS&t.  
     See: http://www.asis.org/ 
169 IFLA.  
     See: http://www.ifla.org/. As reviewer three rightly points out, enabling dynamic 
access to cultural and historical dimensions of knowledge is central to discussions in 
these organizations concerning: “issues of boundary crossing in time, space, language, 
and culture, ethics of globalization; cultural hospitality; multilingual and multicultural 
access to information; metadata etc.” 
We have not considered a full review of these issues since this would take us far beyond 
the limitations of the five issues that concern us here. Interested readers are advised to 
study the books mentioned in the next footnote.    
170  Relationships in the Organization of Knowledge, ed. Carol A. Bean, Rebecca Green, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001; The Semantics of Relationships. An 

 
80 
                                                                                                                                                                             
Interdisciplinary Perspective, ed. Rebecca Green, Carol A. Bean, Sung Hyon Myaeng, 
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002. These books also offer an excellent 
survey of recent literature.   
171 Cf. again the IMASS project mentioned earlier. 
     See: www.i-massweb.org 
172  Cf. the study by Francesca Monti and Suzanne Keene on the DEER under E-Culture 
Net. See: http://www.eculturenet.org/FP5/publicPDF/deliverable11a.pdf.   
173 It is instructive that Dr. Robert Kahn, active in the Internet Society and in the U.S. 
Corporation for National Research Initiatives has similar ideas with respect to the use of 
Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs). Robert Kahn, Testimony before the Subcommittee on 
Basic Research of the Committee on Science on the subject of Internet Domain Names 
     See: http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/testimony.html 
174 It will be noted that this can be done without abandoning the concept of objectivity. 
One is not saying that claims about maps are fully subjective: simply that more than one 
claim exists.   
175 E.g. IRCs, MUDS, MUSHs. 
176 If we had to subject every statement of a friend to a logical truth or trust process, it 
would reflect poorly on our concept of friendship.  
177 This problem is discussed in more detail in the author’s: “Four Ways that Digital 
Communications are Transforming Scholarship:  Sources, Names, Claims and Scope.” 
Submitted to INET 2004.  
178 We are often distracted, for instance, by the daily challenges of moving from one 
operating system, from one format to another, from one file name to another. The scale of 
this revolution is too easily reduced to quick statistics: that what began as a toy for a 
handful of “geeks” a few decades ago is now used daily by 10% of the world’s 
population, which means that over 7 million new Internet pages are being added daily.  
179 For a further discussion of this idea see the excellent report by Suzanne Keene and 
Francesca Monti on the DEER produced for E-Culture Net.     
   See: http://137.120.135.183/FP5/publicPDF/deliverable11a.pdf. 
    Cf. http://res2.agr.gc.ca/ecorc/cnc/histo_e.htm 
180 Unless we find new ways to remember what we have done as humans, and new ways 
to perceive these accomplishments, we risk losing insight into what it is that makes us 
unique as humans. In which case, the technologies that some now fear would truly 
become a threat, rather than providing us with new tools to extend our horizons.  
181 In terms of our space-time horizon (cf. figure 4) the initial division would have looked 
as follows: 
Geometry 
Form 
Arithmetic 
Number  
Dialectic  
Logic 
------------------------------------Space-Time Horizon-------------------------------------------- 
Astronomy 
Music  
Grammar  
Rhetoric 
The mediaeval constellation of the seven liberal arts began to bridge this horizon.  

 
81 
                                                                                                                                                                             
One of the strengths and at the same time principal weaknesses of the Greek approach to 
knowledge was a sharp specialization of the sciences, such that those who studied shape 
and form (geometry) tended not to study number (arithmetic). One of the great 
contributions of the Arabs was to begin a reconciliation of form and number, theory and 
practice, which then led via the late Middle Ages and Renaissance to the synthesis 
foreseen by Leonardo and carried through by Galileo and his successors.   
182 Eric A. Havelock, Preface to Plato, Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press, 
Belknap Press, 1963. 
183 Socrates spoke philosophy but did not write it. Hence the generations of his student 
Plato and Plato’s student Aristotle represented much more than a productive moment in 
the history of thought. 
184 Both Marshall and Eric McLuhan claim that early grammar also entailed etymology. 
Notwithstanding the famous work by Isidore of Seville, the term, etymology, in the sense 
of “tracing of a word to its original” did not enter into English until 1725 (see Oxford 
English Dictionary).  
185 Marshall Mcluhan, “The Place of Thomas Nashe in the Learning of his Time,” 
Unpublished PhD.Thesis, Cambridge University, 1942. 
186 The son of Marshall McLuhan. 
187 Eric Mcluhan, “On Formal Cause,” Unpublished Manuscript, July 2003, due to be 
published by Fordham University.  
188 Denise Schmandt Besserat,  'Before Writing', vol. 1: 'From Counting to Cuneiform,' 
University of Texas Press, 1992.  
    Cf. Chapter 4 of John Heise's 'Akkadian language' on the origin and development of 
cuneiform.  
     See: http://saturn.sron.nl/~jheise/akkadian/cuneiform.html. . 
189 Eusebius, Chapters XXVII-XXXII in: Library of Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, 2nd 
series (New York: Christian Literature Co., 1990), Vol I, 489-91. 
     Medieval Sourcebook. Eusebius. The Conversion of Constantine. 
     See: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/conv-const.html 
     Cf. 6.The Conversion of Constantine  
     See: http://isthmia.ohio-state.edu/teg/50501/6.htm 
190 Plotinus 205-270. 
     See: http://www.island-of-freedom.com/PLOTINUS.HTM 
191 John F. Sowa, Knowledge Representation. Logical, Philosophical and Computational 
Foundations, Pacific Grove: Brooks/Cole, 2000, p. 4. Cf. 
The Internet Encylopaedia of Philosophy under Neo-Platonism.  
     See: 
http://www.utm.edu/research/iep/n/neoplato.htm#Part%20II.%20Porphyry%20and%20Ia
mblichus.  
   Cf. Northwestern University Library. Classics.  
   See: http://www.library.northwestern.edu/collections/classics/ for a fresco painting of 
the Tree of Porphyry: Classification method based on dichotomies, as rendered on the 
ceiling fresco of the library at Schussenried, near Ulm, Germany. Artist: Franz Georg 
Herrmann (1757). (Photograph by J. Garrett, October 2000). 
192 Arthur Oncken Lovejoy, Great Chain of Being: A Study of the History of an Idea, 
Boston: Harvard University Press, 1936.  

 
82 
                                                                                                                                                                             
193 When the Academy closed in Athens seven scholars took its learning to Gundishapur 
which became a centre of learning where Greco-Roman learning was translated into 
Arabic. Cf. The Land of Tajiks.  
See: http://www.geocities.com/tajikland/History.html. From there a corpus of Greco-
Roman knowledge in Arabic moved westwards only to be translated anew into Latin at 
centres such as Toledo.  
194 For a background on Raymond Lull (Ramon Lullius) cf. 1274 A.D. Raymond Lull’s 
Ars Magna.  
   See: http://www.maxmon.com/1274ad.htm 
  For a survey and translation of his Great Art cf. Ars magna   
  See: http://lullianarts.net/Ars-Magna/ars-magna.htm.  
  Lull has nine levels of being which he calls subjects:  
1. God  
2. Angels  
3.    Heaven 
4. Man 
5. Imaginative 
6. Sensitive 
7. Vegetative  
8. Elementative 
9. Instrumentative  
Dahlberg (1995, as in note 24), figure 13 makes interesting parallels between her 
questions and those of Raymond Lull.  
195 Prior to Abbot Suger, the recapture of Toledo by the Christians in 1086 was an 
important moment in this development. CF. SF Timeline 12th Century. 
   See: http://www.magicdragon.com/UltimateSF/timeline12.html for a brief summary of 
chief translators. For a thorough overview see the Catalogus translationum et 
commentariorum, ed. P. O. Kristeller and F. E. Crantz, 4 vols (Washington DC 1960 etc.) 
and now continued by Virginia Brown.  
196 This translation was carried out by Herman of Carinthia (Herman Dalmatin) and 
Robert of Chester (Robert of Ketton). Istrianet.org under Herman Dalmatin. 
     See: http://www.istrians.com/istria/illustri/dalmatin/. 
197 St. Augustine, Enarrationes in Psalmos, XLV, 7 (PL 36,518). Cited in G. Tanzella-
Nitti, The Book of Nature and the God of Scientists according to the 
Encyclical Fides et Ratio, Invited talk at the Jubilee for Men and Women from the World 
of Learning, Vatican City, May, 23, 2000.  
   See: http://www.usc.urbe.it/html/php/tanzella/nature.rtf.  Eric McLuhan building on the 
work of his father (as in note 6 above, cf. note 14) has argued that it was the grammarians 
with their commitment to etymology and interpretation who gradually combined a study 
of the Bible as the Book of God and the natural world as the Book of Nature in which one 
saw God’s creations. 
198Dorothy Verkerk, Early Medieval Bible Illumination and the Ashburnham Pentateuch.  
See: http://assets.cambridge.org/0521829178/sample/0521829178WS.pdf 
199 
See: 
http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/u/eahyvone/presentations/Usix2Ontologiat2003-01-
26.pdf 
200 See: http://www.library.northwestern.edu/collections/classics/ 

 
83 
                                                                                                                                                                             
201 This is generally accepted as being by another author. 
202 Hugh of Saint Victor in the 12th century was an important exponent of this comparison 
between the two books.  
     Cf. The Electronic Labyrinth. The Book of Nature. 
      See: http://www.iath.virginia.edu/elab/hfl0247.html. 
203 The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition.  2001, Hugh of Saint Victor.  
      See: http://www.bartleby.com/65/hu/HughStVi.html 
204 See the article by Tanzelli-Nitti cited in note 191 above. 
205 Joseph C. Pitt, Galileo, Human Knowledge, and the Book of Nature: Method Replaces 
Metaphysics, Dordrecht: Kluwer Publishers, 1982. The idea that the book of nature is 
written in alphabet of mathematics had been expressed earlier by Christopher Clavius in 
his introduction to Euclid’s Elements.   
206 Cf. the Encylopedia Britannica (1911 ed.) article on Vincent of Beauvais:  
     See: http://5.1911encyclopedia.org/V/VI/VINCENT_OF_BEAUVAIS.htm 
     Cf. Vincent of Beauvais, Bibliography.  
     See: http://www.cs.uu.nl/groups/IK/archives/vincent/bibl/subj/sm_g.htm#home 
207 New Advent. Vincent of Beauvais.  
     See: http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/15439a.htm 
208 Alistair Crombie, Robert Grosseteste and the Origins of Experimental Science: 1100-
1700, London-New York: Oxford UP, 1971. While some critics insist that the case is 
overstated, the growing importance given to the natural world and experience remains an 
important point. Grosseteste was inspired partly by Arabic knowledge translated by 
Gundissalinus and others. 
209 In so doing Aquinas was closer in spirit than might first appear to the Franciscan, 
Grosseteste, a founder of Oxford, who claimed that the bridge between theory and 
practice lay in the realm of experience and experiment and who Alistair Crombie has 
credited as being one of the fathers of experimental science.  
210 This has been discussed in more detail in the author’s Literature on Perspective. 
     See: http://www.mmi.unimaas.nl/people/Veltman/books/vol3/ch1.htm. 
 For another interpretation of the role of Albert the Great and Roger Bacon, cf. the 
Jacques Mauritain Center under The Experimental Sciences -- Albertus Magnus -- Roger 
Bacon. 
     See: http://www.nd.edu/Departments/Maritain/etext/staamp3.htm#CULTI 
211 1265 was also the year Clement IV permitted Thomas Aquinas to begin his Summa. 
212 E. I. Samurin, Geschichte der bibliothekarish-bibliographischen Klassificaktion, 
Munich: Verlag Dokumentation, 1977, 2 Vols. Original published in Russian, 1955-1959.  
213 Pierre Duhem, SOZEIN TA PHAINOMENA, Saving the appearances, Original French: 
1906. English translation: Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969.  
214 Pierre Duhem has traced the history of cosmologies in his monumental: Le Système du 
Monde. Histoire des doctrines cosmologiques de Platon à Copernic. Paris, 1913-[59]. 8o. 
10 volumes. 
215 Pierre Duhem (1861-1916) was one of the first to explore in detail how many of the 
Renaissance developments in statics and mechanics had their roots in mediaeval 
philosophy and science. Cf. his: The evolution of mechanics Alphen aan den Rijn: 
Sijthoff, 1980 and The origins of statics. The sources of physical theory. Pierre Duhem. 
translated from the French by Grant F. Leneaux, Victor N. Vagliente, Guy H. Wagener 

 
84 
                                                                                                                                                                             
Dordrecht, London: Kluwer Academic, 1991 (Boston studies in the philosophy of 
science. v.123). 
216  Dana class.  
      See: http://webmineral.com/danaclass.shtml 
217  Elements and Atoms: Case Studies in the Development of Chemistry. 
       See: http://webserver.lemoyne.edu/faculty/giunta/EA/CONTENTS.HTML 
218  Ibid.  
      See: http://webserver.lemoyne.edu/faculty/giunta/EA/CLASSIFICATION.HTML 
219  E.g Derwent chemical classification.  
      See: http://thomsonderwent.com/support/dwpiref/reftools/classification/#chem 
220  E.g. IUPAC nomenclature organic chemistry. 
      See: http://www.acdlabs.com/iupac/nomenclature/  
      Cf. Organic chemistry resources. 
      See: http://www.organicworldwide.net/ 
221  Strunz Class.  
      See: http://webmineral.com/strunz.shtml 
222  First Scientific Descriptions. 
      See: http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/e01/01a.htm 
223  History of Horticulture. Dioscorides, Pedacius or Pedanios 40-90. 
      See: http://www.hcs.ohio-state.edu/hort/history/020.html.  
      Cf. Scienceworld.worfram.com under Dioscorides. 
      See: http://scienceworld.wolfram.com/biography/Dioscorides.html 
224 Re: Global voyages of Linnaeus’ students: Rob. E. Fries’ "De Linneanska 
‘Apostlarnas’ Resor: Kommentarer Till Enkarta" in Svenska Linné-Sällskapets Arsskrift 
(Vol. 33–34, 1950–1951). Cf. Order from Chaos. Linaeus Disposes. See: 
http://huntbot.andrew.cmu.edu/HIBD/Exhibitions/OrderFromChaos/pages/03The%20Lin
naean%20inheritance/students.shtml 
225  Linnaeus Link.  
      See: http://www.nhm.ac.uk/library/linn/ 
226  Potager du Roi. 
      See: http://www.potager-du-roi.fr/. This was also one of the starting points for 
Lavoisier’s work in chemistry. 
227  Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.  
      See: http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/index.html 
228  Ibid., Collections, Herbarium Collections. 
      See: http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/collections/herbcol.html 
229  AOL.Hometown. Scientific Naming Lesson. 
      See: http://members.aol.com/KSmith9526/SciName.htm 
230  See: http://arnica.csustan.edu/boty3700/lectures/history.htm 
231 Based on:  K. Sprengel, Geschichte der Botanik, 2 Bände. Altenburg und Leipzig: F. 
A. Brockhaus 1817 under Renaissance.  
     See: http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/e01/01d.htm 
     Cf. Botanik online - The Internet Hypertextbook  
      See: http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/d00/inhalt.htm 
232  Linaean Classification of Humans. 
      See: http://anthro.palomar.edu/animal/table_humans.htm 

 
85 
                                                                                                                                                                             
233   Systematischer Bandkatalog bis 1964/1965: Übersicht über die Systematikgruppen 
und einige wichtige Untergruppen.  
      See: http://novsrv3.ub.tuwien.ac.at/bandkatalog/kurzsystematik.html 
234  Royal College of Surgeons of England under John Hunter. 
    See: http://www.rcseng.ac.uk/services/museums/history/john_hunter_html 
235 Karl Ernst von Baer. 
    See: http://www.serpentfd.org/b/vonbaer.html 
236 OED. 
237 OED. 
238 OED. Cites C.W. Salesby in Academy June 394/1. 
239 OED. Cf. 1899, Cf. E. Haeckel, 1899. Riddle of the Universe at the Close of 
the Nineteenth Century: 
I established the opposite view, that this history of the embryo (ontogeny) 
must be completed by a second, equally valuable, and closely connected 
branch of thought - the history of race (phylogeny). Both of these branches 
of evolutionary science, are, in my opinion, in the closest causal 
connection; this arises from the reciprocal action of the laws of heredity 
and adaptation... 'ontogenesis is a brief and rapid recapitulation of 
phylogenesis, determined by the physiological functions of heredity 
(generation) and adaptation (maintenance).'" 
     Ernst Haeckel (1834-1919) 
     See: http://www.ucmp.berkeley.edu/history/haeckel.html 
240  Ibid. 
241  History of Plant Taxonomy.  
    See: http://arnica.csustan.edu/boty3700/lectures/history.htm 
242 Monaco Educational Service. Taxonomy. See:   
http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/w/x/wxm15/Online/Taxonomy/taxonomy_lec01.htm 
243 Spaces of Classification. 
    See: http://www.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/CLASSIFICATION/. 
Cf. a site on basis for classification under Monaco Educational Services under 
Taxonomy. See:  
http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/w/x/wxm15/Online/Taxonomy/taxonomy_lec01.htm
#Basis%20for%20classification 
244 Datenbanken für Taxonomen und verschiedene Organismengruppen. 
     Online directories for Experts in Taxonomy and for selected Taxa 
     See: http://biosys-serv.biologie.uni-ulm.de/expertdatei/databases.html 
245 World Taxonomist Database.  
     See: http://www.eti.uva.nl/Database/WTD.html 
246 The Global Taxonomy Initiative (GTI)  
     See: http://www.nhm.ac.uk/science/biodiversity/gti.html 
247 Chapter 10. Classification of Microorganisms Cf.  
http://207.233.44.253/wms/reynolmj/lifesciences/lecturenote/mic20/Ch10Classification.p
df 
  
 
 

 
86 
                                                                                                                                                                             
248 R.H. Whitaker, See: Unlocking the Mysteries. Kingdoms:     
       Cf. http://www.usoe.k12.ut.us/curr/science/sciber00/7th/classify/sciber/5king1.htm 
Cf. Scientific Naming Lesson: 
     See: http://hometown.aol.com/ksmith9526/SciName.htm 
249 See: http://www.usoe.k12.ut.us/curr/science/sciber00/7th/classify/sciber/5king2.htm 
250 Arthur Cronquist, An Integrated System of Classification of Flowering Plants, New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1992.  
    Cf. http://www.nybg.org/bsci/libr/Cronweb3.htm 
251 Armen Takhtajan, Evolutionary Trends in Flowering Plants, New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1991.  
       See: 
http://employees.csbsju.edu/ssaupe/biol308/Course_Materials/classification-
evol.htm 
252  Willi Hennig Society.  
      See: http://www.cladistics.org/about.html 
253  Taxonomy. See: 
http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/w/x/wxm15/Online/Taxonomy/taxonomy_lec01.htm
#Basis%20for%20classification 
254 Molecular Systematics and Evolution.  
      See: http://www.bioinf.org/molsys/ 
255 Jeffrey D. Palmer, Moleculat Evolution.  
     See: http://www.bio.indiana.edu/facultyresearch/faculty/Palmer.html 
256  J.T. Huber and J.M. Cumming, HISTORY OF THE CANADIAN NATIONAL 
COLLECTION OF INSECTS, ARACHNIDS AND NEMATODES. 
     See: http://res2.agr.gc.ca/ecorc/cnc/histo_e.htm 
257  Cf. the homology site. 
     See: 
http://www.bio.indiana.edu/courses/S318-brodie/S318/S318lect23-
homology&class.html 
258 Principles of Classification. 
     See: http://anthro.palomar.edu/animal/animal_2.htm 
259 For hierarchies  
      See: http://biology.fullerton.edu/courses/biol_403/Web/Hierarchies.html 
260  Cf. the work on similarities as a basis of classification adapted by William J. Monaco 
Educational Service. See:  
http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/w/x/wxm15/Online/Taxonomy/taxonomy_lec01.htm
#Basis%20for%20classification 
261  See: http://biology.queensu.ca/~biol440/Biol440_Lec03_SpeciesDefs.pdf 
262 John S Wilkins, A Taxonomy of Species Definitions. Or, Porphyry's Metatree. 
Work in progress - version of 13/5/97. 
    See: http://www.users.bigpond.com/thewilkins/papers/metataxo.htm 
263 This diagram is from G. Ramel at: http://www.earthlife.net/kingdom.html. For an 
excellent introduction to these different views of kingdoms  
   See: 
http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/w/x/wxm15/Online/Taxonomy/taxonomy_lec01.htm 
264 Michael F. Claridge, H. A. Dawah, M. R. Wilson, eds.,  Species: The Units of 
Biodiversity (Systematics Association, Systematics Association Symposium on 'the Units 
of Biodiversity: Species), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997 (Systematics 

 
87 
                                                                                                                                                                             
Association Special Volume Series, 54); Jared M. Diamond, “Zoological classification of 
a primitive people,” Science, 151, 1966, pp. 1102-1105.  cf. Ethnobiology.  
    See: http://www.anthro.washington.edu/Faculty/Faculty%20Syllabi/Anth/Anth458.htm 
B. Berlin, “Folk Systematics in Relation to Biological Classification and Nomenclature,” 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, volume 4, 1073, pp. 259-271. Cf.  
      Folk and pre-Linnaean taxonomy. 
      See: http://www.botany.utoronto.ca/courses/bot300/lectures/300-21-Jan-03.html.  
      People and Plants online. Lecture 12. Ethnobiological classification: categorization  
      See: http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/peopleplants/regions/thailand/lecture12.htm 
265  Watson and Crick describe structure of DNA 1953. 
      See: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aso/databank/entries/do53dn.html 
266  DNA and Passerine Classification.  
      See: http://www.stanfordalumni.org/birdsite/text/essays/DNA.html 
267 Researchers are increasingly turning to non-mechanical metaphors in design. Cf. Järvi, 
Outi, “The sign theories of Eugen Wüster and Charles S. Peirce as tools in research of 
graphical computer user interfaces,” Teoksessa: Terminology Science & Research. 
Journal of the International Institute for Terminology Research IITF. Ed. Heribert Picht. 
International Network for Terminology (TermNet), Wien. 1997, pp. 63-72. The rise of 
organic metaphors in interface design is the topic of a dissertation by my student Nik 
Baerten. 
268 On De la Mettrie under History of Telepresence at TU Darmstadt: 
 See: 
http://nibbler.tk.informatik.tu-
darmstadt.de/public_www/arun/telepresence_and_rejection_of_the_body.pdf 
269 Automata. See: http://www.culture.com.au/brain_proj/CONTENT/NETS_02.HTM 

