© 2008 The Authors
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
Johanna Nichols
University of California, Berkeley
Tandy Warnow*
University of Texas
Abstract
Over the last 10 or more years, there has been a tremendous increase in the use
of computational techniques (many of which come directly from biology) for
estimating evolutionary histories (i.e., phylogenies) of languages. This tutorial
surveys the different methods and different types of linguistic data that have been
used to estimate phylogenies, explains the scientific and mathematical foundations
of phylogenetic estimation, and presents methodologies for evaluating a phylogeny
estimation method.
1. Introduction
Over the last 10 or more years, there has been a tremendous increase in
the use of computational techniques (many of which come directly from
biology) for estimating evolutionary histories of languages. Despite the
enthusiasm with which the popular press has received these studies, it is
probably fair to say that much of the community of historical linguists has
been skeptical of the claims made by these studies, and perhaps even
dubious of the potential for such approaches to be of use.
Indeed, while we ourselves are quite positive about the use of compu-
tational techniques for phylogenetic estimation in linguistics, it is quite
difficult to evaluate phylogeny estimation methods, since the true evolu-
tionary history of any language family is rarely perfectly known. As a
result, our position is that any evaluation of computational techniques (or
of phylogenetic estimations that are based on such techniques) requires a
good understanding of the scientific methodology by which phylogeny
estimation methods are evaluated. Explaining this methodology, and
showing how it has been applied to phylogeny estimation methods in
linguistics, is one of the purposes of this article. In addition, we will
survey the attempts to use computational methods in historical linguistics,
and explain what can be deduced from these analyses – whether about
linguistic evolution or about the phylogeny estimation methods themselves.

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
761
A proper evaluation of a phylogenetic analysis also requires a discussion
and critique of the data, since these greatly impact the phylogenetic
estimation; our discussion will also address these issues.
2. Basics
2.1. TREES
From a graph-theoretic perspective, a ‘tree’ is defined to be a connected
acyclic graph consisting of a set of ‘vertices’ (also known as ‘nodes’) and
a set of ‘edges’, each of which connects a pair of vertices. The statement
that the graph is a connected acyclic graph means that there is exactly one
path between every two vertices. Saying that the tree is rooted means that
the graph has a distinguished vertex (called the root). In our context,
where trees represent the evolutionary history of a set of languages, the
root represents the common ancestor of the daughter languages, the lan-
guages are represented by the leaves of the tree, the remaining internal
nodes of the tree represent intermediate ancestral languages, and the
branching order indicated by the tree represents the diversification of the
group of languages into subfamilies. A more precise statement is that each
language in the input is represented by a path in the tree, representing the
language in its different states as it evolved over time. Finally, most phyl-
ogenetic trees in biology are assumed to be binary (also called ‘bifurcating’,
or ‘fully resolved’), which means that every non-leaf (i.e., non-terminal)
node has two daughters (called ‘children’ in the graph-theoretic literature);
this assumption is not as strongly held in linguistics, however. Example (1)
illustrates these concepts in a diagram of a tree. Note that while linguistics
and biology use much the same terms for different parts of trees, these are
sometimes different from the terms used in computer science. Also, nodes
are also referred to as ‘vertices’, and terminal nodes are also referred to as
‘tips’ or ‘taxa’ (the singular of which is ‘taxon’).
Example (1) is a rooted, or hierarchical, tree in which the top node
amounts to the biological or linguistic ancestor (or protolanguage). It
shows ancestral nodes for the groups abcd, abc, and bc. An example of an
unrooted tree is (2):
(1)

762
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Note that this unrooted tree can be rooted on any of the edges in the
tree, and hence is compatible with five different rooted trees (one for each
edge). In particular, it is compatible with both of the following trees:
Where to root the tree and the ancestral groups this entails are important
questions in historical linguistics (the question of whether Indo-European
split first into Anatolian vs. the ancestor of the rest is a question of this
type). However, most phylogenetic methods do not impose rootings; see
Section 2.6.2 below.
The trees we have drawn here are called ‘binary trees’, since, as rooted
trees, each node has two daughters (so the evolutionary history is bifur-
cating). However, estimated phylogenetic trees are not always binary trees
for a number of reasons. For example, phylogenies based on phonological
innovations may produce clear subgroups, but be unable to resolve the
relationships between the subgroups or the further subgroupings within
the subgroups. In these cases, the tree that is proposed for the family may
have one or more nodes with many children (which we express by saying
the node has ‘high degree’, or more generally by saying the tree is ‘not
resolved’). As an example, the root of a widely accepted tree for Indo-
European has 10 children, one for each of the established subgroups
(Germanic, Italic, Celtic, Balto-Slavic, Indo-Iranian, Albanian, Greek,
Armenian, Tocharian, and Anatolian). This tree is almost certainly incorrect
if interpreted strictly as indicating a precisely simultaneous radiation, but
rather is supposed to be interpreted as being consistent with any of its
binary resolutions.
2.2. NETWORKS
Trees are often reasonable models of evolution, but sometimes a network
model is more appropriate. For example, when creolization or language
mixture occurs the correct graphical model will contain additional edges
between branches in order to indicate the dual parentage. Similarly, when
there is borrowing between languages, the proper graphical model will
(2)
(3)

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
763
reflect that borrowing through the addition of contact edges. Such graphical
models are called ‘explicit phylogenetic networks’ since they represent an
explicit evolutionary scenario. Networks may be drawn as rooted directed
graphs, so that each edge has a direction, generally reflecting elapsed time,
so that the edge is directed from the parent language to the daughter
language. Contact edges may be bidirectional, if both lineages borrowed
from each other, or unidirectional if all the borrowing went from one
lineage into the other. Note that if these graphs are considered as undir-
ected graphs, then they contain cycles; however, as directed graphs these
graphs are considered to be acyclic (since every undirected cycle will
contain at least one node with two incoming edges). Thus, while a tree
is a very simple kind of phylogenetic network, in general phylogenetic
networks are not trees.
Explicit phylogenetic networks have appeared in phylogenetic analyses
of Indo-European (Nakhleh et al. 2005a), and have been used in simulation
studies (McMahon and McMahon 2005: 111–18; also Barbançon et al.
forthcoming). An example of an explicit phylogenetic network is (4),
which represents contact between the branches leading to leaves w and x
via the horizontal line between the branches. Note that this graph clearly
defines an underlying genetic tree as well as the distinct contact event.
Furthermore, we could have directed the contact edge to indicate the
directionality of the borrowing.
Other types of phylogenetic network are based on representations of
‘splits’, and produce graphs like (5) (redrawn from the graph for Celtic in
McMahon and McMahon 2005: 196; dotted lines h–l are other Indo-
European branches):
This graph is not acyclic (in that there is more than one way to get
from a to c or f, or from e to g, etc.), and so is not a tree. There are distinct
differences between this type of phylogenetic network and the explicit
phylogenetic networks given above. This graph does not explicitly indicate
(4)
(5)

764
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
any evolutionary scenario, and instead represents graphically how the
input data (distances or characters) do not fit a tree exactly. Thus, the
graph represents a combination of tree-like signal and the noise in
the data. In particular, the internal nodes of this graph do not represent
ancestors of the given languages, but are introduced in order to make
possible the representation of the conflict between the different splits that
are produced in the data analysis. This makes the interpretation of the
graph somewhat difficult – do the parallel lines represent contact events,
homoplasy (either independent parallel development or backmutation, the
reappearance of a state that occurred at an ancestor – see pages 18–20 of
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/newton-linguistics.ppt), or just
deviation from tree-like data due to having an insufficient number of
characters? For these reasons, such a graph is known as an implicit net-
work. The difference between implicit and explicit networks is important
[and almost all network estimation methods, for example, NeighborNet
(Bryant and Moulton 2002, 2004), Network, Splits Tree, etc., produce
implicit phylogenetic networks], but most users of phylogenetic networks
seem to be unaware of these differences. See, however, Huson and Bryant
(2006) for a discussion of these differences, and McMahon and McMahon
(2005: Chapter 6) for a comparison between different implicit phylogenetic
network methods.
Careful and appropriate modeling of dialect chains is yet another matter,
since instead of a few discrete contact events there is an essentially con-
tinuous exchange between dialects governed primarily by geographic and
temporal proximity. Such scenarios require yet more complicated graphs,
which in no real sense resemble phylogenetic trees. The estimation of
such graphs is beyond the scope of this article.
2.3. CHARACTERS AND CODING OF CHARACTERS
The input to a phylogenetic analysis is generally a data matrix, where the
rows represent the given taxa (in this case languages), and the columns
represent different features by which the languages are described. These
comparanda are known as characters in biology (so that the data matrix is
also called a ‘character matrix’), and variously as features, traits, properties,
variables, and probably other terms in linguistics. Linguistic characters can
be divided into two kinds. Cognates are individual morphemes consisting
of a form and a function or meaning and demonstrably inherited from a
unique ancestor, as proven by regular sound correspondences. Examples
are English two and German zwei from Proto-Germanic, or these plus
Latin duo, Polish dwa, Armenian erku, etc. from Proto-Indo-European.
Note that each cognate set or its ancestral form is a unique or particular
individual. It can be inherited, lost, changed, or borrowed, but by defi-
nition it cannot recur independently. (An accidentally homophonous
word may occur independently, but it is a historically unrelated word and

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
765
not a cognate.) Slightly broader but similar to cognates are phyletic characters
such as the change of *s to *š or the like after *r, *k, *u, or *i in early
Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian (branches of Indo-European), known as
the ruki rule. This is a type of assimilation and might recur in principle,
but it is sufficiently specific, even quirky, that it can be presumed to be
non-homoplastic, that is, unique in the family.
Very different are typological (in biology, phenetic) characters. These
are types and are expected to recur by definition (in biological terms, to
be homoplastic). Examples might include glottalized consonants, tone
systems, accusative alignment in nouns, dual number, case-number coex-
ponence, OV word order, first person singular pronoun in m-. These are
all drawn from Haspelmath et al. 2005, where each is attested in languages
of more than one family. Typological characters are homoplastic by
definition. Cognates are non-homoplastic by definition, but they may
undergo phonological and/or morphological changes and/or semantic
shifts that recur, that is, are homoplastic. Cognates are morphemes
(lexical items, roots, and grammatical morphemes) or larger constructions;
typological characters can come from any and all parts of the grammar
and lexicon. Biological characters have long been exclusively typological
(though this is not a biological term), but molecular genetics makes it
possible to define characters that are sufficiently rare and specific as to be
unique for all practical purposes.
Lexicostatistics is the cover term for phylogenetic techniques that use
the words of languages as characters. Lexicostatistics is usually spoken of
as using wordlists (e.g., Kessler 2001), but in fact what it actually uses is
lists of glosses, that is, overlaying on each language an etic semantic grid
for which the investigator finds the word that surfaces in each semantic
cell. The different character states are then the different forms that occur
in the same gloss slot in different languages. Commonly used gloss lists
are the 100-word and 200-word lists of Swadesh (1952, 1955, see also Lees
1953), but others exist that are adapted to particular language areas [e.g.,
Matisoff 2000 for Southeast Asia, Alpher and Nash 1999 for Australia,
Blust for Oceania (references in Blust 2000)]. An example of a gloss list
approach is these Swadesh list fragments from English, French, Russian, and
(unrelated) Ingush. Character states, the different values for each feature
or variable, are numbered for each gloss. Known cognates are coded as
the same character state.
Gloss
English
French
Russian
Ingush
BLOOD
blood (1)
sang (2)
krov’ (3)
c’ii (4)
BONE
bone (1)
os (2)
kost’ (2?)
t’exk (3)
DOG
dog (1)
chien (2)
sobaka (3)
zhwalii (4)
HEART
heart (1)
coeur (1)
serdce (1)
dog (2)
SUN
sun (1)
soleil (1)
solnce (1)
maalx (2)

766
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Some lexicostatistical approaches track not just the character states for
glosses but also, and chiefly, which states are cognate and inherited from
the protolanguage. (In contrast, what the classic comparative method usually
tracks is not glosses and not cognacy of glosses but cognate forms and
their development regardless of meaning shifts undergone.)
As examples of types of linguistic characters, a series of studies by
Ringe and Warnow and their colleagues (Ringe et al. 2002; Nakhleh
et al. 2005a) seek out cognates and diagnostic phyletic characters that are
non-homoplastic. Dunn et al. survey exclusively typological characters
that are quite homoplastic. Saunders (2005) and Wichmann and Saunders
(2007) combine typological and lexical characters.
2.4. CHANGE
Language change is ongoing constantly in all languages. Its cumulative
effects over time produce dialect splits, then non-intelligibility, then dis-
tant relatedness, and ultimately loss of any evidence of relatedness by
descent. Change can affect characters in various ways; for example, the
following changes can affect words:
• loss with replacement (by a different word or morpheme);
• partial change (e.g., a word is suffixed, derived, or reanalyzed);
• change at one level that does not affect change at another (e.g., sound change
that does not affect morphological structure or the identity of cognates);
• splitting of one word into two separate derivatives; and
• addition of a new word in the same sense or a similar sense to an
existing one, creating homophony (a form of polymorphy)
In lexicostatistics, it is normally only loss and replacement that are
modeled, that is, the character states are cognates and the various borrowings
or innovations that replace them in individual languages. The database for
Dyen et al. (1992) codes each lexeme as cognate or not for each pair of
languages. Strictly speaking, an unchanged cognate and one changed by
derivation probably should be represented as different character changes:
for example, English five and Latin quinque are one character state, while
Russian pjat’, reflecting the same root plus an originally ordinal suffix *-t-,
is another. Alternatively, this derivation could be entered as a phyletic character
in its own right, reflecting an innovation in one branch. Serva and Petroni
(2008) take the unusual tack of representing lexical substitutions not as
holistic character state changes but as distances measured by sound changes,
phoneme by phoneme (or letter by letter) (see Section 5.1.3 below).
2.5. STATISTICAL MODELS OF LANGUAGE EVOLUTION
Statistical models of language evolution are critical to understanding phy-
logeny estimation methods for many reasons. The most obvious reason is

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
767
that some of the newer methods (e.g., the Bayesian methods of Nicholls
and Gray 2008 or Gray and Atkinson 2003) explicitly reference a statistical
model of language evolution, and use the properties of the model to
estimate the evolutionary history. However, even methods that are not
explicitly statistical can be studied using simulations, and these simulations
have to depend on some explicit statistical model. We therefore begin
with a discussion of stochastic processes.
A stochastic process for phylogenetic purposes describes how a set of
traits (i.e., characters) evolves within a family of languages. Each trait can
assume several states, and changes between the states will occur with some
probability on each of the branches of the tree. The probability with
which the trait will change its state can depend on the branch, and it can
also depend on the character; thus, stochastic processes need not assume
that all characters evolve identically, nor that a given character evolves
identically on all branches of the tree. Furthermore, although it is generally
assumed that characters will evolve independently (so that changes in one
character will not impact the probability of change for another character),
this is not always the case; the stochastic process will thus make an explicit
statement about the independence or lack thereof between characters.
Character states can also be borrowed (i.e., transferred from one language
to another), and creolization or language mixture can occur, both conditions
thus requiring that network models of evolution (rather than tree models)
be used. The incidence of homoplasy must also be modeled. Some stochastic
models forbid homoplasy (so that all state changes produce new states),
while some allow it. Finally, polymorphism (meaning that a character
exhibits two or more states in one language; examples are two words, like
rock and stone, for a given meaning) must also be addressed. Thus, in each
model, the process by which character states change, the degree to which
characters evolve homoplastically, the amount of polymorphism (both in
terms of percentage of characters that exhibit it and the number of states
that are permitted to simultaneously be present in one language for one
character), the amount of borrowing (both in terms of number of contact
events and the percentage of characters that evolve with borrowing), and
the degree to which different characters are allowed to evolve differently,
must be addressed.
We now describe some of the different models that have been proposed
in linguistics. The simplest example of a stochastic model is for binary
(i.e., two-state) characters (with State 0 representing the absence, and
State 1 representing the presence, of some feature). A parametric model
of how such characters might evolve would consist of a tree with the
leaves labeled by the set of languages, would include a probability for the
root to exhibit the cognate (i.e., to have the character state at the root be
1), and with substitution probabilities given for each edge of the tree
indicating the probability that the character will change its state on the
edge. Thus, the character would evolve down the tree, and would assign

768
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
states (either 0 or 1) to each node of the tree. Note therefore that the
change on an edge from State 0 to State 1 indicates the appearance of the
cognate (but not whether it is the first appearance, or a reappearance), and
that a change from State 1 to State 0 indicates the loss of the cognate. A
model tree thus consists of a rooted tree (which is generally assumed to
be a binary tree), and the numeric parameters (specifically, the probability
for each character of being in State 1 at the root, and the substitution
probabilities on the edges). Note that in this model, if a character changes
twice on some path, then it will begin and end in the same state; thus,
this model allows homoplastic events. Constraints on the model so as to
prohibit homoplastic changes can be made, however. Note that in this
model, the number of parameters does not grow with the number of
characters; thus, all characters are supposed to evolve under the same
process. However, in some cases, some additional variation between char-
acters is enabled – but is constrained so as to be able to be represented by
just one additional parameter for the entire set of characters (i.e., the
characters draw a rate of evolution from a distribution which can be
described by that single parameter).
Multistate characters can also be modeled in essentially the same way – a
single rooted tree, along with substitution probabilities on the edges, and
the probability for each state at the root. Here, however, the model needs
to specify if the number of states is bounded (e.g., by saying that there are
only four possible states, and all substitutions are between these four states)
or an unbounded number of states. Here, too, homoplasy can be allowed
or prohibited.
These models can be used for simulation purposes (and so used to
produce synthetic data that can be given as input to phylogeny estimation
methods), and can also be used for phylogeny estimation methods as we
now show. Note that the tree and the values for the various parameters
define the probability of any given set of sequences at the leaves of the
tree. For example, the maximum likelihood estimation method would try
to find the tree and parameter values that are most likely to produce the
input sequences.
Stochastic models like these have been used in linguistic phylogenetics
in several ways. First, Gray and Atkinson estimated the Indo-European
history by treating lexical characters as presence/absence of cognates,
and performed a Bayesian analysis under the assumption that these
binary characters (indicating the presence or absence of a cognate in a lan-
guage) evolve under the simple two-state model we described above. The
homoplasy-free version of the multistate character model has been used for
simulation purposes in several studies (see, for example, Minett and Wang
2003; McMahon and McMahon 2005; Wang and Minett 2005). Exten-
sions of these models to allow for borrowing have also been considered,
with homoplasy-free versions studied by McMahon and McMahon
(2005), Minett and Wang (2003), Wang and Minett (2005), and more

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
769
generally by Warnow et al. (2006) (who proposed a parametric model
allowing homoplasy) and Barbançon et al. (forthcoming) (who performed
a simulation study under the Warnow et al. 2006 model).
Phylogeny estimation methods based on unrealistic models of language
evolution are unlikely to produce accurate estimations of evolutionary
history, and simulation studies based on unrealistic models of language
evolution are unlikely to be informative of performance on real data.
Thus, a critical understanding of the models underlying estimation methods
and simulation studies is essential to a proper interpretation of phylogenetic
analyses and simulation studies.
2.6. PHYLOGENY ESTIMATION METHODS
Phylogeny estimation methods use information about languages to produce
an estimate of the evolutionary history of the languages. This information
generally takes one of two forms: a character matrix (where the languages
are described by a set of characters), or a distance matrix.
As we have discussed above, characters in linguistic analysis are of different
types: cognates (which are words or morphemes), phyletic characters, and
typological characters; the latter two potentially include characters from
all domains of grammar (phonology, morphology, syntax, etc.). The choice
of characters for use in a phylogenetic analysis is of great importance, and
has often been one of the main issues involved in critiquing a phylogenetic
analysis: which characters did the authors use, and what are the conse-
quences of that choice? In addition, the characters must then be coded
for each language – a step that is itself critically important, as it is often here
where mistakes are made, even by trained linguists (see Eska and Ringe
2004). Indeed, while there can be many problematic issues in a phylogenetic
analysis, it is often these two issues – the choice of characters on which
to base the phylogenetic analysis, and the coding of these characters for
the languages in question – that are the focus of the linguist’s attention.
As these issues have been rather thoroughly discussed elsewhere, we will
focus our attention here on understanding other aspects of a phylogenetic
analysis, namely, the choice of phylogenetic estimation method.
In order to be able to evaluate how well these methods work, we will
describe how each method operates, the conditions under which each
method is guaranteed to perform well, and the basic assumptions under
which each method operates. Finally, in Section 3, we will survey the studies
that have used these methods, and the implications of these studies with
respect to the reliability of these methods for use in linguistic phylogenetics.
2.6.1. Computational Complexity and Running Time Analyses
One of the important aspects of a computational method is the time it
takes to run the method on inputs of different sizes. The usual way of
describing this running time is in terms of its worst-case analysis (i.e., the

770
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
slowest possible case). For example, the agglomerative clustering technique
used in glottochronology has running time described as ‘O(n2)’ (read
‘order n squared’) time, for inputs with n languages. This means that the
running time is never more than some constant times n2, no matter how
big n is. Algorithms that have worst-case running times that are bounded
from above by some polynomial in the input size (i.e., that are never
larger than some polynomial in their input size) are said to be ‘polynomial
time’, while algorithms that have worst-case running times that can be
exponential in the input size are said to be ‘exponential time’. Fundamen-
tally, an algorithm that runs in exponential time is likely to take a long
time on all but very small inputs (as functions like 10n grow very quickly),
while algorithms that run in polynomial time will still be reasonably fast
even on relatively large inputs. Thus, algorithms that are polynomial time
are considered fast, and algorithms that are exponential time are considered
slow. Note that these running times are based on the worst-case performance,
and so do not predict the running time of the method for typical dataset
sizes. While the running time analysis of the agglomerative clustering
technique is straightforward, some algorithms are difficult to analyze. For
example, some methods attempt to solve computational problems, such as
finding the tree with the minimum total number of evolutionary changes.
For these problems, strategies that examine every possible tree and then
return the best one (in this case, the one that has the minimum total
number of changes) will be provably optimal, but will take a very long
time. Alternative techniques are based on what is called ‘hill-climbing’.
These techniques start with an initial tree, then look at small changes to
the tree (typically obtained by detaching one part of the tree and reattaching
it elsewhere) to see if a better tree can be found. The process terminates
when a tree is found that is better than all the previous trees (meaning it
has a better score), but where none of the ‘neighboring’ trees are better.
Hill-climbing strategies have the attractive property that they can some-
times find good solutions on big datasets, sometimes even relatively
quickly, but they are not guaranteed to find the globally optimal solution.
Instead, they can get ‘stuck in local optima’ – trees that are better than all
the neighboring trees, but not as good as the best tree for the dataset.
Techniques for escaping local optima are also part of these heuristics, and
generally use randomness to move. Running time analyses of such hill-
climbing heuristics are difficult to obtain, and are usually given in terms
of empirical experience. To cite one concrete example, Wichmann and
Saunders (2007: 391) report a running time of 41 hours on an iMac G4
to apply the Gray and Atkinson Bayesian analysis to a dataset consisting
of 12 pairs of sister languages and 17 characters. The samples of the other
work cited here are considerably larger in both languages and characters,
and would require much longer running times.
Another issue, related to this issue of analyzing the running time of a
heuristic, is the computational difficulty of the optimization problem

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
771
itself. Some optimization problems are easy to solve efficiently, so that
polynomial time algorithms have been developed to answer the optimization
problem exactly. An example of such an optimization problem is to find
the largest element in a list, a problem that can be trivially solved in
polynomial time. Other optimization problems are quite difficult to solve,
to the point that no one has yet been able to devise a polynomial time
algorithm that will solve the problem correctly. Examples of such prob-
lems include the famous ‘Traveling Salesman’ problem – given a map of
cities, and the distances between each pair of cities, find the shortest tour
that visits every city in the list. The class of NP-hard problems consist of
problems of this sort: ones that are provably ‘hard’ in the sense that if any
of them could be solved in polynomial time, then all of them could be
– and none of them seem to be able to be solved efficiently. Thus,
although this is an informal statement, if a problem is proven to be NP-
hard, it means that it is unlikely to be solvable in polynomial time.
Instead, heuristics (often based on hill-climbing, but frequently including
randomization to get out of local optima) are designed to ‘solve’ these
problems. It is important, however, to realize that the heuristics may
themselves only find local optima rather than global optima, and may also
take a very long time to reach good solutions.
2.6.2. Maximum Parsimony and Maximum Compatibility
Maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum compatibility (MC) are related
optimization problems.
Maximum Parsimony. Maximum parsimony is an optimization problem for
phylogeny estimation, where the objective is to find a tree on which the
minimum number of evolutionary changes occurs. Putting this more pre-
cisely, the input is a set of n languages described by a set of k characters,
so that each language can be represented by its k-tuple of character states.
The output is a tree T in which the leaves represent the n languages, and
where each internal node is assigned a k-tuple of character states, but the
objective is to do this while minimizing the total number of changes
across all edges of the tree (where the number of changes on an edge is
the number of characters for which the k-tuples at the endpoints are
different). While finding the best assignment of k-tuples to the internal
nodes of a given fixed tree is computationally easy, finding the best tree
in the set of possible trees is a computationally hard problem (technically it
is NP-hard: Foulds and Graham 1982). In some analyses, the different char-
acters are assigned positive weights, and the objective is then to find the tree
with the minimum total weighted sum of the number of changes over all
its edges; this weighted version is again NP-hard, and hard to solve in
practice.
Maximum parsimony analyses can be modified to allow the inclusion
of characters with missing entries, for example, semantic slots for which

772
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
a language has no word. Since MP produces unrooted trees, if the location
of the root is also desired, then additional steps must be taken. The
usual way to root the tree is to use an outgroup (a language that is related
to the rest of the languages in the set, but clearly is not as closely
related to any language in the set as they are to each other), which
allows the tree to be rooted on the edge leading to the outgroup. For
example, including a Germanic language with a group of Balto-Slavic
languages allows the tree to be rooted on the edge leading to Germanic.
Alternatively, including directed characters (i.e., ones where you know
the ancestral state and therefore the direction of the change) in the data
matrix can be used to restrict the possible locations of the root to a subset
of the tree.
Maximum parsimony analyses are performed using heuristics (most often
hill-climbing heuristics combined with some randomization techniques to
escape local optima), which are not guaranteed to find optimal solutions,
but which seem to perform reasonably well in practice. Software products
that perform effective MP analyses include PAUP* (Swofford 1996) and
TNT (Goloboff et al. 2003).
Maximum Compatibility. The input to MC is the same as for MP, so that
each language is described by a set of k characters and identified with its
k-tuple of character states. The objective for MC is to find a tree on
which a maximum number of characters evolve without any homoplasy
(back mutation or parallel evolution); these characters are said to be
compatible on the output tree, and hence the number of such characters
is the compatibility score of the tree. When the characters are weighted,
then the objective is to find a tree with the total weighted compatibility
score (defined to be the sum of the weights of the compatible characters).
Like MP, MC is NP-hard (Steel 1992). Also like MP, MC does not return
rooted trees, and so outgroups or directed characters are used to help
locate the root. Unfortunately, unlike MP, there are no readily available
heuristics that are highly accurate in practice.
Consensus Trees: Processing the Output of Maximum Compatibility and Maxi-
mum Parsimony Analyses. In the case of both MP and MC, it is frequently
the case that several trees are found with the same best score. In this case,
the usual practice is to return a consensus tree of some sort. To do this,
the trees with the best scores are passed to an appropriate algorithm, which
examines the different trees to determine the features that they either all
share, or which a majority share. The usual features that are considered in
this construction are the splits, or bipartitions, on the leaf set induced by
the edges of each tree. As an example, a common consensus tree is the
strict consensus tree that has exactly those splits that are present in every
one of the input trees. Other consensus trees used commonly in practice
include the majority consensus and the greedy consensus, both of which

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
773
can be characterized by their splits (the majority consensus contains those
edges whose corresponding bipartitions appear in strictly more than half
of the input trees, and the greedy consensus is formed by computing the
majority consensus and then refining the tree by adding bipartitions from
the input trees). By construction, the strict consensus tree is the least
resolved, the greedy consensus tree is the most resolved, and the majority
consensus is in between these two trees with respect to resolution. Also,
however, the greedy consensus tree refines the majority consensus tree, and
the majority consensus tree refines the strict consensus tree. All these
consensus trees can be computed in polynomial time.
Frequently, the edges of a majority or greedy consensus tree are anno-
tated with the percentage of the input trees containing that bipartition.
These edge annotations can be interpreted as the support for each edge
(and hence suggest the level of confidence the analysis provides for that
particular edge).
Bootstrapping: Another Technique for Estimating Support Values. Sometimes
bootstrapping (a statistical resampling technique) is used to produce these
edge annotations. Bootstrapping is a technique whereby random datasets
are created by randomly picking characters from the input data matrix and
these random datasets are then analyzed using the same method as the
original phylogenetic analysis. Sometimes bootstrapping is used just to
estimate support values for the edges in a phylogenetic tree, where the
support for an edge is the fraction of times that bipartition shows up in
the bootstrap analysis trees. At other times, the different bootstrap trees
are used as input to a consensus method (like the strict consensus, major-
ity consensus, or greedy consensus), which is then annotated with the
support estimates.
The way the random matrices are produced is by what is called
‘sampling with replacement’, in which each sample character is drawn
randomly from the entire dataset (not the dataset minus characters already
drawn). Recall that the rows of the data matrix correspond to languages
and the columns represent characters. Sampling with replacement produces
a new data matrix with the same number of rows and columns, but where
each column is obtained by picking one of the columns in the original
matrix at random. Thus, some columns from the original matrix will
appear once, some two or more times, and some not at all, in the newly
created random ‘bootstrapped’ matrix. Note that in general any two random
matrices obtained in this way will be a little different from each other,
and hence phylogenies produced using these different bootstrapped matrices
will also potentially be a little different. The basic idea behind this tech-
nique is that if a bipartition in the estimated tree has high support, then
it is likely to be true of the true tree. However, even high bootstrap
support on a bipartition does not really indicate the probability that the
bipartition is true.

774
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
2.6.3. Maximum Likelihood and Bayesian analyses
Two very common methods for phylogenetic analysis in biology are
maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. These methods are based on
explicit parametric models of evolution, and simulation studies of biomo-
lecular evolution have shown that these methods produce very good
estimates of the true evolutionary history – provided that the sequences evolve
under the same model as is used to estimate the history. An additional
advantage that these methods have over others is that they make explicit
statements about the assumptions regarding the evolutionary process operating
on the data. Within this category, maximum likelihood methods explicitly
attempt to find the tree and the associated model parameters so as to
maximize the probability of producing the observed data. Bayesian methods,
in contrast, do not try to find the specific model parameters, or even the
tree. Instead, they try to estimate the probability that each tree is the true
tree (and hence they produce not a single tree, but a probability distribution
on the set of trees). Bayesian methods used in linguistic phylogenetics
include Gray and Atkinson (2003) and Nicholls and Gray (2007).
Bayesian methods used in phylogenetics utilize the following basic algo-
rithmic strategy. The algorithm begins with an initial model tree (i.e., a
rooted tree with initial values for each of the associated parameters of
evolution). Then, the algorithm follows a ‘random walk’ through ‘model
tree space’, at each point computing the probability of the observed
sequences being produced by the given model tree. If this probability is
higher than the previously computed probability, the move to the new
model tree is accepted; if it is lower, the move is accepted with some
lower probability. After a ‘burn-in’ period, the random walk is supposed
to be in the stationary distribution, and then the algorithm randomly
samples from the model tree space that it visits. This collection of model
trees is then used to produce a probability distribution on the space of
model trees. A standard output of a Bayesian analysis is a consensus tree
(usually the majority consensus tree) of the sampled trees. Sometimes,
however, the tree appearing the most frequently (called the ‘maximum
posterior probability tree’) is returned. The edges of these trees are
then often annotated, using the proportion of the sampled trees in which
that edge appears. These annotations are interpreted as the support for
the edge.
Bayesian analyses can take a long time; indeed, it is not clear how long
they need to run in order to reach the stationary distribution (this is an open
research question). Furthermore, Bayesian analyses clearly depend very closely
on the parametric model of evolution, and their accuracy will depend on
the fit between the parametric model used to estimate the evolutionary
history and the data. The main advantage that Bayesian analyses have over
other statistical methods is that they automatically provide support estimations,
whereas maximum likelihood or MP would normally use bootstrapping
(which is computationally intensive) to provide support estimates.

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
775
2.6.4. Distance-Based Methods
While character-based methods like MP and MC are the most frequently
used techniques in linguistic phylogenetics, distance-based methods are
also used. These operate in two steps. First, the character matrix is used
to compute a distance matrix, for example, by defining the distance
between two languages to be the proportion of the character matrix in
which the two languages are different, or the Levenshtein distance
(defined in Section 5.1.3 below: a distance based on defining costs for
each of the possible operations – substitutions, insertions, or deletions of
letters – used to transform one word into the other). This distance matrix
is then used to construct a tree (see page 18 of the slide presentation at
http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/nov26.ppt).
Methods like these are generally very fast, and can also be quite accurate
– but the accuracy of the method depends both on how the distances are
computed and on how they are used to obtain the tree.
The issues involved in computing the distance matrix are subtle and
mathematically somewhat complicated. The fundamental objective in
computing distances is to produce a matrix of pairwise distances that is
close to being additive on the true tree, where being ‘additive on the true
tree’ means that it is possible to assign lengths to the edges of the true
tree so that the distance between any two leaves in the tree exactly equals
the sum of the lengths of the edges in the path between the two leaves.
Additive distances fit trees perfectly and enable exactly accurate trees to
be reconstructed using very simple (and fast) algorithms (Waterman et al.
1977, see also Kim and Warnow 1999; page 18 of the slide presentation
at http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/nov26.ppt shows how an additive
matrix defines the tree). The purpose of correcting distances is to account
for hidden character state changes (e.g., where a character changes state
twice) and so better approximate the actual number of changes that
occurred in the evolutionary pathway relating two languages. More
generally, simulation studies in biology have suggested that correcting
distances to account for hidden character state changes produces improved
phylogenetic estimations. An alternative approach is to assume that evolution
is clocklike (i.e., the number of character state changes is proportional to
time), so that even if the distances are not additive, they will be reasonable
estimates of the time that has elapsed since the common ancestor. Under
these conditions, even the simple distances used in glottochronology will
be sufficient to ensure an accurate tree.
Once the distance matrix is computed, methods like UPGMA
(unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean; Michener and
Sokal 1957), the algorithmic technique used in glottochronology to
produce a tree from the distance matrix, or neighbor joining (NJ) (Saitou
and Nei 1987) are used to produce a tree. Both UPGMA and NJ are
agglomerative clustering techniques, but they use different strategies to
produce the tree. UPGMA operates by repeatedly joining (as sister

776
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
languages) the two languages in the group that have the smallest distance.
UPGMA is guaranteed to perform correctly when the input distances are
produced from a dataset that has evolved with clocklike evolution; other-
wise, it can make a mistake and infer that two languages are siblings when
they are not. NJ, however, operates by computing a transformation of the
given distance matrix, and selecting as a pair the languages that minimize
that transformed distance. Interestingly, this transformation allows NJ to
be correct even when the languages do not evolve under a lexical clock!
2.6.5. Phylogenetic Network Methods
Several methods have been developed that produce networks instead of
trees. In the context of linguistic phylogeny, NeighborNet (Bryant and
Moulton 2004) is the most popular method, but Network (Bandelt et al.
1999), SplitsTree (Huson 1998), and Perfect Phylogenetic Networks (Erdem
et al. 2003; Nakhleh et al. 2005a) have also been used. Of these, Perfect
Phylogenetic Networks are explicit phylogenetic networks, and the others
are implicit phylogenetic networks. We will say more about this subject below.
3. Evaluating Phylogenetic Estimation Methods
3.1 OVERVIEW
Many evolutionary trees (phylogenies) have been constructed for Indo-
European languages, Bantu languages, Sino-Tibetan, Austronesian, and
other families, and often these constructions conflict with each other and/
or with traditionally accepted family trees. How is the interested linguist
to evaluate the reliability of these trees? [Note that biological and com-
putational terminology refer to hypothesized phylogenetic trees (or networks)
as reconstructed or estimated. We use exclusively the latter term here,
since in linguistics ‘reconstruction’ is not phylogeny but determination of
the ancestral state.]
The accuracy of a phylogeny produced by some estimation method
depends on many factors: the method used to analyze the data, the
particular choice of languages used (and how sparsely or densely sampled
that set is), the number and type of characters used and how these characters
are encoded. If all of these aspects are done well (which is itself a non-trivial
issue), then it is likely that the phylogeny that is estimated will be mean-
ingful. However, more frequently some aspect of the analysis is handled
poorly, and this can call the estimation into question. Thus, faults in a
phylogenetic estimation may be due to the estimation method, or perhaps
the data, or the encoding of the data; determining where the fault lies is
sometimes a difficult task.
But evaluation of phylogeny estimation methods is inherently difficult
for another reason: we cannot, in most cases, know the true evolutionary
history of any language family beyond some basic features. All of these

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
777
issues make the evaluation of phylogeny estimation methods quite difficult.
In this section, however, we will examine the various ways that phylogeny
estimation methods can be studied.
Phylogeny estimation methods are tools that produce estimations of
evolutionary history from input data. Like all tools, their performance
needs to be evaluated so that the user can have a sense of the accuracy
that they can expect from the tool. Tools for simple problems can gener-
ally be evaluated easily; for example, cheap bathroom scales are not gen-
erally exactly accurate, but the errors they produce can be estimated (by
comparing their estimations to those of better scales). Tools for more
complex problems require more sophisticated testing: consider, for exam-
ple, political polls, or estimates of population sizes. Understanding the
errors in these techniques requires rather careful modeling both of the
sampling process and of the population, and neither is particularly easy to
do correctly. Thus, the estimated error in such techniques itself exhibits
error, which is a result of any errors in the modeling. Despite these
challenges, because of the fundamental importance of tools to both the
sciences and social sciences, significant efforts are made to develop statistical
techniques for understanding the error rates and the conditions under
which tools produce sufficiently accurate measurements.
Similarly, phylogeny estimation methods are tools that need to be evalu-
ated. Such evaluations need to inform the user about the conditions under
which the tools will produce highly accurate estimations, and also to quantify
the error rates. However, unlike many other tools (for which the ‘true’ answer
can be determined using other techniques and compared to the result obtained
by the tool), phylogeny estimation methods are attempts to answer questions
about history, and this is something that generally is either very difficult
or impossible to know with a high level of accuracy and certitude.
3.2. BENCHMARKS AND MINIMAL EVALUATION STANDARDS
3.2.1. Overview
One approach to evaluating phylogeny estimation is to use well-understood
datasets as benchmarks. For instance, the Germanic, Romance, and
Slavic branches of Indo-European are well-understood as to subgrouping
and dating and have copious and reliable lexical and grammatical data
available. Some benchmarks may be of limited utility. For example, Indo-
European is very well-understood as to its basic subgroups (Anatolian,
Tocharian, Celtic, Italic, Greek, Armenian, Germanic, Indic, Iranian, Baltic,
and Slavic), the two higher groupings Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian, and
its age (dispersal about 5500 years ago), but there is no consensus on its
higher structure. For other families, status as a family is well-understood but
subgrouping is not understood or is debated. Thus, specialized knowledge
is required to decide which datasets can be benchmarks and in what
respects. Below in Section 3.2.3 we list some clear cases for convenience.

778
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
3.2.2. Criteria
Although even the best datasets often provide only partial information
about history, that partial information can be quite adequate for bench-
marking, and indeed we posit that the following should be a minimum
and essential requirement of any phylogenetic estimation method using
data from a well-studied language family:
• Compatible resolution; no conflict. The estimated tree may differ from
the benchmark subgroupings, but the estimation and benchmark tree must be
compatible (in technical terms they should share a common refinement).
Importantly, the constructed tree should not mix established subgroups, e.g.,
placing one Italic language in Germanic.
Note that this criterion only requires that the constructed tree be
compatible with the established subgroupings, and that this criterion can
be met even if the constructed tree fails to return the established groupings.
For example, a tree that has a Germanic clade, but which is completely
unresolved within Germanic (and so does not subdivide Germanic into
North Germanic and West Germanic) is compatible with West Germanic
and North Germanic. That is, undifferentiated groupings are compatible
with differentiated ones.
Key to understanding this criterion is the concept of resolution in a
tree. A rooted phylogenetic tree in which every node has two children is
said to be binary (or fully resolved), and represents a completely deter-
mined evolutionary scenario. When this fails, so that some node has three
or more children (in which case it is called a polytomy or high-degree
node), the interpretation of the tree depends on what is meant by the
high degree node. In some cases, the node represents a true radiation, an
exception to the usual assumption that diversification is bifurcating. Such
nodes are called hard polytomies. In most cases, however, the high degree
node represents instead a lack of information, so that the true history
(which is possibly bifurcating) is unclear; in this case, the high degree
node is called a soft polytomy. Most phylogenetic estimations produce
binary trees, and the only time trees with high degree nodes are returned
when a consensus tree is used, or when the data are insufficient to provide
complete resolution. In particular, polytomies in phylogenetic trees esti-
mated using the comparative method (using, for example, phonological
innovations) are all soft. The reason for this is that individual innovations
provide information about splits in the tree, but do not forbid other
compatible splits, so that the lack of resolution is only an indication of the
inability of the data to fully resolve the history. Note therefore that a tree
with soft polytomies is asserting that all refinements of the tree (i.e., fully
resolved trees that contain all the subgroupings present in the initial tree)
are viable candidates for the true evolutionary history. A soft polytomy is
consistent with any more resolved analysis of its sub-branches, while a
hard one is not. Thus, our minimum requirement for a phylogenetic

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
779
estimation method amounts to the requirement that its reconstructed trees
must be compatible with the established benchmark trees.
Note that the default polytomy, in this article and in general, is soft.
Below we identify some hard ones, and some cases where interpretations
as soft and hard have been in conflict.
A second property, desirable but not essential, is:
• No missing subgroups. The reconstructed tree should include all
established subgroups.
For example, a good estimation method for Indo-European should not
fail to return Germanic as a family, and should not fail to separate Baltic
from Slavic. (It may, of course, fail to return more controversial subgroupings,
such as Italic-Celtic or Greek-Armenian.) Note also that any tree satisfying
the second property automatically satisfies the first property, thus, the
second property is strictly stronger than the first.
It is important to emphasize that compatibility and recognition of all
groups are in some ways independent of decisions as to whether and
where to root trees, which is a matter partly of method and partly of
interpretation (see Section 2.6.2 above). For instance, many phonological
changes have a natural directionality, and these help narrow down the
possibilities of rooting.
A third criterial property, for models involving dating, is again essential:
• Calibration. A method for dating should be tried out on one or more
benchmark datasets, and the reconstructed or computed date must be reason-
ably close to the established date. If it is not, the established date should be
used to calibrate the method (rather than the method’s output being announced
as a new date for the family).
We close this section with some comments about these three criteria.
While it is certainly desirable that a method never fails any of these criteria,
any comparison between two methods may have to take the degree of failure
into account in order to make a recommendation between two methods.
Thus, a method that is very conservative (and hence produces trees that
are relatively unresolved) will be likely to satisfy the first criterion of
compatibility but fail to recognize established subgroups; on the other
hand, a method that is less conservative may succeed in recognizing many
established subgroups, but be incompatible with some established subgroup.
Therefore, comparisons between methods will be somewhat complicated,
and judgments about the relative importance of the criteria will have to
be taken into account. These judgments, however, may depend on the
linguist’s assessment of each violation.
3.2.3. Recommended Benchmark Datasets
For tests of phylogenetic methods, including calibration of dating, the
following are young families for which both dating and subgrouping are
firm because of written evidence and/or historical records:

780
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
• Germanic (about 2000 years for the modern languages, perhaps 2500
including extinct Gothic), Romance (about 2000), and Slavic (about
1500). Three branches of Indo-European, very well-dated on historical
grounds and with well-understood subgrouping. The Germanic and
Romance families both have grammatically and lexically divergent but
recently formed creoles (i.e., creoles with Germanic or Romance lexifier
languages and, usually, West African or Austronesian substrate languages)
that provide well-known acid tests for methods of subgrouping and
(especially) dating. Germanic additionally offers the lexically and gram-
matically extremely conservative Icelandic and extremely innovative
(Romance-influenced) English as milder acid tests. Wikipedia entries
for Germanic, Romance, and Slavic languages as accessed March 2008
appear to be in good accord with the received view. The database to
Dyen et al. (1992) includes lexical data for several languages of each of
these branches.
• Common Turkic (i.e., the Turkic languages minus Chuvash, the sole
survivor of the Bulgar branch that is sister to Common Turkic). Well
dated on historical grounds; spread across the Eurasian steppe and nearby
beginning about 1500 years ago. The daughter languages are usually
classified geographically, as northeastern, southeastern, etc., but these
are not considered innovation-defined subgroups.
• Chinese (lexical data in the appendix to Minett and Wang 2003).
• Mixe-Zoque (see Cysouw et al. 2006, with bibliography on the history
of subgrouping; lexical data in the appendix).
Older groups for which the subgrouping is well-understood and the
dating clear from archeological evidence include:
• Austronesian (AN). The family is about 6000 years old on archeological
and linguistic grounds (e.g., Blust 1985, 1995; Pawley and Ross 1993).
The highest-level and lowest-level groupings are fairly well-understood
(including modern and subgroup ancestral dialect continua, for example,
Ross 1988, 1996, 1997), but intermediate levels are not always well-
understood. The received view of the higher-level structure of the tree
is (e.g., Blust 1985, 1995):
AN
Formosan subgroups
 Malayo-Polynesian:
Western MP: e.g., Philippine and western Indonesian languages;
Chamorro and Palauan are isolate branches at some high level
Central & Eastern MP:
Central
Eastern:
S. Halmahera – W. New Guinea
Oceanic (including Micronesian and Polynesian as
subsubgroups)

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
781
Whether Malayo-Polynesian is really a discrete stage vs. on a par with
the first-order Formosan subgroups is debated (see Ross 2002: 19–20
for a brief review). Zobel (2002) proposes a high-level reorganization
of Malayo-Polynesian based on potentially good phyletic characters, but
these need more analysis and testing (Ross 2002). (The Wikipedia entry
for Malayo-Polynesian as accessed March 2008 incorrectly reports
Zobel’s analysis as the received view.) Fuller listings of AN languages
with the received subgrouping include Ross (1995); for Oceanic, Ross
(1988); Haspelmath et al. (2005) lists a number of the languages by
intermediate or lower subgroup; Ross and Naess (2007) resolve the
question of whether the languages of the Reef and Santa Cruz Islands
are Oceanic (deciding in favor) and revise the Oceanic tree accordingly
(this revision is correctly reflected as the received view in the Wikipedia
entry for Oceanic Languages as accessed March 2008).
• Oceanic (subgroup of Austronesian). This group is very firmly dated at
about 4000 years on strong archaeological and linguistic evidence (e.g.,
Kirch 1997, 2000), and the wide distribution of a number of its discrete
subgroups is due to fairly well-understood episodes of migration and
colonization. For subgrouping, see Ross (1988, 1996, 1997). That Aus-
tronesian, and especially its Oceanic subgroup, presents linguists,
geneticists, and archeologists with a near-ideal natural laboratory
because of the well-understood age and subgrouping, large number of
daughter languages, and good number of well-understood complex
sociolinguistic situations, has been mentioned a number of times, since
the beginning of serious comparative work on the family; a recent such
mention is Gray et al. (2007).
• Indo-European. The date and place of origin are very clear on arche-
ological grounds (e.g., Mallory 1989; Darden 2001; Anthony 2007): an
ultimately very wide dispersal from the western steppe not before ca.
5500 years ago, except that the extinct Anatolian group (Hittite, etc.)
is likely to have separated slightly earlier.1 The major subgroups are
very well-understood: Celtic, Germanic, Italic/Romance, Balto-Slavic
(subgroups: Baltic, Slavic), Indo-Iranian (subgroups: Indic, Iranian),
extinct Tocharian, extinct Anatolian; isolate branches Greek, Armenian,
and Albanian. Higher-level subgrouping is uncertain and usually left
unresolved, except that an initial split into Anatolian vs. all others is
linguistically well-supported. The database to Dyen et al. (1992) pro-
vides lexical data (Indo-European lexical data arranged by Swadesh
gloss and coded for cognacy vs. non-cognacy with each other language.
The larger set of characters, including lexical as well as phonological
and morphological ones, assembled by Don Ringe and Ann Taylor for
24 Indo-European languages for the papers by Ringe, Warnow, and
their colleagues, is available at http://www.cs.rice.edu/~nakhleh/CPHL/
#datasets. These two databases for Indo-European differ in several ways:
the Dyen et al. data are based upon modern languages, while the

782
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Ringe-Taylor data are based upon the earliest well-attested languages in
each branch; furthermore, the Dyen et al. data have not been checked
carefully with respect to cognate judgments, and it is likely that there
are false positives (words noted as cognates that are not true cognates)
in that database.
Two other families with some uncertainties in their subgrouping but
high-quality datasets available on-line are: (i) Bantu (sub-subgroup of
Benue-Kwa, a subgroup of the large and very old Niger-Congo, or
Niger-Kordofanian, family); The Comparative Bantu On-line Dictionary
has extensive lexical data (www.cbold.ddl.ish-lyon.cnrs.fr/); and (ii) Sino-
Tibetan – a large and old family of which Chinese is one branch; The
Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus has extensive lexical
data (http://stedt.berkeley.edu).
3.3. IMPLICIT OR EXPLICIT ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT THE EVOLUTIONARY PROCESS
Evaluating phylogeny reconstruction methods using our criteria has the
benefit of being acceptable to linguists (provided that the established sub-
groups really do reflect the accepted views, and these views are based on
careful linguistic scholarship). However, a drawback of using just the
established subgroups within well-studied language families is that most of
the time, most (or perhaps all) the methods that are being compared will
correctly reproduce the established subgroups. For example, in Nakhleh
et al. (2005b), MP, MC (weighted or unweighted), NJ, and the Gray-
Atkinson method each produced trees that had all the established
subgroups and were thus also compatible with the constraint tree. The
only method that was incompatible with the constraint tree was UPGMA
– which split Italic and Iranian incorrectly (by putting Latin and Persian
respectively into different groups). This study showed that the ability to
match established subgroups is a relatively basic capability that can be
accomplished by many methods, which can otherwise produce very different
solutions. Thus, methods will differ in terms of their phylogenetic
estimations, but these will be typically in the first-order subgrouping and
within subgroups, rather than in the identification of the subgroups; these
differences, while quite important to linguists, will not be reflected in the
results of the testing.
Given these limitations, how are we to evaluate phylogeny estimation
methods, and – equally importantly – determine whether a tree con-
structed for a family is accurate?
One very natural way to understand a method, and to help form a
judgment about the likelihood that the method will provide accurate
solutions, is to try to understand the assumptions made by the method.
But this is not always straightforward. Many methods (such as Bayesian
methods, or maximum likelihood) rely on explicit parametric models of

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
783
language evolution and may have provable performance guarantees under
their models. Other methods (such as NJ, UPGMA, MP, or MC) do not
rely on an explicit parametric model, but may depend on some implicit
assumptions about language evolution. Understanding a method can often
require some investigation into the assumptions – whether explicitly stated
or not – that underlie the algorithmic design.
3.4. THEORETICAL GUARANTEES
The first, and most obvious, way to evaluate a phylogeny reconstruction
method is to consider the conditions under which a method is guaranteed
to produce an accurate estimation (i.e., to reproduce the true evolutionary
tree, modulo the edges on which no characters change), and then see if
it seems reasonable to assume that the data being analyzed will have the
required properties. Note that these sufficient conditions may not be
necessary in the sense that the method may produce the true tree even
when the conditions do not hold. The following are examples of conditions
that suffice to guarantee accurate phylogeny estimations for different
methods.
• Methods for solving MP and MC (weighted or unweighted) are guar-
anteed to produce the true tree when characters evolve in such a way
that the tree with the minimum number of events is the true tree. One
condition under which this second statement holds is when the char-
acters evolve without any homoplasy at all (meaning no back mutation
or parallel evolution) and without any borrowing. This condition is
highly unrealistic, even for very well-understood languages analyzed by
very knowledgeable linguists. However, all guarantees regarding methods
for MP and MC apply only if the optimization problems are solved
optimally – a significant constraint, as algorithms that are guaranteed to
produce optimal solutions are limited to small datasets (generally of about
30 languages). In particular, exhaustive search techniques that evaluate
every tree will have to explore (2n − 5) × (2n − 7) × ... × 3 trees, where
n is the number of languages, which limits the languages that can be
handled to a much smaller number.
• For most models that are considered in phylogenetics, maximum like-
lihood and Bayesian methods will produce the true tree provided that
the true evolutionary process matches the assumed model, the dataset
contains enough characters, and the methods are run exactly instead of
heuristically (equivalently, run long enough).
• Neighbor joining is guaranteed to produce the true tree when the
pairwise distance matrix is sufficiently close to an additive matrix (see
the definition and discussion in Section 2.6.4) defining the true tree.
Most typically, additive matrices in linguistic phylogenetics define the
pairwise distance between two languages to be equal to the number of

784
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
character state changes (e.g., word replacements) that occurred in the
evolutionary history between the two languages.
• UPGMA, the algorithm used in glottochronology, is guaranteed to
produce the true tree when evolution is sufficiently close to clocklike
and there are enough characters. In particular, UPGMA is not guaranteed
to reconstruct the correct tree on additive matrices defining the true
tree unless the true tree branch lengths obey the lexical clock.
• Gray and Atkinson’s Bayesian method is guaranteed to be correct (with
respect to estimations of the tree topology) when all the binary characters
(each based on a single cognate class) evolve identically and independ-
ently of each other. The dating aspect of their method is guaranteed to
be correct when the data evolve under a lexical clock.
Several points should be made here. First, for most of these statements,
one of the required conditions is that there should be enough characters.
How many characters are enough? This is complicated, and very little is
really known analytically (though see Erdõs et al. 1999a,b; Warnow et al.
2001 for some preliminary information). However, experimental results
(based on simulation studies) show that the number of characters that are
sufficient for the condition to hold is often very large (in the tens of
thousands or more; Nakhleh et al. 2001; Moret et al. 2002). Thus, for
many datasets it is likely that there are not enough characters to guarantee
complete accuracy with high probability.
A second issue is the assumption that the phylogeny estimation method
(whether a Bayesian analysis or a technique for maximum likelihood, MP,
or MC) be run long enough. How long is ‘long enough’? Computational
problems such as MP, MC, or maximum likelihood, are all NP-hard,
which – as we discussed earlier – means that in practice heuristics (typically
based on hill-climbing techniques combined with special techniques to
move out of local optima) are used. Unfortunately, there is no reliable way
of determining whether a heuristic has been run ‘long enough’. In practice,
therefore, the methods are run until improvements have not been
obtained for some period of time. Thus, the need to run heuristics for
NP-hard optimization problems ‘long enough’ makes sense. But why do
we require that Bayesian analyses be run ‘long enough’, since they are not
trying to solve hard optimization problems? The answer is subtle. Bayesian
techniques, such as used in phylogenetics, employ Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) techniques (which are based on randomization) to move
through ‘model tree space’. These techniques have the theoretical guarantee
that if run long enough, the random walk is supposed to have arrived at
a stationary distribution, in which further random walking produces only
temporary fluctuation, and when this happens the output from the Bayesian
analysis will have the correct theoretical properties. When this happens,
the maximum posterior probability tree produced by the analysis will be
guaranteed to be the true tree. Thus, in theory the MCMC analysis, if

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
785
run long enough, will produce the correct tree. How long is long
enough? Unfortunately, we do not know. In practice, there are techniques
that can be applied to detect that the method has not been run long
enough, but these techniques do not allow the user to determine that the
method has for sure been run long enough. The problem is a serious one,
since it is easy to be mistaken about whether the analysis has run long
enough (see, for example, the discussion about this issue on the tutorial
page for the MrBayes software at http://mrbayes.csit.fsu.edu/wiki/index.php/
Tutorial_3.2). Thus, some methods (Bayesian analyses and heuristics for
NP-hard problems like maximum likelihood and MP) cannot be guaranteed
to produce correct answers unless run for what may be much longer than
any practitioner is willing to perform the analysis. For the Bayesian analyses
used in linguistics, it is quite possible that runs of a few days are sufficient
(for small enough datasets), but it is also possible that the phylogenetic
analysis would be different in interesting and important ways if the analyses
were allowed to run for longer. Until these questions are studied carefully,
however, caution seems the best policy.
In conclusion, therefore, while there are theoretical guarantees for
many methods, often the conditions sufficient for correct estimations do
not hold. Then the issue becomes one of ‘given that exact accuracy
cannot be guaranteed, how can we predict the performance of a method?’
Or, more simply, if the data do not satisfy the required conditions for any
of the available methods, what method should be used?
3.5. SIMULATION STUDIES
A simulation study has the following basic structure:
• Step 1. A model phylogeny T (tree or network) is produced, along with
the associated parameters of evolution (e.g., probabilities of substitution,
homoplasy, polymorphism, and borrowing).
• Step 2. Characters are evolved from the root of the phylogeny to the
leaves, producing a set S of languages at the leaves of the phylogeny.
• Step 3. The set S is given to a phylogeny estimation procedure, and a
tree or network T’ is produced by the analysis.
• Step 4. The estimated phylogeny T’ is compared to the true phylogeny
T, and the error is computed.
Key to this procedure is the fact that the true history is known by the
person performing the simulation, but not known by the phylogeny esti-
mation procedure (obviously). It is this knowledge that makes it possible
to evaluate the accuracy of the phylogeny estimation procedure. However,
the simulation study will be relevant to phylogeny estimation only to the
extent that the simulation study is based on a sufficiently realistic model
of language evolution. Thus, the simulation should reflect, as much as
possible, the properties that are observed to be true of real languages.

786
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
We begin by discussing the evaluation of phylogenetic tree estimation
methods, where the true history is a phylogenetic tree (as opposed to a
phylogenetic network). These evaluations are based on comparing the
underlying unrooted trees (not the location of the root, and not the
associated parameters such as branch lengths) for topological accuracy. Of
the various ways of measuring topological accuracy, the Robinson-Foulds
(RF) metric (Robinson and Foulds 1981), is the standard measure when
both trees are binary (i.e., fully resolved). Here we consider each tree to
be represented by the set of edges it contains, and each edge is defined
by the way it splits the set of leaves into two parts. The RF metric
measures the difference between these two sets, normalized to produce a
number between 0 and 1. Thus, if the normalized RF distance between
trees T1 and T2 is 10%, then this asserts that 90% of the edges of the two
trees define the same splits, and they differ only in 10% of their edges (see
page 15 of http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/newton-linguistics.ppt
for an example of a calculation of the RF distance between two trees).
RF rates above 10% are generally considered poor, but sometimes the data
are such that better estimates are not really possible. Some studies have
separated out the RF error into two types of errors: false positives (edges
that appear in the estimated tree but not in the true tree) and false
negatives (edges that are in the true tree but not the estimated tree). These
studies allow the two types of error to be distinguished. When both the
estimated tree and the true tree are bifurcating, there will be equal numbers
of both types of errors; however, as one or both of these trees can be
incompletely resolved, distinguishing between the two types of errors
can be quite informative. These error rates too are normalized by the
number of edges in the respective trees, and error rates above 10% are
considered poor.
When either the estimated or true phylogenies have reticulations, and
thus are phylogenetic networks instead of trees, the problem of evaluating
the accuracy of the estimated evolutionary history is more complicated.
However, when the model phylogeny is a network representing borrowing
between languages but no creolization or koine formation and the esti-
mated phylogenies are all trees, then it is possible to extend the standard
approach for evaluating phylogenies as we now show. In this case, the
model phylogenetic network has an underlying genetic tree on top of
which there are borrowing edges. In such a case, the estimated trees can
be compared to the genetic tree using the standard RF criterion given
above. However, evaluating the accuracy of an estimated phylogenetic
history under more general conditions (e.g., when the network represents
creolization or koine formation) is still a matter of mathematical research,
and there are not yet any accepted metrics for comparing two networks.
Some studies have considered repeatability of their results to be evi-
dence of the accuracy of their findings. However, repeatability is not the
same thing as accuracy. For example, a method that always produces the

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
787
same outcome (independent of input) will be repeatable without being
accurate. Thus, while repeatability is desirable to some extent, the accuracy
of the method must be established using either theoretical guarantees,
simulations, or benchmark datasets.
Finally, we make some comments about the use of statistics to provide
evidence in favor of a phylogenetic estimation. Many studies use support
values estimated using the bootstrap, or those returned in a Bayesian
analysis, or the percentage of best MP trees containing an edge, to suggest
that a particular feature of the phylogeny is likely to hold in the true tree.
This practice is common in molecular systematics, but the statistical basis
of this approach is somewhat questionable. The most appropriate inter-
pretation of support values of this sort is that they indicate the repeatability
of the feature, under the hypothetical scenario that there might be a larger
family of characters from which to draw from. MP trees are also often
evaluated using criteria such as the CI, rescaled consistency index (RCI),
or other such statistic. These statistics (which range from 0.0 to 1.0) measure
the amount of homoplasy in the data, with 1.0 indicating no homoplasy
at all (Naylor and Kraus 1995: 559). Here, too, the interpretation of these
statistics is a subtle issue. What these statistics indicate is the quality of the
data, in terms of how much homoplasy they reveal. Since MP performs
well (in that it produces relatively accurate estimates of the true tree)
under conditions of low homoplasy, a MP analysis of a dataset with very
little homoplasy (RCI close to 1.0) will potentially be highly accurate,
and conversely MP analyses of datasets with a lot of homoplasy (RCI
much smaller) may not be particularly accurate.
These statistics are used to validate the trees, but also to lend support
to the assertion that the data are evolving in a tree-like fashion. Since
the CI and its RCI are the most frequently used statistics, we focus on
the use of these two statistics here. Both the CI and RCI measure
homoplasy. Note that if there is no homoplasy at all, then no borrowing
needs to be posited to explain the data. Thus, when either the CI or
RCI is very close to 1.0, the argument that the data are evolving in a
tree-like fashion is probably reasonable. However, CIs and RCIs vary
significantly between different datasets, even for datasets obtained for the
same language family (since this will depend on the encoding and the
cognacy judgments).
3.6. DISCUSSION
Phylogeny estimation methods are studied in terms of their accuracy in
simulation, on benchmark datasets, or with respect to their theoretical
guarantees. However, each of these approaches has its strengths as well as
its drawbacks. While theoretical guarantees are appealing, they only apply
to rather unrealistic conditions: languages evolve exactly according to the
assumed model, and there are a sufficiently large number of characters

788
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
available for the analysis. Performance under simulation too has its appeal,
because in this case you know the ‘truth’, but is limited as well since
simulations depend on models, and the models are always simplifications
of reality. Performance on benchmark datasets might seem to be the only
real test, but here, unfortunately, the utility of these benchmarks has been
limited by their paucity and by the relative lack of resolution available for
even the best understood language families.
4. Special and Advanced Topics
4.1. DESCENT AND CONTACT; SPLITS AND RETICULATION
All linguists are taught in introductory courses that family trees are an
idealization: splits of ancestral languages into descendants are rarely abrupt
and clean. Canonical linguistic family trees reflect only descent, that is,
transmission of most morphology and basic lexicon from a single ancestor.
No language, however, is without borrowed words and grammar from
neighboring or influential languages. (The long-established linguistic
terms are loanword and borrowing, but copying is becoming more
frequent and is more transparent; adoption is occasionally used and is even
more satisfactory. The biological equivalent is lateral transfer. The broadest
linguistic term for interaction of various kinds is contact or contact-based
change.) A descent history or phylogeny with notable amounts of copying
is known as reticulate. Traditional linguistic family trees explicitly ignore
reticulation, but there is much awareness that there has been contact
between branches. Areal linguistics is the study of extensive reticulation
between languages and between families in limited geographical areas.
Infrequently, under the right sociolinguistic conditions, a language may be
so influenced by another that it cannot be described as having a single
ancestor. This happens in the case of creoles, which arise in drastic contact
situations where a majority shifts rapidly to the language of a minority
without adequate access to speech in the latter (the typical outcome is
words from one language and grammar and phonology from another).
The Caribbean creoles have, broadly speaking, European lexifiers and West
African grammar and phonology. Long-term bilingualism together with
the right combination of sociolinguistic conditions can produce mixed
languages in which different parts of the grammar and/or vocabulary
descend from different languages (e.g., Michif, spoken in North Dakota
and Canada, in which the verbs, verbal inflection, and verb phrases are
Algonquian, while the nouns and noun phrases are French). These
distinctive situations, somewhat analogous to hybridization, are hard to
capture well in trees or other graphs. (These and similar situations are
discussed in Thomason 2001; Thomason and Kaufman 1988.)
A language family can be called a ‘stock’, if it is a maximal clade and
both demonstrable and reconstructible (this term from Nichols 1992, 1997).

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
789
The oldest well-dated stocks are about 6,000 years old, on joint linguistic
and archeological evidence, for example, Semitic, Indo-European, Austro-
nesian, and Uto-Aztecan (inscriptional evidence of ancient languages also
helps date the first two). A few are likely to be somewhat older: Uralic
(Janhunen 2001), Nakh-Daghestanian (Nichols 2007), and Austroasiatic
(Blust 1994). The only clear case known so far of a family so old that it
can be demonstrated but not reconstructed is Afroasiatic, in which lexical
cognates cannot easily be identified, though relatedness can be proven on
some highly specific and quirky morphological characters. Given that
cognates cannot be firmly identified, subgrouping and ancestral states of
words and sounds cannot be known. For these reasons, a family at a
higher level than the stock can never serve as a benchmark.
In lexical studies, contact between unrelated or distantly related lan-
guages is easily determined when the families are at all well-understood,
as non-cognate vocabulary can easily be identified; for example, English
face is a patent loan of French face. Contact between more closely related
languages is less immediately apparent; expertise in Germanic philology is
required to determine that English egg is a borrowing from Norse and not
native West Germanic. The major hazard for phylogeny is undetected
borrowings. These can arise when borrowing occurs between close sister
languages before sound changes occur that identify the clades later
descending from those sisters; or when borrowing postdates diagnostic
sound changes but the borrowed word happens not to contain any sounds
that undergo the diagnostic changes; or when a borrowing is reshaped to
‘nativize’ it, undoing or adding diagnostic changes (e.g., Grace 1996).
Undetected borrowing also occurs when comparative work on languages
is in its early stages and the diagnostic sound changes are not well-
understood yet. In all of these cases, linguists estimate the likelihood and
magnitude of undetected borrowing using various techniques.
For example, Embleton (1986) estimates the extent of undetected
borrowing from such things as the number of sisters of each language, the
number of neighbors, and indices of similarity (based on typological properties)
between the compared languages. Minett and Wang (2003) assume that
recurrent non-cognate lexemes are due to borrowing and use statistics to
evaluate the probability that characters evolve through borrowing by
examining incompatibility patterns on MP trees. In a somewhat similar
fashion, Nakhleh et al. (2005a) proposed a model of language evolution
whereby all characters evolve without any homoplasy but potentially with
borrowing and showed how to use it to analyze the Indo-European family.
A mathematically formal parametric model of language evolution with
these properties was proposed in Warnow et al. (2006). Hinnebusch’s
method (1996) of detecting borrowing through lexical skewing was studied
in Wang and Minett (2005) and shown to be a reliable indicator of
borrowing. McMahon et al. (2005) compare numbers of resemblances
in genealogically stable vs. unstable vocabulary to propose that certain

790
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
resemblances are better explained by borrowing than by descent. (More
detailed discussions of these articles are below.)
The graphical models best suited to represent linguistic evolution in the
presence of borrowing are phylogenetic networks rather than trees, but
there are no standards for measuring amounts of reticulation and no averages
for comparison. As a consequence, commentators differ in whether they
consider a given phylogenetic network to be basically reticulate or basi-
cally tree-like. A number of studies draw networks (splits graphs) showing
considerable reticulation in the central part of the graph (i.e., in the early
stages of differentiation) and yet assert that the graph is tree-like: Gray and
Atkinson (2003); Forster and Toth (2003); Bryant et al. (2005); McMahon
and McMahon (2005: 163) (discussed above); to some extent Greenhill
and Gray (2005). Appropriate interpretation of phylogenetic networks is
thus still an open problem at this point.
4.2. DISTANCE MEASURES; DATING (ABSOLUTE CHRONOLOGY)
Some phylogenetic methods (largely distance-based methods like NJ and
UPGMA, but also maximum likelihood) produce trees that indicate not
only subgrouping but also branch lengths. The interpretation of these
branch lengths depends on the model assumptions, but in most cases these
lengths correspond to the expected number of changes that should occur
for a randomly selected character. When evolution is clocklike, however,
these also correspond to the elapsed time for that edge. Thus, the algo-
rithmic techniques involved in glottochronology produce estimates of
branch length and family ages, because they make the assumption that the
evolution is clocklike. All these techniques fundamentally depend on the
original character data, and use their various assumptions to produce
estimates of elapsed time from character state changes.
Differential Rates of Change. It is a truism of comparative-historical linguis-
tics that high-frequency words are more stable (resisting phonological,
morphological, and lexical change) than low-frequency words. Pagel et al.
(2007) test lexical replacement in Indo-European and find that the effect is
consistent across branches. McMahon and McMahon (2005: 103–11) and
Lohr (1999) identify more and less stable vocabulary items. Field (2002)
and Haspelmath and Tadmor (n.d.) find cross-linguistic semantic regularities
in the propensity of words to be borrowed. Nichols (2006) and Nichols
and Nichols (2007) show that the overall lexical type of a language
imposes differential propensities to change independent of lexical frequency
(e.g., stance verbs are more stable in base-intransitive languages than in
base-transitive languages). Apart from these frequency and structural effects,
languages differ in overall lexical stability. Lexical replacement often
proceeds more rapidly under intense contact (the permeation of English
by Romance vocabulary is a classic example). Dialect mixture can produce

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
791
a vocabulary containing ultimately cognate vocabulary from different dialect
sources, confounding the task of distinguishing cognates from borrowings
(Lynch 1999 for southern Vanuatu). Social change can sometimes produce
rapid language change, as when the Norman conquest of England dis-
rupted social institutions and unseated West Saxon from its position as
standard and interethnic language, allowing dialect variety to emerge,
undermining existing stabilizing attitudes, and making possible the rapid
transition to the grammatically and lexically innovative Middle English.
The movement of Blackfoot, Arapahoan, and Cheyenne away from the
eastern mass of Algonquian languages to the Great Plains and into contact
with Plains culture seems to have coincided with rapid phonological
change in these languages; on the other hand, no similar acceleration
of change occurred when some Apachean (Athabaskan) languages and
Kiowa (Kiowa-Tanoan) similarly moved onto the plains and/or into the
penumbra of Plains culture (for some of these developments, see God-
dard 1996; Ives 2003).
Contact and dialect mixture are readily identifiable, and outliers like
English are disregarded or downplayed in estimating glottochronological
dates. It is more problematic if an entire branch or family shows unusually
fast or slow change. The oft-repeated opinion that vocabulary changes
rapidly in Australian languages, because a taboo on pronouncing the name
of a deceased person drives lexemes out of use is shown to be false by
Alpher and Nash (1999). Foley (2007) presents documentary evidence of
unusually rapid grammatical and lexical change in the Lower Sepik-Ramu
family of Papua New Guinea. Lynch (1999) shows that the languages of
southern Vanuatu have undergone much more phonological change than
most Oceanic languages; Grace (1996) traces part of the aberrancy to the fact
that they make up a language area. It is often said that languages of very
small speech communities should be expected to change rapidly, partly
because the impact of any idiolect is greater in a smaller society and partly
because small populations usually have a good deal of intermarriage and multi-
lingualism. However, there are many languages and language families of small
communities whose rates of change since first European contact or since major
archeological episodes can be measured well, and whose rates of change are
unremarkable compared with those of languages with long written histories:
examples include the Algonquian, Athabaskan, Iroquoian, and Kiowa-
Tanoan families of North America (some of these discussed just above).
Finally, we note that the mathematical conditions required in order to
be able to accurately estimate dates include significant restrictions on how
much variability there can be between the different characters’ evolutionary
processes. In particular, different characters need to speed up or slow
down relative to each other in such a manner that if one character evolves
twice as quickly as another character on one edge in the tree, then it
evolves twice as quickly as that other character on every edge in the tree
(Evans et al. 2006). This assumption, called the ‘rates-across-sites’ assumption,

792
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
may not be realistic. In addition, even when the rates-across-sites assumption
holds, if the characters draw their rates from a distribution that is not
sufficiently simple, then it may still be impossible to estimate dates correctly
(Evans and Warnow 2005).
5. Review of Literature
In this section, we review a number of recent contributions, attempting
to answer the following questions:
• What is the evidence for or against each phylogeny estimation method?
• What are the implications of these studies for taxon sampling and char-
acter selection and encoding? and
• What new insights do we have about language evolution, whether of
particular families or more generally, as a result of these studies and the
new methods they introduce?
5.1. STUDIES EMPLOYING NEW COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
In this section, we discuss studies that employ new methods for phylo-
genetic analysis of languages, restricting our attention to those methods
that produce trees instead of networks and that use ‘traditional’ data
(e.g., lexical, phonological, or morphological characters). These methods
include the Gray-Atkinson method, the Nicholls and Gray method,
methods based on edit distances between words, and Holm’s separation
group method.
5.1.1. The Gray-Atkinson Method
This method was introduced in Gray and Atkinson (2003), where it was
used on Indo-European languages, and subsequently used to study the
Bantu language family (Holden 2002; Holden and Gray 2006; Rexová
et al. 2006).
The Gray-Atkinson method uses lexical characters (though it could be
used on any type of character) encoded as binary characters. The lexical
characters are created using cognate judgments, but then each cognate
class for each semantic slot produces one binary character, with ‘present’
indicating that the language contains that cognate, and ‘absent’ indicating
that the language does not contain that cognate. These binary characters
are then analyzed using a Bayesian MCMC analysis under a model that
assumes that the individual binary characters evolve independently and
identically under a Markov model. The analysis is performed using the
MrBayes software (Huelsenbeck and Ronquist 2001).
This model thus allows characters to be homoplastic (i.e., to evolve
several times on the tree) and incorporates polymorphism: because the
binary characters for different cognates evolve independently, each

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
793
language can exhibit two or more words for any basic semantic slot. As
in all Bayesian MCMC analyses, the analysis produces a greedy consensus
tree for the set of trees sampled during a random walk through model tree
space. The edges of this greedy consensus tree are each annotated with
the percentage of the sampled trees that contain the bipartition of taxa
represented by the edge.
Evaluating the performance of the Gray-Atkinson method is challenging,
since in some cases the analyses were run in such a way as to ensure that
the result satisfies all established subgroups for the language family (and
hence will satisfy our first two criteria). For example, many of the Bayesian
analyses of Indo-European by Gray and Atkinson (see Gray and Atkinson
2003; Atkinson and Gray 2006) had an intermediate step in which the
sampled trees were filtered through the use of constraint trees before being
used to compute a consensus tree: ‘To ensure that the sample was consistent
with well-established linguistic relationships, we filtered the 10,000-tree
sample using a constraint tree’ (Gray and Atkinson 2003: 436). Although Gray
and Atkinson explored different constraint trees, even their ‘minimum’
consensus tree enforced all the established subgroups, as well as a split
separating Anatolian and Tocharian from the rest of Indo-European (the
difference between the two constraint trees was only in whether they
forced Germanic to group with Italic and Celtic). Thus, we cannot use
these specific analyses to determine whether their method passes our required
compatibility test or our full recognition desideratum for phylogenetic
estimation methods.
On the other hand, Atkinson and Gray (2006) also included an analysis
of the Swadesh 100-word list in which no filtering of the sampled trees
was performed. This analysis succeeds in reproducing all the established
subgroups, and thus passes our first two criteria. (It also finds a split
between Anatolian and Tocharian and the remainder of Indo-European
(IE), and provides moderate support (46%) for Italic-Celtic and the ruki
group.) Furthermore, Nakhleh et al. (2005b) tested the Gray-Atkinson
method on four versions of the IE dataset compiled by Ringe and Taylor
(some containing only lexical characters, but others containing lexical,
phonological, and morphological characters), and found that the results
did satisfy the first two of our criteria. Thus, the Gray-Atksinson method
satisfies our first two criteria even without filtering.
However, the main objective of Gray and Atkinson (2003) is the dating
of the root of Indo-European, so they are not so concerned with the
estimation of the topology (their date is considerably earlier than the
established date, so their phylogeny fails our calibration criterion).
Furthermore, they assert that reanalyses of the data in which certain
aspects of the analysis are varied produce dates in the same range, and
from that they infer that their dating estimates are reliable. But it is
important to understand that they have established only that their analysis
is repeatable, which is not the same thing as accurate. To use an extreme

794
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
case as illustration, a method that always produces the same outcome
(independent of input) will be repeatable without being accurate.
5.1.2. The Nicholls-Gray Method
Quite similar to Gray and Atkinson’s method is the one developed by
Geoff Nicholls and Russell Gray (2008). This method uses the same data,
that is, binary encodings of the multistate lexical characters, and also
subjects the data to a Bayesian MCMC analysis. However, here the statistical
model that is used is somewhat different. This analysis uses a single character
for each basic meaning, but the state of each character on a given language
is the entire set of words for that meaning in that language. This set
evolves through the appearance and disappearance of words, and hence
explicitly prohibits homoplasy, and permits polymorphism (two or more
words for the same basic meaning). Their method, however, cannot handle
missing data, and so is constrained to work with characters for which
all languages have attestations. They applied this method to the Indo-
European family using various subsets of two basic datasets: the lexical
dataset of Dyen et al. and the lexical dataset of Ringe et al. (2002). As in Gray
and Atkinson (2003), they screened their sampled trees using a constraint
tree to ensure that the Indo-European subgroups were reproduced. Hence,
we cannot evaluate the performance of this method. However, we note that
despite the constraints the relationships between the different subgroups
of IE changed according to the dataset used, with some aspects of IE
history strongly supported by most analyses, while the support for other
aspects changed dramatically depending on the dataset. For example (see
Figure 1 in Nicholls and Gray 2008: 13), the rooting of the tree at
Anatolian is supported strongly for the Ringe et al. datasets, and not at
all for the other datasets; Germanic-Italic is highly supported for some
datasets of Dyen et al., but not supported on the other datasets; and
Greek-Armenian is supported strongly by some subsets of Ringe et al.,
but not supported at all by the other analyses. They performed a simulation
study (based on the same binary-state model, but enlarged to allow for
borrowing between languages), and found that similar differences in
topology occurred when analyzing different subsets of synthetic datasets.
Interestingly, however, they found that estimates of the date of the root
were close across all analyses, and inferred from this that while topological
estimations may be faulty, estimating the age of a family could be performed
with greater accuracy and reliability. This conjecture, however, needs to
be tested.
5.1.3. Analyses Based on Edit Distances between Words
Some of the new methods for phylogenetic analysis use traditional
distance-based methods (e.g., UPGMA and NJ) on edit distances between
words for the same basic meaning in different languages. Edit distances are
costs for replacements of letters by other letters (i.e., sounds by other

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
795
sounds), as well as insertions and deletions of letters. Thus, in a sense these
distances are an attempt to model the transformation of one word into
another by sound changes, without being restricted to uncontroversially
regular sound changes. Note also that words that are cognate but have
undergone different sound changes will have positive distances between
them. Thus, these distances are quite different from the usual application
of distance-based methods to the traditional lexical characters, where two
words that are cognate will not contribute to the distance between two
languages. Edit distances are defined by the cost of each transformation
(i.e., the cost of each replacement, as well as the cost of an insertion or a
deletion of a letter); thus phylogenetic analyses based on different edit
distances may produce different trees.
The most extensive use of edit distances appears in Brown et al. (2008).
Here the authors used NJ [as implemented in SplitsTree4; Huson and
Bryant 2006) analyses of distances based on the ASJP (Automated
Similarity Judgment Program)] to produce trees on Huitoto-Ocaina,
Taconan, Chocoan, Mixe-Zoquean, Mayan, Muskogean, Indo-European,
and Austro-Asiatic.
The ASJP method had mixed performance in this article, passing both
tests for some families, while failing to pass even our minimum compat-
ibility requirement on others. For example, the analysis for Muskogean is
incompatible with the Central Muskogean subgroup (based on the expert
classification by Haas 1949, 1979), and the analysis for Austro-Asiatic is
incompatible with Katuic-Bahnaric (established by Bradley 1994). It is
also questionable whether the ASJP analysis of Mixe-Zoquean actually
meets our minimum criterion, since the subgrouping of Lowland
Mixe, South Highland Mixe, and North Highland Mixe contradicts the
subgrouping established by Wichmann as reported in Cysouw et al.
(2006). Furthermore, for those families on which the method passes both
tests, the sparse sampling of languages for these groups is problematic in
that it makes it easier for the analysis to reproduce the subtrees. For
example, the Mixe-Zoquean analysis omits many of the languages
included in Cysouw et al. (2006), such as Midland Mixe, Tapachultec, and
Ayapa Zoque, and the Indo-European analysis omits Greek, Tocharian,
Anatolian, and Albanian. In our opinion, therefore, the method is insuf-
ficiently accurate to provide confidence in the phylogenetic estimations it
might produce.
Serva and Petroni (2008) used these distances with UPGMA on 50
Indo-European languages (excluding Anatolian and Tocharian). Because
UPGMA was used, the output is a rooted tree. The tree obtained satisfies
our desideratum of no missing groups in that it captures the major daughter
branches (Indo-Iranian, Balto-Slavic, Celtic, Germanic, Romance, etc.),
but it has some questionable higher-level structure. Technically, the com-
patibility criterion is inapplicable at higher levels of IE, as there is no
consensus on higher-level grouping, but this does not mean that all possible

796
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
higher-level structures are equally plausible or would find equal support
among Indo-Europeanists. The two subgroupings that would find the
most support (recall that Anatolian and Tocharian are not included) would
be a radial phylogeny and one in which Celtic (or Italic-Celtic for proponents
of that group) branches off very early. Also plausible would be a grouping
consisting of Balto-Slavic and Indo-Iranian, or an Armenian-Greek one,
or Italic-Celtic. Serva and Petroni’s tree contains none of these. Its basic
structure is the following (note that ‘Other’ means a node ancestral to the
rest of the languages at that level of structure, and that some lower nodes
have been omitted):
Armenian
Other: Greek
Other: Indo-Iranian
Other: Balto-Slavic
Other: Albanian
Other: Celtic
Other: Germanic
Other: Romance
The initial subdivision into Armenian vs. all others (i.e., the rooting of
this portion of the IE tree) is not advocated in any well-supported claim
we are aware of, nor are we aware of support for the other subgroupings.
Thus, the higher-level subgrouping is problematic even for a family for
which this is not yet agreed. There are also some problematic low-level
groupings: the internal subgrouping both of Slavic and Romance violates
our compatibility requirement.
Serva and Petroni describe their method as designed to address the
surreal concern that ‘Cognates are words inferred to have a common
historical origin, their identification is often a matter of sensibility and
personal knowledge. Therefore, subjectivity plays a relevant role. Further-
more, results are often biased since it is easier for European or American
scholars to find out those cognates belonging to western languages. . . .’
They seem to believe that each phylogeneticist determines cognacy inde-
pendently by eyeballing forms or perhaps consulting ordinary defining
dictionaries that sometimes give information on etymology. In fact,
cognacy judgments are expert decisions based on certain requisite kinds
of data and criteria and published in the scientific literature. Phylogenies
are normally drawn up with an expert on the language family among the
co-authors (e.g., Ringe in Nakhleh et al. 2005a,b, Wichmann in Cysouw
et al. 2006) or acknowledged as a consultant (e.g., Robert Blust in Gray
and Jordan 2000).
5.1.4. Holm’s Separation Group Method
Holm (2000, 2003, 2007) introduced a new method, called the ‘separation
group method’, to deal with some known problems of lexicostatistical
analysis. Holm addresses the ‘symplesiomorphy trap’ (shared archaisms are

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
797
hard to distinguish from shared innovations) and the ‘proportionality trap’
(the assumption that a higher proportion of shared cognates indicates a
closer genealogical relationship, when in fact later changes can obscure
earlier relationships). Holm uses shared retentions rather than shared
innovations to do subgrouping, inferring subgroups from the particular
etyma retained (and not assuming a constant rate of change). The description
of this method, as given in his articles, is difficult to understand, but
Cysouw et al. (2006) provide another description that is somewhat more
accessible. Cysouw also tested the method on lexical data for Mixe-
Zoquean and found that it fails our minimum compatibility requirement
(see Section 5.4.3).
5.2. STUDIES EMPLOYING TRADITIONAL COMPUTATIONAL METHODS
Here we discuss the articles that have used traditional methods, that is,
weighted or unweighted MP and MC, NJ, and UPGMA, on traditional
data (characters based on lexical, phonological, or morphological features)
to construct trees on languages.
5.2.1. Maximum Parsimony
Many studies have used MP to perform phylogenetic analyses of linguistic
data. For example, several groups have analyzed the Bantu language family
using MP on a variety of datasets, with Bastin (1983), Holden (2002),
Holden et al. (2005) using only lexical data, and Rexová et al. (2006) also
using grammatical data. Indo-European has been studied using lexical data
(Nakhleh et al. 2005b; Rexová et al. 2003) and using a combination of
types of data (Nakhleh et al. 2005b). Maximum parsimony was also used
by Cysouw et al. (2006) to analyze Mixe-Zoquean. In each of these
studies, MP passed both of our topological conditions, thus showing that
MP is ‘reasonable’.
It is worth noting that though Cysouw et al. stated that the MP analysis
of Mixe-Zoquean was incompatible with the subgroupings established by
Wichmann (1995), the parsimony analysis actually produced a tree that
was a proper refinement of Wichmann’s unresolved constraint tree and so
was compatible with it. The performance of the method on the Bantu
family is not particularly informative, since very little is established about
the subgrouping of Bantu.
Gray and Jordan (2000) used MP to analyze binary-encoded versions
of lexical data for Austronesian and produced a unique MP tree with a
low consistency index (CI) of 0.25. They claim considerable similarity to
the traditional subgrouping (e.g., Blust 1995; Ross 1995). In fact, though,
their tree shows several violations of our minimum compatibility constraint:
Malay is removed from its close sisters (in the traditional Malayic subgroup;
they include Indonesian, Javanese, etc.) and incorrectly placed with
languages of southern Borneo, such as Ngaju Dayak and Malagasy (this

798
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
latter is correctly placed with its geographically distant close sister);
Chamorro and Palauan, probable high-level daughters of Western Malayo-
Polynesian on the traditional tree and high-level daughters of Nuclear
Malayo-Polynesian on a recent proposed reworking (Zobel 2002), are
incorrectly placed in the Oceanic sub-branch; and Fijian, a close sister of
the Polynesian subgroup, is removed from Polynesian and incorrectly
placed with the Micronesian languages. These are violations of both the
traditional classification they cite and its recent proposed reworking (e.g.,
Ross and Naess 2007; Zobel 2002, discussion by Ross 2002; these recent
contributions are reflected in the classifications of Austronesian and its
subgroups as accessed on Wikipedia in March 2008).
5.2.2. Maximum Compatibility
The only group to use MC is the Ringe and Warnow team (Ringe 2002;
Nakhleh et al. 2005a,b), who use it in a weighted version where the
different characters have weights to indicate the relative propensity to
homoplasy and/or borrowing. This method depends on the linguist to
assign weights to characters, and the output of the method will depend
on these weights as well as on the input matrix (whereas other methods
will depend only on the input matrix). The method was used to analyze
Indo-European in Nakhleh et al. (2005b); Ringe et al. 2002, and passed
our first two criteria.
5.2.3. Neighbor Joining
Neighbor joining is a technique that is frequently used in molecular
phylogenetics, but rather infrequently in linguistics. However, McMahon
and McMahon (2005) and Nakhleh et al. (2005b) included NJ in analyses
of Indo-European, and Cysouw et al. (2006) used it on Mixe-Zoquean.
The only one of these analyses that failed our first two criteria was the
NJ analysis of Holm’s distance data, which suggests that the problem
might have been the data rather than the analysis. Thus, the method seems
to pass our first two criteria. The tree produced by a NJ analysis will also
depend upon the technique used to estimate pairwise distances between
languages, with theoretical guarantees only when these estimated distances
are close to ‘additive’ (see Section 3.4). Therefore, it is noteworthy that
generally no attempt has been made to use distances that are approxi-
mately additive – instead, Hamming distances (i.e., the number of characters
that differ between two languages) were used in almost all of these NJ
analyses (the only exception being Nakhleh et al. 2005b, who used the
distance correction provided in Warnow et al. 2006). In conclusion, it
seems that NJ performs well, but additional testing is called for.
5.2.4. UPGMA
Unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean (defined in Section
2.6.4) is the algorithmic component of glottochronology, and although it

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
799
was used frequently in the past, it has largely been dropped from the linguistic
toolkit due to its reliance on a lexical clock. An evaluation of UPGMA on
Indo-European data, and a comparison to other methods, was performed by
Nakhleh et al. (2005b), who found that the trees that were obtained were
incompatible with two established subgroups (Iranian and Italic). However, the
data on which they applied UPGMA included languages selected at different
time depths, a condition that is unfavorable to UPGMA. Finally, as discussed
earlier, Serva and Petroni also used UPGMA on Levenshtein distances.
5.3. STUDIES USING TYPOLOGICAL CHARACTERS
5.3.1. Dunn et al. 2005
Most studies have used traditional cognate and phyletic data, for which
the encoding uses cognate judgments. Dunn et al. (2005) is the first attempt
at computational phylogeny using typological characters. They surveyed
125 grammatical characters (phonological, morphological, and syntactic;
all were binary yes/no characters) across 16 languages from the Western
Oceanic subgroup of Austronesian spoken in the part of Island Melanesia
to the northeast of New Guinea (henceforth ‘AN languages’), and 15
non-Austronesian (or Papuan) languages (henceforth ‘NAN’), not known
to be related to each other, from the same general area. In a MP tree, the
languages fell into two clusters corresponding to AN and NAN. As there
have been cross-family contacts since the first settlement of AN speakers in
the area ca. 3500 years ago (the islands have been settled for some 35,000
years, and there is no way to know whether a given NAN language goes
back to the first settlers or represents later immigrants; all of them are
surely pre-AN in any case), this is a successful demonstration that typological
characters can preserve family lines even under much contact.
Dunn et al. assert that their Western Oceanic tree is similar to received
trees, but in fact the tree is incompatible with the established subgrouping
as determined by Ross (this violation was pointed out by Donohue and
Wichmann (2008), as we discuss below). While one interpretation of the
study would be to reject MP as a phylogenetic estimation method, the
more appropriate interpretation would be to see the data as problematic.
There are 125 binary characters, but the best tree has parsimony length
that is almost twice as long, indicating that on average each character
changes close to twice on the tree, that is, there is a great deal of homoplasy.
The analysis of the NAN dataset demonstrates even more homoplasy (on
that dataset, characters change on average almost three times). For this
kind of data, parsimony analyses may not provide sufficient levels of
phylogenetic accuracy. However, this may be inevitable with typological
characters whose stability and worldwide frequency are not known.
Further interpretation of this pattern of results has been controversial.
Dunn et al. say that their ability to detect relatedness is proved by the
success of the AN tree, and that therefore the rather similarly compact

800
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
NAN tree is also likely to reflect a ‘phylogenetic signal’, this one from ca.
10,000 years ago. The two trees are similar not only in compactness but
in branch length, although the AN languages of their sample represent a
transparently related, 3,500-year-old sub-branch, while the NAN languages
have not been shown to be related and are not believed to be. Dunn et al.
are cautious in their wording (‘If grammatical structures can retain a phylo-
genetic signal beyond the current temporal ceiling on the reconstruction
of language history, then the possibility is opened up of finding relationships
between others of the world’s 300 or so existing language families and
isolates’ [2075]), but the case for familyhood of the NAN languages in
their sample seems too slim for even this claim.
Donohue and Musgrave (2007) note data gaps, language gaps, and
non-independent features in Dunn et al.’s survey. Using Dunn et al.’s data,
they extract 22 of the features that are significantly different in frequency
between the NAN and AN languages of the survey and show that there
is considerably more structural dispersal among the NAN languages (13 of
the 22 features have 0 or 100% frequency among the AN sample languages,
but none of the features do for the NAN languages). They conclude that
Dunn et al. should have used some NAN languages from outside the area
to try to root the tree, and some more distant AN (but not Western
Oceanic) languages to increase the time depth in the AN languages. They
believe that the similarities in the NAN languages reflect areal factors
rather than descent.
Dunn et al. (2007), in a reply to Donohue and Musgrave (2007),
remove 10 of the 27 features identified as problematic by Donohue and
Musgrave and use Bayesian analysis to draw trees of their sample languages
on this smaller set of features and on the entire set. The resultant trees are
very similar (only one subgroup missed), indicating to Dunn et al. that the
data problems do not vitiate the calculation of phylogeny (we do not know
which 10 characters they chose, or on what grounds). They perform an
autocorrelation test to see whether there is appreciable isolation by dis-
tance in either set of languages (i.e., the greater the geographical distance
between the two members of the pair the fewer their shared features), and
find that pairs of AN languages and pairs of NAN languages both show
strong isolation by distance, while mixed pairs do not. This supports
internal relatedness of the two sets. They add to their sample Äiwoo of
the formerly unclassified Reefs-Santa Cruz group east of their survey area.
The Reefs-Santa Cruz group has just been shown to be Austronesian (though
not Western Oceanic) (Ross and Naess 2007), and Äiwoo patterns strongly
with the AN languages of the study.
Dunn et al. do not address Donohue and Musgrave’s question of
whether the NAN languages of the survey exhaust some clade or are
simply among the members of some larger clade, and they do not address
their question of how the time depth between the NAN and AN sets of
languages can be so different.

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
801
Donohue and Wichmann (2008) also critique Dunn et al., noting that
the AN tree found by Dunn et al. actually violates the Ross subgrouping
(and so fails our compatibility criterion). In addition, they divide the
features into nine that differentiate strongly between NAN and AN
languages and 103 that do not, and they perform NeighborNet analyses
of the two character sets. They find very striking differences between the
phylogenetic networks they obtained: the first does suggest support of the
monophyly of the AN languages of the study, while the second intermingles
the two sets almost totally (i.e., shows numerous compatibility violations).
They show that the topological distance (measured using the RF distance
as defined above) between the Dunn et al. tree and the benchmark tree is
7, which is what one would expect between two random trees on the
same 16-taxon dataset.
Finally, in an attempt to further determine the ability of this method
applied to these data to distinguish between related and (probably) unre-
lated languages, they add English to the languages. This results in a tree
in which English is not clearly distant from the rest of the languages. They
add two more distant AN languages and observe a similar response. Adding
English to the dataset allows the tree to be rooted at the branch at which
the added language attaches. This rooting, however, is clearly incorrect.
At a minimum, this demonstrates that the method is unable to accurately
analyze datasets with distantly related (or unrelated) languages. [This analysis
of the trees obtained by adding the outgroups is our own; the analysis
presented in Donohue and Wichmann (2008) attempts to interpret the
trees without first rooting the trees where the outgroup attaches.]
5.3.2. Wichmann and Saunders 2007
This study used a smaller set of typological data to compare methods. The
comparison is discussed below in Section 5.4.3. Although the study is a
test of methods, their results do also show that typological data can produce
a recognizable to fairly good approximation of the known phylogenetic
relationships and (in the case of NeighborNet) can appropriately reflect
the non-tree-like nature of sets of non-sisters. They also tested the phyl-
ogenetic signal of typological data by producing a NJ tree using 96
characters from Haspelmath et al. (2005) and 63 native American languages
containing a few pairs and small sets of known sisters but overall not known
to be related. This analysis produced a tree (their Figure 8) that they
observed to be ‘mostly wrong’. They performed a second NJ analysis by
adding additional ‘ghost’ characters designed to enforce the known subgroups.
This second analysis produced a tree (their Figure 9) that, as intended,
reproduced the known subgroups. Wichmann and Saunders then exam-
ined those subgroupings that appeared in both trees. This examination
produced a few pairings of languages that might be worth further inves-
tigation as possible distant sisters. Using expert knowledge to examine one
of the pairs (Chiapas Zoque of the Mixe-Zoque family of Mexico and

802
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Mapudungun, an isolate of Chile and Argentina), they found 10 words
on a Swadesh 100 word list that they considered ‘similar to the results one
would find by comparing, say, English and Farsi’ (399). In fact, though,
what they have done is analogous to comparing either English or Farsi to
a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) wordlist, which would yield more resemblances
than a comparison of two modern languages would. Up to four of their
10 resemblant words involved free parsing or extraction of one or the
other piece from a compound to compare to the other language, which
would not be done in comparing Indo-European languages. Although we
are less sanguine than they are about this particular trial, we agree that the
technique is promising in the abstract and very much worth applying to
larger datasets with characters better suited to the task.
5.3.3. Saunders 2005
This work applies various methods to Austronesian data, examining the
accuracy of the resultant trees by comparison to the established tree for
Austronesian, and considering the impact of data choice (lexical alone, or
a mixture of lexical and structural) on the resultant trees. We discuss this
work in Section 5.4.4.
5.4. STUDIES COMPARING DIFFERENT PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSES
5.4.1. Indo-European Studies
Nakhleh et al. (2005b) compared UPGMA (the agglomerative clustering
algorithm involved in glottochrononology), NJ, MP and MC (these two
in both weighted and unweighted forms), and the Gray and Atkinson
method on four different subsets of the Indo-European dataset of 336
characters compiled by Donald Ringe and Ann Taylor. The four datasets
differ according to whether they are screened or unscreened and based on
lexical characters alone or all the characters (lexical, phonological, and
morphological). Nakhleh et al. found that UPGMA did the worst, vio-
lating known subgroups (e.g., producing incompatibilities for Italic and
Iranian), no matter which dataset was analyzed; the poor performance of
UPGMA is, however, perhaps to be expected, since the languages were
not sampled at the same time depth (a condition that would be needed
for UPGMA to perform well). However, for every other method, and for
each of the four datasets, the trees that were produced included all the
established groups. The analyses also all shared certain additional sub-
groupings, such as Greek-Armenian, and internal subgroupings within
Germanic, Italic, and Indo-Iranian, and each produced a split between
Tocharian and Anatolian and the remainder of Indo-European (i.e., if the
tree is rooted with Anatolian as the first daughter, then Tocharian is the
second daughter). The placement of Albanian varied widely in the different
analyses and so was considered too variable to be used for benchmarking
purposes. However, otherwise the trees were quite different; in particular,

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
803
where Italic and Celtic were located in the tree changed according to the
choice of data and the method, forming a clade with Indo-Iranian and
Balto-Slavic for all analyses except when using weighted parsimony or
weighted compatibility with one of the morphological characters (the
character encoding the shape of the mediopassive primary person-and-number
endings) given sufficiently high weight.
Rexová et al. (2003) also explored the impact of character encoding,
namely, whether to use the original multistate character encoding, a mod-
ified version of the multistate encoding, or a binary encoding of these
characters. They used the 200 lexical characters in the Dyen, Kruskal, and
Black database. They analyzed each dataset using MP and then computed
greedy consensus trees, annotating each edge with the percentage of the
MP trees exhibiting the same bipartition (edges without such annotations
presumably appear in fewer than 50% of the trees). Their study shows that
trees estimated on multistate and binary-encoded versions of the multistate
characters differ substantially, and in important ways. For example, the
analysis of the multistate character dataset finds the ruki group (the
branches that have undergone the ruki rule, defined in Section 2.3), but
the analysis of the binary-encoded version of that data is incompatible
with the ruki group. The main conclusion of their study is that the binary-
encoded data matrix produces trees that are less reliable than analyses
based on the original multistate data.
There are some problems with this finding, however. They comment
that ‘all the unrooted trees agree that there are four supergroups of IE
languages (Balto-Slavonic, Romano-Germano-Celtic, Armenian-Greek, and
Indo-Iranian).’ However, these supergroups do not appear in all the trees,
but only in some. What is true is that if the majority consensus instead
of the greedy consensus had been used to represent the results of each
parsimony analysis, then these supergroups would be compatible with all
the trees (because the majority consensus trees would be unresolved, and
these supergroups could be obtained by refining the majority consensus
trees in some way). To see this, it is only necessary to contract all the
edges in the trees in their Figure 1 that are not annotated with support
values; thus, keeping only the edges with support values that are greater
than 50%.
Holm (2000, 2003, 2007) makes good points regarding the use of
methods that require a lexical clock in order to be reliable, and also points
out the difficulties in obtaining globally optimal solutions to maximum
likelihood and MP. Holm emphasizes the need to use characters for which
one knows which state is innovative, and dismisses analyses based on
methods that fail to have provable performance guarantees. Thus, he
rejects both MP and maximum likelihood analyses of datasets beyond 20
taxa, because global optima cannot be provably found, and he rejects any
distance-based method that relies on a lexical clock. While we find
his desire for rigor admirable, we think that it is too rigid a position;

804
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
understanding the performance of an algorithm is a complicated issue, as
we show in this article. Furthermore, the assumption that methods will
fail absolutely unless they are perfectly designed for the problem is also
misleading. As we have seen, even mediocre methods can reproduce much
of the true tree (see also our discussion below of Cysouw et al. 2006,
applying Holm’s method to other data).
5.4.2. Bantu
Marten (2006) compared several analyses of the Bantu family, a group for
which there is much dispute about the subgrouping and which is likely
to exhibit a fair amount of dialect interaction and hence be not very tree-like.
He focused on two recent studies (Holden 2002; Holden and Gray 2006)
and compared them to earlier studies (Guthrie 1967–1971; Bastin et al.
1999), finding significant differences between the phylogenetic trees, and
observing that the authors of the studies draw very different conclusions
about the feasibility of inferring a tree for the family. Marten comments
on several methodological issues, pointing out the potential for language
selection (called ‘taxonomic sampling’ in the molecular systematics field)
to impact the phylogenetic analysis, especially with respect to dialect
chains and other dialect interaction. His general conclusion is that linguistic
phylogenetics is problematic and that the interpretation of an analysis is
not at all straightforward. To quote Marten,
Bastin et al. deny the possibility of constructing any one family tree for Bantu
in principle, while Holden (2002) proposes something a version of a tree
which is at least definite enough to be used to support historical hypotheses.
The results reported in Holden and Gray (this volume) seem to come closer to
Bastin et al.’s results, in that several networks are presented. Yet Holden and Gray’s
conclusions with respect to the possibility of developing a sub-classification
of Bantu with the aid of statistical methods are still more optimistic than
those of Bastin et al. Wherever the truth of the matter lies, this difference, to
me, indicates some caution about the use of quantitative methods in
linguistics . . . It seems, thus, that quantitative methods are a highly useful and
welcome addition for the study of linguistic relationship, and improve our
methodological toolkit, but that the application of the method, and the
interpretation of its results remains messy and subject to a certain degree of
subjectivity. (2006: 50–51)
5.4.3. Mixe-Zoque
Cysouw et al. (2006) apply the method of Holm 2000 (see also Holm
2003, 2007) to the Mixe-Zoque family of Central America. This is a
fairly shallow family whose subgrouping is well-understood, having been
carefully done independently and on independently collected data by
Wichmann (1995) and Kaufman and Justeson (2004) (whose trees differ only
minimally). Holm’s method has two steps: in the first step, it produces a
distance matrix (called the ‘N values’), and then from this an evolutionary

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
805
scenario can be obtained. Cysouw et al. apply various tree-building
methods as well as Holm’s narrative interpretation, and all give what they
consider similar results that are different from the received view; this
means that Holm’s N values and not the interpretation of them is what is
at fault. In particular, the application of Holm’s method to this dataset
yields a tree very different from the received one (with violations of the
compatibility criterion, one missing subgroup, and formation of one sub-
subgroup that is not in the established tree at all; Cysouw et al. consider
the latter error minor, p. 240). Apparently, this is due to two problems. First,
use of protoforms ‘creates problems of circularity that cannot be overcome’.
Wichmann was careful not to reconstruct as Proto-Mixe-Zoque (PMZ)
words found in one branch plus only one language of the other branch,
especially when that language was in a contact situation; Holm’s recon-
struction of IE protoforms does not take this precaution. In Wichmann’s
approach, every protoroot survives in both M and Z by definition, so
Holm’s method applied to Wichmann’s data cannot possibly detect the M
and Z major nodes. Cysouw et al. use only PMZ roots; if they used
lower-level protoroots (PM roots, PZ roots), they would be building in
tree structure by definition, and this would amount to classifying based
on shared innovations. Second, the method is sensitive to the amount of
lexical documentation available for the daughter languages.
Cysouw et al. find that other methods (NJ, MP, and Split Decomposition)
return more accurate estimations of the history of Mixe-Zoquean. They
used NJ (called the Fitch algorithm in the article) and MP for tree
estimation, and Split Decomposition to produce a network. The NJ and
MP trees are both compatible with the constraint tree and reproduce all
the established groups, but they also introduce additional subgroups (thus
passing both our tests). Cysouw et al. interpret the two trees differently,
finding the additional subgroup produced by the Fitch algorithm acceptable
but the additional subgroup produced by MP an error; we do not under-
stand why this additional subgroup is considered an error. Their evaluation
of the Split Decomposition network is that it is largely in agreement with
the constraint tree.
Cysouw et al. conclude that Holm’s method would work if etymological
dictionaries and information about protolanguages were perfect, but in
practice it does not work. They also conclude that although Holm’s
criticisms of lexicostatistics are correct, in practice lexicostatistics yielded
‘surprisingly good’ results (254).
5.4.4. Austronesian
Saunders (2005) studied several methods (NJ, MP, the Gray-Atkinson
method, and NeighborNet) on a combination of lexical and typological
data for Austronesian. He used the Austronesian lexical database of Greenhill
et al. (2003–2008), which contains word list items and expert cognate
judgments. [Saunders needed to make a few of the judgments himself

806
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
when they were lacking in the 2005 version he used. He says cognates
were mostly ‘fairly obvious’, which is correct in the sense that it is not
difficult to see whether a word in one language is the same Austronesian
word as those in the others. There is always the possibility of some words
like English egg, mentioned above (Section 4.1), where the word in some
language is clearly Austronesian but only an expert can tell that it is not
directly inherited but borrowed from a sister language. These should not
be counted as cognates.] These lexical characters were then binary-encoded
and combined with structural characters drawn from the World Atlas of
Language Structures database. There were two versions of the structural
character matrix: one multistate and one binary.
Saunders performed a statistical test to see if the phylogenetic signals in
the structural and lexical datasets are compatible (meaning that they could
reflect the same tree), and he found that they did not (2005: 50). Despite
this incompatibility, Saunders constructed trees using the various phylo-
genetic estimation methods on the five possible versions of the data:
lexical alone, structural alone (in its two forms), or lexical plus structural
(in the two forms). The trees he computed were then compared to the
traditional tree (Blust 1978; the same as our benchmark tree, Section 3.2.3
above). To evaluate accuracy, he computed the RF distance between the
estimated trees and the Blust tree. He found that the Gray-Atkinson tree
obtained by analyzing the lexical data (with or without any structural data
added) and the NJ tree on the lexical data (or lexical plus binary encodings
of the structural data) had the smallest distance to the Blust tree, and that
MP was somewhat worse. On the basis of this (and some other observations),
he recommended the use of the Gray-Atkinson method.
This is an interesting study, but we have several concerns. First, and
importantly, the use of lexical data encoded as binary characters, and not
in its multistate form, is problematic and makes it difficult to assess the
performance of the phylogeny estimation methods alone. For example,
trees computed using NJ on multistate character matrices might be different
from trees computed using NJ on the derived binary-encoded character
matrices, and potentially more accurate (see, for example, Rexová et al.
2003, where it is shown that trees based on binary encoded characters
were in general less accurate than trees based on the original multistate
characters). Second, the use of the RF distance to evaluate trees is also
problematic: as was pointed out by Rannala et al. (1998), the RF distance
is biased in favor of unresolved trees, which is what the Gray and Atkinson
method produced. More significantly, the RF metric is inappropriate
when the true tree (in this case, the benchmark tree produced by Blust’s
analysis) is not binary. Third, we would consider any tree that resolves the
benchmark tree to be accurate, but the RF distance counts any additional
resolutions beyond what are in the benchmark tree. This has the unfortunate
consequence that it is possible for an estimated tree that we would con-
sider to have passed our first two tests to have a high RF error, while

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
807
another tree that we would consider to violate the compatibility constraint
might have a lower RF error.
Most importantly, one of Saunders’s main conclusions is that Bayesian
analysis of combined lexical and typological data adds resolution compared
with a tree drawn on only lexical data. We find that his trees for lexical
and combined data are nearly identical in their ability to capture the low-level
groupings, but the resolution in the combined tree is incompatible with
the established tree as regards the placement of the Fijian-Hawaiian-Maori
subgroup, the Malagasy-Maanyan-Yakan-Toba Batak subgroup, and Tukang
Besi, and in its failure to detect the Kapampangan-Bontok subgroup
(compare his Fig. 12, p. 39 with his Fig. 8, p. 32).
5.4.5. Native American Languages
Wichmann and Saunders (2007) report on a study in which they used
four methods (NeighborNet, MP, Gray and Atkinson’s Bayesian Method,
and NJ) on a small sample dataset of six pairs of known sister languages
with no known higher relatedness, and the 12 best-represented and
genealogically most stable typological characters in Haspelmath et al.
(2005). The article contains a lucid, brief, non-technical discussion of each
method and how it works, and gives URL’s and/or bibliographical infor-
mation for each. It includes a brief comparison of biological and linguistic
methods.
We begin with a discussion of the NJ, NeighborNet, and Bayesian
analyses. Their NJ analysis of the six pairs of languages produces five of
the six pairings, and is incompatible (though with low bootstrap support)
with Rama+Ika; thus, NJ fails each of our two topological tests, but
perhaps not badly. NeighborNet’s output (Figure 3) can be interpreted
as strongly supporting only one pairing (Slave + Navajo), showing some-
what weak support for Lealao Chinantec + Chalcatongo Mixtec, but no
real support for the other pairings (and also representing the relationships
between the six pairs of languages as highly reticulate). Thus, NeighborNet’s
output can be considered as (possibly) meeting our minimum criterion
once it is processed, and recovering fewer of the pairings than any of the
other methods. The Bayesian analysis using the Gray and Atkinson
method gives a tree that is fairly unresolved, but gives three of the pairings
and is compatible with the remaining three. Thus, Gray and Atkinson’s
method passes our first criterion, but fails the second – and fails it more
clearly than NJ.
The MP study is more complicated. They give a discussion of MP in
two places and provide two figures for the MP tree: one in Figure 4 (page
26) and one in Figure 6 (page 34). (They also varied the MP analysis to
allow for different weights on different characters and different costs for
changing between states; neither technique made any difference in MP
tree topologies.) These two trees are very different: the tree in their
Figure 4 is clearly poor, as it contains splits that are incompatible with the

808
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
established pairings, while the tree in their Figure 6 not only is compatible
with the established pairings but in fact recognizes three of the six groupings.
It turns out (Wichmann, personal communication) that their first tree is
just one of the many MP trees, and the second tree is the majority consensus
tree of the set of MP trees. By convention, the majority consensus is the
correct tree to use, but the authors use the tree in Figure 4 instead in
order to evaluate MP. As a result, they conclude that MP performs unac-
ceptably. However, if the majority tree had been used to evaluate MP,
then the opposite conclusion would have been reached.
A comparison between the various methods is interesting. MP and
Gray-Atkinson were the only methods that were compatible with the
established groupings, and each recovered the same number of pairings (in
fact, they each recovered the same three pairings). NeighborNet’s output
can be considered as (possibly) meeting the minimum criterion once it is
processed, but it recovers fewer of the pairings than any of the other
methods. NJ’s performance is more complicated: it is incompatible with
one of the established groupings, but with low bootstrap support. Indeed,
it seems that if the majority consensus tree of the bootstrapped NJ analyses
had been used to represent the result, it would have been much less
resolved – and would have passed the compatibility test, but lost one of
the correct pairings.
The authors conclude that more precise testing will require larger and
better-filled datasets, and that multistate characters are more informative
than binary ones. They also conclude that typological characters may be
useful for detecting unsuspected relatedness; see Section 5.3.2.
5.4.6. Simulated Data
Barbançon et al. (forthcoming) explored the performance of MP and MC
(weighted and unweighted), NJ, UPGMA, and the Gray-Atkinson method
on simulated data. In this study, they generated model phylogenetic net-
works (i.e., genetic trees with borrowing between lineages) and evolved
characters down the networks, thus producing synthetic character matrices
that could be analyzed using the different phylogeny estimation methods.
By varying the number of borrowing edges (contact events), the number
of characters, and the amount of homoplasy, they were able to determine
the conditions under which the different methods performed well or
badly. Since each method produces trees, they compared the estimated
trees to the genetic tree contained inside each network for topological
accuracy. They found that the two distance-based methods (NJ and UPGMA)
did worse than the character-based methods, with UPGMA not as accurate
as NJ, and that using weighted maximum with higher weight given to
characters that are more resistant to borrowing and homoplasy improves
the phylogenetic accuracy in some circumstances. The performance of the
Gray-Atkinson method was in between that of the two distance-based
methods and MP, and generally quite close to MP.

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
809
5.5. STUDIES ON DETECTING BORROWING
Phylogenetic analyses are increasingly being performed through the use of
algorithms that produce networks rather than trees, undoubtedly because
of the realization that linguistic evolution is rarely ‘clean’, and that correct
detection (and representation) of contact between lineages is desirable. In
addition, methods designed just to detect borrowing, without also
estimating the genetic tree, have also been developed. In this section, we
describe studies that have used these methods on linguistic datasets or
studied them in simulation.
In earlier sections, we have discussed studies that used phylogenetic
network methods (most often NeighborNet) to estimate phylogenetic
histories on different linguistic groups. In this section, we focus our attention
on those studies that were not discussed in earlier sections. We discuss the
analysis by Forster and Toth of Indo-European languages, the analysis by
Holden and Gray of Bantu languages, several studies by McMahon and
colleagues, two papers by Minett and Wang, and a paper by Nakleh et al.
5.5.1. Forster and Toth
Forster and Toth (2003) survey 39 lexical and typological characters across
14 languages and use network to estimate a phylogenetic network. The
network they construct is in fact unimportant to their paper, whose main
point is to estimate dates, and the network is used only to enable Forster
and Toth to produce a tree on which to estimate the dates. This tree has
an initial split into Continental vs. Insular Celtic, as well as egregiously
early dates for the Celtic split and for Proto-Indo-European differentiation
in Europe. The findings are unreliable because of problems with language
classification, data, and dating method (see Eska and Ringe 2004).
5.5.2. Holden and Gray
Holden and Gray (2006) analyzed lexical data from 93 Bantu languages
(including two non-Bantu Bantoid languages in order to root the trees)
using the Gray-Atkinson method and also using NeighborNet. Their
analysis using the Gray-Atkinson method produces a Bayesian sample of
200 trees, which they represent in two forms: a greedy consensus tree
(with the percentage of the trees exhibiting each edge annotating the
edges of the tree) and also a consensus network (as computed using the
method of Holland and Moulton 2003). While Southeast Bantu appears
in all the sampled trees, and a group containing Central Bantu and East
Bantu also appears in all the sampled trees, many groups appear in fewer
than half the sampled trees: Central Bantu appears in only 27% of the
trees, East Bantu appears in only 18% of the sampled trees, while Southeast
Africa, East Africa, and West Bantu appear as a group in somewhat less
than half the sampled trees. Holden and Gray analyze the lexical data again
using NeighborNet. This analysis produces a highly reticulate network

810
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
(their Figure 2.6) that is then modified by elimination of ‘short edges’ to
produce a more tree-like network (their Figure 2.8). Their discussion of
the two networks indicates that they find the result to be clearly indicative
of support for several groupings, including Central Bantu, West Bantu,
Southwest Bantu, East Africa, Southeast Africa, and East Bantu. However,
none of these groupings are unconflicted, and very few seem well-
supported. An examination of their two networks suggests that East Africa
and Southwest Bantu are somewhat well-supported, and perhaps also
Southeast Africa (though this is less certain), but West Bantu seems only
weakly supported and Central Bantu is not so clear. Interpretation of
these networks is, clearly, difficult.
5.5.3. Minett and Wang
Minett and Wang (2003) and Wang and Minett (2005) propose two methods
for detecting borrowing. The first method (Minett and Wang 2003) is
based on the assumption that phylogenies estimated using distances would
reflect borrowing by producing negative branch lengths (so as to reflect
the fact that two languages that have evolved in contact will be closer
together than would be predicted by purely genetic descent). They studied
this method in simulation under a model in which characters evolve
without any homoplasy, but with borrowing. Their study showed that the
method was able to detect borrowing, and so had a low false-negative
rate, but that it also had a high false-positive rate – and so detected
borrowing under conditions in which no borrowing occurred. On the
basis of the high false-positive rate, they do not recommend the method.
They briefly discussed the lexical skewing method of Hinnebusch (1996)
and argued that because of its similarity to the method they studied, it
would likely also have a high false-positive rate. This assumption, however,
turned out to be false, as they show in Wang and Minett (2005), where
Hinnebusch’s lexical skewing method provided reasonably good results in
simulation. They then proposed a new character-based method, as follows.
First, they analyze their linguistic dataset using MP, thus producing the set
of all the most parsimonious trees for the dataset. These trees are then
treated as candidates for the genetic tree for the language family. For each
of these candidates, they identify the characters that are incompatible
(meaning that they cannot evolve down the tree without homoplasy).
This enables them to compute, for each of the characters in the dataset,
the percentage of the candidate trees on which the character is incompatible.
By their assumption, all incompatibilities are due to borrowing. Therefore,
they also attempt to add contact edges to each candidate tree in order to
derive the character on the resultant network without homoplasy (i.e.,
each character evolves down the network via a combination of genetic
descent and borrowing, but without homoplasy). They then attempt to
determine which of the characters are most likely truly borrowed by using
a statistical technique to see if the null hypothesis that the MP trees are

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
811
random and that a given character is incompatible on a randomly selected
MP tree can be ruled out. They apply this method to a collection of
Chinese dialects and are able to rule out the null hypothesis for certain
lexical characters (‘feather’, ‘small’, and ‘what’); on the basis of this, they
infer that these lexical characters probably did evolve with borrowing.
They conclude that this new technique is promising for detecting bor-
rowing. The method identifies which dialects are involved in borrowing
but cannot determine which of them is source and which is borrower.
These two papers make good contributions to understanding the
performance of methods for detecting borrowing. The 2003 paper defin-
itively shows the weakness of the distance-based method for detecting
borrowing based on negative branch lengths, while the 2005 paper shows
some initial promise for Hinnebusch’s method of lexical skewing. This
result would need to be followed up with a more extensive study to see
how well Hinnebusch’s method works when the datasets are larger, have
greater deviations from a lexical clock, or evolve with homoplasy, since
any of these conditions is likely to increase the false-positive error. However,
it is very good initial work, and there is very little work in this area.
Furthermore, Wang and Minett have also introduced a very natural
character-based approach for detecting borrowing. However, there is a pro-
blem with the interpretation of the statistical test they applied. While they
show clearly that the null hypothesis for the characters ‘feather’, ‘small’,
and ‘what’ can be rejected, the conclusion that these characters evolved
with borrowing does not follow. We can only conclude that the null
hypothesis is false. But the null hypothesis has two parts, the first being
that the MP trees are random, and we know that that is false. Therefore,
the null hypothesis is easy to reject, and unfortunately no inferences can
be made about whether the characters are borrowed.
Interestingly, a different argument can be made that would suggest that
these characters are borrowed. Suppose, for example, that we are willing
to believe that the true tree is one of the MP trees that was obtained. In
this case, if a character is incompatible on every one of the MP trees, it
will in particular be incompatible with the true tree. Then, if we also
assume that all incompatibilities are due to borrowing, we can infer that
any character that is incompatible on every MP tree must have been
borrowed. These two assumptions (that the true tree is one of the MP
trees, and that all incompatibilities are due to borrowing) would still need
to be carefully considered.
5.5.4. McMahon et al.
McMahon et al. (2005) shed light on a long-standing question of language
classification with a lexicostatistical study of the Quechuan and Aymaran
families of Andean South America. Using Lohr (1999) and additional
Andean data collected by Heggarty, they compile word lists of the 30
words shown to be genealogically most stable and the 30 least stable across

812
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
language families. (Lohr’s glosses were taken from Dyen et al. 1992 and
tested on Indo-European, Austronesian, Sino-Tibetan, and Afroasiatic.
High-level Afroasiatic comparisons are problematic as mentioned above in
Section 4.1; within subgroups, however, cognacy can be established, so
Lohr’s findings can be regarded as reliable though in need of further
testing.) NeighborNet analyses of these two sets differ greatly (p. 165): the
one on the more stable words groups the Quechuan and Aymaran lan-
guages as quite discrete and quite distant from each other with almost no
reticulation between the two groups, while the unstable words show
considerable reticulation between the two groups and less distance
between the two than within one of them. This shows that the resem-
blances between the two families are probably due to contact (specifically
borrowing in the case of resemblant words). Since it is not known in
advance whether Quechuan and Aymaran are related, words shared
between the two cannot be considered cognates, and the coding standards
term them correlates for purposes of assessing character states.
McMahon and McMahon (2005) report this study and others in their
Chapter 6 (139–75). They produce a phylogenetic network using Neigh-
borNet on the full data of Dyen et al. (1992: 164) and pronounce it ‘clearly
a tree, though there are some obvious reticulations too’ (163). Since a tree,
by definition, cannot contain cycles (as are produced by the reticulations
in the graph), this statement is not quite true, and potentially confusing.
However, the graph is close to a tree in the following sense: if all the low-
width bands of parallel edges are collapsed into a single edge, the graph
becomes a tree. This statement will not hold for all networks, obviously;
see, for example, their Fig. 6.15 (p. 172), where turning the network into
a tree will require collapsing even the relatively wide bands of parallel edges.
When we collapse the narrow bands of parallel edges in the NeighborNet
network (their Fig. 6.12, p. 164), we do obtain a graph that is tree-like at
its center, but still reticulate within the subgroups. This graph reproduces
all the established subgroups of Indo-European, but provides little resolution
between the subgroups. Thus, it passes our criteria of compatibility and
our desideratum of recognizing all groups.
A similarly constructed network based on data from 26 areally clustered
languages of Australia (from Nash 2002) displays much more reticulation
(p. 165) and is certainly much less tree-like than the IE graph. These are
languages whose genealogical interrelationships are not well known,
though all ultimately belong to the Pama-Nyungan family that spread
across much of Australia in a time frame comparable to the age of Indo-
European. Reticulation is expected given the small geographical area
surveyed. Another graph (p. 166) shows that even the highly reticulate
Australian data will produce a tree when an NJ method is used.
McMahon and McMahon also studied how different phylogeny estimation
methods performed in simulation, when the characters evolve with
borrowing but without homoplasy. Their study used a 12-leaf tree with

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
813
borrowing from one language into another and compared estimated trees
to the true tree. They showed that small amounts of borrowing would not
introduce error into an NJ analysis, but that as the amount of borrowing
increased the estimated tree would deviate from the true tree. They then
examined how different phylogenetic network methods performed on the
same data. Their study showed that NeighborNet was the most sensitive,
in that it produced reticulations (suggestive of borrowing) more readily
than SplitsTree. They find that each method has points in its favor, but
they prefer NeighborNet, since ‘Splitstree . . . has the problematic tendency
to generate progressively more tree-like graphs . . . when confronted with
large and complex data sets’ (McMahon and McMahon 2005: 160).
These applications show that the degree of reticulation varies as expected
depending on the linguistic situation and the data. Given the few contrastive
applications such as these in the literature, the field has no standards for
whether a graph should be considered tree-like or what is an absolutely
high, low, or average degree of reticulation. The relative assessments of
McMahon, McMahon and their colleagues are clear, however, and the
graphic presentations in McMahon and McMahon 2005: 164–72 are striking
and should be pedagogically effective.
5.5.5. Perfect Phylogenetic Network analyses
Nakhleh et al. (2005a) proposed the Perfect Phylogenetic Network model
of language evolution, in which characters can be borrowed but evolve
without any homoplasy. The graphical model that is produced in a perfect
phylogenetic network is an explicit phylogenetic network, so that there is
an underlying tree with added contact edges. Two different computational
methods have been developed to construct these networks from input
data: a graph-theoretic algorithm (described in Nakhleh 2005 and used
in Nakhleh et al. 2005a) and an algorithm using Artificial Intelligence
techniques (given in Erdem et al. 2003). The analysis of Indo-European
(Nakhleh et al. 2005a) used the Ringe and Taylor dataset of lexical, pho-
nological, and morphological characters (with detected loans not coded
as cognates) and produced a network with three additional contact edges,
which was optimal with respect to each of a number of mathematical and
linguistic criteria.
6. Discussion
One of the main observations in the studies reviewed here is that trees
obtained for the same language family but using different datasets and/or
different methods can differ in substantial ways – and yet can all pass the
two topological tests we described earlier. Hence, it is clear that even the
stronger of our two topological conditions is insufficient to imply accuracy
with respect to the remaining features of interest (whether first-order
subgrouping or internal subgrouping within a subfamily). Furthermore,

814
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
the critical examination we have made of the numerous studies reveals
that even the best methods can have poor accuracy if used on poor-quality
data (e.g., lexical data for which cognate judgments are questionable, or
binary-encoded versions of good-quality multistate data). Therefore, our
examination reveals that data selection (both of characters and languages)
and the encoding of the character data have the potential to significantly
impact the resultant phylogenetic estimation. Finally, these issues taken
together show that while the development of methods for phylogenetic
estimation in linguistics is exciting, we still do not have evidence that any
of these methods is capable of accurate estimation of linguistic phylogenies.
To establish whether any of these methods do, in fact, have good promise
will require additional study – in the development of good benchmark
datasets, in the statistical modeling of language evolution, and in the
development of (probably new) methods.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the referees for their very helpful comments,
and the National Science Foundation for its support to Tandy Warnow
(grants ITR-BCS 0312830 and ITR 0331453).
Short Biographies
Johanna Nichols is Professor of Slavic Languages and Literatures and Affiliate
Professor of Linguistics at the University of California, Berkeley. Her
research interests include Russian and Slavic languages, languages of the
Caucasus, typology, language spreads, and reconstructing ancient linguistic
prehistory. She is co-director with Balthasar Bickel of the Autotyp typology
database project and director of Itt Ezar Sahwat, a project aimed at
compiling a very large database of spoken Ingush and Chechen. She has
written an Ingush-English dictionary and co-authored a Chechen–English
dictionary and is completing a reference grammar of Ingush. She was
awarded the Bloomfield Book Award of the Linguistic Society of America
in 1994 and the Order of Merit from the Government of Ingushetia in
2006 and was elected an AAAS Fellow in 2007.
Tandy Warnow is Professor of Computer Sciences at the University of
Texas at Austin. Her research combines mathematics, computer science,
and statistics to develop improved models and algorithms for reconstructing
complex and large-scale evolutionary histories in both biology and historical
linguistics. Tandy received her PhD in Mathematics at University of
California, Berkeley, under the direction of Gene Lawler, and did
postdoctoral training with Simon Tavare and Michael Waterman at the
University of Southern California. She received the National Science
Foundation Young Investigator Award in 1994, and the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation Award in Science and Engineering in 1996. Tandy is

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
815
a member of five graduate programs at the University of Texas, including
Computer Science; Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior; Molecular and Cellular
Biology; Mathematics; and Computational and Applied Mathematics.
She is also the director for the multidisciplinary Cyber-Infrastructure for
Phylogenetic Research Project, currently funded by the National Science
Foundation under their Information Technology Program.
Notes
* Correspondence address: Tandy Warnow, Department of Computational Science, University
of Texas at Austin, One University Station, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail:
tandy@cs.utexas.edu.
1 Renfrew (1987) put forth the view that the spread of Indo-European was a first farming
spread and originated in Anatolia some 10,000 years ago. Renfrew’s view has had wide
publicity, which has led some geneticists, phylogeneticists, and others to believe that it has
appreciable support among linguists and archaeologists. We emphasize that growth of knowledge
in linguistics, as in other sciences, is a matter of evidence and criteria, not opinion polls; there
is a clear received view in linguistics, and it is that Indo-European spread some 5500 years ago
from the western steppe. Some facts about Indo-European bear Renfrew’s interpretation (e.g.,
the presence of terminology for domesticates; IE daughter languages now occupy much of the
range where domestication was early to spread); some do not (e.g., the existence of PIE terms
for wheeled transport and wool, proving that the dispersal of PIE did not occur before the
development of these technologies); and we know of no linguistic facts that demand his
interpretation and many that demand the received interpretation.
Works Cited
Alpher, Barry, and David Nash. 1999. Lexical replacement and cognate equilibrium in Australia.
Australian Journal of Linguistics 19.4–56.
Anthony, David W. 2007. The horse, the wheel, and language: how Bronze age riders from
the Eurasian steppes shaped the modern world. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Atkiinson, Quentin, and Russell Gray. 2006. How old is the Indo-European language family?
Illumination or more moths to the flame? Phylogenetic methods and the prehistory of
languages, ed. by Peter Forster and Colin Renfrew, 91–110. Cambridge, UK: MacDonald
Institute Press, University of Cambridge.
Bandelt, Hans-Jurgen, Peter Forster, and A. Röhl. 1999. Median-joining networks for inferring
intraspecific phylogenies. Molecular Biology and Evolution 16.37–48.
Barbançon, François, Tandy Warnow, Steven N. Evans, Donald A. Ringe, Jr, and Luay
Nakhleh. forthcoming. An experimental study comparing linguistic phylogenetic reconstruction
methods. Proceedings of a conference on Language and Genes, University of California,
Santa Barbara, September 2006. http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/nanterre-talk.ppt.
Bastin, Yvonne. 1983. Classification lexicostatistique des langues bantoues (214 releves). Bulletin
des Séances de l’Académie royale des sciences d’outre-mer 27.173–99.
Bastin, Yvonne, A. Coupez and M. Mann. 1999. Continuity and divergence in the Bantu
languages: perspectives from a lexicostatistical study. Tervuren, Belgium: Musée royal d’Afrique
Centrale.
Blust, Robert A. 1978. Eastern Malayo-Polynesian: a subgrouping argument. Second inter-
national conference on Austronesian linguistics: proceedings (Pacific Linguistics C-61),
181–234.  Canberra, Australia: Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University.
——. 1985. The Austronesian homeland: a linguistic perspective. Asian Perspectives
26.45–67.
——. 1994. The Austronesian settlement of mainland Southeast Asia. Papers from the Second
Annual Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society, ed. by Karen L. Adams and

816
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Thomas John Hudak, 25–83. Tempe, AZ: Program for Southeast Asian Studies, Arizona
State University.
——. 1995. The prehistory of the Austronesian speaking people: a view from language. Journal
of World Prehistory 9.453–510.
——. 2000. Why lexicostatistics doesn’t work: the ‘universal constant’ hypothesis and the
Austronesian languages. Time depth in historical linguistics, Vol. 2, ed. by Colin Renfrew,
April McMahon and Larry Trask, 311–31. Cambridge, UK: The McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research.
Bradley, David. 1994. East and Southeast Asia. Atlas of the world’s language, ed. by Christopher
Moseley and R. E. Asher, 159–92. London, UK: Routledge.
Brown, Cecil H., Eric W. Holman, Søren Wichmann, and Viveka Vilupillai. forthcoming 2008.
Automated classification of the world’s languages: a description of the method and preliminary
results. Sprachtypologie und Universalienforschung.
Bryant, David, and Vincent Moulton. 2002. NeighborNet: An agglomerative method for the
construction of planar phylogenetic networks. Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop
on Algorithms in Bioinformatics (WABI’02), Rome (2002), Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (LNCS #2452), ed. by Roderic Guigó and Daniel Gusfield, 375–91. London, UK:
Springer-Verlag.
——. 2004. NeighborNet: an agglomerative algorithm for the construction of phylogenetic
networks. Molecular Biology and Evolution 21(2).255–65.
Bryant, David, Flavia Filimon, and Russell Gray. 2005. Untangling our past: Languages, trees,
splits, and networks. The evolution of cultural diversity: a phylogenetic approach, ed. by
Ruth Mace, Clare J. Holden and Stephen Shennan, 67–83. London, UK: University College
London Press.
Cysouw, Michael, Søren Wichmann, and David Kamholz. 2006. A critique of the separation
base method for genealogical subgrouping, with data from Mixe-Zoquean. Journal of Quan-
titative Linguistics 13.225–64.
Darden, Bill J. 2001. On the question of the Anatolian origin of Indo-Hittite. Greater Anatolia
and The Indo-Hittite language family, ed. by Robert Drews, 184–228. Washington, DC:
Institute for the Study of Man.
Donohue, Mark, and Simon Musgrave. 2007. Typology and the linguistic macrohistory of
Island Melanesia. Oceanic Linguistics 46.348–87.
Donohue, Mark, and Søren Wichmann. 2008. Typology, areality, and relatedness. Oceanic
Linguistics 48.223–32.
Dunn, Michael, Angela Terrill, Ger P. Reesink, Robert A. Foley, and Stephen C. Levinson.
2005. Structural phylogenetics and the reconstruction of ancient language history. Science
309.2072–5.
Dunn, Michael, Robert A. Foley, Stephen C. Levinson, Ger P. Reesink, and Angela Terrill.
2007. Statistical reasoning in the evaluation of typological diversity in Island Melanesia.
Oceanic Linguistics 46.388–403.
Dyen, Isidore, Joseph B. Kruskal and Paul Black. 1992. An Indoeuropean classification: a
lexicostatistical experiment. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 82, pt. 5.
Philadelphia, PA: American Philosophical Society.
Embleton, Sheila. 1986. Statistics in historical linguistics. Bochum, Germany: Brockmeyer.
Erdem, Esra, Vladimir Lifschitz, Luay Nakhleh, and Donald A. Ringe, Jr. 2003. Reconstructing
the evolutionary history of Indo-European languages using answer set programming. Proceedings
of the 5th International Symposium on Practical Aspects of Declarative Languages (PADL 03),
13–14 January 2003, pp. 160–76.
Erdõs, Peter L., Michael A. Steel, Laszlo Székély, and Tandy Warnow. 1999a. A few logs suffice
to build almost all trees – I. Random Structures and Algorithms, 14.153–84. (Also appears
as DIMACS Technical Report 97–71.)
——. 1999b. A few logs suffice to build almost all trees – II. Theoretical Computer Science
221(1–2).77–118.
Eska, Joseph F., and Donald A. Ringe, Jr. 2004. Recent work in computational linguistic
phylogeny. Language 80.569–82.
Evans, Steven N., Donald A. Ringe, Jr, and Tandy Warnow. 2006. Inference of divergence
times as a statistical inverse problem. Phylogenetic methods and the prehistory of languages,

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
817
ed. by Peter Forster, and Colin Renfrew, 119–29. Cambridge, UK: McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, University of Cambridge.
Evans, Steven N., and Tandy Warnow. 2005. Unidentifiable divergence times in rates-across-sites
models. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 1.130–4.
Field, Fredric W. 2002. Linguistic borrowing in bilingual contexts. Amsterdam, The Netherlands/
Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.
Foley, William A. 2007. Language change and diffusion in the Sepik region, PNG. MS,
University of Sydney.
Forster, Peter, and Alfred Toth. 2003. Toward a phylogenetic chronology of ancient Gaulish,
Celtic, and Indo-European. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA
100.9079–84.
Foulds, L. R., and Ronald L. Graham. 1982. The Steiner problem in phylogeny is NP-complete.
Advances in Applied Mathematics 3.43–9.
Goddard, Ives. 1996. The west-to-east cline in Algonquian dialectology. Actes du Vingt-
cinquième Congrès des algonquinistes, ed. by William Cowan, 187–211. Ottawa, Canada:
Carleton University.
Goloboff, Pablo, Steven Farris, and Kevin Nixon. 2003. T.N.T: tree analysis using new technology,
version 1.0. Program and documentation. <http://www.zmuc.dk/public/Phylogeny/TNT>.
Grace, George W. 1996. Regularity of change in what? The comparative method reviewed,
ed. by Mark Durie and Malcolm Ross, 156–79. New York, NY/Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Gray, Russell D., and Fiona M. Jordan. 2000. Language trees support the express-train sequence
of Austronesian expansion. Nature 405.1052–5.
Gray, Russell D., and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2003. Language-tree divergence times support the
Anatolian theory of Indo-European origins. Nature 426.435–9.
Gray, Russell D., Simon Greenhill, and Robert Blust. 2007. Computational phylogenetic
methods and Austronesian subgrouping. Presented at International Congress of Historical
Linguists, Montreal.
Greenhill, S. J., and R. D., Gray 2005. Testing population dispersal hypotheses: Pacific settlement,
phylogenetic trees, and Austronesian languages. The evolution of cultural diversity: phylogenetic
approaches, ed. by R. Mace, C. Holden and S. Shennan, 31–52. London, UK: UCL Press.
Greenhill, Simon J., Robert A. Blust, and Russell D. Gray. 2003–2008. Austronesian Basic
Vocabulary Database <http://language.psy.auckland.ac.nz/austronesian>.
Guthrie, Malcolm. 1967–71. Comparative Bantu (4 vols.). Farnborough, UK: Gregg.
Haas, Mary R. 1949. The position of Apalachee in the Muskogean family. International Journal
of American Linguistics 15.121–7.
——. 1979. Southeastern languages. The languages of native America, ed. by Lyle Campbell
and Marianne Mithun, 299–326. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Haspelmath, Martin, and Uri Tadmor. n.d. Loanword Typology <http://www.eva.mpg.de/
lingua/files/lwt.html>
Haspelmath, Martin, Matthew S. Dryer, David Gil, and Bernard Comrie (eds) 2005. World
Atlas of Language Structures. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hinnebusch, Thomas J. 1996. Skewing in lexicostatistic tables as an indicator of contact. Paper
presented at the Round Table on Bantu Historical Linguistics, Université Lumière 2, Lyon,
France, 30 May–1 June 1996.
Holden, Clare J. 2002. Bantu language trees reflect the spread of farming across Sub-Saharan
Africa: a maximum-parsimony analysis. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series
B 269.793–9.
Holden, Clare J., A. Meade, and M. Pagel. 2005. Comparison of maximum parsimony and
Bayesian Bantu language trees. The evolution of cultural diversity: a phylogenetic approach,
ed. by R. Mace, C. J. Holden, and S. Shennan, 53–65. London, UK: University College
London Press.
Holden, Clare J., and Russell Gray. 2006. Rapid radiation, borrowing, and dialect continua in
the Bantu languages. Phylogenetic methods and the prehistory of languages, ed. by Peter
Forster and Colin Renfrew, 19–31. Cambridge, UK: MacDonald Institute Press, University
of Cambridge.

818
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Holland, B., and V. Moulton 2003. Consensus networks: a method for visualizing incompati-
bilities in collections of trees. Workshop on algorithms for bioinfomatics, ed. by G. Benson
and R. Page. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2812, 165–76. Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
Holm, Hans J. 2000. Genealogy of the main Indo-European branches applying the separation
base method. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 7.73–95.
——. 2003. The proportionality trap. Or: What is wrong with lexicostatistical subgrouping?
Indogermanische Forschungen 108.38–46.
——. 2007. The new arboretum of Indo-European ‘Trees’. Can new algorithms reveal the
phylogeny and even prehistory of Indo-European? Journal of Quantitative Linguistics
14.167–214.
Huelsenbeck, John and Fredrik Ronquist, 2001. MrBayes: Bayesian inference of phylogeny,
Bioinformatics 17.754–5.
Huson, Daniel. 1998. SplitsTree: a program for analyzing and visualizing evolutionary data.
Bioinformatics 14(1).68–73.
Huson, D., and D. Bryant 2006. Application of phylogenetic networks in evolutionary studies.
Molecular Biology and Evolution 32.254–67.
Ives, John W. 2003. Alberta, Athapaskans, and Apachean origins. Archaeology in Alberta: a
view from the new millennium, ed. by J. W. Brink and J. F. Dormaar. Medicine Hat, Alberta:
Archaeological Society of Alberta.
Janhunen, Juha. 2001. Indo-Uralic and Ural-Altaic: on the diachronic implications of areal
typology. Early contacts between Uralic and Indo-European: linguistic and archaeological
considerations, ed. by Christian Carpelan, Asko Parpola and Petteri Koskikallio, 207–20.
Helsinki, Finland: Suomalais-Ugrilainen Seura.
Kaufman, Terrence, and John Justeson. 2004. Epi-Olmec. The encyclopedia of the world’s
ancient languages, ed. by R. D. Woodard, 1071–111. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Kessler, Brett. 2001. The significance of word lists. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Kim, Junhyong, and Tandy Warnow. 1999. Tutorial on Phylogenetic Tree Estimation. Intelligent
Systems for Molecular Biology, Heidelberg 1999 <http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/tandy/
tutorial.ps>.
Kirch, Patrick V. 1997. The Lapita peoples: ancestors of the oceanic world. Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
——. 2000. On the road of the winds: an archaeological history of the Pacific islands before
European contact. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lees, Robert B. 1953. The basis of glottochronology. Language 29.113–27.
Lohr, Marisa. 1999. Methods for the genetic classification of languages. PhD dissertation,
University of Cambridge.
Lynch, John. 1999. Linguistic change in southern Melanesia: linguistic aberrancy and genetic
distance. Archaeology and languages, ed. by Roger Blench and Matthew Spriggs, 149–59.
London, UK: Routledge.
Mallory, J. P. 1989. In search of the Indo-Europeans: language, archaeology, and myth. New
York, NY: Thames & Hudson.
Marten, Lutz. 2006. Bantu classification, Bantu trees, and phylogenetic methods. Phylogenetic
methods and the prehistory of languages, ed. by Peter Forster and Colin Renfrew, 43–56.
Cambridge, UK: MacDonald Institute Press, University of Cambridge.
Matisoff, James. 2000. On the uselessness of glottochronology for the subgrouping of Tibeto-
Burman. Time depth in historical linguistics, ed. by Colin Renfrew, April McMahon and
Larry Trask, 333–72. Cambridge, UK: The McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.
McMahon, April, and Robert McMahon. 2005. Language classification by numbers. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
McMahon, April, Paul Heggarty, Robert McMahon, and Natalia Slaska. 2005. Swadesh sublists
and the benefits of borrowing: an Andean case study. Transactions of the Philological Society
103.147–70.
Michener, C. D., and Robert R. Sokal. 1957. A quantitative approach to a problem in
classification. Evolution 11.130–62.

© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Tutorial on Computational Linguistic Phylogeny
819
Minett, James W., and William S-Y. Wang. 2003. On detecting borrowing: distance-based and
character-based approaches. Diachronica 20.289–330.
Moret, B. M. E., U. Roshan, and T. Warnow. 2002. Sequence length requirements for
phylogenetic methods. Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Algorithms in
Bioinformatics (WABI’02), Rome (2002), Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS
#2452), ed. by Roderic Guigó and Daniel Gusfield, 343–56. London, UK: Springer-Verlag.
Nakhleh, Luay 2005. Phylogenetic networks, PhD dissertation. The University of Texas at Austin.
Nakhleh, Luay, Katherine St. John, Usman Roshan, Jerry Sun, and Tandy Warnow. 2001.
Designing fast converging phylogenetic methods. 9th Int’l Conf. on Intelligent Systems for
Molecular Biology (ISMB 2001), Copenhagen, in Bioinformatics 17(suppl. 1).S190–8.
Nakhleh, Luay, Donald A. Ringe, Jr, and Tandy Warnow. 2005a. Perfect phylogenetic networks:
A new methodology for reconstructing the evolutionary history of natural languages.
Language 81.382–420.
Nakhleh, Luay, Tandy, Warnow, Donald A., Ringe, Jr, and Steven N. Evans. 2005b. A
comparison of phylogenetic reconstruction methods on an IE dataset. Transactions of the
Philological Society 103.171–92.
Nash, David. 2002. Historical linguistic geography of southeast Western Australia. Language in
native title, ed. by John Henderson and David Nash, 205–30. Canberra, Australia: AIATSIS
Native Title Research Unit, Aboriginal Studies Press.
Naylor, Gavin, and Fred Kraus. 1995. The relationship between s and m and the retention
index. Systematic Biology 44(4).559–62.
Nicholls, Geoff, and Russell Gray. 2008. Dated ancestral trees from binary trait data and their
application to the diversification of languages. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series
B: Statistical Methodology 70.545–66.
Nichols, Johanna. 1992. Linguistic diversity in space and time. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
——. 1997. Modeling ancient population structures and movement in linguistics. Annual
Review of Anthropology 26.359–84.
——. 2006. Quasi-cognates and lexical type shifts: rigorous distance measures for long-range
comparison. Phylogenetic methods and the prehistory of languages, ed. by Peter Forster and
Colin Renfrew, 57–65. Cambridge, UK: MacDonald Institute Press, University of Cambridge.
——. 2007. Language dispersal from the Black Sea region. The black sea flood question: changes
in coastline, climate, and human settlement, ed. by Valentina Yahko-Holmbach, Allan S. Gilbert,
Nicolae Panin and Pavel M. Dolukhanov, 775–96. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Nichols, Lynn, and Johanna Nichols. 2007. Lexical derivational properties resist diffusion.
Presented at Workshop on Language contact and morphosyntactic variation and change, 7th
biennial meeting, Association for Linguistic Typology, Paris.
Pagel, Mark, Quentin Atkinson, and Andrew Meade. 2007. Frequency of word use predicts
rates of lexical evolution throughout Indo-European history. Nature 449.717–21.
Pawley, Andrew K., and Malcolm D. Ross. 1993. Austronesian historical linguistics and culture
history. Annual Review of Anthropology 22.425–59.
Rannala, Bruce, John P. Huelsenbeck, Ziheng Yang, and Rasmus Nielsen. 1998. Taxon
sampling and the accuracy of large phylogenies. Systematic Biology 47.702–10.
Renfrew, Colin. 1987. Archaeology and language: the puzzle of Indo-European origins.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rexová, KateRina, Daniel Frynta, and J. Zrzavý. 2003. Cladistic analysis of languages: Indo-
European classification based on lexicostatistical data. Cladistics 19.120–7.
Rexová, KateRina, Yvonne Bastin, and Daniel Frynta. 2006. Cladistic analysis of Bantu
languages: a new tree based on combined lexical and grammatical data. Naturwissenschaften
93(4).189–94.
Ringe, Donald A., Jr, Tandy Warnow and Ann Taylor. 2002. Indo-European and computational
cladistics. Transactions of the Philological Society 100.59–129.
Robinson, D. F. and L. R. Foulds. 1981. Comparison of phylogenetic trees. Mathematical
Biosciences 53.131–47.
Ross, Malcolm D. 1988. Proto Oceanic and the Austronesian languages of western Melanesia.
Canberra, Australia: Australian National University.

820
Johanna Nichols and Tandy Warnow
© 2008 The Authors
Language and Linguistics Compass 2/5 (2008): 760–820, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00082.x
Journal Compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
——. 1995. Comparative Austronesian dictionary: an introduction to Austronesian studies.
Trends in linguistics, 10, ed. by Darrell Tryon. Vol. 1, 27–42. Berlin, Germany/New York,
NY: Mouton de Gruyter.
——. 1996. Contact-induced change and the comparative method: cases from Papua New
Guinea. The comparative method reviewed, ed. by Mark Durie and Malcolm D. Ross,
180–217. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
——. 1997. Social networks and kinds of speech-community event. Archaeology and language I:
theoretical and methodological orientations, ed. by Roger Blench and Matthew Spriggs,
209–61. London, UK/New York, NY: Routledge.
——. 2002. Final words: Research themes in the history and typology of western Austronesian
languages. The history and typology of Western Austronesian voice systems, ed. by Fay Wouk
and Malcolm Ross, 451–74. Canberra, Australia: Pacific Linguistics.
Ross, Malcolm D., and Åshild Naess. 2007. An Oceanic origin for Äiwoo, the language of the
Reef Islands? Oceanic Linguistics 46(2).456–98.
Saitou, Naryua, and Masatoshi Nei. 1987. The neighbor-joining method: a new method, for
reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 4.406–25.
Saunders, Arpiar. 2005. Linguistic phylogenetics of the Austronesian family: a performance
review of methods adapted from biology. BA thesis, Swarthmore College. <http://
arpiarsaunders.com/documents_download/Saunders_AustroThesis2005.pdf>.
Serva, Maurizio, and Filippo Petroni. 2008. Indo-European languages tree by Levenshtein
distance. Europhysics Letters 81.68005–9.
Steel, Michael A. 1992. The complexity of reconstructing trees from qualitative characters and
subtrees. Journal of Classification 9.91–116.
Swadesh, Morris. 1952. Lexicostatistic dating of prehistoric ethnic contacts. Proceedings of the
American Philosophical Society 96.452–63.
——. 1955. Toward greater accuracy in lexicostatistic dating. International Journal of American
Linguistics 21.121–37.
Swofford, David, 1996. PAUP*: Phylogenetic analysis using parsimony (and other methods),
version 4.0. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Assoc.
Thomason, Sarah G. 2001. Language contact. Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
Thomason, Sarah G., and Terrence Kaufman. 1988. Language contact, creolization, and genetic
linguistics. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Wang, William S-Y, and James W. Minett. 2005. Vertical and horizontal transmission in
language evolution. Transactions of the Philological Society 103(2).121–46.
Warnow, Tandy, Bernard M. E. Moret, and Katherine St. John. 2001. Absolute convergence:
true trees from short sequences. Proceedings of 12th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on
Discrete Algorithms (SODA 01), Washington, DC, USA, 186–95. Philadelphia, PA: Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Warnow, Tandy, Steven N. Evans, Donald A. Ringe, Jr, and Luay Nakhleh. 2006. A stochastic
model of language evolution that incorporates homoplasy and borrowing. Phylogenetic
methods and the prehistory of languages, ed. by Peter Forster and Colin Renfrew, 75–87.
Cambridge, UK: MacDonald Institute Press, University of Cambridge.
Waterman, Michael S., Temple Smith, M. Singh, and W. A. Beyer. 1977. Additive evolutionary
trees. J. Theoretical Biology 64, 199–213.
Wichmann, Søren. 1995. The relationship among the Mixe-Zoquean languages of Mexico. Salt
Lake City, UT: University of Utah Press.
Wichmann, Søren, and Arpiar Saunders. 2007. How to use typological databases in historical
linguistic research. Diachronica 24.373–404.
Zobel, Erik. 2002. The position of Chamorro and Palauan in the Austronesian family tree:
evidence from verb morphosyntax. The history and typology of Western Austronesian voice
systems (Pacific Linguistics; 518), ed. by Fay Wouk and Malcolm Ross, 405–34. Canberra,
Australia: Australian National University.

